In conclusion, no common or constant pattern can be discerned in terms of the co-occurrence or sequencing of variations in economic growth, investment, national savings and external savings rates.
Because of the interaction between shared factors and specifically national factors, these patterns vary across countries and over time.
Consequently, the application of general theories or econometric findings can lead to erroneous interpretations of growth processes and to oversimplifications that can impair the formulation of successful growth-promoting policies for the region.
The fourth chapter of this year’s Survey looks at a number of recent analyses of the region’s growth process and its bottlenecks, including possible reasons why total factor productivity has risen so slowly and why countries have had so much difficulty in finding their way back to a growth path in the aftermath of economic crises.
The chapter concludes with brief analyses of recent growth spells in Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and the Central American and Caribbean countries in which it pinpoints some of the specific factors interfering with the attainment of higher and sustained economic growth rates in each country and subregion.
Highlights of recent trends in the economies of Conditions in the Latin American and Caribbean economies have been highly favourable, and this has been reflected in the sustained growth of nearly every country in the region since 2003.
If these projections are borne out, the region will have registered a cumulative increase of 20.6% in per capita GDP (somewhat over 3% per year) by the time it completes its sixth consecutive year of growth in what appears to be turning into the strongest (and longest) growth spell since 1980.
As noted in earlier editions of the Economic Survey, this growth period is unusual not only in quantitative terms (i.e., its scale and duration), but also in various qualitative dimensions having to do with the stability of key macroeconomic variables both in the region as a whole and in almost all the individual countries within it.
In fact, during these years, growth has been accompanied, at the aggregate level, by surpluses in both the balanceof-payments current account and in the public sector’s primary balance.
The current account surplus is chiefly attributable to the upswing in the terms of trade seen mainly in the South American countries.
In addition, very large foreign-exchange inflows in the form of emigrant workers’ remittances are being received by Mexico, by some countries in the Caribbean and South America (such as Ecuador and Colombia) and by various Central American nations.
Unlike what has customarily occurred during past periods of economic growth, public expenditure has not followed the widespread upturn in fiscal revenues, at least during the early years of this present growth phase.
The way in which public accounts have been managed in recent years has resulted in an increase in the primary surplus and the virtual elimination of the global deficit.
This, in turn, has paved the way for a significant reduction in public debt levels, as will be discussed in greater detail below.
The factors that have made this possible include not only the abovementioned improvement in their current accounts but also the liquidity of international capital markets.
Although the countries’ balance-of-payments capital and financial accounts are still not registering a positive inflow (net of foreign direct investment), these conditions have been reflected in declining levels of country risk.
The question arises as to why net financial flows to Latin America and the Caribbean are negative at a time of such abundant liquidity.
First of all, low domestic interest rates and the greater uncertainty associated with the flexible exchange-rate regimes now in use have spurred borrowing on local financial markets.
In addition, an analysis encompassing both the real and financial sectors of the economy suggests that domestic demand has not grown enough, given the countries’ present export volumes and terms of trade, to generate a foreign-exchange shortage that would then have to be covered with external resources.
Consequently, it may be argued that investment has not been high enough to attract larger capital inflows to finance it and that this is what has prevented the region from posting higher growth rates than those seen in recent years.
This relatively abundant supply of foreign exchange has been reflected, first of all, in rising international reserves and declining levels of net external borrowing.
The behaviour of public accounts has also been a contributing factor in this last regard.
In addition, better financial conditions have allowed the countries to improve their debt profiles in terms of both maturities and interest rates while at the same time increasing the relative share of local-currency debt.
Another conspicuous aspect of this growth phase is that, owing to the combination of lower international interest rates, better terms of trade and higher remittances, national income (measured at constant prices) has been growing faster than GDP.
Since the growth of national income has also been systematically outstripping the expansion of consumption, the resulting increase in national saving has made it possible to finance increasingly higher investment levels.
Consequently, the ratio of gross capital formation to GDP is at its highest level of the last 25 years, although still below the peak levels reached in the 1970s.
The continuing increase in economic activity has also led to an improvement in labour-market indicators.
Job quality is also improving, as demonstrated by the expanding proportion of the increase in total jobs represented by formal wage employment.
The international environment The favourable conditions being experienced by Latin America and the Caribbean in recent years have been set against the backdrop of an extraordinarily strong performance by the world economy, which has been enjoying solid, widespread growth.
In 2006, the world economy grew by 4%, with 96 out of a total of 159 countries surveyed reporting per capita GDP growth rates above 3%.1 Of these countries, 63 are developing economies, and 13 of the latter are within the Latin American and Caribbean region.
Global growth is expected to slow to 3.4% in 2007, principally as a consequence of the tendency exhibited by the United States’ GDP.
As the year progresses, however, it is becoming increasingly apparent that the slowdown seems to be tapering off and that the second half of 2007 will therefore be better than the first.
As a result, the global economic growth rate for 2008 is projected at 3.8%.
Among the developed nations, one of the most significant factors is the slowing of United States GDP growth from 3.3% in 2006 to an estimated 2.1% in 2007.
This economy’s weakness in 2007 is attributed to the problems that have arisen in the mortgage market and the high level of household debt (measured as a percentage of household consumption), which has underpinned growth in the United States in recent years.
Although exports have strengthened in relative terms, the deficit that the United States is running on its external accounts remains very high and continues to have the potential to exert downward pressure on the dollar.
In the euro area, a growth rate of 2.5% is expected for 2007, which is slightly lower than the 2.7% rate posted in 2006.
Exports and investment continue to be the main driving forces for the expansion of demand, but private consumption is beginning to make a strong recovery.
The German economy has been particularly strong, with a growth rate of 2.8% in 2006, to be followed by a projected rate of about 2.5% in 2007.
This slight slowdown will probably be evident in all the rest of the European economies as well.
Japan’s economy is turning in a solid performance and is expected to grow by 2.1% in 2007, thus maintaining a pace quite similar to what was seen in 2006, when it grew by 2.2%.
In fact, the economy has been expanding steadily since 2003, with an average annual growth rate for this period of 2.5%.
Although the external sector continues to be the economy’s major engine of growth, investment has also been a pillar of growth in recent years and is expected to remain strong.
In addition, the improvement seen in the country’s labour markets is expected to have a positive impact on household consumption.
As usual, the Chinese economy’s behaviour makes it stand out among the developing countries, with a growth rate of 10.7% in 2006.
Its rate of expansion is expected to remain at very high levels, although slightly lower, at 10.1%, for 2007.
This forward momentum is powered by exports as well as by the country’s enormous and vigorous domestic market, which is an increasingly important one for exports from other Asian countries and developing nations in general, including those of Latin America.
The other large developing country that is conspicuous for its economic performance is India, which posted a growth rate of 9.0% in 2006.
This economy’s pace of expansion is expected to slow in 2007 as a consequence of its already high levels of installed-capacity use and inflationary pressures, which have prompted the authorities to tighten up their monetary policy.
Given these circumstances, the Indian economy is projected to Generally speaking, the currently favourable economic situation is expected to spread throughout other parts of the developing world, such as Africa, the Middle East, South and East Asia, the transition economies of Eastern Europe and the nations of the Commonwealth of Independent States that were once part of the Soviet Union.
In many instances, the countries concerned are major producers and/or exporters of commodities, especially petroleum.
A nearly unprecedented combination of events The external environment and the current account The region’s growth has been fuelled by a highly favourable external environment.
Factors that have combined to create that environment include the steady expansion of the world economy, China’s and India’s increasing importance in world demand, and international capital markets’ high levels of liquidity.
These trends have driven up export volumes and improved the region’s terms of trade, thereby helping to boost its trade surpluses.
Export volumes have climbed by nearly 7.4%, on average, in the last two years and may rise by a similar rate in 2007.
In contrast, bolstered by an upswing in economic activity and a significant appreciation of the countries’ currencies, imports have been growing at an annual rate of 13% in real terms (19% per annum for South America), and the pace of growth picked up further between 2005 and 2006.
A relevant fact to be noted here is that, as shown by a number of studies, most of the Latin American countries’ imports have an income elasticity in the long run greater than 1.3 In 2006, the region’s terms of trade were 31% higher than their average for the 1990s.
If the comparison is based on the average for the last three years (20042006), however, then the improvement amounts to 24%.
Commodity prices (especially petroleum and metal prices) were the most important contributing factor in this connection.
As this figure also shows, the terms of trade In 2006 Mexico posted a strikingly sharp increase in its exports of manufactures and, within this category, of products from the mining and metals sector, automotive industry, and food and beverage industry, as well as of data processing equipment.
Using real GDP as a measurement of income and the real exchange rate as a measurement of prices, this last study calculated the income elasticity of imports as ranging from 0.67 in Peru to 2.54 in Uruguay.
When the real GDP-to-exports ratio was used as a measurement of income (while also controlling for the real exchange rate), income elasticity ranged from 0.65 in Peru to 3.09 in Uruguay.
In the first case, only one country had an elasticity below unity, while in the other case, two countries did (Peru and Honduras). have been less volatile than commodity prices, at least since 1990, thanks to the smoothing effect of trends for the other products (especially manufactures) making up the region’s export basket.
The terms of trade reflect a strong positive trend since 1990, but this is not the case of the price index for non-energy commodities, where a clear-cut trend has taken shape only during the last few years of the period under analysis.
These remittances amounted to 2.2% of GDP for the region as a whole, but they totalled 11.1% of Central America’s GDP and 2.8% of Mexico’s, which is greater than the percentage of GDP that the latter receives in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI).
For the three Caribbean countries that receive large inflows of such remittances, these funds represent, on average, nearly 6% of GDP.
Another characteristic feature of the trend in the balance-of-payments current account in the past few years has been a sizeable increase in foreign firms’ profit remittances to their parent companies, especially in the case of South America (see figure I.4).
This circumstance is associated with the rising prices of some commodities and the fact that, in many cases, operations involving the extraction of natural resources are carried out by foreign enterprises.
In the past, periods of GDP growth have been associated not only with current account deficits, but also with a progressive deterioration in that account.
The last four years have been the only time that the region has posted a current account surplus at least since the 1960s.
Furthermore, there has never been another period in which the region has grown at this swift a pace while at the same time witnessing an improvement in its external accounts, even though they are still showing deficits.
Current account/GDP No price indices for the Caribbean countries’ exports and imports are available but, since, taken as a group, they are net oil importers, it can be assumed that, if a measure of their terms of trade did exist, it would reflect a deterioration similar to the one experienced by Central America.
GDP, income and demand components In 2006, as in 2004 and 2005, the increase in the region’s disposable gross national income (dGNI) (7.3%) outpaced GDP growth.
One of the main factors driving dGNI has been the significantly stronger terms-of-trade effect, which amounted to the equivalent of 3.4% of the region’s GDP during the year.
In the other South American countries, the expansion of dGNI also outdistanced GDP growth, although by a smaller margin.
The situation in Central America varied across countries, since, in some cases, dGNI still outstripped GDP growth, despite the decline in the purchasing power of exports, thanks to the increase in remittances from emigrant workers (Guatemala, El Salvador and especially Honduras).
In Mexico, the expansion of national income was the outcome of both the increased terms-of-trade effect and a higher level of net current transfers from abroad.
In addition to the continuing external demand for the Latin America and Caribbean countries’ raw material exports, the region’s levels of economic activity and internal demand both rose, thereby boosting intraregional trade in manufactures.
Given these circumstances, the volume of goods and services imports climbed by 14.2%, and the growth contribution of net exports was therefore negative for the third year in a row.
The situation is expected to be much the same in 2007, as export growth is expected to come in at much the same level as in 2006 and, as in the past few years, to be coupled with a larger increase in import volumes.
Internal demand in the region rose by 7.1% in 2006, thereby further improving upon its positive performance expansion was driven by the gathering pace of gross fixed capital formation (13.4%) and, to a lesser extent, by rising consumption (6%), which was spurred by a strong increase in bank lending to the private sector.
This subject will be discussed at greater length in a later section.
Its dynamism has been fuelled not only by the buoyancy of construction, but also by the strength of investment in mainly imported machinery and equipment (with increases of 31% and 60% during those years, respectively).
The 4.1% upturn in wage employment accounted for 89% of new job creation in 2006 in what constituted a continuation of the strong performance turned in by this sector for the past two years.
Over the last three years, the GDP elasticity of wage employment (0.74) has been higher than it has been in the case of total employment (0.53).
The recovery of employment that began in 2003 thus continued with an annual increase of 2.0 percentage points.
This rebound was led by wageemployment creation, which has been rising at a rate of 3.7% per annum.
Unlike what had occurred in 2005, the labour participation rate climbed (by 0.2 percentage points) in 2006, and job creation’s impact on the unemployment rate was therefore less striking: the unemployment rate thus fell by 0.5 percentage points to 8.6%, which was well under the 1.2-point reduction recorded in 2005.
Since 2003 the cumulative decrease in the unemployment rate has come to 2.4 percentage points, thereby helping to bring the rate back down to where it stood in the first half of the 1990s.
The trends seen in 2006 (rising employment and participation rates, falling unemployment, increasing real wages) have carried over into the first half of 2007, but the increase in the labour participation rate has picked up its pace further.
As a result, although the year-on-year growth rate in employment held at 0.5 percentage points (for nine reporting countries), the decrease in unemployment is slowing.
Consequently, the decline in the jobless rate for the region as a whole is expected to be fairly small: from 8.8% in the first half of 2006 to 8.5% for the first half of 2007.
For the year as a whole, the decrease in unemployment is also projected to be relatively limited The number of employed persons in urban areas is estimated to have risen by nearly 6 million (roughly 2.9%) in 2006.
The increase was quite widespread, with 15 out of 19 countries reporting higher employment rates.
The number of employed persons was up by approximately 2.9%, but the increase was very uneven across different since 1990.
Meanwhile, external saving continued on the downward trend that emerged in 2003, falling to 1.7% of GDP.
As in the preceding years, in 2006 regional investment was therefore financed entirely by national saving.
All the various measurements of employment formality/informality indicate that the economic reactivation of the last few years has brought about an increase in formal employment in both absolute and relative terms.
More specifically, the increase in the number of wage earners holding employment contracts that provide them with social security coverage indicates that the creation of these types of jobs has been highly responsive to expanding labour demand in some countries.5 Part of this increase may be attributable to the formalization of pre-existing jobs.
In addition, although the evidence is scanty, the expansion of formal employment may be coupled with an increase in jobs based on short-term contracts.
Taking the period 2004-2006 as a whole, the weighted average annual increase in real wages amounted to 1.5%.
In most of the countries for which information was available, real formal-sector wages appear to have remained on their upward trend in early 2007, with year-on-year real wage hikes in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay of close to 3% or more.
In contrast to what occurred in 2004 and 2005, employment in manufacturing rose only slightly (1.5%) owing, among other factors, to this sector’s weakness in Brazil.
Financial services, real estate and business services once again had one of the highest job creation rates (5.0%) and expanded very rapidly in some of the region’s large and medium-sized countries, such as Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Mexico.
Other tertiary-sector industries (commerce, restaurants and hotels; basic services; and community, social and personal services) grew at rates close to their averages for the past 10 years.6 In 2004-2006, average labour productivity rose at an average annual rate of 2.5%, thereby outpacing the growth of this variable in the United States economy during those years (1.8%).
This has enabled the region to recover a small part of the ground it had lost in terms of productivity.
Commerce and goods-producing sectors saw above-average productivity gains, which also bodes well for the region’s efforts to boost its competitiveness.
This constitutes a continuation of the downward trend observed in this indicator since 2002, when it stood at 12.2%.
The figure for 2006 is largely a reflection of the steep reduction in Brazil’s inflation rate (from 5.7% to 3%).
Inflation also waned in a number of other countries, but in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Uruguay, the rate for 2006 was higher than it had been in 2005.
The Englishspeaking Caribbean countries turned in a very mixed performance, with inflation climbing in Trinidad and Tobago in 2006 (from 7.2% to 9.1%) as a result of rising food prices, but dropping in Jamaica (from 12.9% to 5.8%) thanks to weakening transport prices.
Recent employment trends in the tertiary sector suggest that its job creation rate is the net result of an upswing in formal employment and a relative reduction in the types of informal jobs that are common in these industries.
Exchange-rate trends softened the impact that higher international prices for agricultural commodities, raw materials, industrial inputs and food had on domestic price levels.
Another factor that helped rein in the increase in the consumer price index (CPI) in the second half of 2006 was the downturn in international petroleum and fuel prices, which led to downward adjustments in the prices for these products in a number of the region’s countries in the final months of the year.
The upswing in service prices also slowed in relation to the rate of increase for 2005 in most of the countries.
As of May 2007, the simple average of 12-month inflation rates in the region eased to 6.2%, whereas the weighted average climbed to 5.1%.
In a majority of the countries, indices of core inflation are rising more slowly than the overall CPI.
External assets and liabilities and the region’s macroeconomic vulnerability In 2006 the Latin American and Caribbean region continued to strengthen its net external liabilities position by cutting back on its payment obligations and building up its reserve assets, thus reducing its vulnerability.
The basic surplus came to 2.6% of GDP thanks to a heftier current account surplus (1.6% of GDP) and net FDI inflows amounting to some US$ 30 billion.
Another robust surplus on the basic balance is expected in 2007, although it will be somewhat smaller The region’s FDI inflows were up by 2%, rising to some US$ 72 billion, but the region’s large volume of outward direct investment (approximately US$ 42 billion) drove down net FDI inflows by 43% in 2006.
In line with a trend seen in other parts of the world, the countries of the region have been building up their international reserves, albeit less so than some other regions.
As shown in figure I.11, in 2006 and 2007 the countries of the region have been increasing their reserves more swiftly than before as a consequence of the open market operations being undertaken by some of their central banks (especially in Brazil and Argentina) because of their concern about the level of the real exchange rate.
As in other developing countries, outward foreign direct investment by Latin American and Caribbean firms is a recent development that is based on the operations of a fairly small groups of companies often referred to as “trans-Latins”.
In both cases, however, the performance of the variables represented by the denominators for these ratios has also been noteworthy.
The impact of this increase in liquidity, together with an improved debt profile, becomes clear when the ratio of short-term external debt to international reserves, which has been falling quite sharply, is calculated (see figure I.12).
In addition to reducing its external debt ratios, the region has scaled back its vulnerability to external shocks, thanks to the decrease in a number of its economies’ degree of dollarization; this is particularly true in South America in such countries as Bolivia and Peru, for example. closed out 2006 at 186 basis points).
In addition, overall, the Latin American and Caribbean region has been less affected by such episodes and has bounced back more rapidly than other emerging-economy regions.
In a departure from this trend, Ecuador’s risk rating was downgraded in January 2007 (CCC) and Grenada’s was lowered in April (CCC+).
In May 2006, debt positions were liquidated by a number of emerging economies as the level of risk aversion rose in response to expectations of higher inflation in the United States and the tightening up of monetary policy that ensued.
In late February and early March 2007, another disturbance was generated by China’s announcement that it was adjusting its economic policy to curb the ascent of its asset prices.
The news caused the Shanghai stock exchange index to plunge by nearly 9%.
The contribution of macroeconomic policy Fiscal policy capital expenditure levels, the trend in current expenditure leaves little room for an increase in public investment, which is currently at very low levels.
In addition, some countries are having difficulties in this respect because their expenditure execution capacity is quite limited, especially at the subnational level.
Its overall accounts are virtually balanced, and the simple average of the countries’ primary surpluses rose once again.
These positive trends in fiscal accounts and the public debt have allowed the region to continue on the path of reduced vulnerability on which it embarked in 2003.
At the central government level, the region’s fiscal performance enabled it to post a primary surplus (simple average) of 2.1% of GDP for 2006, compared to a 1.4% surplus in 2005.
The overall deficit (including public debt interest payments) shrank from 1.2% to 0.2% of GDP.
This performance is underpinned by a widespread increase in fiscal revenues (2.3% of GDP between 2003 and 2006) and flat expenditure levels in terms of GDP (with a variation of -0.2% of GDP between those years).
Whereas the improvement in fiscal accounts in 2003-2004 was based on an upturn in revenues and a cutback in spending levels relative to GDP, however, in 2005-2006 the expansion of primary surpluses has been made possible by a steep increase in revenues which has more than offset the growth of public spending in the last two years.
The countries whose fiscal revenues have risen the most are the ones whose terms of trade have improved the most.
As shown in figure I.15, as a consequence of the region’s high degree of specialization and the considerable share of total exports represented by commodities, the level of fiscal revenues is highly sensitive to export prices, especially in the case of exports by State enterprises.
Tax receipts (which, when added to social contributions, equal over 80% of total fiscal revenues on average, although this figure varies considerably across countries) have risen once again in terms of GDP.
Receipts from general taxes on goods and services have increased the most, climbing by 0.5% of GDP and thereby further exacerbating the overall tax structure’s concentration in this type of tax.
Almost all of this increase was in current spending (0.4% of GDP), while capital outlays have remained nearly constant (-0.1% of GDP).
In real terms, primary expenditure has jumped by an average of 5.9% in 2003, the available data as of July 2007 is quite preliminary, some countries’ current expenditure levels during the early part of 2007 appear to be continuing to follow this steep upward trend.
In addition, the countries of the region are taking advantage of the present favourable macroeconomic conditions to implement active liability-management policies that have helped to reduce their financial vulnerability.
Monetary and exchange-rate policy Generally speaking, the common thread running through the strategies adopted by most central banks in 2006 was a gradual tightening of their monetary policy stance in view of the steadily rising level of economic activity in most countries and expectations of higher inflation as a consequence of strong commodity (and especially energy) prices.
In some cases, there was also a measure of concern about the possibility of overheating in some economies.
Brazil and, to a lesser extent, Mexico, were exceptions to this general picture, however.
In countries that have adopted inflation targeting schemes, inflation has remained low and under control, although the various strategies adopted by the countries’ central banks differ in a number of interesting ways.
In the region’s two largest economies (Brazil y Mexico), the monetary policy rate remained on the downward trend that first appeared in mid-2005 throughout 2006 as policymakers sought to bolster these two economies’ growth rates, which have been below the regional average.
In both cases, the monthly inflation rate hovered between levels equivalent to 3%-4% per annum throughout the year.
Nonetheless, in Brazil’s case, real interest rates remained very high, standing at around 10% at the close of the year.
In early 2007, Brazil’s central bank was still gradually lowering the monetary policy rate and is expected to continue to do so throughout the year.
In Peru, the central bank began to raise interest rates when the pace of inflation began to pick up slightly in late 2005 and early 2006, but it suspended further hikes once inflationary pressures started to subside.
These pressures eased so much, in fact, that at year’s end the rate of price increases had fallen below the floor of the central bank’s target band.
No changes were made in monetary policy in the early months of 2007.
In Chile, the authorities appear to have kept rates in alignment with the United States federal funds rate since 2004, regardless of where observed inflation stands relative to the target band.
Nonetheless, during early 2006 the inflation rate was invariably close to the band’s ceiling, and Chile’s central bank stopped raising interest rates in the second half of the year when the monthly inflation rate began to move closer to the floor of the band.
Late in the second quarter of 2007, the central bank began to raise the monetary policy rate again, and the possibility that it may continue to do so in the second half of the year cannot be ruled out.
In Colombia, meanwhile, although the inflation rate hovered in the middle of the target band, the central bank began to hike interest rates in May 2006 in the midst of concern that the upswing in the growth rate might be a sign that the economy could be overheating.
The Banco de la República has continued to raise interest rates in the early 2007.
Rep. of ) In general, the region’s strong economic growth and the external sector’s favourable performance have translated into an improvement in bank credit in conjunction with higher transaction levels and greater confidence.
These factors have also led to an increase in international reserves and, consequently, in the monetary base which many of the countries’ central banks have tended to counteract via open-market operations.
This has been the case in Argentina, Bolivia and Paraguay, but such measures are also being taken by some of the countries that use inflation targeting schemes, such as Brazil, Colombia and Peru.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has also made a great deal of use of various instruments for soaking up liquidity, together with increases in bank reserve requirements, although in this case the aim was neither to defend the exchange rate nor to build up international reserves.
In Central America, liquidity levels have been fairly closed associated with balance-of-payments results and with monetary policymakers’ decisions to intervene in the market, as well as with their ability to sterilize the monetary effect of such actions.
In the Caribbean countries as well, monetary policy has been heavily influenced by balance-of-payments trends and fiscal policy.
Given the widespread improvement in macroeconomic conditions, in most cases the authorities have tended to tighten up their monetary policy positions.
In 2006 commercial and industrial bank lending, together with consumer credit and mortgages, rebounded further in most of the countries for which information is available, thereby continuing the recovery in total credit that began in 2003.
The countries posting the sharpest increases were the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the upswing has been coupled with negative real interest rates.
Of the countries surveyed, Ecuador is the only one to have witnessed a downswing in total credit (2.3%).
In the Caribbean, lending to the private sector has climbed considerably, in line with the subregion’s sustained economic growth.
Although they continue to apply policies based on the use of inflation targeting, concern about the level of the real exchange rate prompted monetary authorities in Brazil, Colombia and Peru to intervene in the market.
As mentioned earlier, policymakers in Argentina, Bolivia and Paraguay also engaged in a significant level of operations in the currency market.
On average, in 2006 the Latin American and Caribbean region’s real effective exchange rate declined (appreciated) by 3% relative to the rest of the world.
As in 2005, the appreciation of the South American countries’ currencies (4.6% in 2006) was above the regional average, whereas Central America, the Caribbean and Mexico registered a very small appreciation (an average of 1%).
Between December 2006 and May 2007 the appreciation of the region’s currencies (as measured against the real effective exchange rate for the rest of the world) has continued.
This increase in value has amounted to 1.1% and, as in 2006, has been significantly greater in South America (1.9%) than it has been in Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean, taken as a whole (0.1%).
During this period, the real effective exchange rates of 11 countries have fallen (appreciated) relative to the rest of the world while the other 7 countries’ currencies have depreciated.
Despite vigorous central-bank intervention, in the first five months of 2007 Brazil’s and Colombia’s real exchange rates appreciated by 6.5% and 12.5%, respectively.
The difficulty that countries in the region are having in maintaining their real parities is a source of concern in view of the slowdown in exports and increasing growth of imports, especially in South America.
Major differences across subregions and countries Although growth has been virtually across the board, with practically no country being left out of the picture, not all the countries have been affected in the same way by prevailing external conditions.
One factor is that some of the South American economies were overtaken by crises early in the decade, and their high growth rates are therefore partially a reflection of their recovery from those slumps.
Be this as it may, the South American countries have systematically grown faster than the Central American nations and Mexico.
This is partly because the former are the ones that are seeing strong improvements in their external accounts due, in large measure, to their position as commodity exporters.
Demand The differences observed among the region’s economies have also been reflected in the behaviour of the fastest-growing components of demand in recent years: investment and exports.
Capital formation has clearly grown faster in South America, where it has been spurred by the considerably improvement in these countries’ terms of trade.
Rep. of) Mexico and Central America Sizeable differences are also to be seen in the countries’ investment-to-GDP ratios (see figure I.20).
This dispersion is attributable not only to the differing dynamics associated Current dollars Current dollars at 2000 prices In view of the large imported component of investment, it is to be expected that the value of the investment/GDP coefficient will be correlated with the real exchange rate.
Periods during which real exchange rates are high will be associated with high coefficients, since relative investment prices will be high in comparison to other prices in the economy.
By the same token, when the exchange rate is low, the coefficient will also tend to be lower.
This type of bias may account for the differences between the values at constant prices shown in the figure and the figures reported by the countries in their national accounts.
An analysis of trends in export volumes during the region’s current growth phase shows that the South American countries have posted the strongest increases, with its 8.4% average annual growth rate for 2003-2006 standing well above the 5.8% rate for this variable recorded for Mexico and Central America.
These averages mask the varying trends observed in the last few years, however (see section A.3).
Finally, some of the countries’ real service exports have been exhibiting noteworthy growth trends.
First of all, the average increase in these external sales has been similar or even slightly greater than the rate for goods.
In Central America, for instance, in addition to the more widely known cases of Costa Rica and Panama, El Salvador has also posted a rate above the regional average.
Rep. of) Terms of trade and the current account The South American countries have seen the biggest improvement in their terms of trade, marking up an increase of 46.7% between the average for the 1990s and 2006.
The rise has been especially striking for countries specializing in exports of petroleum and other energy products and metals (which are grouped under the heading “Rest of South America” in figure I.23), whose terms of trade in 2006 were more than twice as high as the 1990s average.
Mexico has also enjoyed an upswing in this indicator, although on a smaller scale (22% in the same period).
In the MERCOSUR countries, the changes taking place on international commodity markets have been reflected in expanding export volumes more than in improvements in the terms of trade.
The situation for the Central American countries is quite different, since these nations are net oil importers and compete with China on the United States market.
Their terms of trade have deteriorated by 13.1% (measured between the average for the 1990s and 2006) and, Venezuela (Bol.
Rep. of) Latin America (19 countries) what is more, their export growth rate, measured against the rate for the 1990s, has slumped in real terms.
South America’s current account balance improved by nearly 4.5% of GDP thanks to the combined effect of improvements in the terms of trade equivalent to 4% of GDP and in the trade balance (in real terms) equivalent to 2.2% of GDP.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile have registered the greatest improvement in their terms of trade.
In the cases of Chile and Peru, the upturn in this variable has been partially offset, however, by higher payments for factors of production held by non-residents.
It is interesting to note that in a number of South American countries (Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Paraguay), remittances from emigrant workers are beginning to become increasingly significant (see figure I.24b).
In Central America, meanwhile, the current account balance reflected a deterioration of 3% of GDP —despite an increase in remittances amounting to 7.8% of GDP— owing to the subregion’s worsening terms of trade (equivalent to 3% of GDP), the downturn in its real trade balance (equivalent to 7.4% of GDP) and other factors.
Mexico witnessed an improvement in its current account equivalent to around 1.3% of GDP as the deterioration in the trade balance in real terms (3.1% of GDP) was not steep enough to entirely counteract the positive impacts of the terms-of-trade effect (2.9% of GDP), the upturn in remittances (2.2% of GDP) and other factors.
As noted earlier, the region has been posting increasingly large surpluses on its current account.
This positive balance is concentrated in a relatively small number of countries, however.
In 2004, only 8 out of 19 countries in Latin America posted a surplus, while in 2005 and 2006, just 7 countries did so.13 In most of the countries that ran deficits, however, these shortfalls were smaller than foreign-exchange inflows in the form of FDI, which are more stable than other types of capital flows.
Be that as it may, when the basic (rather than current account) balance is analysed, the results indicate that the region as a whole recorded a surplus equivalent to 2.6% of GDP in 2006 and that the number of individual countries running surpluses rose to 15.
In fact, three countries (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Brazil) account for almost the entire current account surplus reported by the region.
These three nations have all grown more slowly than the regional average thus far this decade, but the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has seen a stronger improvement in its terms of trade than any other country in the region, while Argentina’s and Brazil’s export volumes have soared in recent years.
Fiscal balance The widespread improvement in public accounts also conceals a number of divergent trends (see table I.2).
With a reduction equivalent to 2.5% of GDP, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is the only country whose primary surplus has shrunk by a significant amount, however.
An expansion of the primary surplus by more than the equivalent of 1% of GDP was posted by Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama and Peru, while Bolivia, Chile and Panama registered upswings of over 3% of GDP.
With the exception of Colombia, the increase in this surplus was attributable to higher revenues and lower spending levels (in terms of GDP), with the increase in the former being more than twice as great as the reduction in the latter.
All the countries in the region except Haiti have boosted their fiscal revenues (measured as a percentage of GDP) relative to 2005.
In a number of countries (Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama and Paraguay) public expenditure also rose in relation to GDP, although the increase was a minor one except in the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where outlays climbed by 4% of GDP.
Some of the concerns of governments in the region have to do with low tax yields, the tax structure and the level of public investment.
To tackle these problems, some governments undertook a series of fiscal reforms over the past year and reforms in various spheres since the beginning of 2007.
In Brazil, the Growth Acceleration Programme (PAC) introduced by the federal government in January 2007 is designed primarily to boost investment and includes two long-term fiscal regulations that have a direct impact on more than one third of total primary federal spending, the purpose being to provide for growth in capital expenditure in the public budget.
In Colombia, a gradual reduction in the income-tax rate was approved together with an increase in exemptions for reinvested earnings; at the same time, the temporary wealth tax External debt and dollarization Despite the fact that vulnerability has diminished generally, some cases of high indebtedness persist.
While the external debt/GDP ratio has been falling considerably as a result of the payments made by many countries out of the surpluses on their current accounts, it remains relatively high in some countries, especially among those in the Caribbean.
In addition, in some countries, the degree of dollarization of the financial systems in the region remains high in some countries, with rates of over 60% in some cases.
Consequently, while the overall vulnerability of the countries has diminished, there are several cases where it may continue to be cause for concern.
Rep. of) Dominica a Grenada a Saint Kitts and Nevis a Saint Lucia a and the tax on financial movements remained in force.
In Mexico, the federal government presented a public finance reform proposal to Congress in mid-June 2007, consisting basically of measures designed to avoid tax evasion, improve management of expenditure at both the federal and subnational levels and establish a new tax on businesses (the flat-rate business contribution (CETU)), set at a flat rate of 19%.
Lastly, a tax system reform, scheduled to come into force in July 2007 in Uruguay, provides for the institution of a two-tier personal income-tax system, the standardization of employers’ social security contributions for all branches of activity, the elimination of some national taxes and the reduction and application across the board of the value added tax.
The outlook, threats and challenges for the region in the short term The performance of the international economy and the relative robustness of the economies in the region are grounds for cautious optimism with regard to the short-term outlook.
As indicated at the outset, the forecast for 2007 is for growth of close to 4.8% and if this is borne out, 2008 will be the sixth consecutive year of growth and the fifth in which the rate has been above 4%, which implies an increase in per capita GDP of at least 3% per year.
The continuity of the growth process initiated in 2003 has gone hand in hand with the improvement in some key indicators in the real sector of the economy, but also with some warning signs as regards the movement in variables that are no less important.
First, the current account surplus, the principal distinctive feature of this growth phase, is expected to be maintained in 2007.
Investment continues to be the strongest component of demand and although private consumption is picking up steadily, in 2007, it is expected to rise less than national income which implies a further increase in saving at this level.
Conversely, net exports will again be negative as a result of the slowdown in the expansion in exports and high growth rates for imports, the latter being stimulated by the higher level of activity and the lower (appreaciated) real exchange rate.
The fall in the unemployment rate also augurs well for the region.
This rate is projected to stand at 8.3% in 2007, close to the level in the 1990s prior to the financial crises that broke out in South-East Asia and had such devastating effects on labour markets in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Moreover, it is interesting to note that this decline in the unemployment rate comes at a time when job quality has been improving, and these two factors, combined with the growth recorded in the economies, are having a positive influence on poverty indicators.
Although an accentuation of those disequilibria could have an adverse effect on the economies of the region, it does not seem likely that the international context will be an obstacle to the continuity of the expansionary phase being experienced in Latin America and the Caribbean, at least not in the short term.
The United States current-account deficit has remained steady at 6.5% of GDP.
The first of these is the real exchangerate appreciation, which has been affecting some South American countries in particular and is starting to cause concern owing to the significant loss of momentum in their export sector.
In addition, the overall public accounts position has been improving to the point where it was virtually in balance in 2006.
In fact, this was due to the dramatic increase in fiscal revenues, while expenditure showed an overall increase that exceeds nominal GDP growth.
The partial information available indicates that, in the first part of 2007, this situation recurred; while this does not pose a problem in the short term, it casts doubts on the sustainability of the improvement in the fiscal situation.
A similar pattern is occurring with inflation: although, as a simple regional average, it abated in 2006 and into the first few months of 2007, it has been shooting up in several countries.
This coincides with the emergence of the demand-side pressures referred to above, as well as supply pressures (due to the rise in food prices), which could lead to a widespread increase in inflation in the region.
Furthermore, no one knows for certain what will be the magnitude and scope of the reduction in domestic demand in the United States economy.
Theoretically, if the prime concern has to do with the way in which the real estate market and macroeconomic conditions in general evolve (and those of the labour market, in particular, have remained stable), then the fall in property prices may be expected to have a relatively limited impact.
Moreover, if the decline in demand affects primarily non-tradable goods, as has occurred up to the present, then the trend in United States imports suggest that the repercussions on the global economy will be more limited or slower.
In fact, amid a moderate slowdown in the United States economy, such as has been observed since the second half of 2006, the performance of the world economy has shown a relative strength which has enabled it to continue to grow.
Economic policy dilemmas Improvements in the terms of trade, demand for some of the region’s export products, the amount of resources from emigrant remittances and external liquidity are all positive factors for a region that has found it extremely difficult to consolidate a steady process of economic growth, mainly as a result of the recurrent scarcity of foreign exchange.
However, this situation poses some economic-policy dilemmas that not only affect economic performance in the short term but may also determine the production profile of individual countries.
This may result in an equilibrium exchange rate that, while generating income for some sectors (probably producers of resource-based goods), at the same time significantly reduces the profitability of other sectors by preventing them from competing in international markets (as may be the case for much of the manufacturing sector).
This situation, which echoes what the literature describes as “Dutch disease”, can restrict growth if the disadvantaged sector has characteristics that make it an important one (such as more buoyant productivity, productive linkages, economies of scale or externalities).
The challenges this poses for economic policy include issues relating to short-term macroeconomic stability and the formulation of a development strategy.
If the calculation were expressed in terms of the purchasing power parity in dollars, the United States’ share would be smaller and China’s and India’s would be greater.
Monetary and exchange-rate policy Excess supply in the exchange market has pushed down real exchange rates to varying degrees depending on the country.
This gave rise to widespread concern that prompted the monetary authorities to intervene in exchange markets to prop up the exchange rate.
That did not prevent the currencies of some countries from appreciating significantly over the past three years (see figure I.28).
Unlike what happened in the 1990s, the pressure on the region’s exchange markets is not the result of hefty capital inflows, but rather is mainly attributable to higher prices for some commodities exported by the region or to increased emigrant remittances.
This means that economic policy has less room for manoeuvre in terms of controlling the situation by imposing restrictions on capital inflows, for instance.
In theory, concern over currency appreciation could force the economic authorities to choose between the level of monetary independence they are willing to sacrifice, and the level of currency appreciation they are willing to tolerate.
Depending on the sterilization capacity of central banks, the problem could be alleviated through open-market operations, with monetary expansion resulting from the decision to maintain a given real exchange rate.
This does not remove the problem, but simply delays it by generating a quasi-fiscal deficit that will have to be tackled in the years to come.
In their attempts to solve it, countries have incurred varying costs, with a range of results.
Examples include Brazil, where the central bank purchased foreign exchange to maintain the exchange rate.
The authorities paid a high price in terms of the interest rate on the absorption certificates, in order to protect the monetary programme.
In Argentina, on the other hand, the central bank also purchased foreign exchange, but achieved a better result as regards exchangerate stability.
This had a high cost, however, in terms of the capacity to manage monetary policy.
Rep. of) a The figure for the Dominican Republic corresponds to its currency’s real exchange rate against the United States dollar.
Fiscal policy The relative boom in the region has an impact on fiscal policy, although the impact depends on both the origin and the appropriation of the non-recurrent receipts (higher remittances or improved terms of trade), flowing into the economy.
In Central America and in some Caribbean countries, higher national revenues are due to emigrant remittances, and are absorbed by the private sector.
In contrast, in almost all South American countries and Mexico, most of the difference is attributable to the terms-of-trade effect.
In countries where State enterprises are responsible for most exports, a high proportion of the resources from the improved terms of trade is absorbed by the public sector.
This tends to be the case for exports of petroleum and some metals, including copper.
In the case of products not exported by public enterprises, the resources are received by private enterprises, while the State receives a small proportion through taxation.
In the last two cases, higher revenues are expected to result in greater public-sector or private-sector saving, which may increase the availability of resources to finance investment.
Compared with the situation created by higher remittances, higher revenues have a smaller and probably less direct effect on consumption.
This is because the use of public resources is a decision made as part of fiscal policy.
This confers on fiscal policy a greater capacity for stabilization, and the potential to transform those resources into higher investment spending on either infrastructure or human capital.
Above and beyond this distinction, there has been widespread fiscal consolidation throughout the region, although the levels vary from country to country.
This consolidation is reflected in a narrower overall fiscal deficit, a primary surplus and reduced external vulnerability resulting from lower levels of public debt.
Although such consolidation is an unprecedented achievement, it also raises questions about its sustainability in the medium and long term.
In the period 2003-2006, the performance of the public accounts in Latin America and the Caribbean has been characterized by a surge in fiscal revenues and a careful management of public spending initially, although this is giving way to an increasing expansion of outlays.
This creates several problems, including the procyclical nature of expenditure, which tends to aggravate rather than ease the fluctuations inherent in the business cycle.
This could become difficult to finance if the price rise is temporary.
Also, higher public spending may directly or indirectly apply additional downward pressure on the real exchange rate.
This is why ECLAC has insisted on the need for governments to establish fiscal covenants to enable them to satisfy legitimate needs for increased expenditure without sacrificing efforts to achieve a sustainable balance within their public accounts.
There is a need to implement more cautious policies during the expansionary phase of the business cycle, either by keeping patterns of expenditure separate from changes in income, or by reducing the level of public debt.
The main challenge facing the region is therefore to build institutions that foster the consolidation of an acyclical fiscal policy.
Competitiveness beyond the short term As described above, the challenge to prolong the current economic boom and provide a solid base for present growth levels implies some serious economic-policy dilemmas, not only in terms of monetary and exchange-rate policy, but also in terms of the management of public accounts.
In this sense, one of the main potential contributions of macroeconomic policy in the short term is the reduction of countries’ chronic real volatility, which discourages investment and determines the capacity to achieve and sustain the growth rates needed if the region is to continue improving its social indicators.
Above and beyond the aforementioned problems of evaluation, investment levels in the region are undeniably low, both compared with the past and in comparison with other economies at similar stages of development.
This is due to a number of factors, not least the problem of macroeconomic volatility.
A longer-term view highlights the need to diversify both the region’s productive structure and the destination markets for its exports.
This diversification strategy must aim at incorporating knowledge into the productive structure, which means that innovation in the broad sense and the training of human resources are key factors.
This prospect also underlines the need to lay the foundations for increased investment in physical and human capital and higher total factor productivity, with a view to successfully positioning the region on the international stage and consolidating a sustainable process of growth.
Background Under a new outward-looking approach to the promotion of development, Latin America has seen a modest recovery in growth and investment during the 1990s and early 2000s.
This recovery comes in the wake of the stabilization efforts and reforms that followed the 1980s debt crisis.
In this context, investment becomes a variable of major importance, and investment determinants and dynamics are crucial to an understanding of the economic growth process.
In order to support and consolidate growth, it is also a critical vehicle for the creation of productive capacities and the generation of knowledge spillovers and new technologies.
At the same time, ensuring adequate national savings rates is important because foreign saving can be volatile and lead to sudden stops that force countries to make costly macroeconomic adjustments which may eventually trigger growth crises.
With few exceptions, low national savings rates have obliged Latin American countries to depend on foreign saving to finance investment and growth.
The increased volatility This chapter is based on more extensive research commissioned by ECLAC (Gutiérrez, 2005 and 2007a). of international capital flows and the external financing conditions prevailing during this new era of globalization have compounded the challenges involved in enhancing investment and growth prospects.2 Disagreement persists about the role of investment and saving in the growth process.
Other economists have acknowledged the important part played by fixed investment but have argued that productivity has been the engine that has marked the difference between fast and slow growth experiences (Blomstrom, Lipsey and Zejan, 1996; Harberger, 1996 and 1998; Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare, 1997b; Elias, 1992; and Solimano and Soto, 2004).
Influential research on the subject of saving was produced in connection with two symposiums organized by the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the World Bank in 1998-1999.
The IDB research focused on saving in Latin America and was published in an IDB book edited by Reinhart (1999).
In both cases the work used data from the mid-1960s to the mid-1990s.3 The role assigned to investment and saving in economic growth is relevant to growth theory and policymaking.
These are some of the key policy issues addressed in this study.
Stylized facts about investment, saving and growth A comparison of data on investment, saving and growth across regions since 1990 shows that Latin American countries have continued to exhibit low savings and investment rates together with slow and volatile growth (see figure II.1 and table II.1).
Latin American nations, as most other developing countries, are subject to foreign credit constraints that have made investment highly dependent on national saving.
Although investment is also financed with foreign saving, the latter’s contribution to total saving has been modest (below 3% of GDP in 1990-2003).
Low investment levels have acted as a constraint on growth, especially since gross capital formation is a main source of productivity and economic growth in the region (see, for example, Haussmann, Rodrik and Velasco, 2004; Gutiérrez, 2005; and Solimano, 2006).
In fact, investment rates in Latin America have been at the bottom of the distribution when compared to other regions.
The Latin American and Caribbean region was the only one that exhibited lower savings rates in the early 2000s than in the second half of the 1990s (see table II.1), with the gap in national savings rates between Latin America and East Asia widening from about 18 percentage points in 1990-1994 to about 20 points in 2000-2003.
Low national saving has been a major constraint on investment and Evidence of a high correlation between domestic investment and domestic saving in this new era of globalization also indicates that financial markets are not more integrated today than they were during the “first wave of globalization” (from the second half of the 1800s up to the First World War).
A change did occur, however, between the two periods in terms of the composition of capital flows.
In particular, an increase has been seen in short-term relative to long-term capital flows during the current globalization wave (Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006).
Public saving can serve as a mechanism for spurring national saving, since the empirical evidence shows that an increase in public saving is less than fully offset by a concomitant decline in private saving.
Low national saving has also heightened the region’s vulnerability to swings in foreign capital flows, as foreign saving is more volatile than national saving.
Workers’ remittances help to attenuate the volatility of foreign saving because they are less affected by changes in international capital markets than other forms of foreign financing are.
Low national saving has been mirrored by low investment, given the close association between the two variables, and this has limited the scope for productivity and economic growth (see also Haussmann, Rodrik and Velasco, 2004; and Solimano, 2006).
The contribution to growth made by physical capital: growth accounting Growth accounting provides a way of measuring the contribution of capital formation to real GDP growth.
The growth accounting approach has both advantages and disadvantages compared to the regression approach for measuring the contributions of the three broad categories of sources of growth (capital, labour and total factor productivity (TFP)) (Barro, 1999; Klenow-RodriguezClare, 1997a and 1997b; Pack, 1994; Easterly, 2001; and Easterly and Levine, 2001).
The main limitation of growth accounting stems from the use of factor prices to estimate factor contributions to real GDP growth, as deviations between factor prices and marginal products are then included in measured TFP (the residual in growth accounting).
As long as we interpret TFP as a broad measure of “real cost reductions,” however, those deviations may be considered as correctly forming part of the residual when it is broadly interpreted as a measure of economy-wide real cost reductions.
Methodology In the traditional growth accounting method, capital stock series are customarily generated using the series on gross capital formation at constant prices for each country.
Here, however, the wage bill has been decomposed into payments made to “raw labour” and those made to “human capital”.
A proxy is used for the remuneration of raw labour to deflate the wage bill and obtain the two separate labour components.
This innovation will be referred to here as the “traditional modified growth accounting” (TMGA) method.
In both approaches, data on annual factor shares were also used to better capture the changing contributions of capital and labour to annual growth (see Gutiérrrez, 2005, for additional information about these methods).4 In the EGA, the physical capital series is further expressed in terms of “GDP baskets”.
The growth accounting interpretation of this alternative K * series is associated with capital theory: K * units of capital are invested to obtain GDP, with both expressed in the same units (GDP baskets).
In addition, the physical capital series is adjusted to reflect the notion of “utilized” physical capital (a vector of “rates of utilization”), which is approximated by the ratios of actual GDP to potential GDP.
The capital share (1-total labour share) assimilates to the national accounts concept of physical capital (which excludes land and other non-reproducible or intangible assets).
A similar procedure is used in Loayza and Soto (2002) based on Baxter’s and King’s work on business cycles (1999).
These are the largest economies in the region and produce about 90% of its total GDP (WDI database, 2004).
The selection of countries was guided by the availability and quality of raw data.
Tables II.2 and II.3 summarize the results of the growth accounting exercises.
The trends and structures of the growth sources are similar under the two approaches, which is comforting in the sense that the main analytical observations and conclusions will not depend on which methodology was used.
The wage bill is decomposed into its raw labour and quality (or human capital) components.
Based on GDP and gross fixed capital formation at constant prices in local currency.
Capital stock series adjusted by rates of utilization of capital using the series of gross capital formation at current prices (deflated by the GDP deflator).
Based on GDP at constant prices, local currency and gross fixed capital formation at current prices in local currency.
At first sight, the results shown in tables II.2 and II.3 appear to indicate that physical capital has been the leading source of growth for all six countries throughout the period considered (1960-2002), although the impact, in terms of average shares of capital contribution to GDP growth, has varied somewhat across time and countries (see figure II.2).
Further examination of the growth process, however, leads to the conclusion that other growth sources, particularly TFP, have marked the difference between faster and slower growth episodes.
Observations regarding the growth accounting results Observation 1: Physical capital has played an important role in the growth process, but the other growth sources have made the difference between better and worse growth experiences.
Physical capital contributed about 60%-70% to cumulative GDP growth in 1960-2002 in Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Mexico.
Growth performance did not have a direct correlation with physical capital contributions, however.
Large capital contributions were associated with both strong and weak growth performances across countries and subperiods.
The shares of physical capital contributions to GDP growth fluctuated between 30% and 45% for these countries, which is about half the size of the shares registered for the countries whose growth is more dependent on capital.
Observation 2: Labour played a mixed role in the growth process, helping to drive growth in the fastestgrowth countries but not in the slowest-growth countries.
The human capital component has played a more important role than the raw labour component has.
The role of labour as a source of growth has been mixed, but it has not marked the difference between highgrowth and low-growth experiences.
The human capital component has had a more significant impact than raw labour.
It can also be seen that labour has contributed more to growth than physical capital has on many occasions across time and countries.
Observation 3: Total factor productivity (TFP) was the main source that marked the difference between better and worse growth experiences.
TFP has marked the difference between the high and low real GDP growth years.
Argentina witnessed a modest upturn in TFP growth in the early 1990s, but this trend has been reversed since 1997 in tandem with a declining GDP growth trend.
The situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has been even worse, inasmuch as the TFP contribution never really took off and has been declining since the early 1970s.
This country’s poor growth performance has been only partly attenuated by positive direct contributions from human capital.
Additional evidence of the importance of TFP in Latin America’s growth process is furnished by the exercises summarized in table II.4 (based on the results derived from the TMGA method) and table II.5 (based on the results obtained using the EGA method).
The best 10 and the worst 10 growth rates were selected from the panel of all annual growth rates (across countries and years) in each of the following four decades: 1961-1970, show the means and medians for growth rates, physical capital contributions and TFP contributions.
The tables also show the differences in the means and medians between the 10 highest- and 10 lowest-growth events (see the last two rows) and the ratios of the differences in the means and medians between the contributions of physical capital and real GDP growth and between the contributions of TFP and real GDP growth.
These last columns show the relative impact of physical capital and TFP in terms of the differences between the 10 highest-growth and the 10 lowest-growth episodes.
The results shown in the last columns of tables 4 and 5 indicate that TFP accounts for between 76% and 95% of the differences in the means when the TMGA method is used and between 49% and 70% when the EGA method is employed.
In terms of the medians, TFP accounts for between 81% and 100% of the GDP growth differences when calculations are performed using the TMGA method and between 50% and 79% with the EGA method.
The contributions to growth made by investment in machinery and equipment, investment in construction, and economic policies: a regression analysis Key quantitative studies have emphasized the importance of machinery investment in augmenting the role of physical capital and labour in the growth process.
Ever since the industrial revolution, machinery investment has played a vital part, both directly, as a production factor, and indirectly, as a means of acquiring and transmitting technological improvements across and within countries.
De Long and Summers (1991 and 1993) found evidence of high social returns on investments in machinery and characterized this factor as being of primary importance in boosting productivity growth (proxied by per capita GDP).
Their conclusions indicate that fast-growing countries enjoy favourable supply conditions for machinery investment and that developing countries have benefited as much as richer economies have from the technologies embodied in machinery.
Economic policies also have a very strong influence on economy-wide productivity and on economic growth, as they shape the framework for the allocation and use of production factors and decision-making by economic agents.
The contributions of physical capital and labour to economic growth will depend on the quality of the economic framework.
Price stability has become an important factor in boosting growth because the irreversibility of many investments makes investment decisions highly sensitive to the inflation outlook and to the associated level of uncertainty about relative price trends (see Pyndick and Solimano, 1993).
The size of the government apparatus has also been shown to influence growth because an increase in fiscal vulnerability can have an adverse impact on economic prospects and economic stability and because public spending may crowd out private saving and investment.
Economic instability and uncertainty about economic prospects have been shown to be major factors in discouraging investment.
Based on a review of the literature, Schmidt-Hebbel, Servén and Solimano (1996a and 1996b) concluded that investment is a necessary but not sufficient condition for growth and that human capital, technological innovation and appropriate policies are also required in order for sustained high growth to occur.
The impact on per capita GDP growth of fixed investment and its composition by type of asset was tested in combination with a number of key policy variables.
They found evidence, however, of a “striking similarity” between changes in TFP and changes in per capita GDP or GDP per working-age person.
High-inflation episodes have generally been associated with more expansionary monetary and fiscal policies.
A large share of government consumption in GDP often reflects fiscal policies that have assigned the government a greater role in the growth process.
A larger share of trade in GDP frequently reflects commercial policies that have reduced trade barriers.
Larger shares of FDI and of infrastructure in GDP generally reflect policies that have deregulated FDI and have promoted more aggressive privatization programmes (including concessions).
Changes in the coverage of secondary-school enrolment often reflect the strength of education policies, although as discussed elsewhere in this chapter, existing education variables are imperfect yardsticks of human capital formation, as measurements of education levels do not account for quality or for on-the-job training.
Some additional variables were also examined, such as the fiscal balance and the current account balance (both as percentages of GDP), but the series were short, truncated or of questionable reliability.
National accounts data from the United Nations and national sources in Latin America do not include information on fixed investment in the relevant countries that is disaggregated any further than the broad categories of “machinery and equipment” and “construction”.
Initial per capita GDP (values as at the initial year of each subperiod) was also included to account for conditional convergence, which has been reported as being an important factor in other growth studies (see, for example, Barro and Lee, 1994; and Loayza, Fajnzylber and Calderón, 2004).
Panel data for the six Latin American countries making up the sample for the period 1960-2002 were used.
Five-year averages were employed in calculating the estimates shown in table II.6 to reduce the effect of short-term fluctuations in a total of 48 observations.
Observation 4: Key factors affecting per capita GDP growth in Latin America have included: (i) investment, (ii) inflation performance, (iii) the size of the government sector, (iv) the level of external debt and (v) education.
Confirming the findings of section C.3, the regression analysis showed that investment was a crucial source of growth in Latin America in 1960-2002.
Key policy variables such as the following have also had a major influence in this respect: inflation, the level of government consumption, the size of the external debt in terms of GDP and education (using the secondary-school enrolment ratio as a proxy).
The most significant policy-related variables in relation to per capita GDP growth were found to be inflation and the size of the government sector, however.
Other equations (not shown) were tried out that included such variables as FDI and infrastructure (measured by per capita telephone lines), but the resulting coefficients were not significant at the 1% level.
The findings have been interpreted as indicating that, while fixed investment has been important for growth in Latin America, key economic policy variables (mainly those that induce price stability, a low level of external debt, a relatively small government sector and an expansion of educational coverage) helped make the difference between fast- and slow-growth experiences.
These results are also consistent with other evidence about conditional convergence (see, for example, Barro, 1993; and Loayza, Fajnzylber and Calderón, 2004).12 Observation 5: The contribution of investment in machinery and equipment to per capita GDP growth is greater than the contribution made by investment in construction.
When combined with some key policy-related variables (inflation, the share of government consumption in GDP, the size of the external debt in terms of GDP and education), this variable thus provides a more satisfactory overall explanation for per capita GDP growth.
The results indicate that fixed investment in the form of machinery and equipment has a proportionally greater growth impact than overall investment does (see equations 1 through 4 versus equations 5 through 11).
Investment in construction was found to be a non-significant factor in accounting for per capita GDP growth when considering the entire period from 1960 to 2002 (see regressions 7, 8, and 9).
The results provide evidence that the social returns of machinery investments are higher than those of investments in construction.
Machinery (and equipment) investments embody new technologies that are updated on a more dynamic basis and spread more rapidly to different activities and sectors.
In particular, imported machinery provides an effective vehicle for the acquisition of modern technologies.
Buildings and other types of structures, on the other hand, last longer, and their direct and indirect impacts on production processes are less flexible than are those of machinery and equipment.
The economic policy variables that turned out to be the most influential when combined with machinery and equipment investments were inflation and government consumption (see equations 9, 10 and 11).
The significance of education, in contrast, declined when combined with investment in machinery and equipment.
As new investment in this category is combined with upgraded labour, it is possible that the investment variable is capturing the impact of education.
Observation 6: Human capital as measured by secondary education appears to have been a key White’s diagonal test was applied and proved to be robust to observation-specific heteroscedasticity in the residuals.
The results of the annual estimates for the entire period 1960-2002 generally confirm the results obtained using five-year averages.
Per capita GDP growth on the right side of the equations has been computed as the first difference in natural log terms between consecutive periods (ln yt - ln yt-1).
This is important for an appropriate interpretation of the estimated coefficients and the derived elasticities. contributing factor to productivity growth in the first half of the period under consideration but then lost significance after the 1980s.
In three of the five equations in which education was included, its coefficient was significant, at least at the 10% level (see equations 3, 4, 9 and 11 in table II.6).
Education’s effect on growth declines somewhat in significance in equations where it is combined with machinery and equipment investment rather than total investment (see equation 10 as compared to equation 3).
As newer machinery and equipment requires increased training and skills, part of the education effect could be being captured by investment in machinery and equipment.
Testing this hypothesis would, however, require an assessment of the educational requirements associated with the various types and vintages of machinery and equipment.
The available data on education (WDI database, 2002; and Barro and Lee, 2004 and 1993) are not adjusted for quality, however, and provide indicators covering a timespan of just five years.
The quality component can be expected to strengthen the stock of education and therefore its impact on growth.
As more and more of the population of secondary-school age enrols, the margin for additional enrolment shrinks.
This suggests that first-generation educational policies should be gradually replaced by a second generation of policies that increasingly focus on strengthening the effectiveness of the stock of education capital.
Quality seems to be at the centre of successful international experiences such as those of many Asian countries.
The contributions to growth made by private and public investment: a regression analysis The literature has provided evidence regarding the effects of private and public investment on economic growth (Easterly and Rebelo, 1993; Greene and Villanueva, 1991; Khan and Reinhart, 1990; and Schmidt-Hebbel, Servén and Solimano, 1996a).
Some degree of consensus prevails as to the differential growth impact of private and public investment, which will depend on the macroeconomic framework and on the extent of complementarities or substitutability existing between public and private investment.
When public investment complements private investment, it increases the latter’s social returns in terms of economic growth.
Public investment in education and infrastructure exhibits strong complementarities with private investment and therefore has positive economic-growth effects.
When public investment substitutes for private investment, however, it reduces aggregate investment returns and economic growth.
Thus, it is not only the level of total investment that matters for growth, but also the existence of a suitable mix of private and public investment.
The evidence presented in this chapter shows that sound public policies can enhance private investment’s positive impact on growth and leads to the following observation regarding the investment/growth process in Latin America in 1960-2002: Observation 7: Private investment’s contribution to growth has been strongly positive.
Price stability appears to be a leading policy-related factor in strengthening the contribution of private investment to economic growth.
The data on gross enrolment in secondary education (ratios of total secondary-school enrolment to the population of secondary-school age) were obtained from the World Development Indicators (WDI) database 2004.
See also Gutiérrez, 2005 (appendix A) for a description of relevant variables and sources.
Series measuring the quality of secondary education should provide insights into the impact of education on growth.
This is a line of statistical work that would enrich future research on the subject.
As in the previous estimates, per capita GDP growth has been approximated by the first differences of the natural logs of per capita GDP.
The relevant data were available only for the period 1970-2002 at current prices in local currencies; threeyear averages were used.
The only available investment series which are disaggregated into private and public investment are those compiled by the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the World Bank.
These series are available for 1970 onward and are at current prices only.
United Nations national accounts data contain longer historical series, but these series are for central and general governments only and therefore do not cover public enterprises.
The periods for which averages were computed for the relevant variables were shortened from five years to three years in order to compensate for the shortness of the estimation period.
As for the estimates shown in table II.7, similar results were obtained for the entire period (1970-2002) when three-year averages (62 observations) and annual data (178 observations) were used.
Estimates using annual data that incorporated the structural break analysis are included in the more extensive research work done by Gutiérrez (2005).
The estimates for 1970-2002 show that private investment was a major driving force of per capita GDP growth, with public investment playing a negligible role.
Inflation was significant at the 1% level in explaining growth and improved the explanatory power of the equations when combined with private investment.
The results point to the importance of appropriate economic policies in encouraging private investment and growth.
Countries that have promoted private investment and have reinforced price stability, thus reducing the associated vulnerabilities and uncertainties caused by high inflation, have enjoyed faster per capita GDP growth.
Thus, Chile, Colombia and Mexico have performed better, while Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela suffered from stronger price instabilities in 1970-2002.
This discouraged both private investment and economic growth, since such instabilities heighten an economy’s exposure to vicious cycles and make it more difficult to apply countercyclical fiscal policies.
Observation 8:The mutual causality existing between private investment and economic growth may foster the formation of virtuous and vicious cycles involving these two phenomena.
The equations shown in table II.8 were selected from a much larger set of estimates (in terms of explanatory power and the economic and statistical significance of control variables).
Annual estimates and a structural break analysis (see Gutiérrez, 2005) also, in general, provided corroboration for Observation 8.
The results indicate that per capita GDP growth has been a highly significant contributing factor to increases in private investment rates (at the 1% level) (see equations 2 through 5).
When combined with Observation 7, the estimates suggest a mutual causality between private investment and growth which paves the way for the emergence of both virtuous and vicious cycles.
An increase (decrease) in private investment induces an acceleration (decline) of per capita GDP growth, which in turn triggers an upswing (downturn) in private investment.
This mutual causality between investment and growth has also been found in a number of previous studies.
Servén and Solimano (1992a and 1992b) have detected a positively correlated cyclical interaction between private investment and growth in the 1980s and early 1990s.
These authors suggest the possibility of using public investment to attenuate the mutually reinforcing phase of both private investment and economic growth at times of economic contraction, as well as of supporting growth/stability factors to stimulate private investment and induce a virtuous cycle of recovery and growth.
They go on to note that growth recoveries took longer when, in the declining phase of the cycle, public investment was cut back too sharply and when uncertainty about the policy framework delayed the reactivation of growth and private investment.
The evidence also suggests that the type of public policy package that is used has a strong influence on economic growth, in addition to the level of (private and public) investment.
As in the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in 1991-2002, high public investment does not guarantee an acceleration of economic growth.
The evidence gathered for this study shows up a negative correlation between private and public investment for the 1970-2002 period as a whole, suggesting that public investment, rather than private investment, was crowded out.
The evidence also appears to indicate that FDI and infrastructure (see equations 4 through 7) helped to drive private investment during this period, but the results are inconclusive when combined with the structural analysis (see Gutiérrez, 2005).
The results for FDI could be interpreted as indicating that FDI did not contribute directly to private investment.
It may have contributed indirectly, however, through the attraction of new technologies.
More specific research is therefore needed before more precise conclusions can be drawn regarding the interactions between FDI and private investment in Latin America.
Interesting research on this subject has however, been conducted by Lim (2001), Borensztein, de Gregorio and Lee (1998) and Olofsdotter (1998).14 The same type of qualification applies to infrastructure and private investment, given the sensitivity of the association between these two variables.
In a case study on investment and reforms in Latin America, Moguillansky and Bielschowsky (2000) provide a detailed structural analysis of the incidence of infrastructure investments on economic growth in eight Latin American countries in 1960-2000.
Calderón and Servén (2004) have studied the role of infrastructure in Latin America in 1980-2001 in more detail.15 Lim’s (2001) survey of the literature provides substantial support for the existence of positive spillovers from FDI but also shows that there is no consensus as to the causality of FDI in relation to economic growth.
Borensztein and others have found that the level of human capital helps to determine the level of ability that exists for the adoption of foreign technologies and that FDI may crowd out domestic investment.
Olofsdotter has found evidence that the beneficial effects of FDI depend on institutional capacity, which varies across countries.
In their study, they analysed the effects of structural reforms on investment decisions in the 1990s.
Their examination of macroeconomic, sectoral and microeconomic aspects indicates that weak institutions and regulations have limited the benefits derived from the privatization of investments in infrastructure (including concessions).
Calderón and Servén (2004) show that Latin America lags behind international standards in terms of the quantity and quality of infrastructure and that infrastructure investment has fallen in Latin America owing to the retrenchment of public investment and the limited response of the private sector.
Saving determinants National savings and growth rates in Latin America have remained low in the 1990s and 2000s despite the progress of stabilization and reform efforts following the recovery from the “lost decade” of the 1980s.
The average national savings rate for the region as a whole has not surpassed the rather modest levels (20%-23%) observed in the 1960s and 1970s, and the gap between Latin America’s rates and those of more developed regions and East Asia has continued to widen.
Investment rates and per capita GDP growth have mirrored the disappointing results exhibited by national saving.
First of all, it extends the analysis of saving to include the more recent period of 1990-2003 (most of the previous research has been based on data covering the years up to about the mid-1990s).
Second, it examines the causality among saving, investment and growth, an area that has gone uncovered in most previous research on saving in Latin America.
The research done in this area is based on a representative sample of nine Latin American countries (three large, three medium-sized and three small economies, measured in terms of GDP in 2000 dollars).
As shown in the table, national saving was the main source of investment financing, sharp differences existed in savings rates across countries, and foreign saving exhibited greater volatility both across time and when compared to national saving.
The research on saving has identified several key factors associated with low and high national savings rates (see tables II.10 and II.11).
A relative degree of consensus is to be noted in the literature as to the existence of a positive association among national (and private) saving, income levels and growth rates,17 macroeconomic stability, the level of foreign borrowing constraints and the size of the working-age population.
A consensus has also emerged regarding the presence of a partial negative offset between public and private saving and, consequently, of a positive correlation between public and national saving (evidence of partial Ricardian equivalence).
No consensus has been reached, however, regarding the association between (national and private) saving and financial development (generally measured by the degree of monetization and credit-to-GDP ratios), saving and domestic real interest rates, or saving and the distribution of income (and wealth).
The association between saving and membership in a private pension system is also controversial, as it depends largely on fiscal policy developments and consumers’ reactions.
A move to a private funded pension system opens the way for the creation of institutional investors that can help to boost the availability of financial savings in domestic capital markets, but government budget trends and consumers’ attitudes are key factors in terms of national (and private) saving (Schmidt-Hebbel, 1998).
A positive association between national saving and current income levels is observed both in time series and cross-section data (micro and aggregate), as saving (as a percentage of GDP) rises with the level of per capita income.
The evidence points to an inverted U relationship between saving and the level of per capita income (Masson, Bayoumi and Samiei, 1998).
It has become an accepted stylized fact that savings rates rise during the initial stages of development (although not at very low per capita income levels) and decline as countries reach higher per capita income levels and more mature stages of development (see Ogaki, Ostry and Reinhart, 1995).
In low-income countries that are closer to subsistence levels, it is to be expected that most income will be channelled to consumption (with little income being left over for saving).
Higher income levels make it possible to save more, but the size of the effect declines as income rises.
Along much the same lines, a decline in investment and growth opportunities, an ageing population and lower fertility rates are features that tend to be observed in countries approaching higher per capita income levels.
Since, in developing countries, GDP and national income are usually quite highly correlated, empirical estimates use the level and growth of GDP as a proxy for the level and growth of national income, in large part because GDP series are generally more readily available and of better quality than national income data.
There is also a wealth of evidence regarding the positive association between saving and growth (see Carrol and Weil, 1994; Edwards, 1996; and Loayza, Schmidt-Hebbel, and Servén, 2000; and Loayza and others, 2000).
The permanent income theory implies that consumption is determined by permanent (long-run) income, implying that saving follows current (transitory) growth.
The life-cycle model, first developed by Franco Modigliani, argues that productivity growth makes the working young richer than the old and that the young will be saving more than the old are dissaving.
Aggregate income growth would then follow from increases in the lifetime profiles for succeeding generations.18 In turn, habit formation in consumption is a factor that helps to rationalize the positive correlation between saving and growth.
Carroll and Weil (1994) have argued that people adjust consumption habits slowly, which makes saving positively related to current growth of income.
In more extensive models of consumer behaviour, the relationship is theoretically ambiguous (Carroll and Weil, 1994).
The relevant theory says that one of the purposes of borrowing is to allow people to smooth consumption in the event of shocks.
However, consumption will follow current income more closely at low income levels because credit constraints are more binding at those levels.
In contrast, at higher income levels, consumption is expected to follow permanent (or expected) income more closely.
Foreign credit restrictions are more influential in the case of low-income and financially distressed middle-income countries; in those cases, consumption can be expected to adjust more to shocks, as smoothing is more difficult.
In the presence of foreign borrowing constraints, additional foreign saving is likely to lead to higher consumption and, ceteris paribus, lower national saving.
There is evidence of a negative relationship between national and foreign saving, with the offsetting effect ranging between 50% and 70% (see Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén, 1999).
The research on financial development suggests that financial variables’ effect on national saving is ambiguous.
Deeper financial markets and strengthened prudential regulation of financial institutions help to enhance saving (and investment) opportunities by offering a wider variety of financial instruments to channel savings and by providing more security (in the case of effective regulation) to investors.
However, financial development is also often associated with an increased availability of credit for consumption, which relaxes domestic liquidity constraints, and saving may therefore be discouraged as more credit (particularly for consumption) becomes available.19 Theoretically, the association between interest rates and saving is also ambiguous (income and substitution effects may work in opposite directions).
The income effect produced by higher interest rates may be positive or negative depending on whether the saver is a net wealth holder or a net debtor.
The (positive) income effect of an increase in interest rates for a net wealth holder may move in the opposite direction from a substitution effect that induces a cut in current consumption (substituting for future consumption).
The empirical evidence on the effects of interest rates on saving has proven to be inconclusive (see SchmidtHebbel and Servén, 1999).
Some authors have explored the sensitivity of saving to the rate of interest as a function of income levels.
Ogaki, Ostry and Reinhart (1995) provide evidence that saving is more responsive to rates of return at higher income levels.
At higher income levels, it is possible to both save and dissave.
Thus, according to this study, the intertemporal elasticity of substitution between present and future consumption varies with the level of wealth.
The conclusion reached by these authors is that the savings rate and its sensitivity to the interest rate are a rising function of income.
According to the literature, an important reason to save is the precautionary motive, since people will save more at times of uncertainty in order to prepare for the possibility of difficult times ahead.
This factor can be reflected in high and erratic inflation, exchangerate volatility, boom-bust cycles and instability in the financial system, which introduce uncertainty into the anticipation and appropriability of future cash flows and the opportunity cost of funds.
Uncertainty also discourages savers, as the returns on their savings and the prospects for recovering them both decline (Edwards, 1996; and High inflation has been closely associated with macroeconomic instability, financial crises and other events that have depressed growth and saving.
The effects of low-tomoderate inflation on saving are bound to be very different from the impact of high or even explosive inflation of the type that destroys countries’ payments and banking systems and, along with them, financial savings.
The classic example is the hyperinflation seen in Germany in 1923, although there are also more recent cases, such as Argentina’s bout of hyperinflation in the late 1980s and Brazil’s in the early 1990s.
The banking crisis that broke out in 2001-2002 in Argentina following the abandonment of the currency board that it had adopted in 1991 is yet another example.
During that crisis, people (mainly from the middle class) who believed in the system —and thus had bank deposits— witnessed the loss of a good part of their financial savings.
Fiscal policy has been found to be of key importance in building up national saving, especially in developing countries.
Small fiscal deficits or surpluses contribute to national saving, as complete Ricardian equivalence has been refuted empirically (i.e., an increase in public saving is not fully offset by a decline in private saving).
This effect is stronger in developing countries subject to subsistence consumption and liquidity constraints (see Corbo and Schmidt-Hebbel, 1991).
The evidence confirms the partial offset between government and private saving, with an offset coefficient in the 40%-70% range.
This means that 1% of additional government saving (in terms of GDP) adds the equivalent of about 0.5% of GDP to national saving.
Another factor is the impact that the level of taxation has on other variables that affect saving, such as interest rates and corporate dividends.
The age structure of the population is another determinant of national saving.
According to the life-cycle hypothesis, a larger working-age population relative to the older population (or young dependent family members) helps to raise national savings rates.
The working young are net savers, while retired older persons often have negative savings.
In economies with higher proportions of working-age populations, national savings rates will therefore be higher than in ageing economies with a larger proportion of older people in their populations.
The conclusions of some microeconomic studies conflict with these findings at country levels, which may be at least partially accounted for by the aggregation of cohorts of different ages in the macro studies.
Bequests may also be a factor in reducing aggregate saving even if the old do not dissave (Carroll and Weil, 1994; and Deaton and Paxson, 2000).
The bulk of the literature on the subject tends to support the argument that a negative correlation exists between high age-dependency ratios and national savings levels, thus corroborating the theory and empirical evidence.
Richer people are expected to save a larger proportion of their incomes than poor people (saving is, in a way, a superior good).
Some formulations make saving dependent upon functional income distribution (Nicholas Kaldor, for example, assumed that capitalists have a higher propensity to save than workers do), whereas others establish a link between personal income distribution and saving.
While, for the most part, the empirical literature based on cross-section microdata suggests that a positive relationship exists between personal income inequality and overall personal saving, the evidence on this issue is more mixed at the aggregate country level.
Empirical studies such as those conducted by Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén (1998 and 2000) indicate that cross-country data do not reveal a strong association between personal income distribution and aggregate saving.
These authors show that this relationship holds for samples of developing and developed countries and that it is robust to alternative savings measures, income distribution indicators and functional forms.
The more recent political economy literature emphasizes that regressive income distributions are a contributing factor to political instability and that, through this channel, they may depress both growth and saving.
Lower growth plays a role in reducing savings rates via the growth-saving link, but political instability may also discourage saving because of the uncertainty it creates about the outlook for savers.
The terms-of-trade effect, which is viewed as a transitory deviation of national income from its trend, is another factor that has been frequently examined in the literature.
The permanent income school of thought built from Milton Friedman’s consumption hypothesis would therefore argue that most of the additional income resulting from a terms-of-trade improvement would be saved.
The implied relaxation of foreign credit constraints would work against that effect, however.
Thus, the evidence on the terms of trade’s impact on national saving is inconclusive.
Estimation Regression analyses were employed to obtain empirical evidence about key factors associated with national saving using panel data for the nine Latin American countries in the sample used for the period 1990-2003.
As previously noted, most of the evidence has been based on data covering the years up to around the mid-1990s.
In order to examine a wide variety of saving determinants, estimates were calculated for reducedform linear specifications rather than a specific model.21 The stylized facts and selected research findings summarized in tables 10 and 11 were used to select the control variables.
Panel regressions were then run using three methods: pool OLS, fixed effects and random effects.
Hausman and Breusch-Pagan tests were employed to support the selected equations.22 The dependent variable used in the regressions is the national savings rate.
The evidence verified a positive association between saving and growth (growth of per capita GDP) (see equations 3, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9).
Various equations were tried out in order to decompose GDP growth into its transitory and its expected or permanent components.
A three-year moving average was used as a proxy for the expected component, and transitory growth was obtained GDP in dollars), the Gini index of income distribution, the dependency ratio (proportion of the total population represented by persons below 15 or above 64 years of age) and FDI inflows.
Three types of specifications based on pooled OLS, fixed-effects and random-effects models were used.23 The OLS pooled basic model ignores the panel structure of the data, treating observations as being serially uncorrelated for a given country.
In the fixed-effects model, the individual intercepts are free to take any value, whereas, in the random model, the individual effects become part of the error term.
The fixed- and random-effects models take advantage of the panel structure and correct for the potential systematic tendencies of the error terms across countries.
The fixed-effects model considered in this study has constant slopes and intercepts that differ across countries.
In the random model, the intercepts take the form of a random variable with a mean value and a random error that is country-specific and constant over time.24 The fixed- and random-effects models were also tested for heteroscedasticity and residual autocorrelation. as the difference between the actual and expected transitory components.
The conclusions did not change as regards the positive association between growth and saving, but this positive association became significant only for the expected component (see equations 10 and 12).
Carroll and Weil (2004) rationalize a similar finding by arguing that people adjust consumption habits slowly, which makes saving positively related to the current growth of income (even if it is expected) (see also Carroll, 1994).
Mutual causality is likely to be present in the interaction between saving and growth, however.
Consideration was given to the possibility of working with dynamic panel and co-integration techniques, but this option was ultimately ruled out because of the small relative size of the panel.
While the fixed-effects model cannot estimate a coefficient on any time-variant regressor, in the random model, the individual effects become part of the error terms, which may be exposed to bias due to correlations between the errors and the regressors.
The error term µi has a mean value of zero and a variance of σµ.
For µi to be properly specified, it must be orthogonal to the individual effects.
The evidence gathered for this chapter does not support a correlation between saving and the level of income (per capita GDP), since the richer countries have not saved more than the poorer countries in our sample.
Argentina’s per capita GDP, measured in 2000 dollars, has been above the per capita GDP levels recorded for Brazil, Chile and Ecuador, but its national savings rates have been, on average, below those of these three countries.
It is likely that the “development” effect on saving takes longer to make itself felt and that it could therefore not be captured in these estimates.
Across regions, Latin America and the Caribbean have posted higher per capita GDP levels than Asia but lower national savings rates (Gutiérrez, 2007a, table 2).
Although the evidence provided by larger samples and longer time periods points to a positive association between income levels and national savings rates (see tables II.10 and II.11), the estimates calculated for this study do not confirm this observation for the period 19902003 in Latin America.
Richer countries (and regions) in per capita GDP terms have not saved more (or invested more) than poorer countries (or regions).
This body of evidence also confirms a partial negative association between national and foreign saving, with the latter depressing the former (see equations 2, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9).
This partial offset implies that approximately one half of foreign saving is channelled into investment and one half into consumption.
A positive association was also found to exist between financial-sector development as measured by M3 (as a percentage of GDP) and national savings rates (see equations 3 through 9).
The potential negative effect of relaxing domestic credit constraints through financial development seems to be outweighed by the positive effects resulting from financial depth (enhancement of saving opportunities and strengthened financial sophistication and supervision).
In addition, a positive association between inflation and national saving was identified.
When inflation is used as a measurement of macroeconomic uncertainty, the result suggests that a precautionary motive overshadows the negative influence that inflation has on macroeconomic stability and saving.
Fiscal policy as measured by the government balance (as reported by IMF in International Financial Statistics) exhibits a positive association with national saving.
The estimates confirm the rejection of a full Ricardian equivalence found in the literature.
Lower offsetting coefficients were obtained here than in other research studies, however (between 20% and 50%, compared to the coefficient of about 50% found in other studies) (see equations 3 through 9).
This finding implies that fiscal policy can become an effective instrument for raising national saving.
This study did not confirm the negative association between age dependency ratios and national saving found in other research, however (see tables II.10 and II.11).
It is likely that the fact that the panel used here was smaller than those used in other studies that tested this factor influenced the results.
In point of fact, Masson, Bayoumi and Samiei (1998) have shown that the results will depend on the sample size, frequency and estimation technique.
Among the other factors associated with national saving, only the inequality of income distribution (measured by the Gini index) was found to have a statistically significant positive influence on national saving (see equations 6 and 7).
In the case of the dependency ratio, testing over a longer time period with a broader sample would probably be required to reach more solid conclusions.
As previously indicated, inequality could become a source of social conflicts and economic instability that would curb growth and saving.
Using panel data for 1965-1994 for a larger sample of countries across various regions, Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén (2000) found no evidence of any systematic effect of income inequality on national saving (see also Edwards, 1996).
No evidence of an association between either the terms of trade or openness and saving was identified for 1990-2004.
The sample of Latin American countries includes both “winners” and “losers” in relation to the terms-of-trade changes generated by oil and other commodity price trends (Ecuador and Colombia are net oil exporters, while Chile and Costa Rica are net importers).
In a study including both industrialized and developing countries for the period 1971-1993, Masson, Bayoumi and Samiei (1998) found that in the 1990s the terms of trade had a significantly positive impact only on industrialized countries.
A three-year moving average was generated to serve as a proxy for expected inflation, and the transitory component was then obtained as the difference between the actual and expected inflation components.
The results are reported in table II.13 for the nine Latin American countries in the sample and for the other world regions.
A similar procedure was used in section C to measure the impact of investment on growth.
The last subperiod extends up to 2003, as some country data for 2004 were not yet available at the time this information was compiled.
The results shown in table II.13 indicate that the national savings rates associated with the highest-growth episodes are higher than those prevailing in the lowestgrowth episodes.
This observation holds for the Latin American sample and for other world regions.
The results for total saving (which is equal to total investment) and foreign saving are mixed, however.
In Latin America, the highest-growth episodes are associated with higher total savings (investment) rates than those associated with the lowest-growth episodes.
Nonetheless, the means and medians of the total saving rates are higher in the highest- than in the lowest-growth episodes in all regions, except in Europe and Central Asia, where the results vary.
As for foreign saving, there is no clear pattern of association for either Latin America or for other world regions, since some or the highest-growth episodes were found to co-exist with lower foreign savings rates than those present in some of lowest-growth episodes.
In summary, high national saving seems to be required for high growth, but high investment or high foreign saving does not guarantee high growth.29 H.
Conclusions and policy implications The study provides evidence regarding the contribution of investment to economic growth in Latin America in the period 1960-2002 and concerning the determinants of saving and the association with growth.
Growth accounting estimates provided evidence as to the primary role played by total factor productivity (TFP) in explaining the difference between fast and slow growth experiences, with physical capital playing a secondary role in the growth of the six largest Latin American countries in 1960-2002.
The conclusions drawn from this evidence are, first, that aggregate fixed investment is a main source of growth but does not, in and of itself, explain the difference between fast-growth and slow-growth countries and, second, that TFP is actually the factor that accounts for that differential.
It was also found that machinery and equipment are the component of fixed investment that contributes the most to per capita GDP growth, with investment in construction playing a secondary role.
The stability analysis confirmed the significance of total fixed investment and of machinery and equipment investment as contributing factors to per capita GDP growth that provide a valuable channel for the transmission of technological improvements.
Although investment in construction showed little significance (t-values) as a contributing factor to per capita GDP growth in 1960-2002, a slight positive impact developed after the 1980s.
The main policy-related variables that contributed to growth were: low inflation, a limited size of government, a low level of external debt, and education.
Inflation, a proxy for price stability, displayed the most consistent significance in 1960-2002, however.
The evidence gathered in this chapter also shows that secondary education was an important force in contributing to per capita GDP growth during the 1960s and 1970s but that its role declined in the 1980s and was further reduced in the 1990s and 2000s as the coverage of secondary education increased.
The evidence suggests that education policies should incorporate new ways of expanding the human capital stock, including improvements in the quality of all types of education and the provision of other forms of training that will facilitate the dynamic adoption of new technologies.
The chapter provides evidence that private investment had a strong positive impact on growth, while public investment played a negligible role in 1960-1980.
The study also detected mutual causality between growth and private investment, which contributes to an understanding of how vicious and virtuous cycles are formed in Latin America.
The evidence suggests that a pre-condition for the use of active countercyclical public investment policies is the presence of a stable macroeconomic framework (chiefly price stability).
No conclusive evidence was found regarding the impact of FDI and infrastructure on private investment or growth in Latin America.
Specific case-by-case observations seem to be required to gauge the specific influence of these two variables.
These results include the observations that national saving was positively associated with growth, government saving and financial depth but was negatively associated with foreign saving.
No evidence was discovered of an association between national saving and the level of income (per capita GDP), dependency ratios, domestic interest rates, terms of trade or income distribution.
The relatively smaller size of the panel used for this study (which was restricted to nine Latin American countries) may explain the lack of correlation found in the cases of income levels and dependency ratios.
The absence of a correlation between national saving and interest rates, terms of trade or income distribution is in line with the ambiguous evidence discussed in the literature.
A positive relationship was found to exist between national saving and inflation.
This relationship has also been identified in other studies, where it has been rationalized as a precautionary savings motive.
In this study, however, it has been determined that this correlation is likely to be non-linear.
However, in periods of very high inflation, as in the 1980s, growth, investment and saving have all fallen.
Compelling evidence was uncovered of a strong positive relationship between national saving and growth, but no evidence indicating that growth “causes” national saving was found.
The evidence suggests that mutual causality is most likely to develop between national saving and growth on a case-by-case basis.
In the presence of productivity constraints, growth will drive saving (by boosting investment returns), as distortions affecting productivity gains will make additional saving relatively ineffective in accelerating growth.
In the presence of investment financing constraints, saving will drive growth, as the alleviation of borrowing constraints will increase the level of financing required to raise investment.
Sustained growth therefore appears to call for rising productivity and national saving.
Introduction Recent evidence on economic growth indicates that growth fluctuations at frequencies of a decade or so are at the centre of the Latin American countries’ growth story.
Growth in Latin America in particular and in developing countries in general is an irregular and highly volatile process in which a given country may experience several different growth transitions or growth spells (accelerations and decelerations).
Steady growth around a well-defined, stable trend is clearly not a good description of the actual growth experience of Latin American countries.
In this context, investment has played an important role as a source of growth, while national saving has been the main source of investment financing.
Foreign saving has played a secondary role and has generally been substituted for national saving, rather than augmenting the total amount of savings available in Latin America.
The high volatility and vulnerability to external swings exhibited by foreign capital have made foreign saving an unstable source of investment financing.
This study on Latin America helps to provide a statistical framework for analysing the growth story of Latin America, which is a story of frequent growth transitions rather than steady growth around a long-run trend.
The focus here is on growth transitions and on the role played by investment and by national and foreign saving during growth transitions.
Transitions affecting investment and national and foreign savings rates are identified, as are common and country-specific transitions, based on comparisons of a sample group of eight Latin American countries with the Latin American and Caribbean region as a whole for the period 1960-2005.
The Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter was used to identify acceleration, deceleration and stable episodes for four data series and for each of the selected countries and the entire Latin American and Caribbean region.
Growth transitions in the region were compared with transitions in the United States, in 15 high-income countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and in the East Asia and Pacific region.
The United States, as the largest single developed economy, has historically had the closest economic links with Latin America and the Caribbean, while the richer OECD countries have also maintained important trade and financial ties with the Latin America and the Caribbean region.
The East Asia and Pacific region, in turn, has become a standard of reference for Latin America and the Caribbean in terms of economic growth and development.
Measured probabilities were derived for leads and lags in investment, national saving and foreign saving in terms of growth transitions, leads and lags in national and foreign saving in terms of investment, and leads and lags in foreign saving in terms of national saving.
Measured probabilities for common and country-specific transitions (before and after the 1990s) were also derived.
Granger causality tests were applied to all the various pairwise combinations for the series of per capita GDP growth, investment rates, national savings rates and foreign savings rates for the Latin American and Caribbean region in the aggregate and for the eight individual countries making up the sample used for this study.
This research also helps to demonstrate that some growth episodes are not well captured by standard growth theories and econometric work developed and based on different economic contexts and time periods.1 Key observations are provided about growth transitions and the differential behaviour of investment, national saving and foreign saving during growth transitions in Latin America.
The study confirms some general conclusions reached in the literature but provides evidence that raises doubts about others.
Growth transitions: background Empirical work on economic growth has been strongly influenced by the Solow supply-driven model (1950s), which was developed to explain growth in the United States in the first half of the twentieth century.
Under this model, the long-run (steady-state) growth of per capita income is determined by the rate of technological change.
Subsequent econometric analysis based on large panels of data across time and countries (Barro, 1991) and the endogenous growth models developed since the mid-1980s (Lucas, 1988; and Romer, 1986) assign a crucial role to investment in explaining long-run growth as a vehicle for technological progress.
The recent literature on economic growth has gone beyond standard theories and econometric approaches to focus on understanding growth transitions and case-bycase differences in growth experiences.
This work has gained momentum amid the disappointing experiences of some Latin American countries that have followed macroeconomic policy advice that draws heavily on generalizations and simplifications of standard theories and econometric results (see Easterly, 2001 and 2006; Rodrik, 2005b; and Stiglitz, 2003 and 2006).
The empirical relevance of growth transitions is highlighted by the fact that a typical developing country tends to shift between different growth regimes over time rather than growing steadily around a stable trend, which is more typical of developed economies.
Growth in Latin America is characterized by high volatility and a low correlation between current and past growth rates (low time persistence) (see Hakura, 2007; Sahay and Goyal, 2006; and Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006).
The literature on growth transitions has sought to explain how some key economic policies and structures may influence the duration of growth spells (Berg, Ostry and Zettelmeyer, 2006).
Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004), who examine the relationship between growth acceleration episodes and key binding constraints affecting economic growth, argue that growth accelerations are fairly frequent events.
Hausmann, Rodrik and Velasco (2004) have proposed a framework for identifying key binding constraints related to investment and saving that affect economic growth.
They contend that an understanding of these differences can contribute to a more effective formulation of pro-growth policy priorities (see also Rodrik, 2004 and 2005a).
In this context, investment, saving and growth will be stimulated as new opportunities open up.
For further discussion of the foundations for the case approach to economic growth and to economic policy in general, see Easterly (2001 and This chapter is in line with the recent literature focusing on growth transitions.
Such transitions (including growth accelerations, growth decelerations and episodes of stable growth rates) are examined in terms of their relationships with investment, national saving and foreign saving, as well as comovements in common and country-specific transitions.
The sample contains large, medium-sized and small economies that are representative of the diversity found in Latin America.
The selection of countries took into account the availability and reliability of data on growth, investment and saving.
This two-sided linear filter computes the smoothed series mt of a given series yt by minimizing the variance of yt around mt, subject to a penalty that constrains the second difference of mt.
The HP filter chooses a complete sequence m1 … mT to minimize: S (yt – where the penalty parameter λ controls the smoothness of the series mt: the larger the λ, the smoother the mt.
Hodrick and Prescott (1997) suggested the use of λ = 100 for annual for purposes of comparison with the selected countries.
Data on per capita GDP growth for the United States, 15 high-income OECD economies, and the East Asia and Pacific region were used to compare these countries’ and groupings’ trends and co-movements with those of Latin America and the Caribbean.
The World Development Indicators (WDI) database of the World Bank and the International Financial Statistics (IFS) database of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were used for these purposes. data (cycles of about 20 years for smoothing) as it provides a better fit with the growth story of the United States economy.
Given the higher degree of volatility observed in the growth series for Latin America, in this case a λ of 7 (cycles of about 10 years for smoothing) was felt to be the most appropriate choice for reflecting the growth pattern of Latin American countries (see Maravall and The HP filter was applied to the original series.
For the per capita GDP series, however, the HP filter was first used on the original series in level terms, i.e., the per capita GDP (in constant 2000 dollars) series, and the HP-filtered per capita GDP growth rate was then derived from the results.
Moving averages calculated over 3- and 5-year periods were also tried, with differenced moving averages being obtained from the differentials between the original and lagged moving average series (using various lags).
The study distinguishes three types of transitions: acceleration, deceleration and stable episodes.
Accelerations (decelerations) are defined as episodes in which the HPfiltered series displays a persistently increasing (decreasing) trend for at least three years.
When the HP-filtered series exhibits consecutive years of mixed trends, the periods are identified as stable episodes.
In other words, a stable episode is a period in which the series exhibits no clear trend.
Granger causality The Granger causality test examines the degree of significance in the statistical order of precedence between two time series.
Thus, the test does not reveal a “causal” relation in a strict sense, but rather signals “causality” by determining that order of precedence.
Saying that series x “Granger-causes” series y signifies that y’s behaviour can be explained in part by x’s lags.3 Application of a pairwise Granger causality test consists of running bivariate regressions of the form: The reported F-statistics are the Wald statistics for each equation for the joint hypothesis b1 = b2 = bk = 0.
The pairwise Granger causality test examines causality for both equations and therefore tests causality in both directions.
Whenever the test is significant at the 1%, 5% or 10% level, then the null hypothesis is rejected and the existence of “Granger causality” is accepted.
A suite of Granger tests consisting of all pairwise combinations of per capita GDP growth, investment (proxied by total gross capital formation rates), national saving and foreign saving series for the Latin American and Caribbean region and for the eight countries in the sample were performed.
Granger tests were applied to the HP-filtered series using three lags to extract more rigorous statistical conclusions regarding the relationships existing among the four variables examined for the entire story of growth transitions in 1960-2004.4 All the results are reported in appendix A.
Measured probabilities Two sets of measured probabilities were generated using the database on growth transitions compiled for this study.
The first set measures the probabilities that investment, national savings and foreign savings rates lead or lag per capita GDP growth; that national or foreign saving lead or lag investment; and that foreign saving leads or lags national saving.
The second set provides an estimate Common acceleration, deceleration and stable periods for per capita GDP growth, investment, national saving and foreign saving were identified for each of the eight countries in the sample and for the Latin American and Caribbean region as a whole.
For purposes of comparison with Latin America and the Caribbean, growth transitions and common growth transitions were calculated for the United States, 15 high-income OECD countries and the East Asia and Pacific region.
All the results are reported in appendix A. of the probability of common growth transitions.
These measures help to gauge, for example, the probability of a growth transition being led or lagged by an acceleration of investment and the probability of a growth deceleration being the result of a common deceleration (i.e., one affecting all Latin American and Caribbean countries).
Granger-causality between two series is found to exist when the test provides statistical evidence to reject the null hypothesis.
The null hypothesis in the Granger test is that “x does not Granger-cause y”.
When statistical evidence for rejecting the null hypothesis is present, it means that “x Granger-causes y”.
Pairwise Granger causality tests were applied to original series and HP-filtered series using 3, 5, 8, and 10 lags.
These results are not reported because they do not add any further insights to the reported conclusions.
Growth transitions, investment and saving in The literature on economic growth assigns key roles to investment and saving as the main factors driving economic growth, especially during growth transitions.
In the Solow model, the savings rate is exogenous and equal to actual investment.
Savings and investment rates play a role only in the transitions between steady states, but not in the determination of long-run growth.
A different long-term pattern is observed in East Asia and the Pacific (see figure A.2), which experienced a continuous upward long-term growth trend during the entire period.
The United States exhibits a slight decline in long-term per capita growth, but it is less pronounced than the downtrend seen in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The 15 high-income OECD countries used in this study displayed a declining long-run trend which became somewhat flatter after the 1980s.
Of the eight selected Latin American countries, Chile is the only one that exhibits an upward long-run trend in per capita GDP growth.
The other seven countries show either a nearly flat or a slightly declining long-run trend.
Although the frequency of growth transitions (growth spells) is not higher for the Latin American and Caribbean region or for most of the selected countries than it is for the United States or for East Asia and the Pacific, their transitions’ amplitude and duration are much greater. rates, but this conclusion is contradicted by most of the empirical evidence.
The evidence has also confirmed the important role of investment as a key contributing factor to growth in the long run and during growth transitions (Barro, 1991; Lucas, 1988; Romer, 1986; and Hausmann, Rodrik and Velasco, 2004).
Saving is the financing counterpart of investment, and the evidence points to a high correlation between national saving and growth (Feldstein and Horioka, 1980; and Bordo and The results for all the growth transitions (both positive and negative growth spells) indicate that growth leads investment in about 56% of all growth accelerations and 43% of all growth decelerations.
National saving and growth are about equally distributed in terms of leads and lags.
Foreign saving lags growth in about 33% of growth accelerations and 57% of growth decelerations.
The results also show that national saving leads investment in about 44% of investment accelerations and 26% of investment decelerations.
Foreign saving also leads national saving in about 42% of national saving accelerations and 43% of decelerations (see table A.5).
More than 60% of the total years encompassed by accelerations and decelerations of per capita GDP growth and investment rates experienced by Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Peru also occurred at the regional level.
This implies that the majority of these growth transitions resulted either from forces generated outside the Latin American and Caribbean region or from the influence of large countries within the region (intraregional contagion effects).
The results thus suggest that the majority of growth and investment transitions in Latin America have been “common” in the sense that they match up with transitions at the aggregate regional level.
National saving and, to a lesser extent, foreign saving, in contrast, have mainly been country-specific.
The national savings rate has moved more independently across countries, especially during periods of deceleration in national savings rates.
The results also trace out a general pattern of substitution of foreign saving for national saving.
Characteristics of growth transitions (a) Frequency Latin America’s growth story is one of frequent and large fluctuations in growth regimes, and the region’s growth transition episodes have increased in frequency since the 1980s.
This observation holds for the region as a whole as well as for most of the individual countries in the sample.
Growth accelerations or decelerations have dominated the region’s growth story in 1960-2005, with very few stable periods being observed (see table A.1). (ii) Stable growth episodes are rather infrequent events not only in Latin America and the Caribbean but also in the United States, OECD and the East Asia and Pacific region.
Of the eight observed growth transitions, five took place in 1980-2005 (three accelerations, one deceleration and one stable episode). (iv) The story is similar at the level of individual countries.
Growth transitions (mostly either accelerations or decelerations) have been concentrated in the years after the 1970s, with the most frequent number of growth transitions during this subperiod being observed in Brazil (6), Mexico (6) and Peru (6).
The amplitudes of growth transitions have increased in the United States since the 1980s and in East Asia and the Pacific since the 1990s, however. (ii) Amplitudes in Latin America and the Caribbean have remained long since the 1980s.
Growth accelerations were also observed in the 1960s, though less pronounced, in Argentina, Colombia and Costa Rica.
That decade marked the most dynamic period in the import-substitution industrialization model adopted after the Second World War, in which national output was heavily protected from import competition. (v) An extended period of growth deceleration was observed starting in the 1970s that lasted until about the mid-1980s for the region as a whole.
Mexico’s growth accelerated during the first and second oil shocks of the early and late 1970s, however, whereas Venezuela’s growth accelerated only during the first oil shock.
The 1970s marked the death throes of the industrialization model, which came to an end with the 1980s debt crisis.
Argentina’s, Brazil’s and Peru’s growth accelerated in the late 1980s, while Mexico’s did not until the second half of the 1990s. (vii) From 1994 to 2001 the region exhibited a period of growth deceleration followed by a growth acceleration after 2002.
The growth rates posted by the region as a whole after the 1980s have never reached or surpassed the peak rate recorded in the early 1970s (3.8% at its height in 1971).
These data constitute evidence of common events in the entire region, but they also illustrate contagion effects in some of the larger countries.
Country-specific growth transitions not found in the region as a whole have been longer in the case of Mexico (growth accelerations, decelerations or stable periods).
Common episodes have been less frequent for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Costa Rica, Mexico and Peru (correlations below 50% in most cases).
A reform process can also trigger short-term productivity gains that lead to faster initial growth in economies that are starting from high, distorted levels (Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006).
The composition of investment (in terms of machinery and equipment/construction and private/public investment) has an impact on growth (Solimano and Gutierrez, 2006).
In part, this is because the “irreversible” character of physical-investment decisions implies that there is a high “value of waiting” in investment decisions (Servén and Solimano, 1993).
Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004) also provide evidence that growth accelerations have been accompanied by an increase in investment.
The crucial importance of investment during growth transitions is confirmed by the evidence gathered for this chapter, as most growth transitions have been, at some point, supported by accelerated investment (higher investment rates).
In most cases, growth accelerates or decelerates before investment, as growth leads investment in about 56% of all growth accelerations and 43% of all decelerations.
Growth can accelerate before investment when unutilized capacity is available, which seems to be the general case in Latin America and the Caribbean.
This situation also reflects the fact that growth accelerations often follow upon a deceleration.
Although growth needs to be sustained by higher investment rates, an initial impulse from investment is not required in order for growth to accelerate.
Growth accelerations can be preceded by falling or stable investment rates, and not all investment accelerations are accompanied or followed by growth accelerations.
Investment in construction and public investment During the second half of the 1880s and until the First World War, the world economy experienced a first wave of globalization.
In today’s global capital markets, however, capital flows and foreign investment aim for risk sharing and diversification instead of long-term financing to build infrastructure and housing, as was the case in the pre-1914 world (Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006). have proven to be less effective in promoting growth in Latin America than elsewhere (see Gutiérrez 2005; and Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006).
There have also been several growth accelerations that have been accompanied by accelerations of investment rates which extend beyond the end of the relevant growth acceleration episode, as well as several growth decelerations that have been accompanied by decelerations of investment rates which also have extended beyond the end of the corresponding growth deceleration.
This is valid for the Latin American and Caribbean region as a whole and for several episodes in the selected countries.
In such cases, investment reacts after accelerated growth episodes have led to full (or nearly full) utilization of installed capacity, which in many cases takes between three and four years.
When growth decelerates, investment also decelerates but with a lag, and the physical capital capacity that was built during the investment acceleration, if not destroyed, becomes available for the next round of growth acceleration.
A number of other cases of co-movements between investment and growth were also observed, however.
These episodes suggest that investment is required but does not guarantee higher growth and that growth can accelerate even without an initial impulse from higher investment.
The HP-filtered Granger test results show causality in both directions between investment and growth for the Latin American and Caribbean region in the aggregate (at 1% significance, see table A.4).
This suggests a mutual reinforcement between growth and investment; in some cases, lifting constraints on investment may trigger a more rapid pace of growth while, in other cases, an acceleration of growth may improve investment sentiment (and expected returns) and encourage additional investments (for more on this subject, see Hausmann, Rodrik and Velasco, 2004; and Gutiérrez, 2005).
The possibility of mutual causality is confirmed by the diversity observed in the individual countries’ results.
In the cases of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile and Peru, the results are similar to those obtained for the region in the aggregate, as causality in both directions was highly significant in most cases (at the 1% level).
For Argentina, growth caused investment; for Costa Rica, investment caused growth; for Colombia and Mexico, the results showed no direct causality in either direction.
The former states that consumption is determined by permanent (long-run) income, implying that saving follows current (transitory) growth.
The latter argues that productivity growth makes the working young population richer than the old, with the young saving more than the old are dissaving.
It also implies that aggregate income growth would follow from an increase in the lifetime profiles of succeeding generations.7 In the Keynesian school of thought, saving is endogenously determined by interactions between income and consumption.
Higher current growth generates higher incomes, which lead, in turn, to higher saving (as the propensity to consume The terms-of-trade effect is viewed as a transitory deviation of national income from its trend.
According to Milton Friedman’s consumption hypothesis, the additional income resulting from transitory improvements in countries’ terms of trade would mostly be saved.
In more extensive models of consumer behaviour, the relationship is theoretically ambiguous (Carroll and Weil, 1994). out of income is less than one).
Carroll and Weil (1994) argue that habit formation in consumption is a factor that helps to rationalize the positive correlation between saving and current growth.
They also provide evidence that growth Granger-causes saving, although this finding has been questioned by some authors (Attanasio, Picci and Scorcu, 2000; Gutierrez, 2007).
The evidence on growth transitions gathered in this chapter includes information on several cases in which growth accelerations and decelerations have, at some point, been accompanied or followed by accelerations in national savings rates.
This evidence thus corroborates the findings presented in the literature about the relationship between these two variables, with growth driving up national saving or higher national saving helping to finance higher investment and higher growth.
If this is the case, they will be reflected in a rising current-account deficit financed by foreign capital flows (foreign savings).
In such a case, foreign saving would then substitute for national saving, and growth would be coupled with falling national savings rates.
The results obtained in this study for all growth transitions (positive and negative growth spells) show that national saving and growth are about equally distributed in terms of leads and lags (see table A.5).
Several cases have also been observed, however, that suggest that growth may accelerate (decelerate) without an increase (decrease) in national savings rates and that higher (lower) national savings rates do not necessarily translate into an acceleration (deceleration) of growth.
For policy purposes, these cases suggest that some growth transitions may be primarily oriented towards consumption (reducing national saving) and that, in such cases, national savings policies may not necessarily translate into higher growth.
This indicates that, generally speaking, growth and national saving “go together” (as do growth and investment), although this is not always the case These mutually reinforcing elements have also been documented in the literature (see, for example, Attanasio, Picci and Scorcu, 2000; Hausmann, Rodrik and Velasco, 2005; and Gutiérrez, 2007).
This finding suggests that the removal of restrictions on national saving will stimulate investment and growth, but it also indicates that an acceleration of growth will stimulate saving (see also Carroll and Weil, 2004; Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén 1999; and Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006).
The results for the selected countries also suggest that causality may run in both directions, although the pattern is not uniform.
For Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica and Peru, however, causality does run in both directions, although it is stronger in the case of growth causing national saving (significant at 1%).
Foreign saving has been highly volatile, however, and has tended to be a substitute for national saving, thereby fuelling consumption booms and current-account crises.
The evidence on the association between growth and foreign saving is mixed.
There are cases of high growth with relatively low foreign savings rates (East Asian economies) as well as cases of lowgrowth episodes combined with high foreign savings rates (low-income countries in Africa and Latin America that receive sizeable levels of foreign aid) (see Prasad, Rajan and Subramanian, 2006; Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén, 1999; Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006; and Gutierrez, 2007).
The results for all the growth transitions (positive and negative growth spells) show that foreign saving lags behind growth in about 33% of growth accelerations and 57% of growth decelerations (see table A.5).
The results also show that foreign saving and growth display more diverse relationships during growth transitions than national saving and growth do.
Episodes in which growth accelerations (decelerations) are coupled with foreign savings rate accelerations and decelerations have been observed for the Latin American and Caribbean region and for individual countries, but the presence of several cases in which the results vary considerably points to a more unstable relationship between growth and foreign saving.
For Colombia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the results show no causality in either direction. (h) Investment and national saving The literature offers evidence of a relationship not only between investment and growth but also between investment and national saving (Bordo and Flandreau, 2003; Feldstein and Horioka, 1980; and Taylor, 1996 and 1999).
The corresponding empirical studies have uncovered a high and significant correlation between investment and national saving both in time series and in cross-country data, which contradicts the predictions of perfect capital mobility theory and provides grounds for the claim that “home biases” are to be found in the saving-investment process.
The evidence on growth transitions compiled for this chapter shows that, in several instances, investment accelerations (decelerations) have been accompanied at some point by accelerations (decelerations) in national savings rates, thus corroborating the general evidence of a high correlation between these two variables.
Accelerations in investment have also been financed with rising foreign saving (and shrinking national saving), however, as the substitution of foreign saving for national saving can give rise to a mix involving a larger component of foreign saving and a smaller one of national saving that makes a higher rate of investment growth possible.
The overall results show that national saving leads investment in about 44% of all investment accelerations and in approximately 26% of investment decelerations.
In the case of Colombia, causality runs from investment to national saving.
In other words, foreign saving tends to substitute (partially) for national saving (see Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén, 1999; Solimano and Gutiérrez, 2006; and Gutiérrez, 2007a).
It is therefore to be expected that increases in foreign saving will make a partial contribution to the financing of investment.
The literature does not, however, suggest what basis there might be for causality between foreign saving and investment.
Accelerations in investment have been financed with rising foreign saving and shrinking national saving during periods of booming capital inflows.
The overall results also show that foreign saving leads national saving in about 28% of investment accelerations and around 33% of investment decelerations.
In fact, the results show no causality for the Latin America and Caribbean region as a whole or for Chile.
For Mexico and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, causality ran in both directions. (j) National and foreign saving The body of empirical evidence corroborates the existence of a partial Ricardian offset between national and foreign saving (between 50% and 70) (Gutiérrez, 2007; and Schmidt-Hebbel and Servén, 1999).
Thus, a growing current-account deficit would be financed by capital inflows (an increase in foreign saving), which help to finance investment but, at the same time, drive down national saving, thereby stimulating consumption.
Capital inflows could also be driven by a reduction of national saving and/or a rise in investment.
The overall results show that foreign saving leads national saving in about 42% of national saving accelerations and 41% of its decelerations (see table A.5).
There have been several cases in which national savings rates have risen or while foreign savings rates for the region as a whole have been stable or falling too.
The individual countries in the sample, however, display a more general pattern of substitution between these two types of saving.
This evidence suggests that substitutability between national and foreign saving is greater in the presence of net capital inflows than net capital outflows.
It seems easier to maintain or reduce national saving in periods when external foreign credit constraints are more relaxed than to increase national saving in periods of tighter external financing conditions (a reduction of foreign saving associated with lower growth would, at the same time, depress national saving).
This also implies that foreign capital has a more damaging effect on investment and growth when it flows out than the positive effects it has on investment and growth when it flows in.
Thus, the crowding out of national saving by foreign saving seems to be biased on the positive side (when foreign saving is rising).
The HP-filtered Granger results for the entire region and for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela show no causality between national and foreign saving.
These results indicate that, although there is a general pattern of substitution between national and foreign saving, there is no a general pattern of causality or precedence between the two series, suggesting that these two variables tend to move simultaneously in opposite directions.
Final remarks and policy issues The growth story of Latin America has been one of frequent growth transitions rather than steady growth around a long-run trend.
For the purposes of this analysis, a statistical framework for identifying growth transitions was developed, and probabilities of leads and lags related to co-movements among per capita GDP growth, investment, and national and foreign savings rates were derived.
Granger causality tests were also applied with a view to arriving at general observations about co-movements among the pairwise combinations of the series of GDP per capita growth, investment rates, national savings rates and foreign savings rates.
The period 1960-2005 was surveyed for a sample of eight Latin American countries and the Latin American and Caribbean region in the aggregate.
The research conducted for this study helps to shape a statistical framework for the examination of growth transitions and to demonstrate that several growth episodes in Latin America have not been well captured by standard theories or econometric work based on various types of situations.
Common growth spells (accelerations, deceleration, and stable periods) have also been identified, and growth transitions in Latin American countries and in the Latin American and Caribbean region as a whole have been compared with transitions in the United States and in East Asia and the Pacific.
Key observations are made about growth transitions and about the relationships among investment, national saving, foreign saving and growth.
More specifically, evidence is provided that demonstrates the following points: (i) Although growth needs to be sustained by higher investment rates, an initial impulse from investment is not required in order for growth to accelerate.
It is not always the case that investment leads growth, since growth may also accelerate as a result of improved consumer confidence, productivity-driven economic reforms or idle capital stock.
Growth leads investment in about 55% of the acceleration transitions and in roughly 43% of decelerations.
Growth accelerations may also be preceded by falling or stable investment rates, as occurred in Argentina (ii) Not all investment accelerations are accompanied or followed by growth accelerations.
Growth accelerations may be oriented towards consumption, and when this occurs it is reflected in a mounting current-account deficit financed by foreign capital inflows (foreign saving).
When foreign saving is a substitute for national saving, then growth may occur in the presence of falling national savings rates. (iv) The high correlation between national saving and investment does not mean that national saving must necessarily rise in order to finance investment.
Accelerations in investment have also been financed by rising foreign saving (while national saving has shrunk, as occurred in Argentina in 1991-1996 and in Chile in 1977-1979).
These situations constitute cases in which national saving has been more than fully crowded-out by foreign saving.
Country-specific transitions are found more frequently in the case of national saving.
Foreign saving co-movements are to be observed in about 50% of the cases in the Latin American and Caribbean region.
The probability of common growth and foreign saving transitions was found to increase after the 1990s, which is interpreted as an indication of increased growth volatility during this new wave of globalization.
The results of this analysis show no common pattern of co-occurrence or precedence in relation to growth, investment, national saving and foreign saving, which suggests that co-movements among these variables depend on the particular circumstances existing in each country.
The interaction between common and country-specific factors gives rise to variations in comovements and causality relationships across time and countries.
The application of general theoretical considerations or econometric results may therefore give rise to misleading interpretations of growth processes and oversimplification in the design of growth policies in the region.
The diversity of the causality results across countries for growth, investment, and national and foreign saving suggests that growth is the result of forces whose dynamic and motion are continuously changing through time and that are strongly influenced by the economic and social framework in which they interact.
Introduction In recent years, ECLAC has published several studies and organized two seminars on economic growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.
In the first seminar, held in 2003, Solimano and Soto (2006) presented stylized facts revealing that the economic growth of Latin American countries has been very uneven and volatile.
Since 1980, growth has slowed and there have been significant differences in the relative performance of the region’s countries.1 Also presented at the seminar was a series of regional studies analysing the economic growth of each country.
The main theme of the seminar was the poor performance of Latin American and Caribbean countries in terms of growth.
Rodríguez (2007) uses the concept of poverty traps to explain low growth in the region, while Gutiérrez (2007a) analyses the characteristics of countries’ highly volatile economic growth.
The seminar was also presented with five case studies examining various aspects of growth in the region’s three main economies: Argentina, Brazil and Mexico; a study on Central America; and another on Caribbean countries.
Solimano (2006) includes a selection of the studies analysed at the seminar “Latin American Growth: Why so Slow?” held on 4 and 5 December 2003 at the ECLAC headquarters in Santiago, Chile.
Economic growth in Latin America Latin America’s economic growth over the last 50 years compared to that of other regions is an issue of major interest for those who study the economics of development.
According to the figures available, in 1960 the per worker GDP in an average Latin American country was one third that of the United States, half that of the average western European country and 2.4 times that of the average Asian country.
Studies by Restuccia (2007) and Rodríguez (2007) have attempted to empirically determine the causes of the relative stagnation of Latin America.
In countries that have closed the productivity gap with the United States, such as Japan, Republic of Korea and Singapore, such processes have involved major relative increases in sectoral productivity (especially in agriculture and industry).
As already stated, Restuccia (2007) uses a model from Restuccia and Rogerson (2007) that attempts to explain why total factor productivity may vary from country to country.
The author presents a framework for analysing the distortions from institutions and policies that then result in a faulty allocation of factors among producers with different levels of productivity.7 According to Restuccia, Latin America’s low relative productivity is based on distortions such as barriers to entry into the formal market, competition and trade.
This explanation echoes that put forward by Machinea and Kacef (2006), who partly attribute the region’s low relative growth (even now that some problems are beginning to be overcome) to the need for a set of reforms.
The specific reforms required depend on each country, but reforms are urgently needed throughout the region.
These could include reforms of the regulations that hamper the functioning of some markets, such as difficulties in setting up businesses and enforcing contracts and the lack of clear incentives (or presence of obstacles) for private-sector participation in key sectors, as well as the limited development of capital and financial markets and the absence of a human resource training strategy.
Rodríguez (2007) explains the poor economic growth of Latin American countries using the idea of poverty traps.
The idea of self-reinforcing equilibriums that cause a vicious circle of underdevelopment is common among structuralist thinkers, especially Prebisch (1949) (see also Nurkse, 1953, and Myrdal, 1957).
More recently, Sachs (2005) reused this idea to state that poverty traps are essential to understanding why African countries remain poor.
Rodríguez (2007) argues that this concept may help to understand the lack of economic growth in Latin America, and not only in the context of the poorest countries.
This model has also been used by Hsieh and Klenow (2006), Bartelsman, Haltiwanger and Scarpetta (2006) and Alfaro, Charlon and Kanczuk (2007) in empirical applications for the study of productivity differences among economies.
An understanding of poverty traps in Latin American countries can be enhanced by reference to the following: (a) The duration of growth collapses, when per capita GDP displays negative growth in relation to its peak level. (b) The time it takes for an economy to react to shocks (Rodríguez and Shelton, 2007).
In terms of the first point, Hausmann, Rodríguez and Wagner (2006) studied international data to demonstrate that no developed economy had reached its peak level of per capita GDP before the year 2000, although this had happened in 61 of the 116 developing countries (53%) in the sample.
Of these 61 developing countries, 26 had reached their record level of per capita GDP prior to 1980.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, 15 economies posted their highest-ever levels of per capita GDP before 2000.
Also, the duration of the growth collapses, measured by the number of years taken to recover pre-crisis levels of per capita GDP, is 2.5 years in industrialized countries, compared with 6.9 years in Latin American countries.
Furthermore, in Latin American countries the average ratio between per capita GDP prior to crises and the minimum level was five times higher than in industrialized countries, which reveals that the distribution, duration and depth of recession vary considerably among regions.
According to Hausmann, Rodríguez and Wagner (2006), the main variables that explain growth collapses are what they call “open forest”, in addition to a dummy variable to capture the effect of being an oil producer on the estimation.
The “open forest” variable is a measure of export flexibility and reflects the density of non-produced products close to those products currently produced.
Rodríguez considers this variable important as many growth collapses are related to a loss of export capacity and the appearance of specialization traps.
These traps may explain why an economy goes from one equilibrium to another less desirable one where it stays at the onset of a crisis.
In an economy producing two types of goods, such as manufactures involving specialized human capital and primary goods using natural resources and specialized human capital, the specialization trap may arise when an initial shock to natural resources encourages the economy to specialize in primary goods.
When the shock subsides, the economy loses the human capital specialized in producing primary goods, and the potential for recovering that human capital will depend on that economy’s “open forest”, i.e. the closeness between primary goods and manufactures.
Gutiérrez (2007a) analyses the differences between eight countries in terms of economic growth, investment, national savings and external savings, as well as any comovements.
The author shows that the characteristics of several growth episodes in the region cannot be appropriately interpreted using conventional econometric studies and theories.9 C.
Regional studies Coremberg (2007) et al. observed that the macroeconomic experience of Argentina displays sharp cyclical fluctuations, as well as large variations in trend growth rates.
See chapter 3. current prices averaged around 20% and peaked in the early 1970s, at times during the 1960s and in the more recent past, while low points were reached in periods of hyperinflation and during the crisis at the beginning of the current decade.
Up until the 1990s, variations in aggregate saving and investment were similar, with the exception of some brief episodes.
External savings swelled considerably during the 1990s, while savings rates and the current-account balance were also impressive in the last few years.
Investment rates at constant prices have oscillated wildly from levels well below 20% in the 1950, 1980s and during the crisis earlier this decade, to peaks of around 25%.
These patterns resulted in dramatic shifts in the capital-to-output ratio, which was particularly high during the 1970s and 1980s.
Although econometric analyses of savings and investment trends show up some simple systematic patterns, there were also many cases of effects linked to specific episodes measured using dummy variables that considerably altered the statistical significance of the explanatory variables depending on whether they were included or excluded.
The rate of investment at current prices displayed an elastic variation relative to GDP growth, as well as large negative ratios to periods of hyperinflation and macroeconomic crisis.
In addition to the dependence on variations in output, the estimated function for the total savings rate showed indications of distributive effects (with a negative ratio to real wages and a positive ratio to the real exchange rate).
Here also, the result was affected by the inclusion of dummy variables.
In terms of investment volumes, there were lagged output effects and a negative response to the capital-to-output ratio (a variable that was included for its significance of analysis, above and beyond questions of endogeny).
There were also statistically significant dummy variables: positive ones for the 1960s and 1970s and negative for Aside from the regular features that characterized the period as a whole, investment scale, composition and incentives did perform differently in specific periods.
The above-mentioned study considered some of the main projects carried out over time and identified some striking patterns.
For instance, in the period of high investment at the beginning of the 1960s, the most emblematic projects were linked to import substitution in the following sectors: transport materials (automobile industry), chemical and petrochemical production, as well as extraction of petroleum and derivatives, all with a high level of participation by foreign enterprises.
Subsequently, during the 1970s and into the early 1980s, major public projects were carried out in areas such as water supply and the generation of hydroelectricity and nuclear electricity.
This period was also characterized by a series of capitalintensive industrial projects implemented by financial groups of national capital, and influenced by sectoral and geographical development programmes.
Investment was channelled into sectors producing commonly used intermediate goods such as the paper, chemical, iron and steel and cement industries.
These developments were in response to the considerable increase in the aggregate capital-to-output ratio.
During the 1990s, investment concentrated on recently concessioned and privatized public services, with lower aggregate capital intensity.
In a new wave of foreign direct investment that was used to purchase existing companies, the main sectors involved were telecommunications, thermal electricity generation, gas and petroleum extraction and mining.
The Argentine economy has experienced several surges in investment, interspersed with periods of lower accumulation.
The lack of a clear investment trend has been due to changes in the incentives used as a basis for various investment decisions.
Depending on the case in hand, the emphasis has been on import substitution in a protected market, the use of fiscal aid in capital-intensive projects, public investment or expected profitability in favourable regulatory frameworks governing service sectors with various unsatisfied needs.
Changes in these incentives had much to do with economic policy, and also reflected shifts in opinion about the roadmap for growth and investment opportunities.
The study paves the way for subsequent research on the dynamics of these incentive systems and the effects of the resulting investment pattern on aggregate growth and its sectoral and factoral characteristics.
Although average GDP growth in Brazil was 7.5% between the end of World War II and 1980, since the late 1980s the average GDP growth rate has been around 2.5%.
In the last four years, however, Brazil has enjoyed positive external conditions that have produced surpluses in the current account and the overall balance, whereas average growth between 2003 and 2006 was still only 3.4%.
This small increase in GDP went hand in hand with limited productivity growth and a low investment ratio.
Various explanations have been put forward for these results, five of which are discussed by Castelar and Bonelli (2007).10 The first explanation relates to the high cost of investment.
On average, the investment deflator has been above the GDP deflator since the 1980s.
However, the increase in the ratio between price of investment and price of output was more due to a lowering of the latter than an increase in the former.
Nevertheless, the empirical evidence points to a negative relationship between the deflators’ ratio and the level of income per capita.
Given that the cost of investment alone does not explain low growth, the second explanation is related to the country’s low savings ratio compared with the rest of Latin America and other middle-income countries.
Having said that, Brazil has had easy access to external saving for the last four years, unlike in previous periods.
Indeed, the country has been exporting savings since 2003, the year in which the current account first posted a surplus.
Domestic saving also climbed over the same period, although average public saving has posted negative figures since the mid-1990s.
The third explanation put forward by Castelar and Bonelli (2007) is based on the nature of the fiscal adjustment.
To cover such spending without being able to increase public debt, the tax burden climbed by 11 points to stand at 35% of GDP.
In addition to creating various economic distortions, a heavy tax burden harms high-productivity firms that are competing with companies that pay less tax as they have lower levels of productivity.
Despite the country’s high tax burden, the State has a low level of investment.
A breakdown of public investment reveals that the bulk is channelled into the oil sector.
However, several infrastructure indicators (including access to electricity, drinking water and basic sanitation) show that Brazil is above average for Latin America and the Caribbean and middle-income countries.
Infrastructure does therefore not seem to be a direct constraint at present, although the lack of an ongoing infrastructure maintenance and improvement strategy could be a cause for concern in the future.
Lastly, Castelar and Bonelli (2007) associate low growth in recent years with an unfavourable business environment.
According to the World Bank, high borrowing costs, labour laws, corruption and crime are among the main obstacles to growth as perceived by business leaders.
There is also a perception of low legal certainty that calls into question the protection afforded to property rights, which is often the determining factor in private-sector investment decisions.
Overall, recent positive macroeconomic indicators, such as a reduced and improved external debt profile, lower inflation and a fall in interest rates, suggest that the growth rate may pick up speed in the near future.
Nevertheless, many of the improved indicators are due to the favourable external context, which has contributed to a hefty current-account surplus but which has not been used to improve the fiscal adjustment.
This is indeed the main bottleneck in speeding up the growth rate of the economy, which continues to display a high public-debtto-GDP ratio, a considerable tax burden, rising public spending and a low rate of investment.
It is also vital to make progress in promoting the protection of property rights and improving the business climate.
García-Verdú (2007) defines Mexico as a middle-ranking country in terms of demographic transition11 and the accumulation of human capital.
The author analyses the country’s economic growth between 1950 and 2005, with emphasis on the contribution made to real productivity per worker of: (i) demographics, meaning changes in the population and its age structure; and (ii) human capital accumulation, including increases in educational attainment and in life expectancy at birth.
The analysis by García-Verdú (2007) covers five sub-periods and the patterns of five key macroeconomic variables: (i) growth rate of real GDP per worker, (ii) volatility of real GDP, (iii) inflation, (iv) the fiscal balance, and (v) the current-account balance.
Machinea and Kacef (2006), for example, associate Brazil’s recent growth performance with problems of macroeconomic policy and an excessive tax burden.
This consists of successive changes from high birth and mortality rates, to high birth rates and low mortality rates, and eventually to low birth and mortality rates.
This might suggest that the economy functions in cycles of 50 years, except for the fact that: (i) the real GDP growth rate per worker was significantly higher in the period 19501970; (ii) the exchange-rate regimes were different; and (iii) the economy became more open during the process of trade liberalization.
This involves a period of falling dependency ratios, that is the proportion of the population aged from 0 to 14 or 65 and above, in relation to the population aged 15 to 64.
This situation promotes economic growth, as during a time there will be a large generation of people entering the labour force, while the younger generation not contributing to production Central American countries Macías, Meredith and Vladkova (2007) state that, although Central America has made major progress in terms of macroeconomic stability and in continuing with regional remains small.
This has been called the “demographic dividend”, which represents an opportunity for growth that disappears as the population aged 65 and above begins to increase.
In the case of Mexico, the dependency ratio dropped in the period 1970-2000, with projections suggesting that it will continue to fall until 2020 in line with the reduction in the younger population.
According to the results of the growth accounting exercise carried out by García-Verdú (2007) (see appendix), physical capital, human capital and total factor productivity each contribute around a third of the observed growth in real GDP.
This showed that the contribution of physical capital is far smaller than suggested by previous studies (see Elías, 1992).
As for human capital, uneducated workers and those who have completed primary education make a negative contribution to real GDP growth, which is more than offset by the contribution of workers who have completed secondary and higher education.
The results emphasize the potential impact on growth of education and social policies that affect demographic composition. and global integration, the subregion’s countries have not taken advantage of trade liberalization to improve economic growth and the well-being of the population.13 Most theories of economic growth are formulated to explain patterns in output per worker or average productivity per worker.
However, authors who have written about growth have tended to analyse per capita GDP more than GDP per worker, due to the scarcity of data available on the latter.
This inconsistency is especially relevant when the employed population has characteristics that differ from the total population.
Between 1980 and 1989, growth plummeted to an average of just 1.2%, due to the impact of external shocks.
There was a subsequent recovery in output, with growth rates of although levels did not rival those reached in the 1960s and 1970s.
Despite the upturn observed since 1990, only two countries (Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic) have higher per capita GDP than at the end of the 1970s.
For the period 1960-2005, the growth accounting exercise carried out by Macías, Meredith and Vladkova (2007) indicated that total factor productivity did not have a significant effect on GDP.
The same authors point out that the export-to-output ratio remains relatively constant in Central America, unlike emerging economies in Asia and Central and Eastern Europe, where the ratio has climbed significantly.
The first measure of the quality of institutions is the governance indicator of Kaufman, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2003), which itself is made up of two indicators.
The first considers government effectiveness, control of corruption, political instability and violence, accountability and rule of law.
The second refers to aspects of business transactions such as regulatory quality and rule of law.
The results of the regressions carried out by Macías, Meredith and Vladkova (2007) demonstrate that all institutionrelated ratios are significant.
The signs of the ratios of other variables are as projected, despite the fact that the growth of trading partners, degree of trade openness and inflation are not statistically significant.
The results are interpreted as follows: institutions directly affect the trade environment and, even ignoring the effect that institutions may have on the level of investment, the ratios for institution-related variables remain highly significant.
Furthermore, there is some evidence that the benefits of trade openness are linked with the quality of the institutional framework.
Macías, Meredith and Vladkova (2007) conclude by pointing out that the last 15 years have seen increased growth rates in Central American countries.
However, this has not been sufficient for reducing poverty and income inequality.
The fall in productivity in the period 2000-2005 casts doubt on the sustainability of the growth achieved.
Lastly, according to the authors, the regulatory framework of institutions may explain why Central America has been unable to make the most of the opportunities provided by increasing trade liberalization and the favourable external context.
Caribbean countries Pérez Caldentey (2007) uses a consistent stock-flow model to explain the growth pattern of countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The author shows that low GDP growth and the fiscal and current-account deficits during the 1990s may be attributable to the link between fiscal policy and external sector performance.
In particular, according to the model, the external sector is the main constraint on these economies, and the functioning of fiscal policy is determined by that sector’s performance.
In the 1990s, CARICOM countries tended to post very low growth rates, stagnated investment, widening deficits on the current and fiscal accounts and hikes in debt stocks.
While rising fiscal expenditure had a positive impact on domestic demand, the current-account deficit offset this effect and limited growth.
The author defines the following two indicators: (a) a fiscal indicator provided by the growth rate of fiscal expenditure relative to the income elasticity of tax receipts, and (b) an external indicator consisting of the export growth rate relative to the income elasticity of imports.
On average during the period 1990-2005, most CARICOM countries posted a higher increase in the first than the second indicator, which suggests the simultaneous appearance of deficits in the fiscal and current accounts.
This in turn leads to growth that is unsustainable as it goes hand in hand with a process of debt accumulation.
The performance of the fiscal indicator is mainly dependent on the increase in public spending, as receipts remained constant in most countries.
Expansionary fiscal policies were accompanied by a worsening of currentaccount balances due to poor export performance.
The external sector therefore constitutes a major constraint on effective fiscal policy, and a binding constraint on the long-term growth of these countries.
The stock-flow model is used for a situation in which the rate of change in stocks is zero (steady state) or in which stock variation is allowed (out of steady state).
The steady-state model only analyses flows, whereas the “out of steady state” model analyses the interaction between flows and stocks.
The latter model shows the basic reason why the external-sector deficit limits the effect of expanding aggregate demand on growth.
The current-account deficits strip the economy of the assets that may be created by expanding demand.
When more assets are stripped than created, this leads to low economic growth.
The analysis shows that the factors that disrupt economic growth also push up debt levels.
The accumulation of debt therefore results not only from public-sector disequilibria, but also from the interaction between different parts of the economy (including the private sector).
The main point is that fiscal policy management cannot be separated from external-sector performance.
What is more, fiscal policy can be a determining factor in increasing growth through aggregate demand, only as and when permitted by the external sector.
Countercyclical fiscal policies may therefore fail to give positive results if they aggravate external constraint in the face of an external shock.
What is also made clear is that an increase in external public debt cannot be considered solely from a fiscal perspective.
Such increases in external public debt are not due to government expenditure rising more than its revenues, but rather to an increase in public spending in excess of that permitted by the external sector.
Lastly, it should be pointed out that, according to the analysis, asset creation is key to economic growth.
In this sense, increasing saving may promote growth only if it results in a higher level of domestic assets.
The level and composition of savings are therefore equally important in determining their contribution to economic growth.
Appendix To explain trends in per capita GDP in Latin America compared with other regions, Restuccia (2007) begins by defining the stylized facts of the phenomenon and examining per capita GDP, per worker GDP and sectoral labour productivity.
The point of comparison used is the United States economy, which posts high GDP per worker and stable growth rates.
In this sense, empirical evidence shows that the major differences in schooling between the United States and Latin American countries should probably be expressed in differences in economic growth.
This amplification mechanism is significant because the differences in total factor productivity to explain The specific form of this production function is: For a formal development of the link between human capital and income among countries, see Erosa, Koreshkova and Restuccia (2007). differences between per capita GDP in the United States and any Latin American country are smaller.
García-Verdú (2007) uses a similar framework to Restuccia (2007) to conduct a growth accounting exercise.
Taking logarithms in (1) and differentiating gives the following growth rate equation: gY = gYE + gE – gL Indeed, favourable demographic conditions owing to a low dependency ratio (expressed by gL and higher gE) have helped real per capita GDP to grow once more, despite a lack of significant growth in GDP per worker.
In that case, real GDP per capita can be expressed as the product of real GDP per worker and ratio of the employed population to the total population.
The behaviour of the ratio of the employed population to the total population is far from constant over the period 1950-2005.
In fact, it is very similar to the inverse of the dependency ratio.
This implies that per capita GDP and GDP per worker differ throughout the period as follows: (i) GDP per worker grew faster than per capita GDP between 1950 and 1973; (ii) the former fell more sharply between 1981 and 1995; and (iii) the former grew more slowly than the latter between 1995 and 2006.
To measure the stock of physical capital, GarcíaVerdú (2007) uses the perpetual inventory method, assuming a 5% annual depreciation rate and a steady state level of capital in 1950.
According to an earlier study by García-Verdú, α = 0.4 and βi = 0.6.
These assumptions were then combined with the observed number of workers by each education level as a share of total employment in order to obtain their share in the total wage bill.
The average shares over the The Argentine economy continued to grow briskly in 2006.
In fact, GDP increased by 8.5%, while aggregate economic activity expanded by 8.1% in the first quarter of 2007.
This represents a marked recovery by the economy in the five-year interval since 2002, in which the absence of external constraints or public borrowing restrictions is a rare occurrence in Argentina.
The surge in consumption contributed heavily to the rise in domestic demand, while the domestic savings rate and the investment-to-GDP ratio at constant prices were the highest in the series that began in 1993.
In 2006, investment in durable production equipment reached an all-time high, although it fell slightly as a share of GDP.
There was also a major increase in production capacity, especially in the manufacturing sector.
The capital-output ratio fell to levels similar to those in the previous decade’s growth period.
The continuing rapid-growth phase pointed to the consistency of spending and supply-capacity trends.
In a context of rising labour demand, the unemployment rate was below 10% in the final months of 2006, and the urban employment rate showed a year-on-year rise of nearly one percentage point that brought it to a record level.
Within this growth scenario, real wages increased by an average of 8.4%.
Thanks to the combined impact of trends in employment and wages, poverty and indigence rates —although still high— were reduced somewhat.
The inflation rate, which stood at 9.8%, was lower in 2006 than it had been the previous year.
With the structure of relative prices still in a transitional phase, while domestic expenditure increased sharply and the prices of tradable goods climbed, a pattern of moderate rises in the various price indices gradually set in as the recovery progressed.
Monthly inflation rate variations became a topic of public and government debate.
This prompted the authorities to negotiate agreements to directly influence price formation and the application of taxes and subsidies, in particular to curb public-service price adjustments and to redirect some of the exportable supply into the domestic market.
In the first few months of 2007 a debate arose regarding the methodological criteria used in computing the consumer price index, whose rate of increase was slowing.
In 2006, there was a surge in the value of exports as a result of rises in both prices and volumes.
The increase in imports was less elastic relative to the increase in domestic activity.
There continued to be a large trade surplus (US$ 14 billion) of similar proportions to the previous year.
The current-account balance was more than US$ 8 billion in the black (3.7% of GDP), which, added to capital movements in the non-financial private sector, generated a hefty supply of foreign exchange.
The central bank took action to absorb this surplus in order to build up reserves and avert currency appreciation, while steadily stepping up bond issues to sterilize the corresponding monetary effects.
In 2006, public accounts showed a cash-based primary surplus of 3.5% of GDP.
Although this surplus was a little lower than in 2005, it was, once again, quite large in historical terms and, if measured on an accrual basis and in terms of GDP, was actually higher than it had been the year before.
There was a significant increase in tax receipts, in excess of the rise in nominal GDP.
Primary spending, to which investments made a growing contribution, followed revenue trends until the end of 2006, when there was an upswing that continued into the first few months of 2007.
In 2006, the primary surplus of the provinces declined to around 0.4% of GDP.
Macroeconomic policy management was characterized by a continuing primary surplus in the national public sector, a build-up of international reserves linked with the nominal rise in the exchange rate and measures designed to influence inflation levels.
In the first few months of 2007, public accounts continued to show a substantial surplus because of the steep rise in tax receipts.
By contrast, primary spending again expanded more than revenues, largely owing to social security expenditure and transfers to the provinces.
The central bank continued to build up reserves in order to conduct major sterilization operations within a context of gradually rising benchmark interest rates.
In January 2007 the government agreed to pay the arrears of close to US$ 1 billion on its outstanding debt with the Spanish government.
In 2006, growth in the national public sector’s current resources outpaced the rise in GDP.
Tax receipts rose by 25.8% and the tax burden reached a record level of 23.2% of GDP.
This continued in the first few months of 2007, in addition to significant rises in all tax categories in 2006.
Value-added, profit and wealth taxes continued to account for a little over half of tax receipts (55.2%), while the share of revenues brought in by social security contributions increased from 13.4% to 15.7%.
Once again, taxes on foreign trade and financial transactions contributed around 13% and 8%, respectively.
The large increase in social security contributions (44.6%) stemmed from rises in the taxable wage, not only as a result of wage adjustment and the inclusion of sums not formerly considered as gainful, but also of a rise in the number of contributors.
The growth in nominal consumption led to an increase in VAT receipts for the government (27.8%), while higher profit-tax receipts (19.9%) were partly attributable to a rise in the threshold of income subject to tax and in allowable personal income tax deductions.
In addition, increased bank transactions led to rises in the tax on credit and debit (23.9%).
The rise in the nominal exchange rate and in trade in goods pushed up taxes on foreign trade (22.5%), especially on Spending by the non-financial public sector increased more than the growth in revenues.
This trend, where primary spending swelled to 20.6% of GDP in 2006 (compared with 20.1% in the previous year), was fuelled by higher payroll costs (26.3%) and social security benefits (29.3%) arising from a greater number of benefit payouts and more numerous beneficiaries as a result of pension entitlements given to people who had not completed the contribution period.
Once again, capital expenditure climbed steeply (64.5%) to around 2.5% of GDP.
Fund transfers to the provinces (under revenue-sharing arrangements) and to the private sector (in the form of energy and transport subsidies and family allowances) continued to rise at the previous rate of around 20%.
In 2006, the public sector primary surplus stood at slightly above 23 billion pesos, representing a 17.8% increase over the previous year.
The central government’s financial balance showed a surplus of 11.6 billion pesos (23.4%), whereas the primary surplus of the provinces trended downwards owing to a strong upswing in expenditure.
Much of the demand for this government paper came from pension funds, trust funds and the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which received around half of the issues denominated in foreign currency.
In the fourth quarter the government issued debt securities to cover its borrowing needs for 2007.
In September 2006, the public debt stood at US$ 130 billion, representing around 65% of GDP (nearly nine points less than in 2005).
In 2006, the monetary base expanded by 37.6% in nominal terms, partly owing to a change in regulations on the minimum cash reserve, which significantly increased other banks’ deposits held at the central bank (110.5%), while the money supply grew slightly more than nominal GDP (22.1%).
Even though the country paid off its debt with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), its international reserves increased by around US$ 4 billion, rising to over US$ 32 billion by the end of 2006.
The central bank continued to purchase foreign exchange in the first few months of 2007, and intervention in the foreign-exchange market was once again the main factor of growth in the monetary base.
Sterilization mechanisms included the debt security issues of the central bank (whose capital stock stood at 57 billion pesos in April 2007), the recovery of discount loans granted during the financial crisis, the reserve policy and public-sector transactions (albeit to a lesser degree than in 2005).
The monetary authority provided for gradual increases in the interest rates charged in swap operations, leading to a cumulative rise in deposit rates of 1.25 points and in lending rates of 2.25 points over the year.
In early 2007, further increases pushed up the band for seven-day swap rates to 6.5% and 8.5%, respectively.
M3 (M1 plus interest-bearing deposits of the private sector) rose by 21.2% during 2006, thus matching the pace of nominal GDP.
Private-sector deposits increased by 20.2% but, while there was a strong contraction (by a little over one third) in inflation-adjusted deposits, total fixed-term deposits with pre-set nominal interest rates rose by 46.3%.
Public-sector deposits increased by 30.9%, exceeding the growth rate in total deposits.
Private-sector credit increased by 38.3%, equivalent to more than 10% of GDP.
Although an increase was seen in various types of transactions, consumer loans once again rose the most.
In the final few months of 2006, nominal yields on 30-day deposits stood at around 7% (more than two points higher than in the previous year), while average rates on advances and discounts fluctuated between 13% and 17%.
The country risk premium relative to similar bonds in the United States, calculated according to the J.P.
Morgan Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBI), fell by 288 basis points in 2006, whereas the price of GDP-indexed bonds rose sharply.
Domestic absorption played an important part: consumption contributed 5.7 percentage points to GDP growth, while investment contributed 3.7 points.
The considerable increase in consumption (7.3%) trailed behind GDP growth, however, and the domestic-savings-to-GDP ratio at constant prices therefore increased to 22.8%.
Construction and durable production equipment were up by similar amounts, and the highest rise was in imported goods (23.9%).
Expenditure on durable equipment almost attained the record highs of the previous decade as a proportion of GDP at constant prices (8.3% over the year and 9% in the last quarter of 2006).
Given the variation in relative prices after the convertibility regime ended, the ratio between GDP and domestic saving (28.6%), total investment (23.5%) and durable equipment (8.7%) was the highest in the series that began in 1993.
In a context of widespread expansion, the goodsproducing sectors once again grew faster than services (by 8.8% and 8%, respectively), although the gap between the two sectors’ growth rates narrowed.
In the goods- producing sector, construction and manufacturing turned in the highest growth (8.9%), while the agricultural and the mining and minerals sectors edged up by 1.5% and 1.9%.
In the service sector, the strongest performers were financial intermediation (up by 22%) and transport and communications (13.5%).
Even though the area under crops shrank very slightly (-1.6%), grain production fell by a little over 7 million tons (-8.6%) in the 2005/2006 growing season compared with the previous season.
Poor weather conditions led to a decrease in the cereal harvest that was only partially offset by higher oilseed production.
Thanks to stable international prices, both the area under cultivation and output expanded in the 2006/2007 growing season.
Even though beef production was encouraged by comparatively high international prices, there was a decline in the number of animals slaughtered (-6%), in meat production (-3.1%) and in export volumes and values (-26.7% and -7.4% respectively).
Domestic consumption climbed steadily to 63.4 kilos per capita, although this was still less than in the 1990s.
In a context of export restrictions and heavier government intervention in the market, livestock prices remained stable, whereas consumer prices rose (3.3%), although by much less than overall price levels.
The 2006 deposits, all maturities. p The monetary figures are annual averages. q Refers to net credit extended to the public and figure corresponds to the third-quarter balance. private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. 2007 and announced its intention to expand supply by changing regulations and concluding agreements with producers.
While natural gas output remained unchanged, crude oil extraction fell for the fifth year in a row.
In the face of a steady increase in demand, the supply of natural gas (which represents a considerable proportion of the energy matrix) was maintained by purchasing extra supplies from Bolivia, limiting exports to Chile and occasionally cutting gas supplies to corporate customers.
Supply and investment trends in hydrocarbons and energy continued to be a subject of public debate, and as of mid-2007 natural gas and electricity supply constraints were beginning to be felt.
Strong domestic consumption and greater external demand continued to drive industrial activity.
In 2006, major contributions to the growth of the sector as a whole (8.3%) were made by the automotive industry (which added 2.7 points to aggregate growth), the food industry (1.5 points) and the chemical industry (1.1 points).
This upswing in output was achieved with only a slight rise in the use of installed capacity, indicating that potential supply has expanded considerably, in tandem with rising sales volumes.
Levels of construction activity in both private construction and public works reached record levels in 2006.
A downturn began to be seen in the last quarter of the year, however, which carried over into the early months of 2007.
The consumer price index (CPI) rose by 9.8% in 2006, which was 2.5 points less than the previous year’s increase, and this slowdown in inflation continued in the first few months of 2007.
The 2006 trend was influenced by a reduction of nearly two points in the aggregate price index, which does not include seasonal items or regulated goods (10.2%), while seasonal items continued to climb sharply (18.3%).
The rate oaf increase in wholesale prices also slowed imported goods (8.2%) and domestically produced manufactures (7%) were higher than the price increases recorded for primary products (5.8%), which were influenced by oil prices.
The authorities’ concern over the country’s external competitiveness was reflected in the 6% nominal increase in the price of the United States dollar in 2006 brought about by a policy of intervening in the market to buy this currency.
International currency trends led to a real depreciation (2%) of the Argentine peso against the basket of currencies representing the country’s main trading partners.
Real wages of formal private-sector workers continued to rise in 2006 (9% between extremes) and now stand nearly 20% above the levels of late 2001.
Following two years of slight variations, real wages in the public sector and informal private sector staged a recovery (rising by 6% and 10%, respectively), although they were still below pre-2002 levels.
In general, the collective bargaining agreements concluded in the first few months of 2007 led to increases for the formal private sector that outstripped price rises.
At the end of 2006, the urban employment-topopulation ratio reached a record high of 42.1%.
Even though the unemployment rate (8.7% in the fourth quarter) declined less sharply than in previous years, it was the lowest to be recorded since the early 1990s.
If persons who are actively seeking employment and for whom State employment programmes are their main source of gainful employment were to be defined as unemployed, then the unemployment rate would rise to 9.3%.
State employment programmes had the least impact they have had since they were first implemented in 2002, but, despite high unemployment rates, worker shortages were reported in some labour market segments.
The large reduction seen in the deficit in real services was attributable to steadily growing revenues in the tourism and business services sectors.
The capital and financial account posted a deficit of US$ 5.6 billion, which was mainly a reflection of the decision to pay off US$ 9.5 billion in government borrowings from IMF.
The public sector also made net payments to other international organizations and large payments on GDP-linked obligations issued as part of its debt swaps.
The non-financial private sector received net revenues of US$ 1.4 billion, which was substantially less than in 2005, even though the balance of the errors and omissions account increased by almost US$ 1 billion.
A fairly minor decrease in inflows of foreign direct investment brought the total down to US$ 4.8 billion.
In 2006, merchandise exports expanded by 15.4% to US$ 46.4 billion, with prices and volumes contributing to this result in equal measure.
Manufactures grew faster in volume terms than did primary goods, but price rises for the two categories were similar.
Sales of industrial manufactures increased by 24% in value terms and sales of manufactures of agricultural origin rose by 16%, thereby outpacing commodity sales (11%).
In spite of the steep rise in fuel and energy prices, the sharp drop in volumes helped to keep increases low (6%).
The strong upswing in exports to Brazil (29%) led to a 2.2% increase in the percentage of total exports going to MERCOSUR countries (21.3% in 2006).
Goods imports continued to grow vigorously (19%), rising to more than US$ 32 billion.
The increase, which was spread among the various categories, stemmed mainly from an expansion in volumes purchased (16%) and, to a far smaller extent, to prices (3%).
From a geographical standpoint, MERCOSUR lost approximately one point of its share of Argentina’s total imports (37.1% in 2006), while the share of China and East Asia expanded.
Up until the debt-swap operation, the balance-of-payments figures included the total interest owed on government debts in default since 2001.
As from the second quarter of 2005, the figures take into account interest on the regularized debt, excluding interest on securities not included in the swap.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela In 2005, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela recorded GDP growth of 10.3%, driven by buoyancy in non-oil activities (11.7%).
With the exception of the petroleum sector (-1.9%), all branches of economic activity registered rises, with the highest rates being observed in construction (32.1%), financial services (39.2%), communications (23.2%) and commerce (19.9%).
On the demand side, the components that showed the strongest growth rates were investment (30%), chiefly public investment in infrastructure, and private consumption (18.8%).
In the first quarter of 2007 the economy expanded by 8.8% over the same quarter of the preceding year.
Although still high, this rate of growth represents a slowdown in economic activity.
The economy’s expansion was fuelled by a sharp upswing in national income resulting from highly favourable terms of trade, which, in turn, reflected rising international prices for petroleum.
Higher national revenues, combined with an augmented tax-take, helped to considerably swell fiscal receipts, enabling the authorities to increase spending and maintain or key up their social action programmes.
These programmes, which are known as “missions”, target mainly poor or extremely poor sectors and focus primarily on the areas of health, education, employment and food distribution.
Increased fiscal expenditures, together with climbing private demand and a tighter supply of goods, led to a break in the downward trend of inflation that had been in place since 2002; in December 2006 the CPI marked up a 17% increase over the figure registered 12 months earlier.
Expectations of a surge in inflation prompted the authorities to put in place a programme to combat inflation in February 2007.
This programme includes the implementation of fiscal and monetary measures and the enforcement of tighter price controls, together with penalties for non-compliance.
In 2006 there were major changes in regional integration processes involving the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In April, the country announced its intention to leave the Andean Community.
In May, it announced its withdrawal from the Group of Three (G-3), which it had formed with Mexico and Colombia, and in July the country formally joined MERCOSUR.
On 30 April 2007, the government announced its intention to withdraw from IMF and the World Bank.
GDP growth of 6%-7% is expected for 2007, with the exchange rate remaining at 2,150 bolivares to the dollar and the average inflation target for the year at 12%.
In February 2007 the executive branch promulgated an enabling bill, which conferred special powers on the president, allowing him to legislate by decree in a number of areas for the following 18 months.
In the first few months of 2007 the government thus announced and implemented several policy measures which have affected the way the economy functions.
It also acted on its declared intention not to renew, in May, the operating licence of a long-established television channel.
As of 1 May, the four strategic partnerships operating in the Orinoco oil belt became State-controlled enterprises and Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA) assumed a controlling stake.
The Venezuelan government has continued to supply oil to a number of countries at below-market prices in the framework of the Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America and the Caribbean (ALBA), the PETROCARIBE Energy Cooperation Agreement and individual agreements signed with several countries.
It has also piloted the creation of the Bank of the South (Banco del Sur), a multilateral lending institution for the region which is to be financed with resources from Latin American countries.
The central government’s total expenditure expanded by 49.3% over its 2005 level, with both current and capital components rising (49.8% and 49.7%, respectively).
The tax on bank debits was eliminated in February, a tax on crude oil extraction (33.3% of the well-head value) was announced in May and, as of January 2007, the rate of income tax levied on strategic partnerships operating in the Orinoco oil belt was raised to 50%.
In 2006, as in 2005, the government used dollars to invest in foreign bonds (most of which were sold to local financial institutions)1 and set up foreign-exchange funds abroad, as well as pursuing an ambitious programme to reschedule foreign debts with a view to obtaining longer terms and lower rates.
In the first half of 2006, the government repurchased all its outstanding Brady bonds for almost US$ 4.4 billion.
In November, the Ministry of Finance publicly advertised US$ 1 billion worth of “Southern Bonds”.2 It also continued to restructure domestic debt during the year.
As part of the programme to counter inflation, in February 2007 the government decreed a cut in the VAT rate, from 14% to 9%, to take place in two stages: a first reduction from 14% to 11% effective as of 1 March 2007 and a second from 11% to 9% to take effect on 1 July.
In addition, on 15 March the VAT was eliminated for a number of foods, and its rate was reduced for food transport services.
One result of these measures is that fiscal revenues from the oil industry will account for a larger proportion of the central government’s total revenues.
In order to soften the impact of swelling liquidity on the domestic market and ease pressure on the exchange rate in the parallel market, the authorities issued two bonds in the early months of 2007: US$ 1.5 billion in the “Southern Bond II”3 and US$ 7.5 billion in PDVSA bonds.
Combined offer of 15-year bonds worth US$ 500 million from the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and bonds from the Government of Argentina for the same amount (US$ 300 million in BODEN12 and US$ 200 million in BODEN15).
Half of the Southern Bond II are Argentine bonds (BODEN 15) and the rest are fixed-interest bonds (TIFs) and principal and interest-covered bonds (TICCs) issued by the Venezuelan government.
One of the main challenges facing the economic authorities in recent years has been how to handle its significant foreignexchange earnings from exports of petroleum.
Together with the considerable increase in fiscal expenditure, this has brought about continual rises in domestic liquidity.
In view of this strong growth in monetary aggregates and of the inflation figures, the main objective of the Central Bank of Venezuela (BCV) has been to offset these increases in liquidity by intervening in the market.
Its use of various measures to soak up liquidity intensified in the second quarter of 2006.
During the year, BCV issued certificates of deposit in amounts that exceeded the monetary base (by 40% in July).
A number of other steps have also been taken which have had varying effects on trends in base money.
In mid-2006, the central bank announced a reserve requirement of 30% for new deposits taken by banks after 14 July and the maintenance of a 15% reserve requirement for monies held up to that date.
This translated into a considerable expansion in central bank deposits and in the monetary base, with the result that certificates of deposit decreased as a proportion of that base to around 80%.
The sharp rise in liquidity was linked to a lower rate of growth in international reserves, owing to the measures the authorities took to limit the build-up of those reserves in the central bank and the decision to transfer some of them to the National Development Fund (FONDEN).
According to the central bank’s statements of assets and monetary base statistics, between September 2005 and April 2007 BCV transferred some US$ 15 billion to FONDEN.
The central bank’s assets and liabilities position and balance statements have been affected by the increase in the number of kinds of transactions the institution carries out and the higher sums involved, as well as by changes in rules and policies regarding the treatment of such items as foreign exchange, amounts earmarked for FONDEN and the derivation of foreign-exchange earnings.
This complex set of measures resulted in a negative operating balance between January and August 2006 and in difficulties in interpreting or placing a value on certain balance-sheet items.
In December 2006, deposits in the banking system had marked up a 68% increase and bank lending to the private sector was up by 67.5%, both in relation to December 2005.
During the year, the minimum percentages of the bank loan portfolio to be allocated to specific sectors were maintained, and the six main commercial banks offered annual average lending and borrowing rates of 14.64% and 6.81%, respectively.
Between January and April 2007, lending rates rose to an average of 15.6% and deposit rates remained around 6.6%.
The combined impact of sharply rising domestic liquidity throughout 2006, strong growth in domestic demand, constraints on the domestic supply of goods —with shortages in a number of mass consumption items— and the increase in the parallel exchange rate pushed up the prices of goods and services, and the reduction of inflation therefore became a core objective for the authorities.
As part of the effort to combat inflation, the authorities announced a monetary conversion plan to be implemented on 1 January 2008, whereby three zeros will be removed from the monetary unit.
The new currency unit will be called the “bolívar fuerte”, or strong bolivar, and will take the symbol “Bs.F.”.
All prices and values will be expressed in the renamed currency, which the authorities hope will keep relative prices stable.
There will be a transition period of six months during which both currencies will be treated as legal tender.
In 2006 the authorities maintained the currency regime that has been in place since 2003 and the same restrictions on capital outflows.
The larger amounts of foreign exchange made available through the Foreign Exchange Administration Commission (CADIVI) and the establishment of limits on the amount of foreign-currency credit that credit-card holders may use kept the rate of exchange on the parallel market at around 20%4 above the official rate in the first semester of the year.
In the latter months of 2006, however, this spread widened considerably, and the parallel-market exchange rate rose to 58% above the official rate; by January 2007 the gap was 100%.
In order to make more foreign exchange available, in the first quarter of 2007 CADIVI increased the total amount of dollars for imports by around 20% and the government raised the limit on dollar-denominated expenses incurred abroad on private credit cards from US$ 4,000 to US$ 5,000 per year.
As a result of these measures, the difference between the two exchange rates narrowed to 77%.
Using as a reference the exchange rate implicit in the price ratio deriving from transactions involving CANTV equity traded in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the corresponding American Depository Receipts (ADRs) traded on the New York Stock Exchange.
In the first quarter of 2006, GDP showed a yearon-year increase of 8.8%, driven by strong domestic demand: private consumption was up by 19% and gross fixed capital formation by 27%.
The most buoyant sectors were construction (26.5%), commerce and financial services Despite the maintenance of price controls, in 2006 the CPI jumped by 17% (14.4% in 2005), fuelled by rising prices for agricultural goods (33.9%) and fishery products (32.5%).
The wholesale price index showed a 15.9% increase between December 2005 and December 2006 (producer prices rose by 18% for domestically produced goods and by 9.2% for imported goods).
Despite negative inflation in March, which was essentially due to a cut in the VAT rate, between January and May 2007 the CPI marked up a cumulative increase of 5.9% over the figure for December 2006 (the index of core inflation rose by 8.9% in this period).
The wholesale price index climbed by 7.2% in the same period (8.1% for domestically produced goods and 4.3% for imported ones).
As an annual average, the general wage index rose by 19.3% in 2006 (private-sector wages by 15.1% and public-sector wages by 29.6%).
Despite the succession of hikes in the minimum wage since 2003, private-sector wages continue to show negative growth in real terms.
In 2006, merchandise exports climbed by 18%, reflecting a combination of rising international prices for petroleum (22%)5 and a decline of 9% in non-petroleum exports.
Goods imports were up by 36% (consumer goods by 35%, intermediate goods by 30% and capital goods, mainly for State oil enterprises and private firms in the non-petroleum segment, by 46%).
In the first quarter of 2007, the balance of payments recorded a significantly smaller current account surplus than in the year-earlier period (US$ 3.662 billion compared to US$ 7.004 billion) as a result of the decline in merchandise exports (-11.9%) and the continued buoyancy of goods imports, which were up by 46.8% in that quarter.
Rather than a real outflow of resources from the country, however, this reflected the repatriation of the profits of foreign oil companies operating in the Orinoco oil belt.
These revenues had been withheld because PDVSA had not published its financial statements, which had prevented the distribution of profits among the partners of the consortiums operating in the area.
Public debt accounts for 68% of this total and private debt, 32%.
In 2006, in keeping with the two preceding years, the Bolivian economy recorded favourable performances in several sectors.
GDP grew by 4.6 %, the non-financial public sector (NFPS) showed a surplus of 4.5 GDP percentage points, and the balance of payments closed with a surplus of US$ 1.516 billion, US$ 1.012 billion above its 2005 value.
The balance of payments surplus generated an increase in net international reserves of US$ 1. 464 billion, to an unprecedented high of US$ 3.178 billion.
The external debt dropped US$ 1.707 billion and the inflation rate stood at 4.95%.
GDP growth in 2006 was 0.5 percentage points higher than in the preceding year; 1.7 percentage points above average GDP growth for the current decade and 0.7% above that of the 1990s.
The US$ 1.054 billion merchandise trade surplus had a strong influence on the balance of payments, thanks to an external context characterized by a strong upswing in raw material prices, especially minerals and hydrocarbons, which began in 2003.
The trade balance in 2006 reflected a surplus for the third year running, quadrupling the 2004 figure.
Official estimates project economic growth at around 5% for 2007, with a similar rate of inflation.
However, widespread devastation caused by floods at the beginning of the year has prompted ECLAC to estimate the growth rate at 4.5%.
Bolivia’s economic policy framework was marked by institutional change, a tendency towards nationalization of the economy, and a modification of the country’s integration strategy.
In July 2006, elections were held to appoint representatives to the Constituent Assembly, which began meeting on 6 August.
Neither the opposition nor the ruling party obtained the qualified majority of two thirds.
As of July 2007, the Assembly had not completed the drafting of a new Constitution.
The most significant measure in terms of nationalization was adopted on 1 May 2006, with the nationalization of the hydrocarbons sector through the Heroes of Chaco decree.
The new integration strategy has led to the signing of cooperation agreements in several areas with Cuba and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in the context of the Bolivarian Alternative for the Latin America and the Caribbean (ALBA).
This is unprecedented in Bolivia’s fiscal accounts, which have a historical tendency towards deficits.
Broken down by different levels of government, these results show the national treasury with a surplus of 2.4% whilst the prefectures and municipal governments had positive balances of 0.7% and 1.2% of GDP, respectively.
State enterprises enjoyed a surplus of 1.3% of GDP as against the 1.3% deficit reported by other government bodies.
In fact, 21.7% of the department revenues assigned is divided equally between the three petroleum-producing departments —Beni, Santa Cruz and Tarija—, 54.2% is distributed among the other departments, and the remainder is used to balance out differences between the departments.
In September 2006, the government decreed that all vehicles imported illegally into the country must be registered.
The tax is substantially higher for cars that run on diesel, a fuel that is not produced in Bolivia, to encourage switching to vehicles using natural gas or petrol.
In 2006, NFPS expenditure excluding pensions rose 1.6 GDP percentage points; current expenditure went up 1.3 percentage points and capital expenditure climbed 0.3 percentage points.
Items listed under current expenditure as goods and services registered the greatest increase, 3.9% of GDP, mainly owing to the increase in disbursements of the company Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB) to finance their greater involvement in the domestic marketing of hydrocarbons.
Among other institutional changes occurring in Bolivia, YPFB was directly responsible for financing one aspect of social policy in 2006 out of the proceeds arising from the nationalization decree, through the Juancito Pinto bond, aimed at providing an incentive both for primary school registration and for completion of the school year.
By means of this bond, the family of each school-age child enrolled in any of the first five years of primary school is granted 100 bolivianos on registration and the same amount at the end of the school year.
The bond was approved in October 2006 and paid out in full in December, benefiting the families of over a million schoolchildren.
As for wage policy in the non-financial public sector, a decree in May announced a reduction in the representation allowances for the heads of all three branches of government and in the salaries of the highestpaid public employees.
In addition, workers in the health and education sectors, considered by the Government to be essential for Bolivia’s development, were granted a 7% rise in pay.
In January 2006, in accordance with transparency policies, it was decided that reserve fund expenditure would be frozen.
That expenditure was then transferred to a budgetary reserve item, allowing better control over transfers to other budget items.
Under the Government’s austerity policy, the number of top public sector executive posts was reduced from 162 to 158.
As a result of these measures, spending on personal services dropped by 0.7 GDP percentage points.
A rise was announced in lending of both AFP bonds and C bonds used by the Treasury to improve liquidity.
The stock of C bonds dropped by US$ 70.9 million to US$ 15.1 million, as a These taxes, combined with equities, represent 87% of fiscal revenues from hydrocarbons.
All oil and gas fields must pay a direct hydrocarbons tax equivalent to 32% of the value of their production, a 6% national royalty and a 12% government royalty.
According to the official estimates of the Social and Economic Policy Analysis Unit of the Ministry for Development Planning (UDAPE), deposits represented 73% and 36% of the assignments from the direct hydrocarbons tax to municipal governments and departments, respectively. result of the solid fiscal situation of the public sector in 2006.
The external public debt shrank from 52.8% of GDP to 30.6% of GDP as a result of debt cancellations by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) amounting to US$ 233 million, by the World Bank for US$ 1.511 billion and by the Japanese Government for US$ 63 million.
Of the outstanding debt, 50% is held by the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), and will be partially condoned during 2007 in the framework of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative.
In 2006, Bolivia took on the country’s first short-term external public debt since the 1980s, for the sum of US$ 31 million, with Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA).
The central bank’s efforts to absorb liquidity were not very farreaching, owing to the level of net credit to the public sector.
Monetary pressures would increase if this trend were to be reversed, as would the cost of monetary policy.
Moreover, with the abundance of liquidity, central bank credit to the banking system slowed by Bs 56 million or 2.7% in 2006.
In the first quarter of 2007 this trend has become more marked in comparison with the same period in 2006, with a drop in central bank credit to banks of 5.4%.
In 2006 the monetary base grew by 43.3% and the substitution of the dollar for the boliviano continued.
In contrast M3, which includes deposits in foreign currencies, went up 11.7% in real terms, and foreign-currency deposits by 3.1%.
The central bank maintained the same crawling-peg exchange-rate regime that it has operated since the second half of the 1980s, based on small non-preannounced depreciations or appreciations of the boliviano against the dollar.
The policy objective is to maintain a competitive real exchange rate without overstepping target levels of inflation.
In 2006 the nominal exchange rate against the dollar was relatively stable, reporting a 0.5% appreciation.
The variations in 2007 have been similar, with nominal exchange rate appreciation to May 2007 at 0.8%.
The real exchange rate held relatively steady in 2006, experiencing a one-off depreciation of 2.3%.
This result reflects the workings of the real intraregional exchange rate, since the extraregional exchange rate registered a 2.5% appreciation.
In the period from April 2006 to April 2007 the real exchange rate did not vary, whilst the real exchange rate excluding the Latin American countries appreciated by 2.3%.
One of the basic objectives of the Central Bank of Bolivia is to keep the inflation rate low and stable.
Until March 2006, the country’s economic programme operated under an IMF agreement on special drawing rights.
In April 2006 a domestic financial package was arranged between the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance under the same conditions as the IMF agreement.
This includes establishing a ceiling on net domestic credit expansion, a minimum increase in the level of net international reserves and a lower limit on the net reduction of credit to the NFPS by the Central Bank.
In 2006, thanks to a favourable international context, all the quantitative objectives of the package were met comfortably.
For example, US$ 1.464 billion in international reserves were accumulated during the year, compared to the anticipated minimum of US$ 100 million.
The programme had anticipated a maximum deficit of 3.4% of GDP for the NFPS and —as already mentioned— a surplus of 4.5% of GDP was achieved.
With the accumulation of international reserves fuelling an expansion of monetary aggregates, the Central Bank had to step up liquidity absorption through its open market operations.
This trend continued into 2007, with the rate of growth of open market operations over the 12 months to March reaching 182%.
The favourable fiscal position has given rise to a strong expansion in public sector deposits with the Central Bank, which ballooned from at the end of 2006.
The upsurge in these deposits is (d) Other policies In March 2006, the Government announced the Dignity Tariff decree in the electricity sector, consisting of a 25% subsidy on normal prices for household clients of companies in the national electricity distribution network, to be financed by the companies themselves.
In the area of land tenure, a law was enacted in November 2006 aimed at changing the focus of agrarian reform.
This law provides for the expropriation of unproductive units for public purposes benefiting indigenous communities.
In the telecommunications sector, in April 2007 a decree was passed whereby shares in the private operator Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (ENTEL) held by pension fund managers were transferred to the State.
The sectors registering growth rates higher than that of GDP were manufacturing (8.1%), financial institutions, insurance, real estate and business services (6.0%), and crude oil and natural gas (4.8%).
In the manufacturing sector, textile performance was noteworthy, whilst the growth of associated credit played the most significant role in the performance of financial institutions.
Likewise, the agricultural, livestock, hunting, forestry and fishing sector expanded by 4.53%, contributing 0.7 percentage points to GDP growth.
On the demand side, total general government consumption grew by 3.3% and total private consumption for households by 3.9%.
The growth in government consumption was very similar to that of 2005, whilst household consumption grew 1.1 percentage points over the preceding year.
The upsurge in investment had its origins in the increase in government investment.
The national budget forecasts growth for the Bolivian economy at 5% for 2007.
However, flooding at the beginning of this year associated with the El Niño phenomenon, mainly in the departments of Beni and Santa Cruz, make it unlikely that this target will be achieved.
An ECLAC mission assessed the damage and loss caused by the natural disaster at US$ 443 million, mainly in the agricultural and livestock sectors and in road infrastructure.
Prices rose by 4.95% in 2006, a level which was very similar to the 2005 figure and fell within the Central Bank’s target band of 3%-5%.
Food and beverages reflected the greatest hikes on the consumer price index at 6.8%, and household furnishings and equipment at 5.9%.
Cumulative inflation to May stood at 2.8%, 1.4 percentage points higher than the figure for the same period in 2006.
This was largely due to the contraction in supply and to the instability caused in the food markets by the aforementioned weather phenomena, the elimination of flour subsidies and the resulting impact on the price of bread and other food products, and the growing pressure of demand in the Bolivian economy.
Unlike 2005 and 2006, the rate of unemployment is expected to decline in 2007 since both manufacturing and agriculture, both of which are significant for their impact on job creation, were among the sectors reporting the highest growth.
The performance of the external sector is largely linked to the 20.4% improvement in the terms of trade derived from the boom in the international prices of minerals and hydrocarbons.
Disaggregated into individual external accounts, the results show that the current account closed with a surplus of US$ 1.319 billion, US$ 623 million higher than in 2005.
The merchandise trade balance yielded a surplus of US$ 1.054 billion, representing a 130.6% increase on the balance for 2005.
Dynamic merchandise exports generated a rise of US$ 1.071 billion in absolute terms, of which 50.7% and 36.7% are related to hydrocarbon and mineral extraction, respectively.
The deficit on the services trade balance widened by almost US$ 151 million.
In keeping with the balance of payments results, net international reserves registered a rise of US$ 1.464 billion or 85.4% in relative terms, to an unprecedented total of US$ 3.178 billion.
In the first quarter of 2007, the balance-of-payments of the Bolivian economy posted a surplus which was reflected in the expansion of net international reserves by US$ 355 million, US$ 55 million higher than the increase for the same period in 2006.
The current account balance once again yielded the highest surplus, US$ 246 million, whilst the capital account posted a positive balance of US$ 46 million.
Merchandise exports posted a similar balance to that of the first quarter of 2006.
Export sales of minerals soared by 48.3% and agriculture, livestock, hunting, forestry and fishing by 0.45%, whilst manufacturing and hydrocarbons exports slipped by 3.89% and 1.96%, respectively.
The Brazilian economy increased its growth rate during 2006 and the first few months of 2007.
Although the country is growing more slowly than the average for the region and other emerging economies, its economy has nonetheless expanded for 15 consecutive quarters.
In 2006, cumulative inflation fell to 3.1%, while external indicators also showed favourable results.
The value of merchandise exports climbed by 16% and merchandise imports by 24%, which resulted in a wide trade surplus (US$ 46.0 billion).
Real wages increased for the second year in a row in 2006 (4.0%), while the fiscal balance posted a primary surplus for the seventh year running (3.9% of GDP in 2006).
Net public debt shrank to 45% of GDP.1 Factors contributing to this performance included the favourable external situation and the consolidation of the domestic market.
In terms of the world economy, 2006 saw a continuation of good prices for the country’s main export products, as well as increased access to international financial markets.
During 2006, the unit value index for merchandise exports rose by 12.5%, but the expansion of GDP was mainly offset by the low and volatile investment rate and the smaller contribution made by the external sector.
In terms of volume, exports expanded by less (3.3%), while imports shot up (16.1%).
Although the external sector made a positive contribution to growth between 2001 and 2005, this figure was negative at almost -1% in 2006.
Such volatile investment rates could be due to high real interest rates (although the central bank has recently been applying a policy of gradually reducing the monetary policy rate), which might be combining with the appreciation of the Brazilian real to affect certain investments in tradable goods.
Another factor could be the uncertainty surrounding public investment projects and sectoral policies.
In March 2007, the Brazilian Geographical and Statistical Institute (IBGE) published the new series of national accounts of Brazil for the period 2000-2005.
These measurements use 2000 as a reference year and involve new methodologies for calculating the value of some services and the government sector.
For 2000, the new calculations give a GDP for 2000 that is 11% higher than the GDP calculated using the previous methodology.
Furthermore, the growth rates of GDP are also higher than those published previously.
Results from the first quarter confirm an upturn in gross fixed investment, which expanded by 7.2% to represent 17.2% of GDP.
During 2007, investment is expected to rise on the back of the government’s commitment to reviving its investments and increased confidence in the expansion of the domestic market (even the construction sector).
In the first three months of 2007, the unit value index for merchandise exports was up 9.2% on the year-earlier period.
Net inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) stood at US$ 8.5 billion in the first quarter, which was 10 times higher than for the same period in 2006.
In the domestic context, consumption continued to rise, with family consumption expanding by 4.3% in In recent months, the government has focused on ways of stepping up the rate of growth while maintaining fundamentals such as the inflation target, fiscal responsibility and the floating exchange-rate regime that have characterized economic policy since 1999.
In January 2007, the federal government announced the adoption of the Growth Acceleration Programme (PAC), which covers the period 2007 to 2010.
Increased consumption has mainly been financed through credit, which grew by 21% between March 2006 and March 2007, on the strength of lower interest rates and longer maturities.
In the public sector, there has been a hike in the government’s current expenditure, which is mainly attributable to higher social security payments and other expenditure relating to personnel and maintenance.
On the demand side, the growth of GDP in 2007 may be due to the favourable combination of falling interest rates, higher credit, an increased wage bill and greater public investment associated with the Growth Acceleration Programme (PAC) (see below). measures.
Planned investment represents 503.0 billion reais, over half of which will be channelled into energy, and more specifically the oil sector (which receives more than a third of investment), electricity and renewable fuels.
Another priority sector is housing, which will receive 21.1% of the planned investment.
The logistics sector (highways, airports and ports) will absorb almost 11% of the total.
In 2006, the primary surplus target was 3.8% of GDP, and the actual surplus came in sufficiently close at 3.9% of GDP.3 This was mainly attributable to non-recurrent federal government revenues that corresponded to, inter alia, the payment of dividends by banks and federal enterprises (around 0.5% of GDP).
The government also began to receive profits from investment carried out as part of the pilot programme on public investment.4 The primary surplus target for the public sector in 2007 is 3.8% In 2006, gross fixed capital formation as a percentage of GDP was 16.8%, which was similar to the figure recorded in 2000.
In the construction sector, this percentage has dropped from 8.3% in 2000 to 7.1% in 2005, while for the machinery and equipment sector the proportion rose from 7.2% to 7.9% in the same period.
Under the previous series of national accounts, the primary surplus target was 4.25% of GDP, and the actual surplus came in at 4.32% of The pilot programme on public investment was launched in 2005, with the aim of improving the quality and efficiency of public spending.
Expenditure related to this programme can be discounted from the primary result target of the federal government, thanks to the high fiscal profitability expected from the implementation of the investment projects involved. of GDP.
In the first quarter of 2007, which was generally favourable to public receipts, the primary surplus was 4.6% of GDP, compared with 4.9% of GDP for the yearearlier period.
However, the figures for 2006 and 2007 might be affected by the fact that the Ministry of Finance has authorized subnational governments to increase their level of borrowing, rather than maintaining a surplus of almost 1% of GDP.
In addition to investment projects, the proposed Growth Acceleration Programme also provides for two long-term fiscal measures.
The first, which has already become law, refers to future increases in the minimum wage, which is used as the basis for pension payments, social benefits and social welfare programmes.
The rule would be applied for 10 years from 2007, with the exception being those wage agreements signed during 2006.
It is hoped that these two measures, which will directly affect more than a third of primary federal expenditure, will cap the increase in investment expenditure without impacting the primary surplus or requiring new increases in the level of tax collection.
Monetary policy remained focused on ensuring compliance with the 4.5% inflation target.
Despite the gradual reduction in the benchmark interest rate (Special System of Clearance and Custody (SELIC)) from September 2005, the real annual interest rate has remained at around the 10% mark, despite the fact that the interest rate and inflation expectations came in under target.
The central bank has long been concerned about the economy’s supply capacity (including increased access to imports) to satisfy the increase in domestic demand.
Monetary aggregates continued to swell considerably (with the monetary base up by 19.6% and the money supply up by 17.2% in 2006).
Total aggregates (M4) expanded for the second consecutive year by an annual rate of about 19%.
This increased liquidity was the result of purchases of international reserves in 2006 and the first quarter of 2007 (US$ 55.7 billion in 15 months), which were partly neutralized by the fiscal balance and the effect of increased public debt pushed up by high interest rates.
Growth in personal loans, in contrast, slowed from 37% in 2005 to 25% in 2006, while the growth rate of business loans rose from 18% to 22% over the same period.
In 2006 net public sector debt shrank by almost 1.5% of GDP to 45%, mainly as a result of higher international reserves, that now are more than 1% of GDP higher than the external debt of the public sector.
Domestic debt represents 47% of GDP, and is significantly affected by higher interest, although increased confidence in the reduction of domestic debt has enabled maturities to be extended and the use of exchange-rate indexed bonds to be reduced.
Also, fixed-rate bonds now represent more of the total debt (37.3%), which is higher than the 36.2% that corresponds to SELIC-indexed bonds.
At the end of 2002, bonds indexed to the exchange rate and the SELIC rate accounted for 75.4% of total debt.
In March of that year, those same bonds had represented just under 38%, of which only 1% corresponded to indexed bonds.
After rising to almost four reais in 2002, the exchange rate against the United States dollar stood at less than two reais in June 2007.
In real terms, the currency depreciated by 6.7% against the dollar and by 2.1% against a basket of currencies between April 2006 and April 2007.
The balance-of-payments situation, the abundant supply of international resources, and the attractiveness of financial operations in reais due to the spread between domestic and external interest rates have resulted in hefty inflows of foreign exchange.
Another contributing factor The increase of the minimum wage in year t will correspond to the sum of the variation in the national consumer price index in year t-1 and the growth rate of GDP in year t-2.
The central bank purchased international reserves in an attempt to reduce the effects of this inflow of foreign exchange, but with limited success.
In June 2007, the central bank announced a series of accounting measures, including stricter rules on the capital adequacy ratio for financial institutions and their foreign-exchange transactions, with a view to curbing the increase in their speculative operations on the spot and futures markets.
Growth is expected in all sectors, especially those related to the domestic market (services in particular).
Agriculture is expected to expand by 4.5% in 2007, in a continuation of the recovery process that began in 2006 (when agriculture expanded by 4.1%, following a mere 1% expansion in 2005).
In the first quarter of 2007, agriculture increased by 2.1%, compared with a 2.7% decline during the year-earlier period.
Compared with the first quarter of 2006, the services sector grew by 4.6% in the first three months of 2007, thanks to a buoyant domestic market.
Within the services sector, particularly good performances were turned in by information technology services, the financial system and commerce, which all grew by more than 6%.
Mining (4.1%) and public utility services (3.9%) also expanded during the period in question.
Manufacturing remained the weakest performer, despite 2.8% growth in the first quarter of 2007 compared with the year-earlier period.
This pattern reflects the trends of the two previous years: in the 2005-2006 biennium, the average annual growth rate of GDP was 3.3% while manufacturing value added climbed by an annual average The main cause of this is the reduced competitiveness of the manufacturing industry following currency appreciation, and also competition from imported products.
The clearest manifestation is the considerable slowdown in the growth of manufacturing exports, whose volumes Import volumes, on the other hand, climbed by 16% in 2006 and by 23.3% in the first quarter of 2007 compared with the year-earlier period.
The implication of the above is that the supply of domestically manufactured goods has failed to keep up with demand.
In other worlds, the supply of manufactured goods has shifted abroad, thereby slowing the expansion of domestic GDP.
Idle capacity in the manufacturing industry suggests that the problem is not exclusively one of insufficient supply, but also one of reduced competitiveness in some manufacturing subsectors.
Consumer price variation was 3.1% in 2006, and is expected to be 3.6% in 2007 (with 4% estimated for 2008), according to a survey of the main market agents carried out by the central bank.
Inflation fell for the fourth year running and came in on target for the fifth time since the target range was first set in 1999.
The results for 2006 were partly attributable to the appreciation of the local currency, which has limited the impact of high international commodity prices (for petroleum and food, among others) on domestic prices.
In addition, administered prices, especially for energy and telecommunications services, accounted for a smaller proportion of the total (4.3% in In the first five months of 2007, cumulative inflation stood at 1.79%, which was similar to the 1.75% recorded in the year-earlier period, while the 3.18% variation between May 2006 and May 2007 remained below the target of 4.5%.
Expectations for 2007 and 2008 are positive as there is little chance of a depreciation of the Brazilian real and price increases for food and services are predicted to remain small.
The increase was observed in the economy’s most buoyant sectors: services (4.0%) and commerce (2.9%) and, to a lesser extent, manufacturing (2.0%).
The proportion of formal sector employment continued to expand, albeit more slowly.
The highest rate of formal employment in the monthly employment survey (54.3%) was recorded in April 2007.
In May 2007, the unemployment rate stood at 10.1% for the third month running, and this downward rigidity could be attributable to the increase in the number of jobseekers following an upturn in economic activity.
Brazil’s external accounts continued to perform well, continuing the trend that was first observed in 2004.
In 2006, the balance of payments posted a surplus of US$ 30.6 billion, while the trade surplus amounted to a record US$ 46.1 billion.
In the first four months of 2007, the value of exports was US$ 46.5 billion, while the value of imports stood at US$ 33.5 billion.
The resulting surplus of almost US$ 13.0 billion was 5.4% wider than the one posted in the year-earlier period.
The growth rate of exports (18.5% between January and April, compared with the same period in 2006) was lower than the rise in imports (24.6% in the first four months of the year).
Export growth continued to be spearheaded by the increase in prices (9.4% in the first four months of 2007, in relation to the same period in 2006) rather than the rise in volumes (8.3%).
Export buoyancy was mainly based on commodities (which posted volume increases of 19.4% and price hikes of 8.5%) and semi-manufactures (prices up by 18.4% and volume by 2.8% between January and April 2006, in comparison with the previous year).
In terms of imports, there was yet another upturn in the volume traded (up 22.1% on the year-earlier period) and a 2.2% variation in prices.
The surge in imports is a reflection of the recovery in domestic activity and currency appreciation.
Current transactions posted a surplus of US$ 13.5 billion in 2006, which represents almost 1.24% of GDP.
In the first quarter of 2007, the surplus stood at US$ 1.69 billion, compared with US$ 1.57 billion during the yearearlier period.
The income balance improved slightly in the first three months of 2007, with a deficit of US$ 5.8 billion, which was smaller than the US$ 6.9 billion deficit accumulated between January and March 2006.
Net interest payments resulted in a deficit of US$ 3.4 billion, which was wider than the US$ 2.7 billion deficit from the year-earlier period.
Net profit remittances fell to give a deficit of US$ 3.1 billion, compared with the US$ 3.6 billion deficit registered between January and March 2006.
In the first quarter of 2007, the capital and financial account surplus of US$ 21.9 billion was over five times wider than the US$ 4.0 billion surplus recorded in the year-earlier period.
This was partially due to increases in: net foreign direct investment (from US$ 826 million to US$ 8.5 billion), portfolio investment (from US$ 6.6 billion to US$ 9.3 billion) and other investment (which went from a deficit of US$ 3.6 billion to a surplus of US$ 4.0 billion).
As a percentage of GDP, foreign direct investment swelled from 1.56% during January-March 2006 to 2.59% of GDP in the first quarter of 2007.
Total external debt, which stood at US$ 172.4 billion at the end of December 2006, edged up to US$ 175.9 billion in March 2007, primarily due to a rise in the short-term debt of the private sector and the non-financial public sector.
This was due to declining private and public investment, falling government consumption and the larger proportion of imports within private consumption.
Against a backdrop of reduced economic buoyancy and lower fuel prices, inflation dropped to 2.6%.
The labourmarket situation improved thanks to a surge in formal employment, moderate increases in real wages and a fall in the unemployment rate from 9.2% to 7.7%.
Generally speaking, the external environment remained favourable for Chile, and this was reflected in good prices for its exports and smaller-than-expected increases in the prices of its import products.
As a result, the current account posted a surplus of 3.5% of GDP.
In early 2007, the balance of risks seemed more favourable than expected at the beginning of 2006.
More specifically, the slowdown in the United States occurred in an orderly and gradual manner, and its effects on other economies (Chile’s export markets) were minimal.
There were no significant rises predicted in the Federal Reserve interest rate, as any increases seem to have been put on hold.
The economies of China and other countries important for Chile’s foreign trade remained buoyant, which boded well for continuingly high export prices.
At the same time, oil prices fell during the second half of 2006, as both supply and certain geopolitical risk factors settled down somewhat.
Although supply problems with gas from Argentina did materialize, this had only moderate effects.
On the domestic level, the technical and labour issues that had hurt mining production in the previous year have now been resolved.
In this context, and with inflation under control, the central bank decided to reduce the monetary policy rate by 25 basis points to 5% in January 2007.
This, combined with a public budget based on an 8.9% projected rise in expenditure and signs of a gradual recovery of investment, points to GDP growth of almost 6% for 2007.
The government, which took office in March 2006, continued to apply a fiscal policy focused on achieving a structural surplus of 1% of GDP, with the target set to become 0.5% from 2008.
Mainly as a result of high copper and molybdenum prices, fiscal revenues swelled from 23.7% to 25.9% of GDP, while expenditure fell from 19.1% of GDP to 18.2%.
Unlike in other cases, however, higher copper prices are not resulting, pari passu, in an equivalent rise in public spending.
In fact, a large proportion of such income is saved in funds set up to stabilize expenditure and prefinance pension liabilities.
As a result, the policy framework is becoming less procyclical, thereby reducing the negative impact of external fluctuations.
The budget for 2007 provides for an 8.9% rise in public spending, which is expected to be one of the main determining factors in the increase in economic activity during the year.
Following the scheduled redemption of pension recognition bonds, repurchase of sovereign bonds issued on the international market and advance debt payments to the central bank and multilateral agencies, central government debt fell from 7.5% of GDP in 2005 to 5.3% of GDP in 2006.
Thanks to the accumulation of assets, the treasury posted a creditor position equivalent to 7% of GDP.
The policy of issuing nominal and indexed bonds to maintain the domestic market yield curve and develop the local capital market was suspended in 2006 but reintroduced 2007.
The equivalent of US$ 700 million was then issued on the national market.
No bonds have been issued on the external market since January 2004.
The central bank continued to implement a monetary policy aimed at maintaining annual inflation at around 3% (within a range of 1% on either side) over the next two years.
In the first half of 2006, the central bank took action to rein in monetary stimulus, and established a monetary policy rate of 5.25% at a time when the indicators of underlying inflation were showing signs of rising beyond the target range.
From August 2006, increases in the monetary policy rate were temporarily suspended amidst signs of lower-than-expected growth, a smaller narrowing of production-demand gaps, indicators of a slower increase in unit labour costs and fuel prices, and inflation expected to be in the middle of the target range.
In January 2007, in the light of the above-mentioned improvement in the balance of risks, the central bank reduced the monetary policy rate to 5%.
Given that more recent data point to the economic upturn being greater than expected, and with inflation under control, the monetary policy rate is not expected to fall.
Indeed, increases should not be ruled out in the second half of the year.
Along with the above monetary policy, the central bank is implementing a freely floating exchange rate, in a context of relatively high integration of local and international markets.
As a result, the exchange rate is influenced by many variables that determine the country’s external liquidity.
The peso has appreciated as the value of the United States dollar dropped against other reserve currencies, in a context of low sovereign risk and improved terms of trade.
This trend has recently intensified as expectations of a lower monetary policy rate disappeared.
For this reason, and given the need to increase sales of dollars in order to finance higher public spending, downward pressure on the foreign-exchange market is expected to continue.
Those sectors facing strong foreign competition and some export sectors are also expected to ask the central bank to intervene in what they see as an excessive appreciation of the peso.
In aggregate terms, there has been relative stability in various nominal exchange-rate indices during the past two years, following the uncertainties that affected the regional and worldwide economy and in 2003 pushed the exchange rate up to its record level for the decade.
The real effective exchange rate, which takes account of exchange-rate and price variations in Chile’s main trading partners, posted an average appreciation of 4.2% in 2006 compared with the average in 2005, while the bilateral exchange rate recorded a 5.3% appreciation.
Nonetheless, according to the central bank, the variables that affect the balance of payments suggest that the real exchange rate is fairly close to its equilibrium rate.
That is not to say that, in disaggregated terms, some sectors have not been harmed by the appreciation of the peso.
The real exchange rate, which affects imports of intermediate and consumer goods, appreciated by more than the aggregate rate in real terms.
A series of tax incentives was also adopted to boost business innovation.
In response to low levels of investment during 2006, the government submitted a bill to Congress concerning the use of tax incentives to increase investment.
That initiative will probably be supplemented by mechanisms to help small and medium-sized enterprises overcome the difficulties of paying tax and social security arrears while fulfilling their other financial commitments, as these factors may affect their production capacity and level of solvency.
In other matters, 2007 was also witness to parliamentary debates on two major undertakings: a pensions reform aimed at improving solidarity within the system, and the modernization of the education system to improve quality (especially in schools attended by pupils from low-income families).
The implementation phase for a new public transport system for Santiago was launched in 2007.
The system has faced many problems, and the potential effects on economic activity remain unclear.
The authorities hope to overcome most of the problems during the course of the year.
First, there has been a slowdown in the pace of both public and private investment.
Lower private investment was mostly attributable to the considerable inventory accumulation during the previous year and the smaller demand for new housing in the face of rising interest rates and harsher credit conditions.
As the new government took over, there were some late starts on infrastructure projects and a slower implementation of the investment budget, although this situation was turned around in the fourth quarter.
Second, government consumption also lost some momentum, consistently expanding by less than the growth in GDP.
Third, although growth in private consumption remained buoyant, there was a striking and surprising change in its composition.
This consisted of a rise in the proportion of imported components, as prices dropped thanks to a lower real exchange rate (which affects imported consumer goods).
As a result, the import substitution sectors that produce consumer goods have faced stiff foreign competition which, along with higher energy costs compared with previous years, explains why GDP has only grown by 4% despite a 6% rise in domestic demand.
On the supply side, those factors combined with unexpected technical restrictions on the production capacity of mining and fishing, which were reflected in a slower growth rate for exports in real terms.
In the first quarter of 2007, economic activity indicators displayed faster growth than expected, which has led to an upwards revision of the growth projections for the year (which are now in the upper portion of the 5% to 6% range).
In March, the monthly indicator of economic activity increased by 6.5%, which is higher than the original estimate and comes on the heels of increases in excess of 5% during the three previous months.
At the beginning of 2006, inflation was slightly above the ceiling of the target band set as part of monetary policy.
In the second half of the year, however, inflation followed a downward trend, in keeping with low fuel prices, the gradual narrowing of the production-demand gap and the positive performance of unit labour costs.
As a result, the year closed with a twelve-month variation in the consumer price index (CPI) of 2.6%, while trend inflation indicators and expectations pointed to inflation being under control and in the middle of the target range.
In the first five months of 2007, the CPI continued to reflect inflation that was in keeping with the target set as part of monetary policy, with a 12-month variation of less than 3% and reductions in underlying inflation.
Wage patterns were also in keeping with the inflation target, with a moderate but steady slowdown in growth during 2006.
In 12 months, the general hourly wage index rose by 5.4% in nominal terms, or 2% in real terms.
Unit labour costs, which displayed an upward trend in early 2006, posted slower growth as productivity rose.
Trend indicators suggest that these costs will remain consistent with inflation targets during 2007.
Wages have maintained an upward trend of almost 2% per year in real terms.
Following a considerable increase in the workforce and unemployment of 9.2% in 2005, a subsequent reduction in the workforce resulted in an unemployment rate of 7.7% during 2006.
The increase in employment was accompanied by major changes in employment structure and quality: in 2006 waged employment benefited from improved labour conditions and expanded by 4.5%, while declines were recorded in other categories (such as jobs not protected by labour laws and unpaid labour).
There has been a consolidation of the moderately downward trend in unemployment, with a seasonally adjusted unemployment rate of 7.1% in March 2007.
The trade balance posted a surplus of US$ 22.213 billion, while the current account surplus came in at US$ 5.3 billion (or 3.5% of GDP).
In the first few months of 2007, the growth rate of export values was higher than in the previous year, which was partly attributable to higher international prices for copper, pulp and fishmeal.
Up to April 2007, the cumulative trade balance for the year was US$ 9.1 billion, while the balance of payments turned in a cumulative deficit of US$ 2.075 billion.
The international reserves of the central bank, which stood at US$ 19.4 billion in December 2006, fell to US$ 17.5 billion in April.
This appears to be due to seasonal factors, since December is the time when banks increase their deposits with the central bank to comply with technical reserve requirements.
In summary, the macroeconomic situation looks more promising in 2007 than the previous year, since most economic activity indicators show growth that exceeds original expectations, in a context of low and controlled inflation.
The 6.8% growth rate observed in 2006 exceeded the expectations of the economic authorities and leading analysts alike.
Buoyant domestic demand (consumer spending and investment) continued to drive growth and the good pace of economic activity improved the fiscal indicators.
The central bank raised its intervention rate a number of times from April onwards to curb rising demand.
Unemployment rose in the second semester of the year despite the high economic growth rate.
In the area of foreign trade, exports and imports continued to register high growth rates, as did flows of FDI.
Thus far in 2007 the economy has maintained its momentum, although a number of factors point to a slight slowdown for the year overall.
First, the measures adopted by the economic authorities to curb rising inflation and the Colombian peso’s significant appreciation could dampen domestic demand.
Second, low first-quarter growth in the United States economy, which absorbs 40% of Colombia’s exports, could affect exports.
A final factor is the delicate political situation surrounding the prosecution of several congress members and former public officials over their links with illegal armed groups.
The economic policy deployed in recent years has restored consumer and investor confidence in the national economy and this contributed significantly to its excellent performance in 2006.
Although the prevailing context of international liquidity has certainly helped, credit for the steady increase in investment rates in the past three years accrues mainly to domestic policy.
The reforms made as regards pensions, the stock market and legal and tax stability since 2005 have helped to create an investmentfriendly climate.
In the monetary sphere, low interest rates have boosted credit, generating a beneficial knock-on effect on a number of sectors, principally construction.
The authorities have taken steps to curb excess liquidity in order to avoid missing inflation targets.
As regards trade, the finalization of negotiations for the free trade agreement with the United States further strengthened investor confidence.
In 2006, the fiscal accounts continued on a positive footing on the back of higher tax receipts.
As a result of greater economic growth, the consolidated public sector deficit was 0.8% of GDP and the NFPS deficit was 1%, both under the targets set in the 2006 medium-term fiscal policy framework.
The national central government deficit came in at 4.1% of GDP, which was well within the target set in the 2006 financial plan and smaller than the 2005 deficit.
This improved fiscal performance stemmed from a 21% rise in tax receipts stoked, in turn, by the upturn in economic activity and in imports in particular.
Income tax and foreign VAT made the largest contribution to tax receipts.
Investment and interest were the fastest-growing categories of expenditure in 2006 (38% and 35.2%, respectively), as a result of higher domestic interest payments and spending on road maintenance and upgrading programmes and on bridge construction and other civil engineering projects.
The latest revision of the government’s financial plan shows a consolidated public sector deficit of around 1.3% of GDP for 2007.
The national central government deficit is expected to be 3.9% of GDP.
This should be offset by a surplus in the decentralized sector (social security, national and local corporations and regional and local governments), despite the slowdown in the performance of ECOPETROL and other national corporations and of the local and regional public sector.
The ECOPETROL deficit is likely to increase as the corporation expands its oil exploration and oilfield development efforts.
The firm is expected to increase its investment to around US$ 2 billion, far outstripping its US$ 692 million average for 2000-2006.
Local government deficits will reflect the spending increases that have occurred broadly in all administrations this past year.
The national government expects to make fewer domestic debt issues than originally forecast, owing to a shrinking deficit and to income from the previous year’s privatizations.
Since interest and pension payments, together with transfers to subnational governments for the provision of basic social services, absorb virtually all the tax receipts, it will be difficult to reduce the fiscal deficit any further.
In the first semester of this year the procedure for transfers was changed, with the approval of a constitutional reform amending the 1991 regulation that had linked transfers to the national government’s current revenue.
A rule was adopted to guarantee funding for local governments without deepening the structural imbalance of central government finances.
On the income side, in late 2005 the Minister for Finance and Public Credit tabled a draft tax reform designed to thoroughly overhaul the country’s finances which, however, failed to attract the necessary political backing.
In 2006, the legislature approved a gradual reduction in the income tax rate, together with an increase in exemptions on reinvested profits and the maintenance of the temporary wealth tax and the financial transactions tax.
Efforts to simplify the different VAT rates did not prosper; on the contrary, a further rate was added.
These measures represented the fifteenth partial reform since 1990 of a complex taxation structure whose efficiency and fairness have been called into question.
In April 2006, the central bank embarked on an effort to check monetary expansion by raising its intervention rates in order to curb rising aggregate domestic demand and avoid missing short- and longterm inflation targets.
The 4.5% target figure for 2006 was met and a long-term target of between 2% and 4% is envisaged.
Up until May 2007, the bank had raised the intervention rate by 25 basis point on 11 separate occasions, taking it to 8.75%.
The aim was to shunt the hike in the intervention rate through to market rates and thereby curb expansion in credit and aggregate demand, as well as inflationary pressures.
By late 2006, market rates were reflecting these rises only partially and unevenly, perhaps as a result of the continuing high liquidity in the markets.
In 2006, the annual average nominal rate on deposits was 6.3%, compared with 7.0% in 2005, while the nominal lending rate was 12.9% as an annual average, compared with 14.5% the previous year.1 In the second semester of 2006, rates for domestic public debt securities dropped and stabilized somewhat.
Underpinning the higher value of debt securities and of the general index of Colombia’s main stock exchange (Bolsa de Valores de Colombia) was the sound performance of the United States economy, which increased confidence in international markets, world prices for raw materials and global liquidity.
In the financial system, commercial credit increased by an annual rate of 22.9% and consumer credit, by 42.5%.
The central bank continued to raise intervention rates in early 2007 in order to achieve the inflation target of 4% with half a percentage point tolerance in either direction.
In response to an upturn in inflation and to exchange rate trends, In December 2006, the nominal deposit and lending rates were 6.8% and 13% respectively, compared with 6.3% and 13.3% in the same month the monetary authority also took a number of quicker-acting measures.
It introduced a marginal reserve requirement of between 5% and 27% of total deposits, reintroduced the obligation to deposit the equivalent of 40% of the value of public and private foreign loans and set a cap to limit the leverage of derivatives transactions by intermediaries in the foreign exchange market to 500% of their regulatory capital.
Later, the government also enforced a deposit requirement for portfolio investments from abroad.
In the first quarter of 2007, growth in the monetary base accelerated to 22.8% and that of broad money supply to 19.7%, whereas the rate for M1 fell to 18.1%.
The increase in intervention rates has been reflected commensurately in the interbank rate thus far in 2007.
Most of these rises occurred in March, which may indicate that intervention policy was beginning to be passed through to market rates more quickly.
Following a short-lived depreciation in the second quarter of 2006, the peso resumed the upward trend it has shown since 2005.
Some of the factors behind this continued increase were the favourable international business cycle, which contributed to higher export earnings, sustained growth in FDI and excess liquidity in international markets, which fuelled demand for debt securities from emerging markets such as Colombia’s.
A possible link between fiscal management and the appreciation of the peso is also under discussion, as Colombia still has a high level of public debt and its necessary external borrowing accentuates the currency’s tendency to appreciate.
As an annual average, the peso depreciated by a nominal 1.6%, appreciating in real terms by 2.8% against the dollar and by 0.6% against a basket of currencies of the country’s main trading partners.
In 2007 the peso consolidated its upward trend and the exchange rate fell to less than 2,000 pesos to the dollar.
The factors fuelling the appreciation include the large supply of foreign currency generated in the domestic market to cater for debt issues by national corporations such as ECOPETROL, Empresa Colombiana de Gas (ECOGAS), Almacenes Éxito, ISAGEN and the recently sold Acerías Paz del Río.
Foreign remittances and external credit have also contributed to the influx of capital.
Added to the familiar requirement to renegotiate aspects concerning the intellectual property of medicinal products and various labour issues, there is now a requirement to clarify and prevent impunity in the matter of violence by paramilitaries against human rights defenders and trade unionists in Colombia.
In addition, in an effort to lock into higher rates of economic growth, the Colombian government has created forums in which the public and private sectors can work together to improve areas that influence the country’s competitiveness and to consolidate trade strategies for increasing the export supply.
In 2006, the economy grew by 6.8% on the back of rapid growth in domestic demand (9.9%), fuelled, in turn, by investment and consumer spending.
Stimulated by still-low interest rates, investment rose by 26.9%, spearheaded by investment in machinery and equipment.
Consumer spending increased by 6.7% as a result of increased income, readily available credit and liquidity and stakeholder confidence.
The fastest-growing sectors in 2006 were construction (14.4%), manufacturing (10.8%) and trade (10.7%), while the most sluggish were mining and financial institutions.
The agricultural sector bounced back from a poor performance in the first semester to post an overall annual growth rate of 3.1%.
The outlook for 2007 is good, although growth is expected to be down on 2006, owing to a possible economic slowdown in the United States, the country’s principal trading partner, and to a moderate reduction in oil and coal prices.
Inflationary pressures early in the year could pose a threat if they undermine stakeholder confidence and macroeconomic stability.
Consumer spending and investment are expected to retain the momentum they gathered in the latter quarters of 2006.
The Colombian authorities expect growth of close to 5.0%, while ECLAC forecasts a figure of around 5.8%.
In 2006 central bank met its inflation target, which that year was 4.5% with half a percentage point tolerance in either direction, for the third consecutive year.
At the end of the year, the cumulative rise in the consumer price index was 4.5%, below the 4.9% registered in 2005.
Price inflation slacked significantly during the first semester, but upward pressures developed in the second, especially for the prices of foodstuffs and regulated goods.
The oil price rise triggered increases in other prices in Colombia and worldwide.
The public and private sectors both acknowledge that it will be extremely difficult to meet the 2007 inflation target of 4% with half-percentage-point margin on each side because of the uptrend in the prices of foodstuffs and regulated goods that was already apparent in the first semester.
The unemployment rate began to rise slightly in August 2006, which triggered some controversy in Colombia.
The employment rate dropped from During the first semester of 2007 unemployment fell slightly.
Morgan’s EMBI+ index. j The figures up to 2000 are based on the Bogota Stock Exchange Index to May. k Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. the peso.
Nevertheless, unless currency appreciation eases up, it is likely to hurt employment in export companies.
In 2006 the current account deficit came in at around 2.1% of GDP, up on the previous year’s figure of 1.5%.
Exports continued to expand apace (15.1% in 2006), largely owing to high export commodity prices, albeit not as strongly as in the two previous years because of a slight deterioration in the terms of trade and weaker demand from the United States domestic market.
Traditional exports rose by 13.9% in 2006, led by oil and petroleum products, ferronickel and coal.
Non-traditional exports posted a 16.2% upturn, thanks to brisk foreign sales of industrial products.
The main export destinations in 2006 were the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the United States and Ecuador, although sales of non-traditional products to the United States slowed.
Imports rose by 23.4% compared with the previous year, driven mainly by purchases of intermediate goods (raw materials for industry) and capital goods, which reflected rapid growth in investment and industrial activity during the year.
The income account registered a deterioration associated with the increased flows of FDI, because these led to outflows in the form of profits and dividends, which were, however, offset by inflows of remittances.
The capital and financial account registered a US$ 2,687million surplus as a result of FDI going mainly to the mining and telecommunications sectors.
In early 2007, the strong currency appreciation began to take its toll on exports.
The central bank has forecast an average current account deficit of 3% of GDP up to 2011, although high international reserve levels (in excess of US$ 19 billion) lessen the country’s vulnerability on that front.
Unemployment fell and the employment rate rose on the strength of the buoyant performances turned in by sectors employing a large workforce, such as services (including commerce).
Annual inflation remained low at 2.9%, while exchange-rate competitiveness was buoyed by a depreciation of the United States dollar against the currencies of Ecuador’s trading partners.
The fiscal situation improved, as the rise in income of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) exceeded the increase in expenditure, thereby boosting the primary and overall surpluses.
Higher oil prices resulted in windfall fiscal revenues, which brought down the level of the external and domestic public debt in nominal terms.
In addition to economic growth, this was also reflected in a notable reduction in the debt-to-GDP ratio.
In 2006, the banking sector’s acquisition of assets abroad (bonds and deposits) and the change from incoming to outgoing net capital flows for portfolio investment caused a deterioration in the balance-of-payments financial account.
Reserves shrank as a result, despite the significant improvement in the current account following a rise in petroleum exports.
Following the elections in November 2006, the new government took office in January 2007 and announced plans to increase the role of the State in the economy.
In April 2007, a referendum approved a decision to hold elections for a constituent assembly.
Growth of 3.5% is expected for 2007, with a slowdown in the oil industry and buoyant performances in services and in manufacturing geared to domestic demand.
In 2007, the government announced its intention to increase the role of the State in the economy.
Measures proposed by the authorities include reducing the proportion of tax revenues accounted for by VAT and increasing the share represented by special consumption taxes and taxes on profits.
In terms of expenditure, more resources would be channelled into investment, and health and education spending would rise, both in terms of budget allocation and as a proportion of GDP.
Following the six-month extension of the preferential tariffs under the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA) granted by the United States in December 2006, the new government has concentrated on ways of maintaining such tariffs in the future.
However, the government has suspended negotiations for a free trade agreement with the United States, unlike its Andean Community trading partners Colombia and Peru.
Fiscal performance was determined by the 23.1% increase in NFPS revenues, which exceeded the 11.8% rise in disbursements.
The central government results also posted an improvement, albeit on a smaller scale: the primary surplus broadened from 1.8% of GDP in 2005 to 2.5% in 2006, and its overall deficit narrowed The year 2006 saw yet another rise in the State’s windfall oil revenues.
This was due to higher oil prices and income from the Block 15 oilfield, which has been run by the State since May 2006 following the termination of the contract with Occidental Petroleum.
Given the fact that domestic sale prices for petroleum derivatives have been frozen since 2003, and with current international prices so high, domestic sales generated no fiscal revenues in 2006.
In terms of public spending, outlays for wages climbed by 8.8% during 2006 to represent 31.8% of total NFPS expenditure (or 7.7% of GDP).
Gross fixed capital formation in the NFPS increased by just US$ 82 million (or by 4.5%), which is the equivalent of 0.2% of GDP.
By way of comparison, NFPS expenditure on wages expanded by three times more, by 0.6% of GDP.
Although external debt repayments were lower than disbursements during the first quarter, the former exceeded the latter in the other three quarters of the year.
As a result, net repayments amounted to US$ 702 million (1.7% of GDP) in 2006.1 As for domestic debt, repayments surpassed disbursements by US$ 409 million (the equivalent of 1% of GDP) in 2006.
Based on an economic growth rate of 4.1%, the total debt-to-GDP ratio fell from 39.8% of GDP in 2005 October 2006 saw the enactment of the Act Creating the Ecuadorian Investment Fund for the Energy and Hydrocarbon Sectors (FEISEH), which was then regulated in March 2007.
The remainder is accumulated in the Saving and Contingency Fund.2 The government hopes that the Investment Fund for the Energy and Hydrocarbon Sectors (FEISEH) may help to increase investment in the oil sector (including in the Esmeraldas refinery) and in hydroelectricity generation.
In March 2007 for instance, the government declared a state of emergency in the health system, which will now make it easier to increase expenditure in that sector.
Between 2005 and 2006, lending and deposit interest rates both increased, with the latter rising by less than the former.
This pattern, associated with the hike in international interest rates, resulted in a wider banking spread.
In June 2007, Congress approved the bill for the regulation of the maximum cost of credit.
The law has resulted in, inter alia, a segmentation of lending, with a different maximum interest rate (including the cost of the relevant bank commission) for each segment.
First, banks hold a high proportion of their assets abroad and in liquid form (23.2% in 2006).
As a result of variations in the exchange rates of currencies in which the country’s external debt is held, this debt swelled by US$ 67 million.
These assets tend to be held as bonds (including United States Treasury Bonds), currency and deposits, probably as a backup in case of negative events.
Second, banking institutions have continued to decrease the proportion of assets held in Ecuadorian government bonds: from an average of 4.7% in 2003 to 1.6% in 2006.
Third, 2006 saw a consolidation of the upward trend in loans to non-company resident sectors, especially consumer loans.
This constitutes a nominal increase of 76.1%, compared with a 41.8% rise in total assets.
This was mainly a reflection of the United States dollar’s depreciation in relation to the currencies of some of Ecuador’s other trading partners such as Brazil, the Russian Federation and Chile, as well as lower inflation in the currencies of other partners such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
This was in spite of the appreciation of the dollar against the Japanese yen.
Ecuador recorded real bilateral depreciations in relation to the currencies of Brazil (12.7%), the Russian Federation (10.9%) and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (7.2%), and an 8.1% real appreciation in relation to the currency of Japan.
This performance was mainly attributable to the decline in investment during the second half of the year.
The main contributors to economic growth were the services and manufacturing sectors, while oil extraction expanded by only 0.8%.
On the demand side, household consumption rose by 6.8%, while gross fixed capital formation and exports increased by a mere 2.9%.
The small rise in exports was in contrast with the 7.4% growth observed in 2005.
Services and manufacturing for the domestic market are expected to remain buoyant.
In contrast, the production of the Stateowned PETROECUADOR is likely to continue falling, with no significant increase forecast in private crude extraction either.
In 2006, crude oil extraction rose by only 0.8%, which was less than the increase in domestic demand for petroleum derivatives.
On 15 May 2006, the government terminated the petroleum concession contract with Occidental Petroleum, and the fields previously operated by the latter (Block 15, Edén-Yuturi and Limoncocha) are now managed by the State enterprise PETROECUADOR.
Since then, crude extraction by Petroproducción (the company’s upstream subsidiary) has dropped every month from a daily average of 291 barrels in June 2006 to 253.2 barrels in March 2007.
First, management problems have hampered investment that would have averted the natural decline in production as the oilfields’ reserves get used up.
By way of example, in June 2007 PETROECUADOR held US$ 152 million in non-performing loans.
Second, there have been various incidents involving local people (including strikes, oilfield sit-ins, sabotage of facilities and stolen materials) in the extraction areas, with the problems also affecting several private companies.
Inflation was 2.9% between December 2005 and December 2006, which is slightly lower than during the year-earlier period and only just higher than inflation in the United States (2.5%).
This is important because the United States dollar is legal tender in Ecuador.
During 2006 and early 2007, there was a continuation of the downward trend in unemployment seen in 2005, as a result of a buoyant performance in the services and manufacturing sectors (which both employ a large workforce).
Includes hidden unemployment. l Percentage of urban total. m In January 2000, the country adopted the United States dollar as its official the economically active population, three cities; 1998, urban total. n Reference rate in dollars, monthly average. o Accrual basis. p For 1998 and 1999, the primary and overall balance include currency.
As of 2000, includes net credit extended by the Central Bank of Ecuador and the National Finance Corporation. for the first four months of 2007.
Unemployment fell despite a 0.7 percentage point rise in the overall labour participation rate, as the employment rate climbed by 0.9 percentage points.
In the first four months of 2007, real average wages were 4.3% higher than in the year-earlier period.
According to quality indicators, employment structure remained basically the same, as visible underemployment dropped in line with unemployment, while other forms of underemployment represented a larger proportion of the total.
As a result, the proportion of underemployed people as a percentage of the total employed population slipped slightly from 53.0% to 52.9%.
In 2006, for the first time in several years, the balance of payments showed a drop in reserves, and a financial shortfall of US$ 131 million.
This was primarily the result of the US$ 992 million increase in the balance of goods, and the US$ 414 million increase in current transfers.
The balance of services deficit widened by US$ 218 million, while annuities paid remained high but mainly unchanged.
The financial account recorded net capital outflows of US$ 1.678 billion in 2006, which was in sharp contrast with the net inflows of US$ 628 million observed in 2005.
This was mainly attributable to the exchange of United States debt for cash by Ecuadorian banks.
Second, the amount of currency and deposit placements abroad (US$ 3.733 billion or 9.1% of GDP in 2006) was almost double the US$ 1.907 billion worth of placements made in 2005 (also in the form of bank operations).
Morgan’s EMBI+ index. j Refers to net credit monthly average. k Refers to total credit extended by the extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. banking system. derivatives was responsible for 65.5% of the increase.
The volume of oil exports expanded by 3.8%, while the price of crude climbed by 23.7%.
Among non-oil exports, impressive performances were turned in by exports of vehicles (up by 106% to represent 6.8% of the total increase) banana (up by 11.9% to account for 5% of the increase) and shrimp (up by 27.3% to represent 4.9% of the total increase).
Oil exports are expected to perform well in 2007, as prices of crude should remain steady during the year.
However, there are doubts about whether PETROECUADOR has the capacity to increase extraction.
During the first three months of 2007, the volume of oil exports was 18.1% lower than in the first quarter of 2006.
This combined with a slight fall in the average price of crude oil to bring down the value of exports by 20.5%.
Two thirds of the increase was due to higher imports of fuel, lubricants and raw materials.
As in 2005, external purchases of fuel and lubricants rose not only owing to the increase in petroleum derivatives, but also because the limited refining capacity of PETROECUADOR means that the country has to import petroleum derivatives to meet domestic demand for such products.
Although imports of capital goods swelled by 10.7%, two thirds of the increase were attributable to purchases of transport material, while imports of industrial capital goods rose by a mere 5% and those of agricultural goods by just 0.1%.
In the first three months of 2007, external purchases climbed by 12.6%, with a considerable slowdown in imports of consumer goods.
The Paraguayan economy’s expansion by 4.2% in 2006 was driven by the service sector, which registered an exceptionally high growth rate of 6.3%.
The agricultural sector recorded a moderate upturn of 0.6% in what turned out to be the third consecutive year of drought.
The livestock sector expanded by 9%, with meat exports soaring by 67% as a consequence of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Brazil and the restrictions placed on Argentine meat exports.
The current account showed a deficit of around 2% of GDP despite these results, but the capital and financial account1 reflected substantial inflows of foreign exchange into the country which resulted in a 13% appreciation of the guaraní against the United States dollar.
Inflation rebounded considerably in the last three months to close the year at 12.5%, mainly due to supply constraints in the fruit and vegetable sector.
The central government closed out 2006 with a slight surplus (0.5% of GDP).
This was the third year in a row in which fiscal accounts showed a positive balance, and a similar result is expected in 2007.
Nevertheless, the domestic debt balance at the close of 2006 was up by almost 18%, mainly as a result of bond issues in May and December.
This reduction in interest payments helped to curb current expenditure, which thus rose by no more than 14.8% (compared to 15.9% in 2005) even though spending on personal services was up by 17.6% despite a freeze on recruitment and appointments to public institutions.
The 2007 budget also makes provision for the sale of up to a maximum of 667.120 billion guaraníes (approximately US$ 130 million) in treasury bonds.
If this ceiling is reached, the country will have sold double the amount it placed in 2006.
Part of the proceeds from the 2006 bond issues was used to fund the Development Finance Agency (AFD) which received a transfer of 100 billion guaraníes (approximately US$ 20 million).
This transfer boosted capital expenditure by 16.7% (4.3% of GDP), but its share in total spending was not significantly affected.
The behaviour of this item of expenditure over the past decade has been extremely volatile and has been strongly influenced by specific events rather than being the result of a coherent public investment policy.
One of the reasons for this is that these expenditures are more flexible than current items and are therefore more liable to reflect temporary adjustments.
The number of taxpayers registered with the Office of the Under-Secretary of State for Taxation increased by 17.8% in 2006, but receipts from taxes on net income and profits rose by only around 1%.
Value added tax (VAT) revenues were up by 17.3% thanks to the expansion of commerce.
Receipts from the excise tax on fuel rose by 7.4% as the prices of petroleum and petroleum products subsided somewhat.
These four taxes accounted for 88% of fiscal revenues in 2006, slightly less than the 91% average registered In 2006, the introduction of the personal income tax was postponed until 2007.
The legal provisions for its implementation were passed in December and entered into force on 1 January 2007.
In its first year of application, this tax will be levied at a rate of 10% on taxpayers whose annual income is more than 120 times the minimum wage (or 10 times the monthly minimum wage) and of 8% on taxpayers whose annual income is equal to or below that threshold.
In the second year, the threshold will be lowered to 108 times the minimum wage; thereafter it will be gradually lowered until reaching 36 times the minimum wage.
In addition, in 2007 the IRPC —an income tax on one-person companies with an annual income of up to 100 million guaraníes (approximately US$ 20,000)— was introduced to replace the consolidated tax (tributo único).
This 10% single-rate tax does not exempt taxpayers from VAT, although a simplified system for its payment is planned.
As for non-tax revenues, the contractual income of the Itaipú and Yacyretá binational entities was up by 14%.
In addition to these earnings, the binational entities bring funds into the country which are then used to finance social expenditures not provided or accounted for in the national budget.
In 2006, total inflows of foreign exchange generated by the binational entities rose by 51%, and inflows registered under the heading of administrative expenditure (which includes the social programmes financed by these entities) jumped by almost 200%.
These capital flows represented 14.5% of the monetary base at the close of the year and may therefore have contributed to the monetary impulse and stepped up the pressure for an appreciation of the local currency.
For the last two years, Paraguay’s monetary policymakers have been using benchmarks for the inflation rate.
The year-on-year target for the increase in the consumer price index (CPI) for the metropolitan area of Asunción is set at 5%, with a margin of 2.5 percentage points on either side.
This approach is an introduction to a system of inflation targeting, sharing the dual objective of increasing the credibility and transparency of monetary policy and anchoring the inflation expectations of economic agents.
The central bank set the interest rate on its 35-day instruments of monetary regulation (IMRs) as the policy rate, but in practice it has used the entire interest-rate curve for these instruments to signal the market about its monetary policy intentions.
Lending and deposit rates in the banking system have generally stayed in step with the rise in IMR rates observed since mid-2005.3 Interest rates on sight deposits, which have been virtually zero since late 2004, have been the exception to this rule.
This type of deposit has represented, on average, around 80% of total deposits since January 2004, and the effect of the low rate of return on these instruments, both for account holders and for banks’ financial balances, has therefore been extensive.
Despite the prominence of sight deposits, the use of certificates of deposit has increased rapidly in the last two years; this was especially true in 2006, when the rush to take advantage of their higher yield resulted in a year-on-year average increase of 45%.
Unless otherwise indicated, this analysis refers to interest rates on local-currency deposits and loans.
Lending operations have also reacted to the rise in IMR rates, with the growth rate of such operations slipping from 29% in 2005 to 21% in 2006, on average.4 Foreign-currency lending has behaved more erratically.
The sharp appreciation of the guaraní against the United States dollar observed since early 2006 has helped to boost total foreign-currency loans, which surged in March 2007, marking up a year-on-year growth rate of 35% in dollar terms (14% in guaraníes).
Due to expectations of a smaller appreciation of the guaraní in 2007, this aggregate should stabilize in the course of the year.
Private-sector foreign-currency deposits rose by about 20% in the first four months of 2007, following an average increase of 11% in 2006.
Nevertheless, in February 2007, this aggregate (when measured in guaraníes) was surpassed by localcurrency deposits for the first time ever.
The expansion of the amount of notes and coins in circulation (M0) began to accelerate in the second quarter of 2005 and has since then averaged a year-on-year nominal growth rate of 17% (7% in real terms).
This has led to an increase in the monetary base, whose main growth factor has been the upswing in net external assets generated by the strong build-up of international reserves.
The build-up has been partially sterilized through IMR issues, which are the main contraction factor for the monetary base.
In December 2006, the balance on these instruments represented 70% of total base money.
The behaviour of M0 and deposits has contributed to the rapid growth of monetary aggregates (from M1 to M3) over the past three years, although there has been a marked decline in the rate.
In March 2007, following a change in its board of directors, the central bank intervened extensively in the foreign-exchange market in order to slow the appreciation of the guaraní against the United States dollar.
In order to sterilize these interventions, additional IMRs were issued, and the balance of these instruments showed a year-on-year increase of 42%.
Nevertheless, there was a significant increase in monetary aggregates: M0 registered a year-on-year expansion of 22% (15% in real terms), while in real terms) and M3 by 15% (9% in real terms).
The new board of the central bank also decided to launch competitive IMR auctions, which led to a significant drop in interest rates.
Average interest rates decreased from 11% in February to 8% in March, with short-term interest rates (60-90 days) falling from 10.8% to 5.7% and longer-term rates (546-728 days) from 12.5% to Refers to loans made by the banking system to the private sector. 11.5%.
From mid-April onward, IMRs were issued at benchmark rates on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays, and interest rates declined further, slipping to an average of 4% in April and May.
The new board of directors has also been looking into the possibility of creating a futures market, which could provide a way of helping to blunt the impact of exchangerate fluctuations and control liquidity through interbank swaps.
The fact that production activity does not absorb all the liquidity in the system can build up inflationary pressures in the future, and this risk needs to be taken into account in monetary policymaking.
The central bank intervened heavily in the foreignexchange market in March and April 2007 and succeeded in stabilizing the exchange rate at around 5,000 guaraníes to the United States dollar.
In March, the central bank bought US$ 159 million in net terms, which was equivalent to 60% of net purchases for the whole of 2006.
In addition to these interventions, it also raised the daily limit on the amount of foreign exchange that banks are allowed to buy and sell.
The central bank’s expectation is that lower IMR interest rates and the introduction of a futures market will ease exchange-rate pressures and thus reduce the need to intervene in the foreign exchange market. (d) Other policies The Development Finance Agency (AFD) was created by a law passed in 2005 to perform second-tier banking functions and began operations in July 2006.
Its function is to provide medium- and long-term credit, particularly to the production sector.
It is also gradually moving into the mortgage segment, where it is offering loans for up to 20 years.
The National Development Bank, which is due to take on first-tier banking functions, is still in the midst of an internal restructuring process.
The 2007 national budget authorizes AFD to issue up to 155.8 billion guaraníes (approximately US$ 31 million) in government-guaranteed bonds.
In addition, the institution expects to obtain long-term financing from Petróleos de Venezuela S.A., the National Bank for Economic and Social Development of Venezuela (BANDES) and the Inter-American Development Bank, as well as through the allocation of additional funds still awaiting congressional approval.
In 2006, although these weather conditions management in each of these corporations.
To this end, it created specific indicators for use in monitoring and evaluating their management performance.
The possibility of allowing the entry of private capital is still under study, however. were still causing significant losses, the sector was able to achieve a growth rate of 0.6%.
A good harvest is forecast in 2007 for the main crops, especially soybeans, maize, cassava, sugar cane, wheat, beans, peanuts, sunflowers and rice.
Soybean output is expected to swell by around 65%, which has been reflected in exports.
Activities associated with meat have benefited from the emergence of new export markets for these products, particularly the Russian Federation.
In 2007, a slowdown is expected in both the livestock sector and meat production due, among other factors, to Brazil’s resumption of exports to certain markets.
Along with the expansion of the livestock sector, the output of dairy products also registered significant growth (10%).
In the manufacturing sector, the production of machinery and equipment was up by 22%.
This, together with the noteworthy upswing in imports of capital goods, was a major factor in the 8.9% increase in gross capital formation.
Construction slumped by 5.2% as a consequence of problems with cement supplies.
Now that this situation has returned to normal, activity in the sector is expected to pick up in 2007.
The outcome of all the above was that the production of goods grew by 2% in 2006.
Financial services (6.6%), business services (6.5%) and household services (6%) also reflected the overall rise in the level of production activity.
Private consumption climbed by 7%, but this rate of increase was outdistanced by growth in gross capital formation and exports (10%).
In 2007, it is estimated that the Paraguayan economy will once more grow by approximately 4% and that its expansion will again be driven by the services sector but also in part by the considerable increase in activity in the agricultural sector.
The CPI showed a variation of 12.5% in 2006, thus exceeding the 2.5% margin above the 5% benchmark rate.
Supply constraints affecting various items of fresh agricultural produce had a significant impact on these results in the last quarter of the year.
Core inflation (which does not include the prices of fruit and vegetables) was 7%.
In general, food prices, especially in the cases of meat and vegetables, rose the most steeply during the year.
This had a deflationary influence on prices in the first quarter of the year, as did falling prices for meat and fuels (and related goods and services).
The country is expected to close out the year with an inflation rate close to the upper limit of the central bank’s reference band.
The legal minimum wage was raised by 12% in April 2006 and has remained unchanged since then.
Rising inflation towards the end of the year has resulted, therefore, in a loss of purchasing power.
Despite the upturn in economic activity, the open urban unemployment rate is estimated to have climbed The exchange rate fell considerably in 2006 as a result of hefty foreign-currency inflows.
The guaraní presented an average nominal appreciation against the United States dollar of 8.8%, while the December-December variation was 13%.
The guaraní registered an average nominal appreciation of 1.8% against the Brazilian real and of 13.5% against the Argentine peso, which was reinforced by Argentina’s control of its exchange rate against the dollar.
As a result of the nominal appreciation and the inflation registered in 2006, the real effective exchange rate had appreciated by 18.4% at the close of the year (the average appreciation was 12.4%).
In 2007, a less significant appreciation is projected, although a falling exchange rate should help to keep inflation under control by contributing to more moderate prices for tradable goods.
In 2006, a deficit of approximately 2% of GDP was posted on Paraguay’s balance-of-payments current account.
This outcome was largely a consequence of the strong growth of imports, which climbed by 51%.
The machinery and equipment sector, which marked up a 100% increase over the year before, witnessed the sharpest increase in imports.
Registered imports of durable consumer goods rose by 110% owing to a surge in motor vehicle imports.
Exports also jumped by an extraordinary 46%, driven by the boom in registered meat exports, which soared by 67% overall.
Exports of soybeans and cotton, in contrast, were down by 22% and 15%, respectively.
The opening of new export markets for Paraguay, such as those of the Russian Federation and Chile, as a result of the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in Brazil and the export restrictions in place in Argentina, had a strong impact on meat exports.
However, the restoration of some Brazilian states’ status as “foot-and-mouth-free zones with vaccination” and the significant quotas of Brazilian meat that enter the Russian Federation market duty free have hurt Paraguay’s registered beef exports, which, up to May, had fallen by 19% compared to the same period of the year before.
The expansion in soybean production, in contrast, had a positive impact on registered exports of this product, which, up to May, had soared by 119% compared to the corresponding period of 2006.
In addition, soybean prices posted a year-on-year rise of around 30% in the first five months of the year.
Net current transfers ballooned by about 74% as a result of the increase in emigrants’ remittances.
Foreign-exchange inflows recorded in the financial account, which yielded a surplus of around 6% of GDP, therefore put considerable pressure on the exchange rate.
This was attributable to hefty FDI inflows, which swelled by 86% and were mainly directed to the telecommunications, agriculture and livestock sectors, and to the redemption of, or returns on, assets held abroad.
These flows resulted in a build-up of international reserves totalling nearly 4% of GDP.
The stock of international reserves amounted to US$ 1.703 billion at the close of the year, which was 31% more than the year before.
In March and April 2007, this balance had grown by 40% and 52%, respectively, in year-on-year terms, in line with the central bank’s operations on the foreign-exchange market.
Cumulative growth for the past five years stood at 32%, resulting in a 23% rise in per capita GDP.
The unusually favourable external environment, particularly the high prices of the country’s main exports, led to high surpluses on the trade balance and the balance-of-payments current account.
High fiscal revenue created a surplus equivalent to 2.1% of GDP in the non-financial public sector.
This, together with strong inflows of foreign exchange, lessened external vulnerability thanks to reduced debt and increased international reserves.
Low inflation (1.1% in late 2006) and a nominal exchange-rate appreciation promoted the dedollarization of the financial system.
Unlike that of previous years, economic growth was largely based on domestic demand, which showed its greatest expansion in 10 years, stimulated by considerable job creation and strong private investment.
In mid-2006, following an election campaign which temporarily increased the volatility of the foreign-exchange and financial markets, the second government under President García took office.
The main components of economic policy remained unchanged, but the authorities announced a significant increase in public investment and the adoption of measures to strengthen the impact of social and production policies in the regions and population groups affected by poverty.
The favourable external climate, buoyant economic growth, stable prices and strong job creation continued in the first half of 2007.
Predictions for the year as a whole call for growth of above 7% and inflation remaining within the target range of 1% to 3%, which is lower than the previous year’s target (1.5% to 3.5%).
The figures for the fiscal balance and the balance-of-payments current account are expected to remain positive, but less so than Thanks to the favourable external climate, the government’s economic policies continued to reduce the vulnerabilities affecting the Peruvian economy, including the heavy public debt and the dollarization of the financial system.
The authorities continued with the system of inflation targets and intervened on the open foreign-exchange market.
A free trade agreement was negotiated with the United States —and approved on the Peruvian side— in order to increase and diversify exports.
In January 2007, a two-year precautionary stand-by arrangement was signed with the International Monetary Fund.
Among other elements, the agreement emphasizes the broadening of the tax base, improved efficiency in public investment, an active approach to external debt management, combating poverty and strengthening the financial sector.
The steep upswing in revenue from 2005 onwards as a result of high prices for natural resources, rapid economic growth and measures to tighten up tax collection and broaden the tax base led to a fiscal performance which was much better than expected.
The increase in tax receipts was mostly due to income tax, whose contribution rose from 4.3% to 6.0% of GDP.
This was to a great extent due to tax revenue from mining companies.
Disbursements were limited by the Law on Fiscal Responsibility and Transparency, which restricts increases in public spending and contains specific provisions for pre-election periods.
The new government modified the long-term direction of fiscal policy as defined in the multiyear programme, focusing on increasing current-account saving (higher receipts and lower current expenditure) and greater capital spending, which is expected to rise from 2.9% of GDP in 2005 to 4.4% in 2009.
To facilitate this increased investment, the Law on Fiscal Responsibility and Transparency was amended, exempting capital expenditure from the 3% limit on real annual increases in public spending.
The increase in public investment will continue to be restricted by the goal of a deficit of no more than 1% of GDP.
In the second half of 2006 and in early 2007 the adjustment issues usual with a new government, together with management problems in the regions and municipalities, obstructed the execution of a number of works projects.
As a result, capital spending in 2006 remained relatively stable in GDP terms and total central government spending primary central government balance rose from 1.1% to 3.2% of GDP and the overall central government balance improved from a deficit of 0.7% of GDP to a 1.4% surplus.
Thus, fiscal policy played an countercyclical role and the public debt, whose nominal amount was relatively stable, fell from 37.7% of GDP in late 2005 to 32.7% of GDP in late 2006 thanks to strong economic growth and a nominal appreciation of the new sol.
To reduce vulnerability in relation to the public debt, internal debt as a proportion of total debt was increased and —by means of a bond swap and repurchase operation in February 2007 for a total of about US$ 2.3 billion— the debt profile was softened and the proportion of variable-rate external debt was reduced.
In mid-2007 the member countries of the Paris Club accepted the government’s proposal to prepay part of its debts.
In 2007, the authorities are endeavouring to improve the management of public investment.
A fall in revenue in GDP terms is expected, owing to lower tariffs on a number of capital goods and the reduction of the excise tax on fuels imposed in 2006 to limit the impact of high world oil prices.
With a marked increase expected in spending, particularly capital spending, the authorities are forecasting equilibrium in the non-financial public sector for 2007.
Nonetheless, in view of the growth of revenue and the restrictions on spending in the first months of the year, a fiscal surplus can once again be expected, albeit smaller than in 2006.
The authorities continued the system of inflation targets, mostly by means of central bank lending and borrowing rates.
Beginning December 2005, from an initial rate of 3.0%, a series of interest-rate hikes were implemented in response to rising international rates, a moderate upturn in inflation, strong economic growth and a preelection climate which resulted in greater volatility in the foreign-exchange market.
After increasing the benchmark rate to 4.5% in May 2006, the authorities held it steady for the rest of the year and in early 2007 in response to falling inflation and reduced foreign-exchange volatility.
In early 2007, in order to strengthen confidence in the national currency and promote the dedollarization of the financial system, the central value for the inflation target was lowered from 2.5% to 2.0%, retaining the one-point range above and below the central value.
In addition to raising interest rates, beginning in late 2005, the authorities began to sell dollars in order to stabilize the new sol, which was in danger of depreciation during the election period.
Owing to favourable expectations resulting from the presidential election, the new sol resumed its earlier trend of nominal appreciation of the bilateral exchange rate, and the Central Reserve Bank of Peru began to buy dollars again.
To sterilize the impact of these purchases, the authorities resumed the issue of deposit certificates, the volume of which increased by almost 10 billion new soles between July 2006 and mid-May 2007.
The outcome of the opposing exchange-rate trends in 2006 was an 0.5% increase in the annual average of the real exchange rate against the dollar and a 1.7% rise against trading-partner currencies as a whole.
In late 2006 it showed a real appreciation of 5.0% against the dollar and of 1.0% in terms of the multilateral exchange rate, compared with the December 2005 figures.
In the early part of 2007, the national currency continued to appreciate against the dollar in nominal terms, but owing to low inflation in the country and the appreciation of other currencies, the bilateral and effective real exchange rates remained relatively stable.
Demand for credit strengthened markedly, with a year-on-year increase in the financial-sector credit to the private sector of 9.7% as of December 2006 and 14.2% as at March 2007.
Reflecting the growing dedollarization of the financial system, the proportion of credit in national currency rose from 33.4% in late 2005 to 39.5% 12 months later and to 40.9% in March 2007.
The banks’ consumer loans and credit to microenterprises showed the fastest growth, with volume increases of 32% and 23% and borrower numbers of 22% and 15%, respectively, from December 2005 to December 2006.
The level of bad debts in the banking sector continued to decline, from 2.1% in December 2005 to 1.6% 12 months later. (c) Other policies Negotiations were completed in 2006 for a free trade agreement with the United States which was ratified by the Peruvian Congress in mid-year.
A final decision on the free trade agreement is expected in the second half of 2007.
A broadening of the economic complementarity agreement with Chile was also agreed and trade negotiations continued with Mexico and Singapore.
In December, in order to strengthen trade integration, tariffs on 2,900 items of capital goods were reduced.
To promote private investment, a law to eliminate excessive costs, red tape and restrictions was passed in In 2006, the Peruvian economy grew by 8.0%, a rate which exceeded expectations, well above the 2005 figure of 6.4%.
The growth rate of internal demand rose, with both consumption (6.6%) and gross fixed investment (19.0%) achieving their greatest expansion since 1995.
Private consumption was boosted by high levels of job creation, moderate wage rises and the expansion of consumer credit.
Gross fixed investment showed high growth rates in both the private (20.1%) and public sectors (13.0%), although the share of the two sectors in GDP (16.8% and 2.8%, respectively, at current prices) is still lower than that needed for sustained high growth.
This slowdown was mostly due to a fall in external sales of fishmeal owing to marine resource protection measures, and also to the weak growth in gold, zinc, molybdenum and copper exports which resulted from the exhaustion of a number of mines and the fact that no major new operations were opened.
The swelling growth of imports (12.4% at constant prices) meant that, for the first time since 1995, the net contribution of exports to GDP growth was negative.
Fisheries and mining were the lowest-growth sectors, whereas all other branches of activity grew by over 6%.
Particularly strong were construction (14.7%) and commerce (12.1%), reflecting the strong expansion of domestic demand.
The authorities were watching prices with some concern in the first half of 2006, when a set of supply problems with a number of foodstuffs and fuels pushed the consumer price index (CPI) upwards by close to 3% year-on-year in April of that year.
Rising world fuel prices were cushioned by a cut in the excise tax on fuels and by the use of the fuel price stabilization fund.
The subsequent normalization of agricultural supply and the fall in petroleum prices, together with the nominal appreciation of the new sol against the dollar and strong competition in retail trade, brought about a fall in the CPI between April and December.
As a result, inflation stood at 1.1% in late 2006, below the range provided for in monetary policies for the year (1.5% to 3.5%).
In early 2007, the moderate monthly increases in the CPI compared with the relatively high inflation in early 2006 led to another fall in year-on-year inflation.
Nonetheless, cumulative inflation to May 2007 stood at 1.3%, and with soaring domestic demand, the upswing in world oil prices and the low figure for comparison for the second semester, it is likely that in the last six months of 2007 the inflation rate will lie within the range selected for the year.
The strength of economic growth was reflected in labour demand, with formal employment up 7.3%, which had a considerable effect on the labour market.
The employment rate in the Lima metropolitan area rose from 60.7% to 61.8% of the working-age population.
Although the labour-force participation rate also increased, job creation was sufficient to cut the unemployment rate from 9.6% to 8.5%, the lowest since 2000.
Wages reacted moderately to demand, with an average rise of 1.2% for the year.
Job creation remained strong in early 2007 but improved job opportunities led to a marked upswing in labour supply, which in turn pushed the unemployment rate up from 9.1% in the first four months of 2006 to 9.5% in the same period in 2007.
Morgan’s EMBI+ index. h Refers i Refers to total credit to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. j Data to April. extended by full-service banks.
In 2006, the balance of trade in goods attained its largest surplus since 1979 (9.6% of GDP) thanks, mostly, to the favourable trends in the prices of many of the country’s exports (such as fishmeal, copper, tin, gold, silver, lead and zinc), leading for the fifth consecutive year to an improvement in the terms of trade, which reached 26.2%.
The favourable external situation was mostly conducive to traditional exports (41.9%) but non-traditional exports also soared (23.2%).
In comparison with the growth of exports (37.0%) the rise in imports was somewhat lower, at 23.4%, yet they represented the highest percentage of GDP since 1982.
All the components of the country’s imports swelled strongly, but capital goods showed the highest growth rate (35.4%), reflecting the rise in investments.
While the negative balances for non-factor services and current transfers were fairly constant as percentages of GDP, the factor services deficit rose from 6.4% to 8.1% of GDP, mainly owing to increased profit transfers by mining companies.
Even so, the current account showed a surplus for the third consecutive year and the size of the surplus swelled from 1.4% of GDP in 2005 to 2.6% in 2006.
The financial account recorded a slight surplus of 0.2% of GDP, mainly because of an upturn in foreign direct investment (US$ 3.388 billion in 2006 compared with US$ 2.548 billion in 2005).
This was partly counteracted by the policy of reducing the public sector’s external debt, which brought it down from 28.1% to 23.5% GDP.
All the components of private-sector financial flows (long- and short-term, including errors and omissions) became more negative, as a result of which private-sector external debt dipped from 8.0% to 6.7% of GDP.
The overall balanceof-payment surplus of 2.9% of GDP enabled the central bank to boost international reserves.
Lower surpluses on the goods account and current account are expected for 2007 because the growth of imports is accelerating whereas export growth is flagging, mostly because natural-resource prices are not rising as fast as in 2006.
In 2006, the Uruguayan economy continued to expand, recording 7.0% GDP growth with the manufacturing industry, construction, transport and communications and the agricultural sector all putting in a strong performance.
Inflation rose slightly to stand at 6.4%, while the fiscal position improved and the fiscal deficit contracted to 0.6% of GDP.
Reflecting the more robust economic activity as well as the rise in oil prices, imports expanded sharply, causing the merchandise trade deficit to widen, but the growing financial flows were more than sufficient to offset the resulting balance-of-payments current-account deficit.
A 2.5% rise in the employment rate resulted in a 0.8 percentage-point decrease in unemployment, bringing it to an annual average of 11.4%.
The proportion of poor people declined by four percentage points over the year to the current figure of 25.2% of the urban population, while indigence levels were halved, from 3.4% in 2005 to 1.7% in 2006.
This improvement was due basically to the combined effect of social programmes, the increase in employment and the increase in the real wage.
The economic authorities maintained their broad policy objectives, which were to revive public investment, boost government social spending and restructure the debt, which included the early write-off of debt with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
For 2007, GDP growth of around 5.2% is predicted against a backdrop of stable or slightly favourable terms of trade, due to trends in commodity prices on the world market and to the fact that oil prices have stabilized somewhat.
Inflation is expected to be close to the ceiling of the target range set by the authorities of between 4.5% and 6.5%.
The primary fiscal surplus should reach 4.0% of GDP by the end of the year, while the global deficit should be equivalent to 0.5% of output.
In 2006, the non-financial public-sector (NFPS) balance yielded a primary surplus of 4.1% of GDP and a global deficit of 0.4%, as a result of debt servicing, which represented 4.4% of GDP.
Central government revenues increased by 8% in real terms over the year compared with the previous year, while expenditure was up by 5%.
Fiscal revenues expanded in line with the expansionary phase of the business cycle; the greater economic activity and improved tax management resulted in higher receipts.
Revenues of the Social Security Bank rose by 12% in real terms, while that of the Tax Administration Department rose by 10%.
The breakdown of expenditure shows a 5% rise in real terms in current primary expenditure with non-wage expenditure accounting for a significant proportion (2.1 percentage points).
This item increased by 12% over the 2005 figure following the implementation of the National Social Emergency Plan (PANES).
Following this by order of magnitude were staff wages, which increased from 5.8% over the year and accounted for 1.1 percentage points.
Public investment expanded by 13.1% —with a substantial increase (24%) in the amount channelled into public corporations— and accounted for 0.7 of a percentage point of the growth in primary expenditure.
In 2006, bond issues and redemptions continued on the international market, resulting in significant debt restructuring.
Thus, in terms of their share of total gross debt, bonds increased from 54% in 2005 to 79% in 2006, while the share of international loans shrank from 43% to 20% in the same period.
The trend in the gross public debt, together with the upturn in economic activity, meant that the ratio of this debt to GDP declined from 70% to 63%.
A tax reform designed to increase efficiency and equity will come into force in July 2007.
The main features of this reform are: the establishment of a dual personal income tax system, the standardization of employer social security contributions for all sectors of activity, the elimination of some national taxes, the reduction of VAT and its extension to all goods and services.
In 2006, the monetary authorities pursued their policy of containing inflation within a preset range (between 4.5% and 6.5%) by controlling the principal monetary aggregates.
The same range was maintained for 2007, while a nominal expansion in the narrow money supply (M1) was agreed (around 9% per year) with effect from the second quarter 2007.
The monetary base expanded in real terms by 3.4% in 2006, to stand at 4.7% of GDP.
One of the instruments used to expand the money supply was the net purchase of foreign exchange by the central bank for a total of US$ 572 million.
The average annual rate for local currency deposits was 2.2% per year in 2006, half a percentage point lower than in 2005.
The average rate for foreign currency deposits was slightly lower at 1.9%.
Annual lending rates in local currency averaged 25.7%, some seven percentage points below the previous year’s rate.
Lending rates in foreign currency grew by just over half a percentage point compared with 2005 to Local currency deposits continued to rise.
Foreign currency deposits increased by 2.0% in real terms in the same period and accounted for 84.9% of total deposits in the banking system at the end of 2006.
Local currency loans increased by 7% in real terms during 2006, while foreign currency loans were up by 5%.
The exchange rate was allowed to continue to float in a market in which foreign currency purchases by the public sector accounted for a substantial proportion of total purchases.
For its part, the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Mining launched a programme to increase the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises by generating new networks and clusters and promoting existing ones.
The installation of the seat of the MERCOSUR Parliament in Montevideo in May 2007 was a further step towards the country’s international integration.
In addition, the authorities signed a framework agreement on trade and investment with the United States and set up a bipartite commission with that country to deal with relevant issues.
Trade policy continues to be one of the Government’s main focuses in 2006 and 2007.
Efforts to expand exports to extraregional markets will be stepped up in order to improve the region’s trade performance.
A strategic unit is to be set up in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 2008 in order to deepen trade relations with the rest of the world.
The country’s sound economic growth in 2006 was attributable to the robust performance of all sectors of the economy, especially manufacturing, which expanded by 8.4% and accounted for as much as 1.6 percentage points of growth in output.
Next in order of importance were transport and communications (up 12% and accounting for 1.5 percentage points of the rise in GDP), commerce, restaurants and hotels (up 8.5% and accounting for 1.0 percentage point), agriculture (up 8.3% and 1.0 percentage point), and construction (up 14% and 0.3 of a percentage point).
The remaining sectors combined expanded by 4.2% in 2006, and accounted for 1.5 percentage points.
The electricity, gas and water sector was the only one that contracted over the year owing to problems in electricity generation due to the shortage of water supplying the hydroelectric stations and the rise in oil prices.
The most dynamic subsectors were food and beverages (up 11.8%), wood and wood products (16.0%), chemicals (13.9%), non-metallic minerals (14.6%), machinery and equipment (19.2%) and transport The higher production figures were due primarily to the increase in domestic demand, which grew by 10% over the previous year, while exports increased by 7.7%.
Gross fixed capital formation was up by 32.0%, hence the investment rate in the economy rose to 16.4% of GDP, compared with 13.2% in 2005.
The item that showed the sharpest rise was food and beverages (9.1%), as unfavourable weather conditions caused a shortage of fruits, hence a 58% escalation in prices.
Next by order of magnitude were increases in the cost of medical care (8.4%) and education (8.0%).
Wholesale prices were up by 8.2% in 2006, owing to increases in the prices of agricultural and industrial goods.
In the first few months of 2007, the annualized inflation rate stood at approximately 8%, as food shortages became more acute.
The Monetary Policy Committee of the Uruguay Central Bank therefore decided to lower the annual target for monetary expansion from 15% to 9%, as mentioned above.
The cumulative recovery in the real wage in the last three years was 11%, which means that this indicator is still 16% below the 1998 level.
The overall balance-of-payments figure stood at US$ 2.396 billion in 2006, while reserve assets varied by US$ 15 million.
The balance-of-payments current account showed a deficit of US$ 457 million, (equivalent to 2.4% of GDP), which was more than offset by a capital and financial surplus of US$ 2.853 billion.
This surplus consisted of a financial investment of US$ 1.476 billion and a record FDI figure of US$ 1.377 billion.
The merchandise trade balance showed a US$ 474 million deficit, partly offset by a positive balance in services in the order of US$ 361 million.
The negative balance of the trade balance was due to the sharp increase in imports, resulting from the greater economic activity and the higher oil bill.
Although the coverage of the National Household Survey has been extended to the entire urban and rural population, for purposes of comparison with the previous year, the figures quoted relate to urban localities with at least 5,000 inhabitants.
As of 2001 the source was private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. the Central Bank of Uruguay.
Measured in dollars and on an f.o.b. basis, external sales grew by 16.3% in 2006.
The principal items were beef exports —which increased by 26.5% in dollar terms over the 2005 figure— leather and leather products (20.4%), rice (9%), textiles (5.9%) and dairy products (5.0%).
Exports may be broken down by geographical destination as follows: MERCOSUR (24%), North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) (18%), European Union (17%), rest of the Americas (11%) and rest of world (30%).
Intermediate inputs were up by 23.9% in the year, accounting for 16.3 percentage points of the increase in total imports.
Despite the uncertainty typical of any electoral process and change in administration, the country’s growth dynamic and macroeconomic stability were unaffected.
This was due primarily to the sharp increase in exports (12.6%) and gross fixed investment (9.3%).
National disposable income —a more appropriate indicator for measuring the resources that may be used to finance domestic expenditure— expanded by 6.6% and was equivalent to 90% of GDP as a result of the losses generated by the worsening terms of trade.
The deficit of the narrowly-defined global public sector shrank from 2.3% to 0.4% of GDP, the lowest level since the crisis of the early 1980s, while major changes were introduced in the monetary and exchange-rate policies.
The crawling peg mini-devaluations were replaced in October 2006 by a crawling band system designed to enhance the effectiveness of monetary policy.
One of the greatest achievements in 2006 was the reduction in the rate of inflation, which fell to 9.4%, its lowest level since 1993, thanks to the attenuation of the impact of external and internal shocks, stronger fiscal discipline and the slower devaluation of the colon against the United States dollar.
The inflow of external financial resources, including foreign direct investment (FDI), financed the current-account deficit and contributed to the increase in international monetary reserves.
Lack of parliamentary support for the initiatives of the executive has hindered the adoption of some important economic policy measures, including fiscal reform and the ratification of the Dominican RepublicCentral America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR).
In May 2007, the Supreme Court of Elections decided to organize a referendum on the issue in October.
According to the 2007-2008 macroeconomic programme of the Central Bank of Costa Rica, output will grow by 5%, while inflation will stand at 8%.
The overall consolidated deficit of the narrowly defined public sector is estimated to rise to 2.3% of GDP, while the balance-of-payments current account deficit, as a percentage of GDP, will be similar to the The new government’s economic priorities are to strengthen linkages with the world economy, solve fiscal constraints and effectively combat poverty and inequality.
At the same time, the monetary and exchange-rate policies will gradually be adjusted in an effort to slash inflation.
In 2006, the deficit of the narrowly defined global public sector diminished from 2.3% to 0.4% of GDP.
All components contributed to this positive result: the central government, the rest of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) and the Central Bank.
Maintaining fiscal equilibrium nevertheless remains one of the main challenges facing the Costa Rican authorities, especially bearing in mind the high amount of debt payments, pensions and specific disbursements provided for under the Constitution and the law.
Thanks to higher revenues and a tighter rein on expenditure, the central government deficit declined from 2.1% of GDP to 1.1%.
This deficit was financed primarily through the issue of new domestic bonded debt.
Current revenue, as a percentage of GDP, increased from 13.8% to 14.5%.
This increase was due mainly to the economic acceleration, growth in imports and better tax control, which helped to reduce tax evasion.
Revenues from customs duties (26.3%), general domestic sales tax (26.9%) and income tax (21.6%) showed the sharpest increases.
This was due to the more limited increase in capital expenditure (5.7%), since current expenditure continued to rise sharply (16.3%), reflecting increases in the wage bill, interest on public debt, transfers to the special fund for higher public education at university level and pensions.
The net result of the rest of the NFPS also improved with respect to the previous year.
Although the active monetary management designed to deal with the volumes of foreign capital flooding into the country implies high financial costs, the Central Bank deficit diminished slightly in GDP terms (1.2%).
An interesting point to note in connection with this change in the structure of the balance is that interest-yielding assets were equal to cost-bearing liabilities.
These two variables had been gradually getting closer mainly as a result of the partial capitalizations by the government, the profits associated with the redemption of the external debt, and seigniorage.
In 2006, the public debt, measured in GDP terms, was reduced by over three percentage points with respect to the previous year, thanks mainly to the reduction in central government debt.
Curbing inflation was the principal objective of the central bank’s monetary policy in 2006, although a number of factors continued to limit its effectiveness.
Instability in the demand for money, influenced by financial innovation and high capital mobility, made it difficult for the central bank to control total liquidity in the economy.
The preannounced daily exchangerate adjustment system, which is similar in effect to a fixed-rate regime, combined with the free movement of external capital, implied that primary money creation occurred, not just through expansion of internal assets in the central bank, but also through changes in the foreignexchange market.
In fact, in addition to influencing consumer and investor decisions, interest-rate increases based on central-bank monetary policy stimulated capital inflows, whose monetization diminished the contractionary effect expected following the increase in the interest rate.
The Central Bank of Costa Rica has had to deal with the “impossible trinity” of economic theory, according to which a central bank cannot, in a context of free movement of capital, have an active monetary policy and, at the same time, control of the exchange rate.
In these circumstances, the authorities decided, on the one hand, to initiate the transition from control of monetary aggregates to a monetary policy based on inflation targets and, on the other, to adopt a more flexible exchangerate regime.
This decision was based on the favourable macroeconomic juncture, of which the main features are the relatively high level of net international reserves, fiscal discipline and the stability of the financial system.
The short-term (30-day) investment system interest rate, which had been used as the monetary policy rate, was replaced by the one-day deposit facility in order to stem the inflow of speculative capital and its resulting monetization.
New monetary absorption instruments, such as monetary stabilization bonds, were introduced and an electronic deposit facility was set up for this purpose.
In mid-October 2006, the authorities decided to replace the daily exchange-rate adjustment system (consisting, at the time, in a daily 13-centavo adjustment in the nominal exchange rate of the colón against the United States dollar) by exchange-rate bands with a moderate initial width (3%) to be expanded over time to allow greater flexibility.
Initially, it was established that the floor of the band would move up by 6 centavos per day, while the ceiling would increase by 14 centavos.
However, the abundance of dollars on the market kept the intervention exchange rate stuck to the floor of the band and forced the Central Bank to intervene systematically on the wholesale currency market.
In January 2007, the monetary authorities therefore agreed to set the purchasing rate (the floor), for an undertermined period of time, at 519.16 colones and to reduce the daily increase in the intervention selling rate (the ceiling) to 11 centavos.
At the same time, the yield on central bank short-term investment instruments diminished.
While the measures adopted are expected to stem capital inflows and the supply of dollars, the colón continued to appreciate in the first quarter of 2007 (1%).
The principal monetary indicators grew at relatively high rates in 2006 owing mainly to the monetization generated by the build-up of international reserves.
The higher-than-expected expansion, the favourable outlook for the economy, the excess liquidity in the financial system and the downward trend in interest rates, especially for housing loans, led to an expansion of credit to the private sector (27.7%), above the target established by the Central Bank.
Loans were concentrated in the construction sector, tourism, consumption and commerce. (c) Trade policy In 2006, actions were stepped up to consolidate and improve access for exports to significant markets through new trade agreements and better use of existing agreements.
In particular, measures were taken to launch negotiations for an association agreement with the European Union, to reactivate negotiations on the free trade agreement with Panama and to make headway with the process of Central American integration.
Costa Rica has an open investment regime but with some important exceptions.
In some sectors, restrictions continue to apply and the State holds the monopoly over certain key services that suffer from certain inefficiencies.
These services include the import, refining and destribution of oil and oil products; insurance; railways, maritime ports and airports, electricity, and telecommunications.
Several restrictions would be eliminated by the application of CAFTA-DR, which Costa Rica has signed but not yet ratified.
In 2006, the Costa Rican economy grew by 7.9%, a high rate when compared with the 2005 figure (5.9%) and with the annual growth rate of the country’s potential output, which is estimated at 4.3%.
The output gap has been a pattern since June 2005 and tends to confirm the presence of excess demand, which could generate inflationary pressures.
For the time being, however, such pressures have not been particularly evident, since some of the overexpenditure has been absorbed by imports and growth in consumption was below GDP growth.
On the expenditure side, the vibrancy of the economy was linked to the increase in external demand (12.6%) and the surge in domestic demand (8.4%), stimulated by the expansion in gross domestic investment.
The stronger domestic demand reflected the increase in private consumption, especially of imported goods, as well as the expansion in gross fixed capital formation.
The rise in private consumption was due to the increase in real terms in family income, the decline in local currency lending and deposit rates and the rally in consumer confidence in the national economy.
The growth in fixed capital investment stems mainly from the construction boom (especially in the housing sector) and the performance of the manufacturing industry.
Of particular note at the sectoral level was the increase in value added in the manufacturing industry (12.5%), attributable mainly to the production of companies operating in the free zones and companies that export mainly to the rest of Central America.
The construction sector expanded by 14.8% and the agricultural sector also performed well (up by 10.6%).
High growth was again recorded in telecommunications (especially cellular telephony and Internet), international tourism, financial intermediation, commerce and international corporate services (production of software and call and corporateassistance centres).
In the first quarter of 2007, the monthly index of economic activity showed a deceleration in interannual growth in production due mainly to the downturn suffered by some manufactured and agricultural products, such as coffee, pineapple and melon.
Companies situated in the free zones, especially high technology electronics firms, recorded slower growth in their external sales.
On the other hand, the moderate growth in inflation and the slide in interest rates triggered an increase in domestic spending, pushing up the demand for loans in certain sectors —such as construction— which continued to show robust growth. wage increased by 1.6%.
All of this has affected the number of households affected by poverty, which, in percentage terms, declined from The CPI-based inflation rate stood at 9.4%, well below the target set in the monetary programme (11%) and the lowest level recorded since 1993.
The methodology used to calculate the CPI was changed in August and is now based on a new basket which attributes a higher weighting to transport and a lower one to food and beverages.
Thus, the reduction in fuel prices has led to a sharper slowdown in inflation and the rise in food prices has had less of an impact on the variation in the CPI.
In addition, this indicator reflects the effect of fiscal discipline and the slower nominal annual depreciation of the colón.
The sharp expansion of the economy had a positive effect on the labour market.
The 3% rise in employment meant that the national open unemployment rate diminished from 6.6% to 6.0%.
At the same time, the real average In 2006, the balance-of-payments current-account deficit as a percentage of GDP was similar to the previous year’s (4.9%) owing mainly to the widening of the trade deficit.
The deterioration in the terms of trade, caused by the higher prices for hydrocarbons and other raw materials, was counterbalanced by an increase in external sales that avoided a larger external deficit.
The merchandise deficit (11.7% of GDP) was partly offset by the net surplus of the services account owing mainly to the favourable performance of the tourism sector, on-line information processing services and business support services.
Financial resources from abroad have boosted net monetary reserves by US$ 800 million to US$ 3.115 billion, equivalent to 14.1% of GDP or 4.6 months’ imports.
Rica, however, the level of the current-account deficit continues to be a source of vulnerability in the face of possible external shocks, such as the worsening terms of trade or rising interest rates.
These were channelled mainly towards the real estate sector (25%), reflecting a boom in housing and land purchases by non-residents.
The share of the financial system increased significantly (23%) with the acquisition of the Interfin Financial Group by Scotiabank.
The development of new infrastructure projects in coastal areas and the expansion of existing tourism infrastructure account for the tourism sector’s contribution (10%).
The products that showed the most robust growth were traditional products (11.3% of total external sales), thanks to the strong increase in banana exports (30.8%), and non-traditional agricultural products (pineapple, flowers, foliage and ornamental plants).
The most dynamic industrial exports were integrated circuits, electrical microstructures and parts for modular circuits, medical equipment and pharmaceutical products.
Raw materials and intermediate goods accounted for the bulk of the 17.5% increase in imports, owing mainly to the rise in the oil bill and external purchases of firms located in the free zones.
Real GDP in El Salvador grew by 4.2% in 2006, resulting in the largest increase in per capita GDP (2.6%) for nine years.
Such buoyancy was due to a rise in investment (10.8%) and an impressive performance in agriculture and services.
Inflows of family remittances (18% of GDP) once more served to fuel private consumption and ease the impact of rising international oil prices on the balanceof-payments current account, which posted a deficit of 4.6% of GDP.
The fiscal deficit of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) stood at 1.1% of GDP, while annual inflation came in at 4.9%.
By December 2006, the balance of net international reserves had swelled Although the government estimates economic growth of around 5% for 2007 (on the strength of buoyancy in agriculture, services, tourism and construction), firstquarterly results and the slowdown in the United States (the country’s main trading partner) point to a more modest expansion.
The main economic policy goal is to maintain fiscal discipline, and the fiscal deficit is therefore expected to narrow slightly.
Similarly, the current account deficit is also predicted to shrink, mainly thanks to hefty inflows of remittances.
Foreign direct investment (FDI), meanwhile, is expected to rise on the back of the sale of banking assets.
In view of the absence of monetary and exchange-rate policy since dollarization in 2001, the main feature of economic policy was the successful implementation of the 2005 tax reform, which included changes in the tax code, the law on banks and the income tax law.
The NFPS deficit amounted to 1.1% of GDP (including grants of 0.2% of GDP), which was 1.9 percentage points less than in 2005.
This change is due to the creation of a trust fund to manage the pension system.
The fund is run by the Multisectoral Investment Bank, and was set up to issue pension liability certificates that are then purchased by pension fund administrators for a term of 25 years.
The State would therefore be postponing the payment of around US$ 349 million in debt (1.9% of GDP).
As a result of this and the elimination of the transport subsidy, the NFPS deficit is expected to stand at 0.6% of GDP in 2007 (not including grants).
Tax revenues surpassed those from the year-earlier period by around US$ 344 million (1.9% of GDP).
Expanding the tax base to include much of the informal sector, cross-checking information and introducing tax monitoring plans increased the tax burden to 13.9% of GDP (before refunds —0.5% of GDP—), which is almost a whole percentage point higher than the previous year.
Income tax displayed a real growth rate of 12.1%, followed by VAT (11.6%) and property transfer tax (8.6%).
In contrast, contributions to the Road Maintenance Fund fell by 0.9% as a result of lower fuel consumption.
Total expenditure swelled by 5.5% in real terms (an increase of 1.5 percentage points of GDP).
Current expenditure rose by 5.2%, mainly owing to the interest on debt, transfers and wages.
To mitigate the negative impact of rising prices for petroleum and its derivatives, subsidies totalling US$ 159.8 million (0.9% of GDP) were provided for public transport and consumption of electricity and liquefied gas.
The central government deficit therefore narrowed from 1% of GDP in 2005 to 0.4% of GDP in 2006, while the deficit for the rest of the NFPS widened.
External public debt expanded by US$ 717 million to stand at US$ 5.693 billion.
In 2006, the State issued bonds worth US$ 664 million, with US$ 625 million issued on international markets.
As a proportion of GDP, total public debt remained at around the 45% level, while the debt of the NFPS represented 40% of GDP.
A lack of consensus means that no new reforms are expected in 2007.
Congress has been divided since no party achieved a qualified majority in the mid-term parliamentary elections held in March 2006. (b) Financial policy Nominal interest rates rose in 2006.
On average, real interest rates on 180-day deposits stood at 0.3%, following two years of negative figures.
Net domestic credit to the private sector swelled by 6% in real terms, while credit to the public sector declined by 57%.
By December 2006, there had been no change in the level of non-performing loans as a percentage of total credit, although the implicit interest-rate spread did edge up slightly.
Furthermore, net international reserves amounted to US$ 2.559 billion (17.5% more than in 2005), which is the equivalent of over five months of goods and services imports.
Up to April 2007, both lending and borrowing interest rates remained unchanged in real terms.
Since the end of 2006 and early 2007, the regional integration of the financial system has been gaining ground in El Salvador.
In May 2007, Bancolombia’s purchase of 89.15% of the shares of Banagrícola was completed, thereby consolidating the presence of foreign banking in El Salvador. (c) Other policies Following the government’s adoption of the general tourism law in December 2005, incentives and facilities offered to private investors were the driving force behind various tourist development projects.
In 2006, earnings from tourism totalled US$ 862.3 million (4.6% of GDP), which means they were up by 34% compared with 2005, partly thanks to promotion activities being stepped up by the Ministry of Tourism.
Earnings from tourism exceeded flows of foreign direct investment (FDI) for the fourth year running, and also surpassed the combined income from coffee, sugar and shrimp exports and maquila value added.
The number of tourists was higher than the target established in the National Tourism Plan.
In addition, a US$ 7 million tourism promotion fund was set up and began to operate in 2007 under the country brand slogan “El Salvador impresionante” (“El Salvador impressive”).
In the first quarter of 2007, income from tourism amounted to US$ 199.3 million, which is 11% higher than for the year-earlier period.
In 2006, the Solidarity Network programme continued to be successfully implemented, with the aim of reducing extreme poverty among the families of 100 municipalities.
Over 24,000 families have received education and health vouchers, 22,900 adults and young people have been provided with literacy training, around US$ 24 million has been invested in infrastructure, and 12,400 families have benefited from training, inputs and participation in productive projects.
In 2007, 15 new municipalities (21,840 families) will be included in the programme, which will also benefit from a US$ 17 million investment in infrastructure.
Given the country’s security problems and the importance of this issue for all heads of government in Central America,1 President Saca has implemented various crime-reduction programmes.
In 2007, special courts were set up to deal with organized crime and the National Crime Prevention Plan was presented.
In July 2006, the National Energy Council was set up, and in May 2007 the authorities presented the national energy policy, which aims to extend coverage and ensure a reasonably priced supply of energy with minimal negative impact on the environment.
The economy grew by 4.2% in real terms during 2006, mainly driven by gross fixed investment (up by 10.8%).
This was spearheaded by a rise in private investment (11.8%), while public investment expanded by only 3.5%.
On the domestic demand side, economic growth was boosted by remittances, which served to fuel private consumption (4.9%).
In 2006, goods and services exports increased by 7.0%, while the corresponding imports increased by 9.3%.
According to government estimates, GDP growth may be due to a significant rise in total factor productivity (TFP) (1.6%) and increases in terms of workforce (1.5%) and capital (1.1%).
In 2007, TFP is expected to grow by 2.3%, with GDP predicted to rise by 5%.
To make this growth sustainable, however, would require greater investment in production and human capital.
In 2006, the agricultural sector expanded by 7.1% on the strength of increased basic grain production and rising international prices for coffee and sugar.
In terms of products for domestic consumption, beans increased at their highest rate since 1999 (39%).
The forestry, hunting and fishing sector expanded by 6.5%, while milk production rose by over 10% for the second year running.
These trends are expected to continue in 2007, bringing growth in the agricultural sector to 6%.
Within this sector, electricity generation increased for the third consecutive year (this time by 16%).
Total electricity consumption (up by 7.2%) remained as buoyant as in the previous year.
The construction sector expanded by 5.5%, owing to higher private investment and the reconstruction costs following the damage caused by hurricane Stan and the eruption of the Ilamatepec volcano in October 2005.
In 2007, the sector will benefit from the use of resources from the Millennium Challenge Account (US$ 461 million over five years) for the construction of the northern longitudinal highway.
However, the maquila sector (which accounted for 11.4% of manufacturing in 2006) continued its downward trend for the third year running declining by 2%.
The country’s economic activity, as measured by the economic activity index, registered annual growth of 3.9% in the first quarter of 2007, which was lower than the 4.8% recorded in the year-earlier period.
This was attributable to high petroleum prices, which in turn pushed up the prices of intermediate inputs for production and transport.
It should be pointed out that the negative impact of higher prices was partially offset by subsidies provided for public transport and the consumption of electricity and liquefied gas.
As oil prices fall, the government expects inflation to follow suit and stand between 3% and 4%.
See the declaration on security adopted at the extraordinary meeting of heads of State and government of the member countries of the Secretariat for Central American Economic Integration (SICA), Honduras, 3 October 2006.
In January 2006, public-sector employees received their first pay rise since 1998 (US$ 40 million for increases of between 3% and 10% depending on level of pay).
Meanwhile, there was a 10% increase in the minimum wage paid to workers in the manufacturing, commerce and service sectors, and a 4% rise for maquila workers.
This, combined with a half percentage point fall in unemployment (to 6.6%), resulted in a slight upturn in families’ purchasing power.
This performance was partly due to an 11.7% decline in maquila exports (which make up 46% of total exports), a sector that has been facing stiff competition for many years.
On the other hand, there was a recovery in the prices of some agricultural exports, such as coffee (up by 15.3%) and sugar (up by 7.7%).
Sugar exports benefited from the Dominican Republic —Central America— United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR), as the export quota to the United States market doubled and demand increased for the production of biofuels such as ethanol.
Since the entry into force of the Agreement on 1 March 2006, exports to the United States have grown by 68%, not including maquila products.
Including maquila products in the calculation of exports to the United States gives a decline of almost 2.5%, which is in keeping with the downward trend resulting from the elimination of the Multifibre Arrangement.
Furthermore, imports from the United States were up by 17%, which means that El Salvador maintained its trade deficit with that country.
There was a 23.1% rise in the value of non-traditional exports, thanks to an increase of over 30% in diesel, fruit juices, soap and organic preparations and bed, table and kitchen linen.
Merchandise exports to the rest of Central America (29.2% of total exports) climbed by 12.4%, while exports to the rest of the world (70.8% of total exports) increased by only 0.5%.
As of April 2007, the export sector had registered growth of 5.4%.
Of this, almost 53% was due to imports of intermediate and capital goods, 32% to consumer goods and the remaining 15% to maquila inputs.
In 2006, the country’s oil bill hovered around the US$ 1.2 billion mark, which is the equivalent of 6.5% of GDP and 21.4% of total imports of goods and services.
The overall result of these and other factors was that the terms of trade worsened for the fifth year in a row (down by 0.9%).
Furthermore, in 2006 the bilateral real exchange rate with the United States dollar continued to appreciate (by 0.8% compared with 2005).
This was entirely due to higher inflation in El Salvador compared with the United States.2 In April 2007, the growth rate of merchandise imports stood at 13.9%, and the trade gap is therefore expected to widen.
The economy once again benefited from a rise in family remittances (17.2%), which totalled US$ 3.3157 billion.
Remittances fuelled private consumption and covered almost 90% of the goods and services trade gap.
These trends combined to produce a balance-of-payments current account deficit of 4.6% of GDP.
In May 2007, the country obtained its fifth extension of Temporary Protection Status (TPS), which will enable nearly 220,000 Salvadoran people to work legally in the United States until March 2009.
Although massive inflows of remittances are expected to continue in 2007, the expected growth rate of 10% is lower than the average of 16.5% recorded over the last three years; this is due to the slowdown of the United States economy.
Up to April 2007, US$ 1.113 billion was received in remittances, which is 8% more than in the year-earlier period.
The financial account posted a positive balance of US$ 1.018 billion, which was US$ 295 million higher than in 2005.
This was because the flow of portfolio investment liabilities increased by US$ 629 million, while foreign direct investment (FDI) amounted to US$ 204 million.
The real exchange rate is the nominal exchange rate deflated by the ratio of El Salvador’s inflation index to that of the United States.
Growth was driven by burgeoning private consumption fuelled by family remittances (12% of GDP).
Inflation was down to 5.8% (8.6% in 2005), the fiscal deficit widened slightly (1.9% of GDP) and the balance-of-payments current account deficit remained unchanged at 5.1% of GDP.
Despite the wide trade deficit (17.6% of GDP), international reserves continued to swell thanks to significant receipts from abroad.
The year saw the entry into force of the Dominican Republic —Central America— United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) and interventions in two banks (one in October 2006 and another in January 2007).
The actions of the authorities successfully averted a banking crisis, and there were only temporary repercussions for the confidence of economic agents in the financial system.
For 2007, the authorities predict GDP growth of 5.2%, on the strength of new public works, an inflation The central government deficit represented 1.9% of GDP (1.7% in 2005).
The budget included allocations for implementing the reconstruction programme following the tropical storm Stan.
Revenues were affected by the application of the law to strengthen tax administration, the main aim of which target range of between 4% and 6% and a central government deficit of 2.3% of GDP.
With a slightly more expansionary fiscal policy, and despite a restrictive monetary policy, it will be a challenge to meet the target inflation range set.
Given the climate of public insecurity, there is a consensus within society that a better national security system should be created.1 In May, the electoral campaigns began for the presidential elections to be held in September. is to combat tax evasion.
In this context, a fiscal register of printing presses was established, a number of taxation procedures were channelled through bank accounts, and tax administration powers were widened.
Thanks to advances in tax administration, government income grew by 11% in real terms.
The main contributing factors to this result were income tax, VAT and the tax on the In March 2006, the 16 parties of the permanent forum of political parties signed an agreement to build a national security system in Guatemala. consumption of petroleum and its derivatives, despite a reduction in revenue arising from the tariff cuts mandated by CAFTA-DR.
Nonetheless, its low level continued to hamper the implementation of social projects.2 Total expenditure grew by 11.8% in real terms.
Current expenditure increased by 8%, especially in terms of goods and services expenditure.
Capital expenditure picked up to stand at 5.3% of GDP, recovering from the decline of the previous biennium.
The main increase was in physical investment (38%), resulting from higher rates of implementation of projects, some related to repairing damage caused by the climatic events of 2005.
To a lesser degree, there were increases in capital transfers to autonomous and decentralized institutions and the resources were allocated in line with the priorities established in the peace agreements.
In the first four months of 2007, real total income rose by 8.6%, but real total expenditure continued to grow at the same rate as in 2006.
As in 2005, monetary policy continued the approach of establishing explicit inflation targeting, for which a range of 5%-7% was set in 2006.
The legal framework for the explicit inflation target policy has improved, as it now includes provisions to increase the transparency of the decisions of the monetary authorities and to enhance monetary stabilization operations.
Monetary policy was supported by fiscal policy, as government deposits at the Bank of Guatemala were kept above the set level, thereby making it possible to mitigate monetization.
Although the operations of Banco del Café (BANCAFÉ) were suspended in October 2006, 3 the impact on the money and foreign-exchange market was minimal.
However, at the end of 2006 and the beginning of 2007, there was an unmet increase in the public demand for cash, which led to a temporary shortage of banknotes.
With a view to curbing the inflationary expectations of economic agents, the authorities raised the monetarypolicy interest rate (rate on 7-day deposit certificates) by 0.25 percentage points in April, June and July 2006, such that the rate stood at 5%.
During 2006, the average nominal borrowing rate was 4.7% (real rate -1.8%), while the average nominal lending rate was 12.8% (real rate 5.8%).
The level of financial intermediation remained high, at around 8 percentage points.
To reduce exchange-rate volatility, the Bank of Guatemala purchased US$ 130.5 million on the foreignexchange market in 2006.
The Bank’s sterilization measures continued with monetary stabilization operations in local currency.
The weighted average interest rate went from 6.4% to 6.7%, due to a higher benchmark interest rate and the longer terms for bids.
The monetary authorities reduced the frequency of auctions and, in July, replaced the 91-day auctions with 182-day auctions, in order to defer liquidity to the medium term.
At the end of 2006, the balance of monetary stabilization operations decreased by 7% in real terms.
Also in real terms, money supply (M3) expanded by 11%, while credit to the private sector increased by 22%, with both of those figures being above the range set in the monetary programme.
In the first few months of 2007, credit in local currency to the private sector declined, while credit in dollars remained buoyant due to the lower financial cost involved.
In the light of the stable nominal exchange rate and the fall in domestic inflation during 2006, the real effective appreciation of the quetzal was 3%.
In October 2005, the assets of Bancafé International Bank (an offshore subsidiary 4 of Banco del Café (BANCAFÉ)) were affected by the freezing of a US$ 201 million investment5 in Refco Capital Markets.
This New York stock and bond brokerage firm filed for bankruptcy ECLAC and the Central American Institute for Fiscal Studies (ICEF) have often pointed to the need to increase the tax burden, which is one of the lowest in the region.
The law on Banks and financial groups establishes a framework for those banks that put the functioning of the country’s financial system at risk to withdraw from the system in an orderly way.
In July 2005, investment in offshore entities by 11 banks represented 25% of the total assets of the banking system.
Refco Capital Markets, with this investment as a guarantee, granted a US$ 155 million loan to an enterprise linked with BIB.
The operation was not recorded in the financial records. in the United States.
The Superintendency of Banks then notified the authorities of Bancafé that they must fulfil a restructuring programme.
As the Bank failed to comply, the monetary authorities had its activities suspended in October 2006.
A small bank was intervened in January 2007, when deposit-taking operations were found to have been illegally carried out through other enterprises, without being included on the bank’s financial records.
The Savings Protection Fund (FOPA) used 1.96 billion quetzales (US$ 255 million) to compensate those who had made deposits with the above-mentioned banks.
To help cover these emergency outlays, FOPA requested 360 million quetzales in financial assistance from the Fiduciary Fund for Bank Capitalization.
During 2007, it will probably prove difficult to control liquidity due to the resources injected into the system, and it will also be more difficult to curb inflationary pressure.
The strength of the economy and the authorities’ commitment to answering for the deposits made with intervened banks were key factors in avoiding a systemic banking crisis.
However, the authorities must make it a priority to strengthen and improve banking regulation and supervision —which is considered lax, even by some bankers— by establishing sensible limits on the type and amount of investment in offshore entities and on loans to associated enterprises.
Furthermore, improvements should be made in the information provided to savers on the use made of their investments, with a view to pointing out the higher risks involved in offshore entities and also providing information on bank solvency.
With the exception of the above-mentioned banks, the national banking system operated with stable interest rates, and there was a credit expansion, in addition to improvements in portfolio quality and a reduction in non-performing assets (those that generate no financial income).
Since October 2006, several banking mergers have taken place in response to the strategy of national banks to strengthen their position within the banking system by increasing their solvency.
Non-performing loans and arrears as a percentage of total loans fell from 6.1% in 2005 to 5.9% in 2006, in comparison with the Central American average of 5%. (c) Trade policy The Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) entered into force in July 2006.
The Agreement is an opportunity for export diversification and the entry of new foreign investment.
March 2006 saw the approval of a free trade agreement with Taiwan province of China, and a Partial Scope Trade Agreement between Belize and Guatemala was signed in July.
With a view to beginning negotiations for the Association Agreement between the European Union and Central America in 2007, a joint assessment exercise of the Central American Customs Union was carried out in 2006 to determine the level of integration achieved by the region.
In June 2006, Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras began negotiations for a free trade agreement with Colombia, and negotiations were also relaunched with Panama.
In May 2007, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and El Salvador began negotiations for a free trade agreement with countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM). (a) Economic activity6 Per capita GDP rose for the third year running, this time by 2.3%, which outstripped the cumulative growth rate of 1.5% for 2004-2005.
The main determining factor in this performance was investment in construction (22%) and external demand (up by 5%).
Private consumption (which represents 91% of total consumption) grew at a similar rate to 2005 (4.5%), on the strength of rising family remittances.
Government consumption increased by around 6% due to higher spending on health and education.
Corresponds to new estimates in constant 2001 quetzales compiled using the 1993 system of national accounts.
Central administration Central administration debt Money and credit n Domestic credit o b Up to 2000, based on figures in local currency at constant 1958 prices.
Construction, transport and communications, and banking and insurance were the most buoyant sectors.
Construction turned in an impressive performance (21%), which was spearheaded by the private sector following a recovery in 2005.
Agriculture expanded by 2%, with production of basic grains up by 5% and coffee up by 2%.
However, there was a decline in the production of banana and cardamom (3%) and in sugar cane production (-8%).
Agriculture is feeling the effects of a lack of investment and an appreciation of the quetzal in recent years.
Manufacturing expanded by 3.4%, which was a higher growth rate than in 2005.
Commerce grew by 3.7%, partly thanks to the boom in the consumption of imported goods fuelled by inflows of family remittances.
Falling oil prices since August, a stable nominal exchange rate and a crop year with no climate problems all contributed to the reduction.
The absence of adverse weather conditions also halved the variation in food prices (12.4% in 2005).
Between January and May 2007, inflation fell to 5.5% despite the rise in oil prices observed since February.
Although formal employment was up by 2.4%, underemployment and informality remained high.
In 2004, official estimates suggested that 75.4% of the employed population were working informally, although some of these people earn a good income and have no incentive to switch to the formal sector.
The deficit in goods and services remained chronically wide in 2006 (17.6% of GDP), while net payments of profits and interest stayed stable (1.1% of GDP).
The trade deficit was offset by the surplus of current transfers (13.6% of GDP).
Moderate export growth and the increase in imports have been influenced by the appreciation of the quetzal in real terms during the last five years.
Higher external sales of sugar (20%), cardamom (9%) and banana (2%) were mainly due to increased unit values.
Oil exports expanded by 13%, with higher prices more than compensating a fall in volume (10%).
Exports of coffee declined by 4.5% as a result of smaller volumes shipped, as the price remained unchanged.
Non-traditional exports expanded at a higher rate of 7.5%, boosted by sales of rubber, shrimp, fish and lobster, fruit and foodstuffs.
In the case of clothing (-34%), this was partly due to the termination of the Multifibre Arrangement, and also the result of Asian competition.
This sector was very dynamic in the previous three-year period, while vegetables and pulses varied considerably (-19%), partially owing to price volatility.
External sales to Central America continued to climb (15%), while maquila exports (4%) recovered slightly following a fall in 2005 (-27%).
As of March 2007, exports had been boosted by a significant increase in non-traditional products in terms of volumes shipped.
In contrast, prices for sugar and banana plummeted, as did prices for coffee and petroleum, although to a lesser extent.
In terms of sales of non-traditional products, positive performances were turned in by fruit (volumes shipped) and minerals (as a result of prices).
Purchases for agriculture recovered above and beyond the decline of 2005, while imports for industry, telecommunications and construction expanded by 21%.
Imports of intermediate goods were marked by a slower rate of increase in the oil bill, which nonetheless represented a high proportion of total imports (19%).
Non-factor services posted a deficit of US$ 253 million, which was similar to 2005 levels.
Contributing factors to this result included higher payments for transport and other services, including tourism.
Revenues from tourism (US$ 973 million) continued the upward trend of the last decade, while the number of tourists (1.5 million) was 14% higher than in 2005.
There were net payments of profits worth US$ 210 million and net payments of interest for US$ 161 million.
Current transfers, mainly in the form of family remittances, helped to offset the deficit in factor and nonfactor services.
In 2006, family remittances accounted for US$ 3.609 billion, with an annual variation of 21% (17% in 2005), which is the equivalent of two thirds of total exports.
In the first four months of 2007, annual growth in remittances slowed slightly to 13%.
This growth rate will probably be in single figures by the end of the year as a result of unemployment and lower wages among immigrants working in the troubled construction sector in the United States.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) amounted to US$ 325 million, which is the largest inflow of the last five years.
As net capital inflows more than covered the current account deficit, there was an overall balance-of-payments surplus of US$ 279 million.
In March 2007, international reserves represented almost five months of imports of goods and services.
This buoyant performance reflected rises in investment and private consumption fuelled by significant inflows of family remittances (which represent 26% of GDP).
Per capita GDP rose for the third year running, while the nationwide unemployment rate dropped to 3.3%, although underemployment remained high (29.9%).
Given that the trade and income deficits were financed using current transfers, the current-account deficit was relatively small (1.9% of GDP).
Nonetheless, the oil bill continued to rise on the back of high prices for petroleum and derivatives, while management problems persisted in public enterprises in the energy and telecommunications sectors.
Projections for 2007 point to GDP growth of between 5.5% and 6%, an inflation target ranging from 5% to 6% In contrast with the situation in 2005, fiscal policy helped monetary policy to maintain stability, as fiscal expenditure declined considerably.
July saw the launch of the Policy Support Instrument (PSI),1 the aim of which is to coordinate macroeconomic and social policies, with an emphasis on poverty reduction.
In 2003, 68.5% of households were living in poverty.2 Social violence and the lack of public safety have become two of the main obstacles to building citizenship.
The urban centres of Distrito Central and San Pedro Sula have the highest incidence of crime.3 of external public debt were cancelled, although debt servicing relief will be rolled out during a period of up to 40 years.
Despite the tariff cuts mandated by CAFTA-DR, total revenues grew by 9.5% in real terms.
Current income was up 8% and tax revenues rose by 12%, while nontax revenues fell by 22%.
Proceeds from direct taxation turned in the best performance (up 19%), owing to higher receipts from income tax and despite lower receipts from the tax on property and net assets.
Revenue from indirect taxes was up by 9%, as tax on general sales, carbonated drinks and cigarettes sustained an overall increase of 15%.
However, average receipts from taxes on items such as beer and petroleum derivatives stood still.
Import revenues swelled by 3%, as the above-mentioned tariff cuts were offset by increased economic activity.
The decline in non-tax revenues was tempered by the rise in transfers (grants).
Contributing factors to higher tax revenues include the expanded tax base, electronic payment systems and audit procedures.
Total expenditure grew by 3.3% in real terms, as the increase in current expenditure (11%) more than offset the 25% fall in capital expenditure.
The rise in current expenditure was partly a reflection of the teachers’ pay award; the wage bill (as a percentage of GDP) rose from 9.5% in 2005 to 9.7% in 2006.
Wages will have a greater effect on the 2007 fiscal accounts, with a wage policy that does not seem sustainable in the medium term.
Another contributing factor to higher current expenditure was the fuel subsidy, which amounted to 500 million lempiras.
Real capital expenditure declined sharply, given the low rate of execution on investment projects caused by implementation difficulties that are usual in the first year of a government, and problems in the disbursement of external loans.
Steps were taken to overcome financial management problems and address the reduction of capital investments by State-owned enterprises in the electricity (ENEE) and telecommunications (HONDUTEL) sectors.
Liabilities were also reduced thanks to debt cancellation by the Paris Club.
In 2006, the total relief on external public debt service amounted to US$ 211 million, of which US$ 125 million had been allocated to finance expenditure in the poverty reduction strategy.
Following the redrafting of the law on the poverty reduction strategy in 2004, 70% of the relief originally committed to poverty reduction was used to finance projects from previous financial years and current expenditure up to 2006.5 This brought the resources used for the poverty reduction strategy in 2006 to US$ 37 million.
In March 2007, the US$ 1.2 billion public debt cancellation by IDB in the framework of the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) took effect.
The initial inflation target set by the central bank for 2006 was between 5.5% and 6.5%, which was subsequently lowered by half a percentage point.
The target range for 2007 was set at between 5% and 6%, which will be difficult to meet if prices for petroleum and maize remain high.
In the second half of the year, the monetary policy interest rate is thus likely to rise, thereby reversing the reduction observed in 2006.
The fall in inflation allowed the monetary authorities to lower the monetary policy interest rate from 6.75% to 6.5% in April and to 6% in September.
Average lending rates fluctuated around 11% in real terms, while real borrowing rates stood at 1.5%.
The central bank continued to issue bonds in local currency to moderate the rise in liquidity that had resulted from significant inflows of foreign exchange.
This was partly due to their reduced yield rates, which were in turn attributable to a lower benchmark interest rate.
The abundant liquidity in the financial system was reflected in a greater use of permanent investment and credit facilities.6 Temporary repurchase agreements were also concluded for 5.615 billion lempiras worth of government securities in 2006.
See World Bank, “Honduras: temas y opciones del sector energía”, Informe final, 27 April 2007.
Instruments that financial institutions use to manage liquidity by making short-term deposits in the central bank with an interest rate linked to the monetary policy interest rate.
The monetary base swelled by 14% in real terms, as a result of the above-mentioned operations, variations in international reserves and public-sector deposits.
The increased liquidity in the economy was a major boon to lending to the private sector (up by 21%).
Indicators of solvency, asset quality and profitability of the banking system all improved in 2006.
Non-performing loans and arrears as a percentage of total loans fell from 8.6% in 2005 to 7.1% in 2006 (compared with a regional average of 5%).
Despite high levels of receipts from abroad, monetary policy successfully avoided a significant appreciation of the lempira.
The exchange rate remained at 18.9 lempiras to the dollar in 2006 and experienced a slight annual appreciation in real terms (1%).
The first quarter of 2007 saw a 2% appreciation as the exchange-rate value of the lempira remained stable while domestic inflation rose. (c) Trade policy The Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) entered into force in April 2006.
Although the Agreement is an opportunity for export diversification and the entry of new foreign investment, it also carries some risk if machinery and equipment are not modernized to face increasing foreign competition.
In December 2006, guidelines were approved for negotiations to begin on the Association Agreement between the European Union and Central America from mid-2007.
Honduras signed a free trade agreement with Panama and another with Taiwan province of China in the first half of 2007.
The country is also in negotiations for a free trade agreement with Colombia, El Salvador and Guatemala, and trade negotiations are also under way with the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The expansionary cycle that had begun in 2004 intensified, with the economy growing by 6% in 2006 and per capita GDP expanding for the third year in a In an environment of abundant liquidity and low interest rates, growth was driven by domestic demand (up by 9%).
Consumption grew quickly (8%), with private consumption fuelled by increasing family remittances.
Private investment rose by 20%, which more than compensated the decline registered in 2005, while public investment dropped by 16% as government projects were postponed.
One of the most dynamic was the banking and insurance sector, with growth of 11% thanks to the surge in lending to the private sector.
Two thirds of the agricultural expansion was due to a recovery in coffee growing, following the introduction of a mass production programme in the light of improved international prices.
Construction expanded by a This represents only 74% of GDP. mere 2.5%, as delays in public works projects were only partially offset by buoyant private construction.
In the first quarter of 2007, the monthly index of economic activity7 rose by 7.9% on the back of booming private construction and the banking and insurance sector.
This performance was facilitated by a stable nominal exchange rate and steady basic grain prices.
In the first half of the year, another factor keeping prices in check was the fuel subsidy, while the second six months saw slower growth in oil prices.
In May 2007, twelve-month inflation stood at 6.1%, due to increasing oil and maize prices from the end of 2006.
The average daily minimum wage rose by 11% in January 2006, to give a monthly wage of US$ 127 compared with the Latin American average of US$ 206.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit stood at 1.9% of GDP (1.4% in 2005), reflecting two opposing movements: a deficit on goods and non-factor and factor services (29.3% of GDP) and a surplus on current transfers (27.1% of GDP), mainly family remittances, which offset that deficit almost entirely.
Merchandise export growth of around 11% was slower than the 14% observed the previous year.
Only 6.4 percentage points of the growth in export values corresponded to an increase in volume.
The terms of trade declined by more than 4%, thereby continuing the downward trend of the current decade.
In the first quarter of 2007, imports continued to soar while exports stood still.
For the third consecutive year, the growth of merchandise exports was driven by buoyant sales of traditional products (19% growth in 2006).
Coffee, bananas, zinc, wood and sugar (in that order) were the five main contributors to the total value of exports.
A particularly strong performance was turned in by exports of zinc (up by 133%, almost entirely thanks to price effects) and coffee (up by 21%, exclusively due to volume).
External sales of banana stagnated, with volumes reduced by the effects of the tropical storm Beta in late 2005.
There was a considerable rise in shrimp sales (18%), while lobster sales were down for the second year in a row due to lower export volumes.
The value added recorded by the maquila industry came to US$ 1.062 billion.
The maquila industry has felt the effects of competition from Asian countries and the appreciation of the lempira.
In 2006, Honduras exported 143.5 million dozens of garments to the United States market, which is 4% less than in 2005 according to the Honduran Manufacturing Industry Association.
Merchandise imports continued their steady expansion of recent years, and they accounted for 60% of GDP in 2006 (compared with 47% in 2003).
This is partly due to the hefty oil bill resulting from higher prices for petroleum and its derivatives.
In four years, the oil bill has doubled to represent 11.8% of GDP in 2006.
Imports of raw materials were also buoyant, with construction materials benefiting from the boom in private construction.
Imports of capital goods picked up following the decline in 2005, thanks to a surge in machinery and equipment purchases for agriculture and transport.
Non-factor services posted a deficit of US$ 417 million, which was 59% wider than in 2005.
This was attributable to higher payments for transport and other services, not including tourism.
Even though the number of visitors was up by 5% compared with 2005, spending per visitor dropped from US$ 690 to US$ 660, owing to a reduction in the number of visitors from outside Central America.
This initiative will allow for the introduction of tax- and duty-free goods and services into the area.
There were net profit remittances of US$ 353 million and net interest payments of US$ 58.5 million, with the remainder of the balance corresponding to employee wages.
The US$ 53 million reduction in factor payments was due to interest payments.
Between 2005 and 2006, interest payments fell by US$ 11.8 million due to cancellation of the external debt, but also because the country received US$ 73.5 million more in interest payments.
As for profit remittances from foreign enterprises, they increased by US$ 32 million between 2005 and 2006.
Current transfers (mainly in the form of family remittances) helped to offset the factor and non-factor services deficit.
In the first four months of 2007, the growth rate slowed to 16%, and income from family remittances in 2007 is expected to be similar to that of 2006.
This is the result of factors such as unemployment and lower salaries among Honduran emigrants working in the troubled construction industry of the United States.
In 2006, family remittances represented the equivalent of 62% of total external sales.
Net inflows to the capital and financial account stood at US$ 450 million (US$ 330 million in 2005), as a result of the upturn in financial capital (from a negative result of US$ 42 million in 2005 to a positive figure of US$ 65 million in 2006).
Foreign direct investment (FDI) amounted to US$ 385 million 2006, which is similar to the year-earlier period.
FDI was mainly channelled into the communications and transport sectors and maquila enterprises.
International reserves swelled for the third year running, this time by US$ 387 million.
Given the extraordinary financing of US$ 116 million, the overall balance closed at US$ 271 million.
The Mexican economy posted growth of 4.8%, with all the components of aggregate demand rising strongly in the first three quarters, although this trend weakened towards the end of the year.
Consumption was up by 5.1%, fixed investment by 10% and exports by 11.1%, all driven by the motor vehicle sector, which contributed to the largest expansion in employment in the last six years and helped to narrow the balance-of-payments current account deficit (0.2% of GDP).
Domestic demand received impetus from growth in credit to the private sector, migrant remittances and the upturn in employment.
The high petroleum price contributed to the fiscal surplus (0.1% of GDP), despite increased spending on infrastructure works and on the presidential, legislative and state elections.
The close presidential elections and the difficult period that followed generated only a minor financial volatility towards mid-year, with no major repercussions on economic acitivity or the real exchange rate.
The gradual slowdown that began to be felt as the year progressed carried over into 2007, owing to slacker growth in the United States’ economy.
At 2.6%, GDP growth in the first quarter of 2007 fell well short of the 5.5% recorded a year earlier.
For the year overall, GDP growth will be about 3% and will be driven by domestic demand, which will continue to be spurred by remittances and credit.
Inflation will come in at around 4% and the fiscal accounts will be close to balance.
In the last few months, concern has mounted over law and order, particularly owing to organized crime, in certain parts of the country and the economic authorities have singled this out as a factor that could limit investment and constrain economic growth.
The fiscal position benefited from the high price for petroleum and the public sector posted a surplus equivalent to 0.1% of GDP.
Public revenues rose by 12.1% in real terms and contributed 24.7% of output, thanks to an increase in tax receipts (especially VAT and income tax) and larger revenues from petroleum and from non-petroleum agencies and enterprises.
Non-oil tax revenues were up by 13.1% and represented 41% of public income.
Petroleum revenues rose by 14.3% and accounted for 38% of public income, which was the highest proportion since 1987.
In 2006 Mexico’s oil mix fetched an average price of US$ 53.10 per barrel, or US$ 21.60 more than the figure projected at the start of the year.
Although the wider economy is not particularly dependent on oil, the fiscal position is.
Hence, Mexico needs to reduce the reliance of its public revenues on oil income, in a way that is consistent with the objective of widening its narrow tax base (9.7% of GDP).
The higher-than-expected revenues facilitated a 11.1% real increase in public spending, which was 15% higher than envisaged.
Much of this spending went to personal services, which increased 5.5% owing, in turn, to wage rises in State-owned enterprises.
Physical investment rose by 12.6% and went mainly to the electricity and educational services sectors, hydraulic infrastructure and the provision of resources to states and municipalities.
Operating expenditure, which includes payments corresponding to long-term production infrastructure projects, as well as health services, education programmes and electionrelated outlays, rose by 12.1%.
The law also establishes adjustment mechanisms in the event that either the oil- or non-oil component of income drops below the budgeted level and provides deadlines for the approval of the annual fiscal budget, which must be concluded no later than 20 October each year.
Tax receipts should continue to rise in 2007 as a result of amendments to income tax and VAT provisions in the federal revenue law.
On the spending side, changes to the legislation governing the Social Security and Social Service Institute for State Workers (ISSSTE) will lead to an increase in State outlays on staff costs.
Together, the rise in spending and the simultaneous drops in the oil price and the rate of economic activity could push public finances into the red, which, under the law on budget and fiscal responsibility, would oblige the authorities to adjust spending in order to avoid slipping further into deficit thereby accentuating the economic slowdown.
In April 2007 this rate was raised to 7.25% to counteract inflationary pressure which could, in principle, worsen the slowdown in production, although the nominal benchmark lending rate decreased from 8.6% at the end of 2005 to 7.5% in 2006, where it remained in the first quarter of 2007, in keeping with the broad framework of monetary policy.
The money supply swelled by 12.4% in real terms, while cash outside banks increased by 11.6%.
This, like other variables seen previously, is evidence of the effects of the remonetization process.
The decline in interest rates starting in the second half of 2005 helped to fuel expansion of M1 and other monetary aggregates, and this effect continued up to mid-2007.
Financial saving by residents (M2) registered double-digit growth, associated mainly with investment in government securities.
Saving by nonresidents (M3) grew even more strongly (28.5% in 2006 and 13.9% in the first quarter of 2007) and was channelled mainly into long-term government securities.
Credit continued to be widely available from commercial banks and other lending institutions in 2006.
Such financing expanded by 18.4% in real terms; within this category, consumer lending was the fastest-growing, with an increase of 33.3%.
Mortgage lending was up by 11.9%, fuelled by commercial banks and non-bank agencies and by the resumption of State home-finance loans to workers, through the National Housing Fund for Workers Institute (Instituto del Fondo Nacional de la Vivienda para los Trabajadores) and the Housing Fund (Fondo de la Vivienda).
Corporate lending expanded by 20.1% in 2006, but represented only 4.3% of total commercial bank lending and 0.6% of GDP.
Most of these loans went to services and commerce and the majority of small firms lacked access to credit.
The commercial banks’ non-performing loans index rose to reach 5% at the start of 2007.
Mexico’s foreign-exchange policy has been based on a floating exchange-rate regime since the end of 1994.
The foreign-exchange market experienced periods of volatility in 2006, associated to some extent with the domestic political context.
Before the elections, the exchange rate reached 11.5 pesos to the dollar, but returned to its previous levels of around 11 pesos afterwards.
In 2006 the nominal rate remained practically unchanged from the 2005 average (10.9 pesos to the dollar), but in the early months of 2007 it registered some episodes of volatility and depreciation that Monetary policy continued to be aimed at keeping inflation at around 3%.
One of the two main instruments of monetary policy is the “corto” (a compulsory level of commercial bank balances in the central bank), which was last raised to 79 million pesos per day in March 2005.
The other instrument is the setting of minimum rates of interest, which the Banco de México uses to send clear signals to the markets on its desired monetary position.
In real terms, the peso appreciated by 0.4% against the dollar in 2006, owing to demand for pesos driven by remittances, foreign investment and hydrocarbons exports.
The Banco de México continued to take measures to reduce the build-up of international reserves.
In 2006 international reserves were down by US$ 989 million and the balance stood at US$ 67.680 billion at the end of the year.
Reflecting the drop in these reserves, the average sum auctioned daily in 2007 has decreased to US$ 23 million and the level in May was close to US$ 70 billion.
As in 2006, international reserves will build up more slowly than in previous years because of the slowdown in exports.
Economic growth was spurred by increases in both domestic and external demand (5.4%, the highest figure since 2000, and 11.1%, respectively).
Unlike in previous years, public consumption grew faster than private (6% and 5%, respectively), owing to spending incurred by the previous administration, including elections-related expenditures.
Private consumption benefited from the availability of commercial bank funds, an upturn in employment, a real rise in wages and remittances from emigrants.
In 2007 private consumption will continue to fuel the economy, although less powerfully than in 2006, with GDP growing by around 3% over the year.
Gross fixed capital formation posted the highest rate of expansion for six years (10%) and represented close to 22% of GDP.
Public investment reflected efforts to conclude infrastructure and reconstruction work after the damage caused by Hurricanes Wilma and Stan in late 2005.
Much of the growth in private investment came from the restructuring of productive capacity, especially in the motor vehicle sector, which fuelled imports of capital goods.
Investment in construction was up by 6.9%, led by activities in the housing sector.
With regard to external demand, exports of goods and services posted an upturn in the first half of 2006, but slowed in the second half of the year and up to mid-2007.
After contracting in 2005, agriculture expanded by 4.8% in 2006 (the highest figure since 1990) thanks to favourable weather conditions, especially in the springsummer season.
By contrast, in the early months of 2007 the sector’s performance was somewhat less dynamic.
The construction sector turned in its highest growth rate since 1997, thanks to the building of housing, schools, offices and plants, as well as infrastructure works.
Like other branches of activity, in late 2006 the sector entered a slowdown that has lasted throughout 2007, with a decline of 2.1% at the end of the first quarter.
Manufacturing returned the highest growth rate for six years (4.7%), as a result of activities driven by external demand (automobiles and autoparts, machinery and electronic apparatus and optical and medical equipment), whose combined output went up by 10% in 2006.
The automobile sector expanded significantly (albeit decreasingly as the year went on) owing to investment in modernizing production lines and making new models, mainly for export to the United States.
The number of units manufactured for export jumped 27.9%, while those made for the domestic market rose by 4.1%.
Domestic sales of motor vehicles increased by 0.7%, after a decline The export sectors driving manufacturing began to gradually lose momentum in the second half of the year and posted a sharp 3.1% drop in the first quarter of 2007 as external demand shrank.
This, together with the loss of buoyancy in the food and beverages segment, contributed to the manufacturing industry’s 0.1% contraction in the first quarter of 2007.
The textile and timber industries also continued to show a downward trend.
The expansion of services was led by transport, storage and communications (9.1%), followed by banking and financial services (8.5% and 5.4%, respectively).
The performance of services was influenced by growth in the rest of the economy and by spending on communications associated with the 2006 elections, as well as the expansion of telecommunications, the upturn in consumption and investment in hotels in the country’s south-east.
Inflation trended downwards in the first quarter of 2006 and then began to climb in August, which translated into an average of 4.1% for the year overall, slightly above the target set by the Banco de México.
The increase in the prices of sugar, tortillas, milk and gasoline in the second semester was an influential factor that continued to affect price stability in 2007.
Core inflation1 reached 3.6% in 2006, which was largely a reflection of higher prices for building materials.
The price of processed foods was strongly influenced by increases of 13.8% in the price of tortillas and 31.9% in the price of sugar.
Non-core inflation (5%)2 reflected higher prices for crop-farming products (tomatoes and onions) and for poultry and eggs, driven in the latter case by a hike in the price of maize.
Up to May 2007 inflation registered an increase of 3.9% in annualized terms, which was the result of a steady climb in the prices of imported maize and other grains, including both bioenergy crops and foods for animal consumption.3 All this led to high prices for meat in the first half of the year, which pushed up inflation in general.
The buoyancy in exports and in motor vehicle production helped to boost job creation.
Nevertheless the nationwide rate of open unemployment remained practically unchanged from its 2005 level, at an average of 3.6% of the economically active population (EAP) for the year as a whole.
The slowdown in economic growth in the first semester of 2007 pushed this rate up to 4%, however.
Almost 12 million people, or the equivalent of 26.9% of the employed population, now work in the informal sector.
A noteworthy feature of job creation in 2006 was the increase in the number of workers registered with the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) —to 13.7 million in 2006 and 14.3 million in the first quarter of 2007— in a continuation of a trend that has been in evidence since 2005.
Also of note is the fact that seasonal workers have become the fastest-growing category among formal workers and now account for almost 20% of IMSS affiliates.
Services Core inflation covers merchandise (processed food, beverages and tobacco) and services (housing and others).
Non-core inflation covers agricultural products (fruits and vegetables, meat and eggs); controlled goods and services; and education.
In the case of maize tortillas, for the first time since the end of the 1980s, the government was forced to broker the signature of an agreement between the maize sellers and the tortilla manufacturers in order to ensure a sufficient supply at the maximum prices allowed.
Manufacturing employment was up by 4.1% after three straight years of contraction, while the number of workers employed in the maquila industry rose by 2.9%, the smallest increase since the sector began to regain ground in 2004.
Labour productivity in the manufacturing sector rose by 3.5% in 2006 (1.4 percentage points less than in 2005) but this indicator has been declining in recent months in the context of the slowdown observed since the second semester of 2006.
Real average wages rose 0.4% in 2006 and the combination of the two factors translated into a 3.0% decline in unit labour costs.
With production slowing, in February 2007 manufacturing productivity posted a contraction of 1.4%, while real average wages stood still and the unit labour costs rose 1.6%.
This performance was driven by petroleum exports, boosted by high oil prices, the upturn in exports of automobiles and autoparts and the restructuring of large segments of productive capacity, which drove demand for imported goods, especially capital goods.
As regards the current account, remittances continued to rise, although more slowly owing to the loss of momentum in the United States’ economy; this slowdown was felt particularly strongly in the construction sector, which employs many of Mexico’s emigrants.
The balance-of-payments registered one of the smallest current account deficits since 1995, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of GDP (US$ 1.853 billion and 0.2% of GDP), thanks to inflows of foreign-exchange earnings from petroleum and migrant remittances.
Both exports and imports surged by over 16% in the first three quarters of 2006, but this rate began to fall in the fourth quarter and continued to decrease up to mid-2007, to reach less than 10%.
Worthy of note among these was the strong growth registered in the exports by the mining and metallurgy sector (73.3%), the motor vehicle industry (21.2%) and the sectors of foods and beverages (21%) and motor vehicle parts and accessories (18.3%).
In the first quarter of 2007 good exports declined by 2.2%, steepening the trend that began in the last quarter of 2006.
Imports expanded at a slightly lower rate than exports (15.5%), reflecting a similar growth rate for imports of manufactures (15.1%), which account for 89% of external purchases.
The largest jump was seen in consumer goods (17.3%), followed by capital goods (16.4%) and intermediate goods (15%).
The transfers account, which consists mainly of remittances sent by Mexicans residing abroad, continued to perform well, with a balance of US$ 23.468 billion in 2006, representing an expansion of 14.6%.
Although this was a lower rate than in 2005, remittances exceeded both the oil trade surplus and net FDI which, as it happened, decreased sharply in the first few months of 2007.
The financial account registered a surplus of US$ 378 million, which was the lowest for 17 years, owing mainly to smaller portfolio investment flows than the previous year’s combined with higher public sector borrowing.
Outward direct investment behaved in a similar fashion, since it was 11% down on the previous year at US$ 5.758 billion.
As a result, net foreign investment varied little from the 2005 figure and came in at US$ 13.279 billion.
In 2007 gross FDI inflows are expected to be about US$ 16 billion.
Economic growth slowed slightly in 2006: GDP expanded by 3.7%, as exports rose and domestic demand lost some of its momentum.
Economic performance was affected by the uncertainty surrounding the elections that led to the swearing in of President Ortega and his administration.
Also, hikes in international oil prices aggravated the problems of the energy sector and worsened the terms of trade.
The low level of rainfall caused by the “El Niño” phenomenon had adverse effects on crop production and contributed to high inflation (9.4% compared with 9.6% in 2005).
The nationwide open unemployment rate fell from 5.6% in 2005 to 5.2% in 2006, while real wages rose by 3.6%, led by increases for public sector workers.
However, levels of underemployment and participation in the informal market remained high (33.3% and 63.3%, respectively).
The framework for economic policy was the programme agreed with IMF in December 2002.
The fiscal deficit (not including grants) narrowed from 4.5% to 3.6%, thereby facilitating the achievement of monetary policy objectives.
The balance-of-payments current-account deficit (16.1% of GDP) widened by almost one percentage point, mainly due to the larger merchandise trade gap.
However, greater net capital inflows were sufficient to finance the external imbalance and boost net international reserves.
Also, the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) made it possible to reduce external public debt from 110% of GDP to 85%, while debt servicing fell to just 6% of the value of exports.
This improved the perception of country risk on the part of international investors.
According to the central bank, GDP will grow by 4.2% in 2007.
This is higher than the 3.3% average growth rate recorded over the last five years.
Despite the prospect of slower economic and trade expansion for the country’s main trading partners, the external environment remains generally favourable to Nicaraguan exports.
The positive effects on trade and investment resulting from the entry into force of the Dominican Republic —Central America— United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) are also significant in this regard.
These factors are expected to combine with an upturn in domestic demand thanks to productive credit and an upswing in investment.
The economic growth rate could be increased if the country adopts a tax reform seeking to reduce the high levels of tax exemptions.
The central bank predicts that inflation will fall by over two percentage points (to 7%), as the pressures of imported inflation and exchange-rate depreciation (5%) should be offset by a narrower fiscal deficit, austerity and increased efficiency in terms of public spending, and a sensible wage policy.
In the external sector, the current-account deficit is expected to remain more or less constant (16% of GDP).
Although the growth rate of family remittances is expected to slow down, they will remain key in maintaining economic stability.
Loans on concessional terms and resources that have become available following the cancellation of external debt and foreign direct investment (FDI) will be used to finance the balance-of-payments current-account deficit and to build up net international reserves.
The new administration intends to consolidate the achievements made to date in terms of macroeconomic stability, improve the investment climate and begin arrangements to ensure the continuity of external financing.
In this context, the government began negotiations for a new three-year agreement with IMF.
The main aims of monetary policy were to ensure macroeconomic stability, promote economic growth and step up the economic reforms agreed with IMF.
Stability and the increase in international reserves were considered essential in strengthening confidence in the exchange-rate regime, which in turn had significant effects on price setting.
At the same time, the situation was conducive to a stable local currency and normal internal and external payments.
Furthermore, improvements were recorded in certain vulnerability indicators, such as coverage of the monetary base and of imports.
Fiscal policy was designed to support the implementation of monetary policy objectives.
Thus, reserves swelled thanks to measures adopted to narrow the deficit and greater external financing.
The new administration showed its support for macroeconomic stability as a means of reducing poverty, rather than merely an end in itself.
This stability, along with the promotion of a business environment conducive to national and foreign investment and a new direction in Nicaragua’s foreign relations, is considered essential if the country is to increase exports, generate jobs and raise income levels.
Using a productive and non-welfare-based approach, economic policy will focus on social affairs, with a view to reducing poverty.
For this purpose, the authorities will devise a medium-term growth strategy centred on investment in economic and social infrastructure, especially in terms of human capital.
It should, however, be pointed out that several factors will limit the new government’s room for manoeuvre.
These include the country’s high dependency on international economic aid and cooperation, the elevated level of domestic public debt and extensive dollarization of the economy.
The results of fiscal policy were a key factor in macroeconomic performance during 2006.
Not including grants, the fiscal deficit of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) narrowed from 4.5% to 3.6%, thereby facilitating the achievement of monetary policy objectives.
The central government’s fiscal deficit (before grants) shrank from 5.2% of GDP to 3.9%.
Current revenues expanded by 19.1%, while the tax burden stood at 19.2% of GDP.
The rise in grants from 3.4% to 3.9% of GDP contributed to the increase of almost one percentage point in the participation of total revenues within GDP (22.7%).
Customs duties, income tax, VAT and the tax on petroleum derivatives accounted for 88.5% of total tax revenues.
This involved measures to systematize fiscal control plans, follow-up late payers and streamline registration and collection procedures for contributors, as well as the entry into force of the tax code.
Customs procedures were also simplified, and an electronic payment system set up.
Total expenditure as a percentage of GDP remained practically unchanged (22.7%), while current expenditure (15.4%) rose by almost two percentage points.
This rise was mainly due to the wage demands of health and education workers, the elections, increased public security and the urban public transport subsidy in Managua.
Capital expenditure, on the other hand, dropped from 9.4% of GDP to 7.2%.
The main causes of the underexecution of the investment programme were delays in the tendering process, lack of execution capacity, legal disputes and the late approval of budgetary reform.
The government transferred a sum the equivalent of 1.4% of GDP to the central bank, thereby improving its financial situation.
As in 2005, uncertainty surrounding the election process and the associated low demand for public bonds made it difficult to use domestic financing.
The main aims of monetary policy were to build up international reserves and strengthen the exchange-rate regime and the financial system.
In order to increase the efficiency of open-market operations, the terms of the debt instruments used were also diversified.
To avoid the adverse effects of greater deposit volatility due to the elections, the central bank set up a special liquidity credit line and arranged a contingency line with the Central American Bank for Economic Integration (CABEI).
However, such intervention was not necessary, as the US$ 100 million reduction in deposits in the days leading up to and following the elections of 5 November was smaller than during previous elections, with deposits gradually recovering once the election period was over.
At the end of the year, most monetary aggregates had expanded by less than in 2005.
This slowdown, along with a stronger preference for high-liquidity (mainly transferable) deposits, is thought to be the result of the uncertainty surrounding the electoral process.
Increased foreign borrowing and the resources from the redemption of public bonds more than offset the effects of the higher reserve requirement.
These factors enabled the banking system to increase its level of credit (31%).
The structure of the loan portfolio shows the buoyancy of consumer loans (especially in the areas of credit cards) and loans for commerce, housing, as well as for the agricultural and manufacturing sectors.
In 2006, the central bank maintained the exchangerate policy of daily mini-devaluations consistent with a pre-announced annual devaluation rate (5%) to serve as an anchor for inflationary expectations.
This Agreement and the one signed with Mexico in 1998 guarantee preferential access for about 70% of Nicaragua’s exports.
From July 2006, tariffs were lowered on 18% of imports from Mexico, with total elimination on most products expected by July 2007.
As part of its trade strategy, Nicaragua signed and ratified a free trade agreement with Taiwan Province of China.
Trade negotiations were reopened or stepped up with Canada, Chile and Panama.
Arrangements were made to begin negotiations for an Association Agreement between the European Union and Central America, while actions were also implemented to speed up the process of Central American customs integration.
In 2007, the new government signed up for the integration and cooperation project known as the Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America and the Caribbean (ALBA), which brings together the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Bolivia and Cuba.
Besides cooperation in the energy sector, the ALBA project includes resources for infrastructure, health, agricultural development and residential construction in the case of Nicaragua.
This resulted in an increase in per capita GDP of only 1.7%.
The slowdown was the result of reduced buoyancy in domestic demand (up by a mere 2.8%), which in turn was due to a decline in public investment that was only partly offset by an increase in —especially public— consumption.
The climate of uncertainty surrounding the elections had a moderating effect on the increases in gross fixed capital formation (from 10.1% in 2005 to 4.7% in 2006) and in private-sector consumption (from 3.5% to 3.3%).
The export sector, on the other hand, turned in a healthy performance (with High international oil prices affected the structure of production costs, caused electricity supply cuts, pushed up domestic prices and brought down disposable income.
Other determining factors in the modest expansion of domestic demand included underexecution of the public investment programme and supply problems for agricultural products, owing to the “El Niño” phenomenon.
In contrast, growth in the world economy and in particular the United States and the countries that make up the Central American Common Market (CACM) fuelled external demand for Nicaragua’s goods and services.
This, combined with the entry into force of CAFTA-DR, contributed to the surge in exports.
Up to 1999 the figures refer to the nationwide total. l Weighted nationwide total. m Weighted average rate on short-term loans. n Includes grants. o The monetary figures are end-of-period average rate on 30-day deposits. p Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. stocks.
Economic growth was mainly driven by the financial sector, the manufacturing industry and commerce.
However, value added slowed or declined in construction, mining and fishing. most in the private sector were technical and professional workers.
Despite such adjustments, however, the average official minimum wage covered only 52.8% of the cost of the basket of staple goods.
Year-on-year inflation (9.4%) was practically the same as in the previous year.
The general rise in prices was linked to the rise in international oil prices, which put direct pressure on domestic fuel, electricity and transport prices.
Another determining factor in the price increases were the supply problems caused by “El Niño”.
A smaller fiscal deficit and exchange-rate appreciation, on the other hand, had the opposite effect.
According to the results of the household survey, nationwide open unemployment dropped for the third year running, this time from 5.6% in November 2005 to 5.2% a year later (while the rate remained at 7.0% in urban areas).
Real average wages rose by 3.6%, while official minimum wages were adjusted in March.
Government workers saw the largest pay increases, while those who benefited the In the external sector, the current-account deficit This was due to the broadening of the merchandise trade deficit (27.2% of GDP), as the service and income account deficits remained constant.
These mainly took the form of family remittances, which represented 12.4% of GDP and covered 77% of the current-account deficit.
Higher net capital inflows served to cover the current account deficit and consolidate net international reserves, while foreign direct investment (FDI) amounted to US$ 280 million (5.3% of GDP).
Investments in the financial sector played a major part, with the majority acquisition of the Banco de Finanzas by the Panamanian group ASSA, as did investments in free-trade zones and the country’s energy and industrial sectors.
Merchandise exports f.o.b expanded by 19.5%, while imports were up by 15.7%.
Exports increased thanks to the positive crop cycle and improved international prices for some of the main traditional export products, such as coffee free-trade zones were also buoyant, especially in terms of maquila textiles.
Generally speaking, the country’s textile and clothing industry has competed successfully at the international level following the termination of the Multifibre Arrangement.
In recent years, the country has been promoting the creation of free-trade zones (by means of tariff concessions and tax credits), which have benefited the manufacturing sector.
At the same time, Nicaragua is the region’s only country to have secured preferential treatment for textiles and clothing (related to the use of textile inputs) as part of the CAFTA-DR negotiations.
Furthermore, the World Trade Organization (WTO) has extended the tax benefits of free-trade zones for investors by an additional 15 years for Nicaragua in comparison with other countries.
The rise in imports was the result of a hike in the oil bill (24.9%) and increased external purchases of consumer goods (15.6%), especially non-durables.
In 2006 the Panamanian economy grew rapidly for the third consecutive year.
GDP rose by 8.1% (6.9% in 2005) while per capita GDP expanded by 6.3% during the year and 17% over the last three years.
Favourable international conditions boosted exports of goods and services, while domestic demand remained very buoyant, bolstered by the abundance of credit.
The public sector posted a surplus, and the balance-of-payments deficit was halved.
Open unemployment continued to fall, and real wages edged up slightly, in part because of the moderating inflation.
The main events in terms of economic policy were progress in rehabilitating public finances, the restructuring of the external debt and, above all, the referendum vote in favour of widening the Panama Canal.
This removed the obstacles in the way of large investments to be made between 2008 and 2012 in the Canal, which is a highly profitable State enterprise that plays a key role in world trade.
Economic growth continued to be spearheaded by export services (Panama Canal, the international banking centre, the Colón Free Zone, ports and tourism) and construction.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) reached unprecedented levels with the sale of the country’s main private bank, which signalled the growing interest of international investors in the country’s major investment projects and its economic upswing.
Besides its positive effects, the upturn in investment also created tensions in Panama’s physical infrastructure and labour market, which in turn considerably pushed up the price of urban land.
In the first quarter of 2007, GDP expanded by 9.4%, and is expected to rise by more than 8% over the year as a whole.
Exports remained extremely buoyant, while increases in employment and banking liquidity continued to promote domestic demand.
Fiscal revenues are on the rise, while fiscal discipline is expected to be maintained and the annual deficit is estimated to come in at around 1% of GDP.
Although the authorities hope to see lower annual inflation (a rate of 1.5%), in May prices climbed by 3.4% owing to continually high international prices combined with a supply shortfall and higher costs for certain local products.
Progress made in terms of the rehabilitation of public finances, transparency, improvements in the public debt profile and bilateral trade negotiations was partly based on the positive results of the 2005 fiscal reforms and the high rate of economic growth.
There was an increase in subsidies for the construction of low-cost housing and for fuels, which helped curb inflationary pressures, and targeted subsidy programmes were also introduced for the poorest families.
The non-financial public sector (NFPS) turned around its finances from a deficit of 2.5% of GDP in 2005 to a surplus of 0.5% of GDP in 2006, a level that had not been seen in over a decade and that far exceeded original projections.
The positive primary balance (excluding debt interest payments) recorded for the second consecutive year easily covered the level of capital expenditure.
Contributing factors to this result included the central government surplus of 0.2% of GDP and increased surpluses posted by public enterprises and non-consolidated agencies.
The current revenues of the central government soared by 31.6% in real terms.
This was due to increased receipts from direct taxes (led by income tax) and indirect taxes (based on higher taxes on personal property transfers).
Non-recurring income was also recorded from capital gains tax, following the sale of the private bank Primer Banco del Istmo to the Hong Kong Shanghai Bank Corporation (HSBC).
Such hefty revenues made it possible to increase total central government expenditure by 8.3% in real terms, contrasting with the curbed spending of the previous year.
The 8% rise in current outlays was partly attributable to higher transfers for the urban transport subsidy, consumption of electricity and liquefied gas and preferential interest rates for mortgages, as well as support for decentralized institutions.
Debt interest payments climbed moderately, mainly as a result of domestic liabilities.
The 10.1% rise in capital expenditure in real terms was used to revive physical investment, which had declined considerably in 2005.
Resources were increased for the education sector, public works, the Ministry of the Presidency and the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance.
In addition, social spending (on education, health, employment, social security and community services and housing) was 25% higher than in 2005, representing 35.6% of total expenditure.
The Social Investment Fund was used to implement programmes involving rural electrification, nutrition, assistance for marginalized communities and social community development.
Total public debt edged up slightly (1.9%) to stand at US$ 10.452 billion, but as a proportion of GDP it fell from 66% in 2005 to 61.1% owing to high GDP growth.
External liabilities increased by US$ 208 million, and amounted to US$ 7.788 billion or 45.5% of GDP.
In late 2005 and early 2006, a US$ 1.062 billion restructuring operation was carried out through the exchange of old global bonds for new bonds, extending maturities from 12 to 16 years and lowering the interest rate.
The outstanding balance of Brady bonds (US$ 359 million) was repaid, marking the end of an era in the country’s history of debt.
The aim of these measures was to reduce borrowing requirements over the next few years, with a view to facilitating the management of external financing required for the widening of the Panama Canal, as well as to bring down country risk.
In May 2007, Standard & Poor’s raised the country’s debt rating from stable to positive. (b) The international banking centre and credit policy In 2006, liquidity remained high in the international banking centre, where consolidated assets rose by 16.8% to stand at an unprecedented US$ 45.101 billion (a figure 2.6 times higher than GDP).
The country’s national banking system and international banks continued to expand their operations, although the growth rate for international banking has tailed off.
Deposit-taking in the national banking system was up by 17,4%, with more buoyant activity in deposits by foreign nationals, including foreign banks.
The placement of loans for the domestic market rose by 12.2%, a rate similar to that in 2005, to a total of 16.479 billion balboas, equivalent to 92% of GDP.
Housing construction, commerce and personal consumption continued to lead demand for credit.
Spurred by sustained housing demand, mortgage lending rose by 14.6% —compared with 19.6% in 2005— and credit for shopping-centre and hotel construction grew even faster.
Against a favourable economic background, lending for household consumption was equivalent to 43% of GDP and showed strong growth, boosted by the expansion of personal loans, credit cards and financing for the purchase of new vehicles, the main indicator of growth in consumption.
The commerce sector obtained total financing 7% higher than in 2005, mainly owing to expanding operations in the Colón Free Zone.
The country’s banking system continued to show signs of low credit risk: a non-performing portfolio of 1.35% of credit and capital adequacy of about 16%.
Investments by the international banking centre, mainly on international markets, also swelled strongly (18%), exceeding the US$ 7.1 billion level.
The domestic banking sector’s average interest rate edged up slightly, in harmony with trends in the principal world financial centres.
The deposit rate stood at 3.83% compared with 2.70% in 2005, but the benchmark lending rate (one-year commercial loans) remained practically unchanged at 8.1%.
In real terms, deposit rates rose from a negative figure of 0.15% to a positive level of 1.33%, and commercial lending rates went up from 5.34% to 5.60%.
Foreign banks implemented larger increases in both deposit and lending rates in accordance with their parent companies’ policies.
There was no change to the policy of subsidizing mortgage rates in the framework of the preferential interest rate law, and the benchmark mortgage rate stood at 7%. (c) Trade policy Completing the bilateral trade negotiations which were under way was among the government’s priorities.
In December, two years of talks for a free-trade agreement with the United States came to an end, although the two countries’ Congresses have yet to ratify the instrument.
The importance of the agreement lies in the fact that the preferences granted under the Caribbean Basin Initiative will expire in 2008.
Negotiations were also completed with Chile and Honduras, and approval of the resulting treaties is pending.
Talks continued with Costa Rica, Guatemala and Nicaragua, and the negotiations with Mexico, which had made considerable progress, were resumed.
The start of negotiations between the Central American countries, Panama and the European Union is expected in the second half of 2007.
In 2006, thanks to strong recent growth, the country’s per capita GDP exceeded US$ 5,000 (at current prices).
All sectors posted positive results and, for the second consecutive year, external and internal demand contributed equally to GDP growth.
As a result, aggregate supply reflected a substantial rise in imports (15.3% in real terms), which made up 42% of supply.
The transport, storage and communications sector, the emblem of the Panamanian economy, swelled by 13% in 2006.
There was growth in vessel traffic through the canal, in the services provided to ships, in cargo movements in the port sector and in goods transport via the interoceanic railway.
Air transport also expanded, thanks to increases in the number of aircraft and in the number of destinations served by the national airline.
Telecommunications posted growth of 16%, boosted by mobile telephones, international calling and Internet services.
The hotel and restaurant sector grew by 12.5% as a result of higher numbers of foreign tourists and rising hotel capacity and per capita spending.
Lively domestic demand strengthened retail trade (13.7%) and consumption was encouraged by increases in employment and the total wage bill and by credit expansion.
The 8% rise in wholesale trade was helped by expanding operations in the Colón Free Zone.
The upswing in construction (17.4%) was caused by the building of luxury housing, especially in highrise blocks located in the Bay of Panama and intended for external demand; investments by foreign nationals in the country’s interior, including rural areas, and the building of housing for middle- and low-income groups.
There were also works projects in hotels, ports and public infrastructure, including the resumption of work to clean up the waters of the Bay.
The construction upturn led to a sharp increase in consumption of cement and other inputs and caused a perceptible upswing in land values in a number of urban areas.
There was a large increase in the production of tropical fruit for export, but cereals and vegetables performed poorly.
In the area of livestock, poultry output strengthened but pork production was down.
Manufacturing posted 5.1% growth, supported by the production of construction materials and other intermediate inputs, but output of foodstuffs rose by only 3.6%.
Value added in the electric-power sector was up 3.6%, increasingly boosted by thermal energy generation, with higher demand from the commerce and industry sectors.
Nonetheless, for the third consecutive year the rise in consumer prices was higher than usual (about 1%), owing to higher world market prices.
Wholesale prices were up 6.1%, compared with 5.7% in 2005, because of rising prices for many imports.
Particularly notable were fuel price rises, but industrial inputs, machinery and foodstuffs were also more expensive.
In the first few months of 2007 there were sharp price rises for housing, water, electric power and gas, and rents and maintenance charges, as a result of which the CPI was up 3.4% in May.
Although fuel prices fell by 0.5% from March 2006 to March 2007 and public-transport subsidies held back fare increases, there were price rises in a number of areas such as new vehicles, beef, fish, cereals, vegetable fats and sugar.
The most significant fall was in open unemployment, with a smaller decrease in hidden unemployment.
The sectors creating the greatest numbers of formal jobs were restaurants and hotels, wholesale commerce, manufacturing and retail commerce.
Jobs in the public sector rose by 3.3%, especially in central government.
Average wages increased considerably in most of the following sectors: restaurants and hotels (4%), retail trade (8.1%), wholesale trade (3.4%), other services (5.6%) and manufacturing (1.6%).
In real terms, wages in the above sectors taken as a whole increased by 2.3%.
Public-sector wages averaged a 0.9% increase, which in real terms meant a 1.6% fall.
The increased surplus on the services account was more than enough to finance the deficit on the merchandise trade balance.
The income balance remained high but the balance-of-payments current account deficit (US$ 378 billion) was cut by half, from 5% to 2.2% of GDP.
FDI more than doubled, to US$ 2.56 billion, mostly owing to the sale of the Primer Banco del Istmo to the international conglomerate HSBC, which brought about a positive balance on the financial account.
The strongest growth was in services exports (24.2%), stimulated by rising revenue from the Panama Canal which was mostly due to higher charges; tourism income of almost US$ 1 billion; and the significant upturn in international banking operations.
Those sales were boosted by sustained demand from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Guatemala, which absorbed half of the total.
The Free Zone’s imports were higher than the previous year in anticipation of the upward trend in sales.
Exports of tropical fruit such as melons, pineapples and watermelons have soared in value terms, rising fivefold in the past four years.
There were also increases in exports of bananas and various manufactures such as fishmeal, medicines and cardboard cartons.
Exports of marine products (refrigerated fish, shrimps and lobsters), on the other hand, had a bad year because of the falling catch and lower profitability owing to rising fuel costs; also down were sales of sugar-cane aguardiente and sugar.
For the third consecutive year, growth of goods and services imports was high (12.9%), reaching a total of US$ 12.004 billion.
In addition to the considerable amounts of goods purchased by the Colón Free Zone, there was an upturn in imports for the national market.
In contrast, external purchases of non-factor services fell by 2% because the spending of Panamanian tourists outside the country was stalled, and external purchases of financial services were down.
Strong domestic demand required growing imports of merchandise (totalling US$ 4.472 billion), both consumer goods (petrol and diesel fuel, domestic appliances, semi-durables and non-durables), raw materials (mostly for construction and manufacturing) and machinery and equipment (for the construction and transport sector and telecommunications).
Trade with the other countries of Central America continued to rise: the growth of Panamanian exports was in two-digit figures for the second consecutive year, while imports returned to their 2001 level.
In the first quarter of 2007, favourable trends continued for goods and services exports.
Traffic on the Canal continued to swell, as did goods movements in the ports; international tourism, after rising by 21.6% in the period from January to April, is expected to surpass the 2006 total easily.
High receipts from customs duties suggest that imports continued to rise in the first four months of the year, reflecting rapid economic growth.
The Caribbean Economic growth in the Bahamas rose to 3.4% in 2006, the highest figure in the past seven years, with tourism as the main engine of that growth.
Visitor numbers have declined slightly (1%) but demand for real estate from non-residents and investment in hotel complexes boosted construction, which grew by 25%.
Higher tax receipts from increased imports and real-estate transactions helped to improve fiscal accounts.
Spending rose by almost one percentage point of GDP, for reasons which included preparations for the general election in April 2007, but revenue increased more, by 1.5 points of GDP.
Liquidity increased, particularly credit to the private sector, but inflation remained low, close to the United States price index.
The balanceof-payments current account deficit almost doubled, and although the surplus on the financial account expanded owing to very strong external capital inflows, it was not enough to make up for the current-account deficit.
Despite stronger economic growth, the opposition party won the elections in April 2007.
The new government is following the same basic economic orientation, and forecast growth for 2007 stands at 4.5%.
The fiscal deficit dipped from 1.9% of GDP in 2005 to 1.2% in 2006, a small step toward achieving the goal of reducing the public debt to 30% of GDP in the medium term.
In accordance with the policy of keeping taxation low, no new taxes were created in 2006.
The efficiency of tax collection improved, however, resulting in an unexpectedly high increase in receipts.
The new Tax Compliance Unit has resolved a number of loopholes, while the various tax collection agencies have adopted new electronic systems.
Half that amount was derived from taxes on external trade, the collection of which increases in response to growth in imports; in second place were receipts from the stamp tax, which soared upwards on the back of real-estate transactions for the development of tourism projects.
The new government announced plans to simplify the tariff schedule and combine it with the stamp tax on imports.
Studies were undertaken to that end, and the change is expected to be made in 2008-2009.
Considering its importance for attracting foreign investment, the government has stated that it will maintain the policy of not taxing income.
Includes hidden unemployment. i Deposit rate, weighted average. j Lending and overdraft rate, weighted average. k From 1998 to 2003, figures refers to fiscal years. l Includes grants. m The monetary figures are annual averages.
Overall spending rose by 0.9 points of GDP to stand at 21.8%.
There were significant increases in transfers to non-profit organizations in the security, health and education sectors.
The rise was proportionally greater for capital spending (from 1.9% to 2.3% of GDP), owing to an increase in infrastructure projects such as the desalination plant and a new electric power generating plant.
The fiscal deficit was financed mostly through a rise in the national debt, which remained at about 46% of GDP, putting into perspective the ambitious goal of reducing that deficit to 30% of GDP in the medium term.
The debts of public-sector corporations, equivalent to more than half the total, increased by 28.4%, mostly as a result of a bond issued by the electric power company.
The new government is making plans for a current surplus, which would be the first since 2000.
The central bank’s Monetary Policy Committee kept a close watch on the effects of rising domestic credit, the evolution of liquidity and the quality of loans, but the discount rate remained unchanged.
The sharp rise in net domestic credit, led by personal loans, boosted demand for import products, and this helped to increase tax receipts.
Liquidity in the system trended downwards, and this was reflected in a rise in the interest rate on deposits.
The lending rate, however, was unchanged as a result of intense competition in the market.
The monetary authority resorted to moral persuasion to convince commercial banks of the need to be cautious with credit supply and to comply scrupulously with prudential standards and capital requirements.
The central bank worked closely with the stock exchange to deepen the local capital market and make it more efficient, and took measures to modernize the payments system.
Tourism-related investments contributed to the rise in construction, which boosted the country’s economy in 2006 (25.2%).
The number of tourists was slightly down (1%) because of a 7% decline in cruise ship arrivals.
The country’s main cruise destinations, the islands of Grand Bahama, New Providence and the Family Islands, suffered the same decline.
The new requirement for United States nationals, who now have to show their passports after a trip to the Caribbean, has not helped to stimulate the sector.
Most United States nationals have no passport, and many of them, particularly students during the spring break, opted for cruise ships whose ports of call did not involve that requirement (Puerto Rico and the United States Virgin Islands).
The contraction in 2006 has not changed the government’s goal of increasing the number of visitors by 40% to reach 7 million tourist arrivals per year by 2010.
More important for the country’s economy, however, is the number of visitors who arrive by air, because they stay overnight in the islands and their spending is greater.
Arrivals by air were up by 0.5% in 2006 in comparison This segment is expected to grow quickly, as indicated by the expansion in construction.
The main construction project was phase 3 of the Atlantis complex on Paradise Island, which will add 600 rooms to the existing 2,317.
A group of investors headed by Sol Kerzner, the South African hotel magnate and president of the corporation, bought the shares for over US$ 3 billion, the region’s largest foreign direct investment transaction A number of other large-scale hotel projects are under construction or preparation.
The most significant are the Ritz-Carlton project on Rose Island, worth US$ 750 million; the South Ocean Golf and Beach Resort, in the capital Nassau, worth US$ 1 billion, and the Baha Mar project, worth US$ 2.4 billion, which aims to consolidate the major hotels of Cable Beach into a single large complex.
The first phase of the Baha Mar project will be completed in 2011.
This reflects mostly the impact on the country’s economy of rising import costs, especially for fuels.
The segments which climbed the fastest were food and beverages (5%) and furniture (2%).
Housing, the segment that has the highest weighting, rose by 1.7%, an improvement over the 2005 figure of 2.8%.
Unemployment in the Bahamas fell sharply from a stable figure of 10.2% to 7.6% in 2006, mostly owing to hotel project construction.
This seems to be due to the numbers of demotivated workers, who respond to surveys saying that they are able to work and have no jobs, but do not seek employment because they expect to be unsuccessful.
The increasing levels of economic activity and employment boosted the average household income from increase of over 10%.
The overall balance of payments was negative and international reserves fell for the second consecutive year.
This result was due to the doubling of the current account deficit, which the higher surplus on the capital and financial account could not make up for.
Rising oil prices, demand for imports for construction, and rising consumer demand impacted negatively on the balance-of-payments current account.
The deficit on the goods account widened by 6.7% despite rising exports.
The surplus on the services account was cut by half, particularly owing to services related to the design and execution of major works projects.
It is assumed that this services account figure is exceptional and that in 2007 the account will return to its usual levels.
The surplus on the capital and financial account was more than double that of 2005 owing to income from direct and portfolio investment.
The GDP of Barbados grew for the fifth consecutive year since the recession of 2001, this time by 3.8%.
As in the previous year, growth in 2006 was boosted by the domestic economy, with both construction and basic services showing growth of almost 7%, while traditional export sectors such as tourism and manufacturing stagnated.
The imbalance between growth in sectors that cater to the external and domestic markets is worrisome, particularly because the economy of Barbados operates under a fixed exchange rate regime whose sustainability depends on international reserves and therefore on its capacity to generate or attract foreign exchange.
The planned removal of exchange controls in 2007, part of the gradual integration of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME), will accentuate the need to stimulate the foreign exchange-generating sectors.
The National Strategic Plan of Barbados 2006-2025 lays out strategies to enhance competitiveness and strengthen the brand image of Barbados in world markets.
Economic policy since 2005 has been geared toward containing the fiscal and external deficits by means of contractionary policies.
In 2006, the fiscal deficit was 1.5% of GDP and the balance-of-payments current account deficit stood at 8.4% of GDP.
The unemployment rate The central government deficit was 1.2% of GDP in the fiscal year 2006-2007,1 while the consolidated non-financial public sector deficit was 1.8% of GDP was the lowest in 16 years (8.7%), and net international reserves increased to US$ 931 million as of December 2006, although they have not yet returned to their 2003 level.
Growth for 2007 was projected at 4% taking into account the fact that the boost from the Cricket World Cup did not live up to expectations. for the calendar year 2006.
Both figures were within the government’s target ceiling of 2.5% of GDP.
From April 2006 to March 2007, the central government collected current revenue of 2.186 billion Barbados dollars (BDS$), a 2% increase on the previous fiscal year.
Includes hidden unemployment. growth led to an increase in receipts from the income and profits tax (11.3%).
Despite the reduction in the corporate tax rate from 40% to 25% in 2006, corporation tax revenues rose by 20% as International Business Companies (IBC) reported increased profits.
Income tax receipts declined by 2%, reflecting the reforms which have been put into place.
Despite the fall from 0.65% to 0.45% in the rate of tax on the ownership of real property valued between US$ 175,000 and US$ 425,000, effective receipts increased by 10% as a result of property revaluations, improved compliance and a broadening of the tax base.
Tax receipts from external trade rose by 2% but receipts from goods and services in general fell by 4.5% owing to falling consumer demand which resulted from the contraction of domestic credit.
Central government current expenditure, including amortization, increased by 3.8% in nominal terms to US$ 1.179 billion, reflecting a considerable drop in spending in GDP terms.
Spending on wages was slightly up (0.3%) despite a 2% increase due to cost-of-living adjustments.
Current transfers were 3.5% higher because of increased allocations to the Barbados Defence Force in anticipation of the Cricket World Cup, the subsidization of the airline LIAT (Leeward Islands Air Transport) which is structurally unprofitable but essential for transport and tourism between the islands; and increased transfers to the University of the West Indies and the Queen Elizabeth Hospital.
Decreases in capital spending (3.2%) and in capital formation (6.1%) were recorded for the fiscal year for the central government despite preparations for the Cricket World Cup.
Interest payments on external debt climbed by 15% in the latest fiscal year because of debt accumulation, particularly a bond issue in 2005.
Another issue generated US$ 65 million in 2006, partly covering the fiscal deficit for that year.
Most of the deficit for 2006 was made up by sales of bonds to the National Insurance Scheme, private non-banking entities and the central bank.
The restrictive monetary policy stance adopted by the central bank in late 2005 was maintained in 2006 in order to contain the external deficit and protect net international reserves in a fixed exchange rate environment.
The money supply contracted by 1% compared with the two-figure growth between 2002 and 2004, and the M2/GDP ratio continued the decline which began in 2003.
The expansion of domestic credit slowed from 16.5% in 2005 to 9.6% in 2006, owing to slower growth of credit to the non-financial private sector and a contraction in credit to the public sector.
The central bank’s usual monetary instruments are the minimum deposit rate, reserve requirements and moral suasion.
A combination of all three was used in 2006 to restrain growth of credit and liquidity.
In March 2006 the central bank increased from 10% to 12% the discount rate payable on its temporary advances to commercial banks.
The last increase was followed by an announcement that the minimum deposit rate would be aligned to the United States federal funds rate in order to prevent capital flight due to real interest rate differentials.
The expected effect of this series of hikes was to cause commercial banks to raise lending rates.
In April 2006, as a result of the gradual liberalization of the capital account to promote greater economic integration within CSME, it became necessary to create a new reserve requirement of 6% of foreign currency deposits.
Thus, total average reserves held by commercial banks with the Central Bank rose by 46% over the year.
For the third consecutive year, growth in real GDP was mainly driven by the services sectors.
Basic services expanded by an average of 6.5%, and the growth of other services was 4%, mainly because of strong domestic demand; this was stimulated by rising disposable incomes made possible by the easy availability of credit and reform of personal income taxes.
While demand in the construction sector was spurred by the easing of the land tax and by public-sector works, construction was also driven by strong demand by nonresidents for property in Barbados.
Increased competition among commercial banks since 2005 has brought a surge in mortgage loans for private dwellings and in loans to non-residents.
Growth in the demand for construction will have spill-over effects in other sectors of the economy, notably electricity, gas and water as well as the quarrying of building materials.
The 3.1% contraction in mining and quarrying in 2006 may be heralding a slowdown in growth in the construction sector for 2007.
External demand for residential property in Barbados could benefit in the future from regional growth and the increased intraregional mobility associated with the CSME.
The international business and financial services sector expanded in 2006, as reflected by the issue of 537 licences compared with 428 in 2005.
This expansion followed the conclusion of new double taxation agreements with other countries in 20052 and the fall from 2.5% to 1% in corporate tax for international business companies, international banks and limited-liability companies.
Growth in tradeable goods and services sectors was weaker than in 2005.
The performance of the sugar industry was poor (0.1%), reflecting its transition to a sugar-cane-based ethanol industry as part of the current “sugar adaptation strategy”.
Barbados is an increasingly mature tourism market, but the non-sugar agriculture and manufacturing sectors have yet to be fully developed, given the internal and external constraints affecting them.
The government’s protectionist policy for the sector (competing imports are faced with a 60% surcharge) seems to have had little impact and is expected to be phased out by 2008.
Long-stay tourist arrivals grew by 3%, offsetting the 6.3% fall in cruise passenger arrivals.
Nonetheless, the steep drop in cruise-ship arrivals in the past two years appears to have bottomed out.
Itinerary adjustments on the part of cruise companies owing to high fuel costs continued in 2006, and fewer cruises offered Barbados as a destination.
Prospects for tourism in early 2007 were good, with the holding of two major sports events on the island: the World Golf Championships (December 2006) and the final of the Cricket World Cup (April 2007).
Factors behind the increases were rising oil prices in the first half of the year, the increase in the levy on extraregional imports, known as the cess, in 2006 from 3% to 6%, as well as rising aggregate demand for goods and services fuelled by an 18% expansion of private credit.
Price increases are projected to moderate in 2007 with a tightening of monetary policy, more stable oil prices and the removal of the cess.
Wage increases were negotiated in December 2006 for a two-year period beginning in April 2006, between the government and the National Union of Public Workers, representing 10,000 of the 28,000 government employees (20% of the employed labour force).
A 7.5% increase was backdated to April 2006 with a further 2.5% payable as from April 2007, with no cost-of-living adjustment.
Publicservice pensioners were awarded a 6.67% increase for the next two years.
Given that payments will be effected in 2007, it is expected that this will impact on the fiscal deficit for that year.
The nominal wage increase of 10%, however, falls short of the combined inflation rates for 2006 and 2007, which should stand at 13%.
Reports indicate that in the first 3 quarters of 2006, job creation occurred in tourism, construction and utilities sectors while losses were recorded in manufacturing, government services and the finance, insurance and business services sectors.
The overall balance of payments showed a US$ 44 million surplus in 2006 compared with a deficit of US$ 68 million in the previous year.
The change was due to a narrowing of the current account deficit, owing to a strong rise in the services account surplus and the reduced deficit on the goods account, and an expansion of net capital and financial inflows (16.5%).
The fall in the current account deficit from 12.4% to 8.4% of GDP within a year can be partly explained by the continued tightening of monetary policy as well as the increased cess on extraregional imports in 2006.
Given that extraregional imports make up 76% of the total, the cess had a significant demand-reducing impact.
Unsurprisingly, the slowdown in imports came from consumer and intermediate goods, whereas capital goods imports grew by 13.2%, led by infrastructure development on the island.
Receipts from travel services, mostly tourism, were up 9% and those from government services increased by 21.8%, reflecting expansion in the international business and financial services sector.
The current account deficit of US$ 289 million was financed by a surplus of US$ 333 million on the capital and financial account, the largest ever recorded in Barbados.
Net private capital inflows totalled US$ 146.9 million on account of proceeds from international real-estate transactions and lower amortization payments by the private sector, whereas net long-term public capital inflows amounted to US$ 67.4 million thanks to the success of a 2035 bond to finance preparations for the Cricket World Cup.
Over the past seven years the government has increasingly resorted to external borrowing in order to finance current account deficits and relieve pressures on the foreign exchange reserves in the face of a pegged exchange rate.
In 2007, the removal of the cess and of the surcharge on imports to protect locally-produced goods is expected to push the merchandise trade deficit upward.
The Government of Belize has calculated GDP growth at 5.8% for 2006; this includes a 3.3 percentage point contribution from oil drilling activities which started that same year.1 Demand for tourism services and the high prices brought by agricultural exports stimulated the performance of the economy, but construction and manufactures contracted.
The external debt, which had a fairly short maturity profile, was restructured through new bond issues with terms up to 2029.
The fiscal problems underlying the adjustment initiated in 2005 were the result of a period of high growth during which foreign borrowing was used to finance reconstruction in the aftermath of devastating hurricanes that hit the country early in the decade.
Although the economic and political context was further complicated by financial problems in State enterprises and with Stateguaranteed loans, the situation was handled sensibly and transparently.2 The committee investigating the bankruptcy The overall fiscal deficit narrowed from 4.3% of GDP in 2005 to 1.7% in 2006.3 Achieving this involved building up a primary surplus of 4% of GDP in 2006.
The surplus is in sharp contrast with the primary deficit of 5% of GDP in 2003, and demonstrates the scale of the fiscal adjustment measures applied over the last three years.
The primary surplus is mainly the result of tax revenues increasing by half a percentage point of GDP of the Development Finance Corporation (DFC) met from August 2006 to March 2007, and the proceedings were transmitted live throughout.
The favourable external environment and petroleum exploitation both helped to moderate the tax burden and the pressure on the balance of payments towards the end of the year.
Economic activity is predicted to be less buoyant in 2007, with GDP growth of only 2%.
Fiscal policy will continue to focus on controlling the deficit. and the fall in current expenditure (0.7 percentage points, not including interest payments), given that capital expenditure had already dropped to a minimum during the two previous years.
Tax receipts swelled thanks to the introduction of the general sales tax (GST) in July 2006, which has a wider tax base that the tax it replaced.
Increased receipts from the general sales tax offset lower revenues from taxes on international commerce resulting from changes in the calculation of consumer prices for petroleum derivatives.4 In Belize, real economic growth is calculated based on the production and price structures of the year 2000.
The authorities decided to value the oil produced from 2006 onward against current prices for that same year.
The budget presentation for fiscal year 2007/2008 was aptly titled “Facing, Fixing, Moving Ahead”.
To avoid a hike in fuel prices following the introduction of the general sales tax, fuel prices were made less dependent on a specific import tax (revenue replacement duty).
In 2007, tax receipts will be boosted by the introduction of royalty payments for the oil industry.
In 2007, the Tax Reform Committee met to consider, inter alia, an amendment to the excise tax on alcoholic beverages and tobacco, which the authorities claim was encouraging smuggling.
The government also decided to eliminate the import tax on gasoline, and instead to tax gasoline by a fixed sum per gallon, so that any fluctuations in international oil prices are passed directly on to the consumer.
Expenditure was contained thanks to a restriction on public wage increases and the freezing of debt servicing following the announcement of a restructuring offer.
For fiscal year 2007-2008, expenditure is expected to drop in the wake of debt restructuring.
In terms of current expenditure, wages are expected to rise in line with the new performance evaluation system, and purchases of goods and services are predicted to increase, in the light of higher basic service charges and the need to carry out delayed maintenance work.
For the first time in several years, capital expenditure will also edge up to meet priorities in terms of education, health and infrastructure.
A large part of the fiscal deficit was covered by nonproject loans, which are not included in programmed capital expenditures.
This included policy-based lending from the Inter-American Development Bank (US$ 25 million) and the Caribbean Development Bank (US$ 25 million), as well as loans from Taiwan province of China and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
New bonds were issued to help guarantee the debts of the Development Finance Corporation (DFC).
Its main component is external public debt, which dropped to 80.7% of GDP.
In February 2007, the government announced the end of its offer to exchange its short- and medium-term foreign commercial debt for 2029 bonds.
This new issue was worth US$ 546.8 million in nominal terms, and resulted in the restructuring of 98.1% of the debt.
The operation had been painstakingly prepared with the advice of a United States consultancy firm, and involved identifying and subsequently negotiating with the main creditors.
The fact that the Creditors’ Committee for the country’s foreign trade debt was made up almost entirely of financial institutions from the English-speaking Caribbean (with most headquartered in Trinidad and Tobago) contributed to the successful outcome of negotiations.
Broad money (M3) swelled although credit to the public sector remained steady.
The driving forces behind the rise were the doubling of net foreign assets in the banking system, and the strong increase (13%) of net domestic credit to the private sector.
Monetary policy sought to cap the rise in local currency liquidity, in order to curb demand for foreign exchange and support the fiscal adjustment policy objective of meeting the country’s external obligations.
January 2006 saw the implementation of the International Banking Act, which clearly distinguishes between the deposits of non-residents and domestic deposits, and avoids artificial rises in liquidity.
Also in early 2006, the legal reserve requirement was raised by 1%.
In September, there was a further 1% increase in the requirement for cash deposits and a secondary reserve requirement.
The positive results in terms of exports of goods and services —combined with foreign receipts in the form of investments, loans and transfers— created a high level of liquidity in the banking system, thereby minimizing the effectiveness of monetary policy interventions.
The average weighted interest rate on loans even dropped slightly, while the deposit rate rose.
Although half of the increase in credit to the private sector took the form of personal loans, the number of loans also increased to companies in the real estate, commerce, transport and professional service sectors.
As for foreign-exchange policy, the fixed parity of two Belize dollars for one United States dollar was maintained.
Given the prevailing circumstances, maintaining exchangerate parity was a significant outcome of monetary and fiscal policy. (c) Other policies The crisis that overtook the Development Finance Corporation prompted a review of the country’s structural policies.
It also had a loan portfolio of its own worth US$ 162 million, half of which was in arrears.
The institution’s new authorities restructured the institution, and the resulting downsizing of the scope of the Corporation’s activities has made it necessary to introduce a new assistance mechanism for micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises in the production sector.
The government has requested advice from the Caribbean Development Bank in this connection.
Economic growth in the non-oil sector, as measured by indicators that are comparable with the series based on the production structure and prices for 2000, amounted to 2.5% and was driven by a sharp upswing in the output of electricity, strong demand for some tourism-related services, especially commerce, transport and communications.
The most striking feature of economic activity, however, was the beginning of commercial oil exploitation and, by including this sector in calculations of GDP for 2006, the authorities arrived at an economic growth rate of 5.8%.
Small-scale exploration and production activities had been carried out since 1956, but it was not until 2004 that Belize Natural Energy Limited (a local private company) joined forces with the United States exploration enterprise West Bay Exploration Co. and found commercial quantities of hydrocarbons.
Their value was the equivalent of 11% of the country’s total merchandise production.
Agricultural activity increased by a modest 1.4%, despite good international prices for most export products.
Sugarcane and sugar production rose (by 26% and 11%, respectively) while citrus production fell (-19%).
Shrimp fishing plummeted by more than 10%, as a result of Asian competition in the United States market.
The number of visitors arriving by land increased by 13%, as a result of increasingly better communication links with Mexico and Guatemala.
Despite being a small sector, yacht tourism turned in the country’s most dynamic performance during 2006.
In contrast, the number of cruise ships and cruise passengers fell, following a restructuring of the main companies’ routes and the lack of suitable docks in Belize.
Plans to build a dock, as part of a joint project between the port authority and Carnival Corporation (the sector’s main international enterprise), have suffered setbacks due to disagreements between the parties involved.
The main price increases were recorded in the transport and communications sector, as well as in rentals, fuel and energy, all of which was mostly due to the introduction of the general sales tax and higher oil prices.
The labour force survey, which is carried out every April, showed that unemployment had dropped from 11% in 2005 to 9.4% in 2006.
The 2007-2008 budget is expected to include a slight increase in public wages as a result of the new performance evaluation system.
The balance of payments turned in an overall surplus of US$ 33 million, as the small current-account deficit was amply offset by a surplus in the capital and financial account.
The current-account deficit was much smaller than in 2005, and indeed the smallest for 10 years, which reflects the degree of adjustment in the country’s economy.
The balance of goods and services even posted a surplus, mainly thanks to higher merchandise exports and lower imports of services.
Exports performed well thanks to the initiation of oil exports, good prices for agricultural exports, an increase in sugar quotas for the United States and European markets, the strong demand for tourism-related services and rising sales from the free-trade zone.
Merchandise imports increased in value (10%) owing to the effect of oil prices.
In contrast, service imports declined (-5%), mainly as a result of a slump in business services.
The deficit on the income account widened as a consequence of the level of interest payments and payments of dividends on direct and portfolio investments.
Following an impressive performance in the last three years, foreign direct investment (FDI) led an improvement in the financial account which made up for the small current-account deficit.
The overall result is reflected in the expansion of net international reserves, which were sufficient to cover the equivalent of 2.2 months of imports by the end of 2006.
Cuba According to information from the National Statistical Office, the Cuban economy expanded by 12.5% in 2006, which was similar to the figure for per capita GDP growth, owing to the standstill in population numbers during the year.
The fiscal deficit was equivalent to 3.2% of GDP, one percentage point smaller than in 2005.
The inflation figure to December was two percentage points higher than for 2005, at 5.7%.
Open unemployment remained low, registering 1.9%, the same rate as in 2005.
The national accounts show an increase of a mere 1.1% in the volume of goods and services exports, which stood in contrast to 2005, when exports were the main drivers of growth with an expansion of 45.9%.
Domestic demand, therefore, appears to have played a predominant role in 2006, thanks to public investment and private consumption.
The second of these rose sharply, largely as a result of wage and pension rises at the end of 2005.
In contrast, in a number of key sectors growth slackened (manufacturing) or turned negative (agriculture).
The government estimates a growth rate of 10% for 2007, reflecting a jump of some 22% in investment (mainly in construction), an 8% rise in the volume of goods and services exports and a drop of 1% in the volume of goods and services imported.
The government will continue to restructure the energy sector in the course of the year, aiming to make more rational use of resources.
There will be a strong drive in residential construction and efforts will be made to revitalize the agricultural sector.
The authorities hope to step up and strengthen bilateral relations with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the People’s Republic of China.
In 2006 the government maintained the economic policy adopted in 2004 to reduce the disequilibria that had built up in the 1990s as a result of the severe economic adjustment following the break with the Eastern European countries (after the dismantling of the Soviet Union and the transformation of the socialist economies into market economies).
Another objective was to consolidate the recent changes in monetary and exchange-rate policy.
This was one GDP percentage point less than in 2005 and brought the fiscal deficit nearer to the target of around 3% of GDP.
Income increased by 19.7% in real terms, owing mainly to a 25.2% rise in the tax take due, in turn, to a jump of 46.6% in the collection of indirect taxes, especially those on circulation and on sales and services.
This last tax provided the largest proportion of tax income, representing 26.7% of GDP and 44.6% of total revenues.
By contrast, income from direct taxes declined by a slight 1.1% in real terms, since the drop in the take from profit and personal income taxes exceeded the rise in receipts from other direct taxes.
The item “other non-tax income” —which includes price differentials arising in external trade, other business contributions and net external income— registered a rise of 17.3%, however.
In the last few years this segment has risen at dizzying rates and its contribution to output has more than doubled, from 4.6% of GDP in 2003 to 9.6% in 2006.
Capital revenues also recorded a strong climb of 34%, but are still not very significant at 1.7% of GDP.
Expenditure rose by 17.1% in real terms, largely thanks to a strong 55% rise in capital spending, from 6.6% of GDP in 2005 to 9.4% in 2006, which reflected the government’s policy to eliminate the obstacles facing the Cuban economy.
The variation in current spending was much smaller, at 12.3% in real terms.
Staff costs (wages) were up by 12.3%, as a result of wage rises implemented in 2005.
This was the outcome of the wage reform begun in 2005 which, among other aims, was designed to tie remuneration more closely to outcomes and to introduce some financial incentives in order to boost labour productivity.
In contrast, transfers to the business and cooperative sector slipped back, with a reduction in compensation for losses of one percentage point of GDP.
The amount entered under other subsidies and transfers increased, however, also by one GDP percentage point.
The economic authorities are making changes as regards subsidies, in order to direct them at individuals and households instead of particular products.
Owing to the rise in fiscal income and expenditure, the proportion of the economy accounted for by the State continued to rise in relation to GDP, in keeping with the recent trend.
The external debt agreements Cuba has signed with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the People’s Republic of China in the last two years have become increasingly significant to the country.
Cuba has also arrived at bilateral arrangements with a number of countries lately, thereby opening up other possible sources of credit.
After debt rescheduling, Cuba now maintains payments arrears only with the Paris Club.
This was largely a reflection of an increase in official debt (41.5%).
Medium- and long-term debt continued to account for the bulk of the total (75%).1 En 2006 efforts continued to reduce monetary duality and move towards unification in the framework of the reform begun in 2004.
Measures to centralize and heighten the efficiency of currency operations continued to be improved and deepened.
The United States dollar was prohibited as a means of payment between Cuban firms.
The Central Bank of Cuba continued to use the legal deposit and credit controls, as well as interest rates, to administer liquidity.
As has been the case for several years now, the interest rate spread was structured in such a way as to encourage saving in Cuban pesos.
In the absence of other financial savings instruments, part of the wage and pension increases of 2005 and 2006 was invested in time deposit certificates.
The contraction in M2 was not so sharp, at 3%, but the variations recorded in monetary aggregates overall were much smaller than in There were no major changes in the financial system in 2006.
It still comprises eight commercial Cuban banks, which offer an increasing range of services, 17 offices representing foreign banks and a number of jointly local- and foreign-owned financial institutions.
A Cuban-Venezuelan mixed bank, which will broaden the These data refer to “active debt”, a term used to refer to financial and commercial transactions whose balance reflects new financing obtained and payments made.
Of this amount, 60.2% represents official debt owed to the Paris Club. range of financial services between the two countries, also opened for business.
After two revaluations (both of 8%) of the convertible Cuban peso in 2005, no further changes were made to exchange-rate policy in 2006.
An important scheme in this regard is the Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America and the Caribbean (ALBA), which Bolivia joined in 2006 and Nicaragua in 2007.
Imports from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Bolivia have been made 100% tariff-free within ALBA, and progress is expected to be made as regards Nicaragua in 2007.
This facilitated exports to Cuba by small and medium-sized Venezuelan firms, which account for 10% of the value of that country’s exports to Cuba.
In 2006 the two countries embarked upon a joint scheme to refurbish the Cienfuegos refinery, which should be completed in late 2007.
With a view to boosting mutual trade, Cuba and the members of MERCOSUR signed a partial economic complementarity agreement in 2006.
Cuba’s trade with the countries of the bloc is worth around US$ 400 million at present and this amount is expected to expand considerably in the next few years.
Per capita GDP behaved similarly to overall GDP in 2006, owing to the standstill in population numbers.
Unlike what happened in 2005, in 2006 economic expansion was driven basically by buoyant domestic demand, which climbed by 16.6%.
In 2005 the volume of goods and services exports helped to boost economic growth with a jump of 45.9%, but in 2006 this volume rose by a meagre 1.1%.
This, combined with a strong increase in imports, which were up by 20.6%, caused the external sector’s contribution to growth to become negative.
Despite this high rate of growth, however, investment was equivalent to only 13.1% of GDP.
A proportionally larger investment effort will be needed in order to achieve strong, steady output growth in the future.
Total consumption was up by 15.8%, led by private consumption (20.7%) which, in turn, was driven largely by the rise in wages and pensions in 2005 and 2006.
The most dynamic branches of activity were construction (37.7%) and commerce and restaurants (22.6%).
By contrast, after a contraction of 11.6% in 2005, agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing again turned in a poor performance in 2006, decreasing by 6%.
The authorities have attributed this state of affairs to productivity problems and to the fact that the sector is still recovering from the effects of drought and three hurricanes which hit the country in 2005.
Sugar cane, tubers, vegetables, legumes and fruit all registered downturns despite good weather conditions.
Tobacco and cereals turned in a positive performance, as did the livestock sector (except beef).
Manufacturing expanded only by 1.9%, owing to a decline in the production of sugar and nickel.
Measured by the CPI for December to December, inflation rose by 5.7% in 2006, which was two percentage points higher than the year-on-year rate at December 2005.
This increase reflected pressures generated by wage and pension hikes in a context of shortages of certain products.
However, since the State sets the prices of a The convertible peso’s official exchange rate is 1 to 1 with the United States dollar.
The effects of several measures implemented in the framework of wage reform in 2005 —especially the 125% rise in the minimum wage— began to be felt in 2006.
The balance-of-payments current account registered a downturn in 2006, since it posted a deficit of 239.7 million pesos, in contrast to the surplus of 154 million pesos the year before.
The merchandise trade deficit widened to 6,355,400,000 pesos, which was more than enough to offset the larger net surplus on the services account (6.456 million pesos), as well as an increase in net current transfers and a narrowing of the deficit on the income account.
According to information provided by the authorities, in 2006 Cuba’s terms of trade posted an upturn of almost 24%, after the deterioration seen in 2005.
Merchandise exports were 34.5% up on the previous year in terms of value and by 7.5% in terms of average volume.
Some key products such as nickel and sugar benefited from improvements in international prices, so that exports of these products rose in value even though export volumes stood still or declined.
Exports of fish and shellfish decreased in value owing to a drop in prices.
Conversely, higher export volumes of tobacco compensated for the lower prices being fetched by the product.
Export volumes of citrus and preserved fruit shrank by a third, owing to the poor performance of agriculture, but the citrus sector benefited from higher prices, which were more than enough to counteract the volume effect.
Medicines continued to render an extraordinary performance and the value of exports rose by 92% in 2006, doubling the value registered in 2005.
This mainly reflects the export of new products (vaccines), especially to developing countries, stemming from a broader effort to diversify Cuba’s exports in terms of both products and destinations.
The largest increase was registered in capital goods (50.8%), thanks to imports associated with the energy restructuring programme.
Imports of generators were up by 117.9% and of machinery and electrical apparatus and devices by 128.2%.
Imports of consumer goods also increased by a considerable 27.3%, led by foods (wheat flour, preserved meat, preserved fruits and vegetables) and furniture.
In 2006, tourism revenues amounted to US$ 2.056 billion, which represented a decline of 0.7% with respect to 2005, caused by a drop in the number of foreign visitors.
There was a notable decline in the number of Venezuelan citizens travelling to Cuba for health reasons, since the Barrio Adentro (“Into the Neighbourhood”) and Operación Milagro (“Operation Miracle”) programmes being conducted in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had helped to reduce the need for such trips to the island.
Despite higher international oil prices, inflation fell again and stood at 5%.
However, the public-sector deficit widened to 3.7% of GDP and the trade deficit broadened to 15.1% of GDP.
For 2007, the authorities project more moderate growth of between 6% and 7%, although production trends from the first half of the year suggest that the actual figure might be higher.
Despite the inflation target of 5.5% being slightly higher than for 2006, the objective is unlikely to be met as cumulative inflation for the first five months of the year was almost 4%.
The implementation of the structural reform programme suffered some setbacks in 2006, although the parliamentary majority achieved following the May elections did enable significant progress to be made towards the end of the year, especially in fiscal matters.
The campaigns for the presidential elections may slow down the pace of reform in 2007.
The Dominican Republic —Central America— United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) finally entered into force in March 2007, and this has generated many positive expectations about its potential effects on the economy.
Economic policy was implemented in accordance with the guidelines set out in the agreement concluded with IMF.
Deviations in the fiscal sphere during the year were offset by achievements in terms of monetary policy.
The quasi-fiscal deficit, which had formed in the wake of the financial crisis, was 2.5% of GDP (slightly narrower than the level recorded the previous year).
As a result, the fiscal year closed with a consolidated publicsector deficit of 3.7% of GDP.
As in the previous year, the increase was mainly due to tax revenues, especially from indirect taxes.
Tax revenues in 2006 were nonetheless 4% less than projected, largely as a result of a reduction in taxes on foreign trade.
The anticipated elimination of the import tax under the Dominican Republic —Central America— United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) slashed income from that source by 29% compared with the previous year, while its contribution to tax revenues fell from 25.5% in Total public expenditure was highly buoyant in 2006, surging by 12.8% in real terms.
The expansion was the result of factors such as the local and parliamentary elections held in May, the construction of a metro system in Santo Domingo and energy subsidies (for electricity and liquefied petroleum gas).
The election process also boosted growth in components of current expenditure such as non-personal services (especially basic services and social welfare programmes), for which outlays rose by 34% in real terms.
The construction of a metro system in Santo Domingo bolstered fixed public investment, whose main component —construction— expanded by an impressive 54.4% in 2006.
Subsidies to the energy sector caused current transfers to swell to 43% of total current expenditure.
Another item of expenditure that recorded a significant expansion was debt interest payments, whose real value increased by one third.
Almost three quarters (73%) of the item total corresponded to external debt.
In December, Congress adopted a tax amendment bill, some of the aims of which were to increase tax on the consumption of cigarettes and alcoholic beverages (including beer) and introduce a 16% tax on general insurance services.
These amendments are expected to push up the government’s tax revenues by 1.5% of GDP in 2007.
The targets in the 2007 fiscal programme include a primary surplus of around 2.3% of GDP for the consolidated public sector.
In addition, the 2007 budget features measures to restrict transfers and capital expenditure.
Inflation was reduced to the lower edge of the range agreed with IMF in the Letter of Intent for 2006.
The weighted rate of interest on zero-coupon certificates fell to 10.0% in December 2006 (compared with 14.7% in the year-earlier period), while the interest rate on certificates sold directly to the public dropped to 14% (compared with 17% in 2005).
Lower financial costs narrowed the quasi-fiscal deficit to 2.5% of GDP (compared with 2.9% at the end of 2005).
Net international reserves in the central bank swelled by 17.6%, thereby far exceeding the minimum target set in the monetary programme.
In 2006, the lower interest rates on the central bank’s monetary instruments brought down bank rates to their lowest levels since they were liberalized in 1991.
In December 2006, deposit and lending interest rates of multipurpose banks averaged 16.4% and 7.7%, respectively, which were 3.7 and 4 percentage points lower than 12 months previously.
Despite this, the level of intermediation of multi-purpose banks was a little higher in December (8.7%) than one year earlier (8.5%).
In keeping with the buoyant domestic market, cash held by the public was the fastest growing component (9.3%) of money supply.
Liquidity in local currency (M2) and broad liquidity (M3, including deposits in dollars) only grew by 2% in real terms.
Total financing by commercial banks in 2006 rose by 10.1% in real terms, to reach its highest level of the last five years.
More than four fifths of loans were granted to the private sector.
Of these, 73.2% were channelled into productive activities, especially construction (for which bank financing grew by 75.5% in real terms) and manufacturing (up by 35.6%).
Credit for construction and manufacturing made up 40% of the effective increase in loans to the private sector.
Above and beyond the cyclical variations in the exchange market (especially towards the end of the third quarter), the exchange rate remained stable, thereby encouraging capital inflows into the economy.
Within the free currency float system, in nominal terms the exchange rate of the Dominican peso during 2006 remained similar to levels recorded in the last two months of the previous year.
The impressive economic growth of 2006 (10.7%) resulted in a hefty 9.1% annual increase in per capita GDP.
The economic buoyancy is continuing into 2007, and growth in the first quarter was 9.1% higher than in the year-earlier period.
Unlike in 2005, buoyancy was driven by domestic demand, which in turn was based on higher spending on investment (19.4%).
Despite the increase, the investment to GDP ratio of 17.8% remained lower than the 21.6% recorded in 2000.
Consumption was up by 9.5%, and external demand for goods and services rose by 5.2%.
With the exception of free zones, practically all productive activities contributed to overall economic growth in 2006.
The value added of agricultural production turned in its best performance since 2001, with an increase of 9.9%.
By the end of 2006, the agricultural production index was 16% higher than the level seen prior to the 2003 crisis.
Unlike in 2005, all sectors of agriculture played a part in the expansion: livestock production, fishing and, above all, export crops and those destined for the domestic market.
Contributing factors to agriculture’s positive performance included the policy of incentives, financing and technical assistance for small- and medium-scale producers offered by the government (especially through the Basic Food Production Programme (PROABA)) and the Banco Agrícola.
The amount of financing granted by the Banco Agrícola in 2006 posted a real annual increase of 20.3%.
The portfolio of production loans for national councils of coffee, cocoa and the dairy industry also expanded.
The positive performance of the agricultural sector carried on in the first few months of 2007.
Overall manufacturing output increased more slowly in 2006 than in the previous year (4.5% compared with 7.9%).
In the non-maquila manufacturing sector, whose annual value added rose by 7.4%, positive performances were turned in by food processing and milling, as well as by certain branches linked to construction and public works, such as cement production.
This boom is largely thanks to domestic demand from consumption and investment.
The sector has been slowing down in the first few months of 2007.
Output from free zones declined severely (by 8.3%) in 2006, as an even larger annual slump was recorded in textile manufacturing (down 18.4% compared with a decrease of 5.4% in 2005).
In the first quarter of 2007, the value added of free zones and the textile industry plummeted by 12.2% and 17.6%, respectively.
These figures point to the negative impact that the opening of the United States market to other exporters has had on the country’s textile export industry.
The elimination of the Multifibre Arrangement has increased competition from other manufacturers (especially Asian ones) in the United States market.
As a result, the share of the Dominican Republic in free-zone textile exports to the United States dropped by 16% in In 2006, construction displayed one of the highest growth rates (22.9%, almost twice the national average).
This was the result of the central government expanding public works by increasing expenditure on that item by nearly 30% in real terms.
Most investment was linked to the construction of a metro system in Santo Domingo and road building in the rest of the country.
The construction boom was also fuelled by a considerable rise in mortgage lending on the part of the financial system.
By the end of 2006, the real value of the mortgage loan portfolio of commercial, mortgage and development banks was 74% higher than one year previously.
In the first quarter of 2007, loans from multi-purpose banks to the construction sector were up by 86.8% on the year-earlier period.
Output from basic services, which accounts for 22% of GDP, also surged (12%).
The output of the transport and storage sector and that of the energy and water sector both underwent a relatively significant expansion (of 8.3% and 7.2%, respectively).
As in previous years, however, the communications sector turned in the most dynamic performance.
With an annual growth rate of 26.1%, the communications sector was bolstered by the growing demand for telephone services, which in turn requires the constant expansion of service networks.
In 2007, communications value added continued to soar, with the sector up by 20.7% in the first quarter.
The performance of the hotels, bars and restaurants sector was less buoyant than in the previous year (5.5% in 2006 compared with 9.2% in 2005).
Although the increase in the number of foreign visitors was higher than the rise in 2005, tourism revenues posted a lower annual growth rate.
One contributing factor to this situation was the combined effect of the 5.4% increase in room capacity and a 0.9% dip in the hotel occupancy rate.
Financing of the economy climbed significantly, in keeping with the general buoyancy of productive activities.
Loans from multi-purpose banks (the most important financial subsector) were up by 15.6% on 2005.
Output rose by 11.7% in 2006 as the result not only of high levels of economic activity, but also thanks to the renewal of bank financing, which climbed significantly (12.9%) after falling by 2.2% in 2005.
Another major determining factor was the notable rise in personal consumer loans, the value of which was up by 44% in real terms.
Commerce remains driven in 2007, with value added increasing by 17.2% in real terms.
The 5% annual rate of inflation was lower than in 2005, and was at the lower limit of the target range set in the monetary programme and the agreement concluded with IMF.
The groups of products and services that had the largest effect on the overall rise in prices were food, beverages and tobacco; housing; transport; and education.
These four categories together accounted for 75.8% of the annual variation in the consumer price index (CPI).
The impressive economic growth promoted a continued improvement in general labour-market conditions.
The open unemployment rate (4.9%) reached its lowest level since 2000, and the broad unemployment rate was the lowest in four years.
Total employment grew by 4.8%, which was much more than double the growth rate of the previous year (2.1%).
The productive sectors that made the largest contribution to the overall rise in employment were agriculture (22.3% of the total increase), construction (16.8%) and other The nominal minimum wage remained at the level observed in 2005, the year that saw a nominal increase of 30%.
This figure was within the target range agreed with IMF and is in keeping with the growth rate of the economy.
The trade deficit widened by US$ 1.026 billion to reach just over 15% of GDP.
The import demand inherent in the economic expansion resulted in a currentaccount deficit of 1.1% of GDP during the first quarter Merchandise exports displayed slow growth (4.8%), due to the 5.1% decline in the value of exports from free zones (which make up 70% of total exports).
Non-maquila exports, on the other hand, swelled by 38.6%, especially in the case of ferronickel.
The 13.4% rise in imports was also driven by demand from the non-maquila sector.
Unlike in 2005 (when imports of consumer goods were high), the best performance of 2006 was turned in by the raw materials subsector, which goes hand in hand with the expansion of productive activity.
Non-maquila exports have remained buoyant in 2007, with a 50.3% increase in value recorded between January and March.
Meanwhile, exports from free zones continued their downward trend with a decline of 8.6%.
Increased domestic demand pushed up the value of non-maquila imports by 30% during the period in question, which was in contrast with a 12.8% drop in free-zone imports.
These remittances maintained the upward trend in net current transfers, which represented 12.5% more than in 2005.
Family remittances continued to expand in the first few months of 2007.
Between January and March, they accounted for 91% of current transfers and their value was 9.3% higher than in the preceding year.
The balance-of-payments capital and financial account displayed a positive balance, mainly thanks to the higher annual inflows (15.7%) of foreign direct investment (FDI).
The bulk of FDI was channelled into tourism projects and free zones.
In the first quarter of 2007, FDI inflows were 18.5% higher than in the year-earlier period.
The central bank’s net reserves stood at US$ 1.7878 billion at the close of the year.
Following its contraction in 2005, the Guyana economy achieved significant growth (4.7%), driven mainly by the construction and agriculture sectors.
Various infrastructure works, notably those undertaken in preparation for the Cricket World Cup, resulted in some level of fiscal expansion, although fiscal savings were also achieved thanks to the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI).
The authorities adopted a predominantly tight monetary policy in an effort to mop up excess liquidity in the banking system.
The increase in effective demand was reflected in a deterioration in the balance-of-payments current account which was offset by capital —in particular FDI— inflows, to yield an overall surplus of US$ 45 million.
Projections are for growth of 5% in 2007, based on an expected increase in sugar production and transport and communications services (10%).
Mining output should stabilize following a slump in recent years, while construction should return to its normal growth rate following a two-year boom.
The impetus for growth will come mainly from private activity and should help to reduce the fiscal deficit to 10% of GDP.
An overall balance-ofpayments surplus is also projected thanks to higher FDI inflows targeting the mining, telecommunications and forestry sectors and to the reduction in debt payments following the implementation of the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative.
The 2006 general elections were relatively peaceful and the aftermath was not marred by the instability of previous elections.
Thanks to a revival of private investor confidence, FDI inflows and domestic investment were buoyant, reflecting a relatively stable policy, greater security and deeper economic reforms.
Economic policy sought to strengthen fiscal accounts further and maintain price and exchange-rate stability in order to boost growth; the restructuring of commodity sectors to enhance productivity and competitiveness also contributed to this objective.
The economic recovery was also reflected in greater freedom to implement tourismrelated infrastructure projects and to ease monetary policy in order to increase credit for private-sector production activities.
In 2006, the central government fiscal deficit, expressed as a percentage of GDP, decreased by just over one percentage point to 11.5% compared with 12.6% in 2005; this was due mainly to the increase in total revenue, which was more than enough to offset the rise in expenditure.
The recovery in economic activity, supported by improved tax administration and collections by the Guyana Revenue Authority, boosted current revenue by one percentage point of GDP.
Current expenditure diminished by one percentage point of GDP following the implementation of the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative and a substantial reduction in interest payments due to the cessation of payments on the matured bonds of the Guyana Mining Enterprise Limited (GUYMINE).
Interest payments on public debt were practically halved to 2.5% of GDP.
In addition, the 5% wage increase awarded to civil servants represented a small increase in the real wage.
The government concluded a multi-year wage agreement with the teachers’ union, which augurs well for wage restraint.
Higher fuel costs and increased material and equipment costs led to a rise in central government expenditure on goods and services.
Construction works in preparation for the Cricket World Cup resulted in a 19% expansion in capital expenditure in absolute terms.
A number of crucial infrastructure investments have been made that could boost domestic investment and FDI.
These include the upgrade of the international airport, bridges and road network, completion of the four-lane highway linking Georgetown with the airport, and seadefence works.
The Skeldon sugar modernization project, which includes capacity improvements, should contribute to the sector’s competitiveness when it comes fully on stream in 2008.
External debt relief (equivalent to 1.8% of GDP) provided under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative has helped to alleviate fiscal constraints.
The write-off of US$ 254 million of external debt under this Initiative strengthened the public debt control policy, which is aimed at achieving more sustainable growth.
The external debt was reduced from 143% to 108% of GDP and debt servicing fell to US$ 22 million (8.3%).
The negotiation of debt relief from the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the country’s most important creditor, is expected to yield positive results.
Following the fiscal expansion in 2006, the government intends to tighten policy in 2007, the target being to reduce the overall deficit to 10% of GDP, from 13.4% in 2006.
Capital spending is expected to decrease owing to lower transfers to the Skeldon project of the Guyana Sugar Corporation Inc. (GUYSUCO).
Tax collections should be boosted by the introduction of the value added tax (VAT) in January 2007.
Despite some teething problems, the VAT returns for the first quarter of 2007 were quite satisfactory at 75% to 80% of the projected amount.
High liquidity in the banking system determined the main thrust of monetary policy in 2006; excess liquid assets were 67% above the reserve requirement, reflecting the banks’ preference for short-term assets, especially treasury bills.
In this environment, monetary policy was geared towards liquidity management designed to maintain price and exchange-rate stability and increase credit to the private sector in order to boost productive activity.
The overall aim was to avoid the high liquidity being channelled towards unproductive imports, which could have an adverse effect on external accounts and growth.
In line with these policies and with the strong economic upturn, credit to the private sector increased by almost 18%.
Robust growth in credit to mining and manufacturing was reflected in an improved performance in these two sectors.
Buoyed by strong demand for accommodation for Cricket World Cup spectators and for housing generally, credit to the real estate sector increased by 20% in 2006.
The public sector continued to be a net depositor in the banking system, in line with the government’s policy of fiscal consolidation.
The expansion in broad money to 15%, more than double the 2005 level, was due to a significant increase in the demand for cash and demand and saving deposits.
Both public- and private-sector deposits soared following the economic expansion, with business recovery marked by almost 20% growth in their deposits.
The build-up of liquidity in the banking sector led to a decline in average commercial interest rates.
The weighted average lending rate declined by 38 basis points to 13.1%, while the weighted average small savings rate fell by 19 basis points to 3.2%.
The movements of commercial bank interest rates reflect in part the limited response to monetary policy, as the benchmark 91-day treasury bill rate increased by 42 basis points to 4.2%, but did not lead to the expected rise in bank rates owing to the excess liquidity position.
This calls into question the effectiveness of market-based instruments of monetary policy in shallow, imperfectly competitive markets, such as Guyana.
Higher oil prices and strong demand for construction materials and capital goods led to higher demand for foreign exchange during the year, which pushed up the exchange rate by 1.1%.
The net foreign assets of the banking system grew sharply (31%), reflecting increases at both the Bank of Guyana and commercial banks.
The accumulation of foreign assets at the Bank of Guyana is attributable to debt relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative, while the commercial banks’ build-up reflects lower interest rates and limited domestic investment opportunities, leading to investments overseas.
Agriculture rebounded by 5.5% following the 13.7% contraction in output caused by the floods in 2005.
Rice output was up by 12.4%, while sugar production increased by 5.5%.
The agricultural sector was bolstered by government subsidies for transport and support under the competitiveness programme sponsored by the European Union.
In spite of an improved performance, sugar output fell short of its target owing to flooding in the early part of 2006 and low productivity in some fields stemming from inadequate management.
Forecasts for 2007 are for higher production in sugar (up 9.8%), rice, forestry and livestock.
The manufacturing sector experienced a turnaround with growth of 4% compared with a decline of 47% in 2005.
In the liquid pharmaceuticals sector, small businesses that benefited from technical and financial support expanded their installed capacity.
The value added in mining diminished by a further 22.3% in 2006 with declines in the output of bauxite, gold and diamonds.
Bauxite production fell by 12%, following a slump in prices due to China’s participation in the refractory-grade bauxite market (refractory “A”-grade super calcined bauxite (RASC)).
Gold declarations fell by 23%, reflecting the continued impact of the closure of OMAI Gold Mines in 2005 and the inability of small producers to match former levels of production.
Diamond output also contracted as some producers shifted to gold in the latter part of the year.
Growth in public-sector investment at over 90% outstripped private investment for the first time since 1990 and reflected major infrastructure upgrades and modernization.
Public construction projects included the Guyana National Stadium, highways and the low-income housing programme.
Fuelled by expectations of strong returns from the Cricket World Cup, private construction expanded sharply and included hotel and other categories of accommodation.
The tapering off of these works in 2007 will be reflected in a slowdown in construction activity (5%) during the year.
Shortages of agricultural products following the floods in the early part of the year and higher prices for inputs for producers resulted in an increase in food prices (5.1%), but lower housing costs resulting from increased supply following the construction boom of 2006, together with reduced education and transport and communications costs, helped to contain inflation.
According to projections for 2007, the increase in the money supply, coupled with high international prices, will push inflation up to 5.2%.
A 5% public-sector wage and pension rise, retroactive to 1 January 2006, was awarded in December 2006 and represented a marginal increase in real wages.
As part of the measures designed to consolidate and streamline the public sector, employment in the sector was reduced by 5.8% in 2006 compared with 1.7% in 2005.
Employment in GUYSUCO contracted by 9.8% in line with efforts to improve cost efficiency.
Substantial growth in employment in the construction sector was partly counterbalanced by the loss of 541 jobs due to the closure of the Omai bauxite mine.
To ease the impact on these workers, the government provided a monthly stipend of G$ 25,000 for two months together with allowances for retraining.
The overall balance of payments strengthened in 2006, with the surplus expanding sharply to reach US$ 45 million or 5% of GDP.
This performance reflected a marked improvement in the capital account, which more than offset the current-account deficit.
This boosted international reserves at the Bank of Guyana by US$ 26.6 million to US$ 278 million, the equivalent of three months’ worth of imports of goods and non-factor services.
Encouraged by the recovery in activity and improved security, foreign investors injected US$ 100 million of FDI into the economy (an increase of over 30%).
These inflows were concentrated in forestry activity, mining and telecommunications (especially cellular telephones and Internet access).
The capital account has also benefited from government loans, grants and external debt relief.
The structural relationship between growth and imports was again demonstrated in 2006, with the upturn in activity fuelling demand for imports; this led to a deterioration in the current account, in spite of the improved export performance.
Soaring fuel prices and the surge in imports to meet the demand generated by investment projects resulted in an import bill equivalent to 100% of GDP (up 12.9% on the 2005 level).
Household consumption was also up, supported by an increase in remittance inflows.
Sugar export receipts increased by 16% to US$ 137 million, owing to higher volumes and a 12% rise in export prices.
Rice and timber also performed well, thanks to larger volumes and buoyant prices, while gold receipts increased despite the lower export volume.
Net factor service payments rose sharply since debt service payments were up in spite of debt relief; non-factor service outflows increased owing to the high cost of freight and stronger demand for travel and transportation services.
A sharp increase in workers’ remittances led to a 55% rise in current transfers, which are crucial as income for households.
The overall balance on the goods and services accounts resulted in a widened current account deficit of US$ 181 million, the equivalent of 20.5% of GDP.
The current account deficit should narrow to 18% of GDP, following a contraction in imports for public works projects.
Tourism receipts will probably be below the expectations fuelled by the Cricket World Cup.
The capital account will continue to show a positive balance with net inflows of around US$ 235 million.
In addition, this account will benefit from further debt relief as well as from FDI inflows into mining, telecommunications and forestry.
As a result, an overall balance of payments surplus is projected in the order of US$ 41 million or In 2006, the Haitian economy again experienced positive GDP growth (2.3%) and a drop in inflation to 10.2% for the 12-month period to December 2006 (down from 14.8% in the previous year).
Steps taken to restructure public finances resulted in fiscal equilibrium without monetary financing from the central bank and the economy benefited from the inflow of current transfers to the tune of US$ 1.382 billion, or the equivalent of 29% of GDP.
With institutions returning to normal following the presidential, legislative and municipal elections in 2006, public management was conducted in a climate of greater confidence regarding the outlook for the short and medium term, which facilitated the implementation of a set of initiatives.
These included the holding of the International Conference for Haiti’s Economic and Social Development in July 2006 and the launch of new plans and programmes —such as the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper— designed to establish guidelines for sustainable development over the coming years.
However, given the numerous challenges that the country has faced and continues to face, it would be premature to assume that this fragile stability can be the basis for development.
In fiscal year 2007, GDP growth is expected to recover to around 3.5%, although slightly lower than the government’s original forecast (4%).
This difference is due, among other things, to the insecurity experienced in the final quarter of 2006 and the uncertainty regarding the fulfilment of international cooperation commitments and agreements and new debt-forgiveness initiatives.
Nevertheless, the surge in external cooperation and its effect on investment, together with the flow of remittances, will facilitate the economic recovery.
In addition, the moderation of international hydrocarbon prices (and subsequent reduction in the import bill) and the improvement in the prices of Haiti’s main exports (coffee and cocoa) are expected to boost GDP growth.
In terms of economic policy, one of the government’s priorities in 2007 will undoubtedly be to complete the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper in order to benefit as soon as possible from debt relief and other programmes.
In recent months, there has been an upsurge in the number of boat people seeking to migrate to the United States and neighbouring islands, often with tragic losses, as well as in the constant migratory flows to the Dominican Republic.
The government’s economic policy sought to move from stabilization to reactivation and the main points were summed up in the letter of intent presented by the new administration to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in November 2006.
This paved the way for the signing of a Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (in an amount of US$ 109.5 million) for the period 2007-2009, which replaces the Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance (EPCA) Programme, which had been in force since January 2005.
This facility, Haiti’s formal inclusion in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, upon reaching the decision point, and the above-mentioned Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper will be the main frames of reference for economic policy in the coming years.
Total expenditure declined by 2.3% in real terms, owing to the decline in both current expenditure (down 1.5%) and public investment (down 8.7%).
This trend was in keeping with the climate of uncertainty that prevailed over the year; the authorities’ prime concern at this time was to restructure public finances while proceeding with extreme caution.
The medium-term fiscal programme for 2007-2009 seeks, on the one hand, to raise tax collections —mainly by applying tighter controls, reducing tax evasion and combating smuggling— and, on the other, to increase capital investment and social expenditure without resorting to central bank financing.
The aim is to consolidate the favourable results of 2006 and jump-start the economy, leaving behind the procyclical policies applied recently, especially those that restrict monetary growth and credit expansion.
Preliminary figures for the period October 2006March 2007 point to a 19.5% increase in revenues, which surpasses the original target.
There is actually a surplus with respect to expenditure: total outlays fell by 2.5% in real terms and current outlays declined by 6.3%, despite the 13% rise in wages, attributable to the nominal 17% increase in civil servants’ salaries awarded in December 2006.
Subsidies and interest payments both contracted, the first by 36% and the second by 34%.
Capital investments expanded by 26% in real terms, the main projects being the construction of highways and the remodelling of the Port-au-Prince airport.
In May 2007, the Ministry of Finance and Economy requested the parliament to rectify the expenditure budget in order to bring public disbursements in line with the Fiscal year 2006 covered the period October 2005-September 2006. projected increase in fiscal receipts and grants.
These adjustments are designed to compensate for the restrictive fiscal policy as well as for the insufficient capacity for implementation, which was reflected in the fact that scarcely 18% of total expenditure budgeted for fiscal year 2007 had reportedly been used up in March.
In the remaining months, there should be a substantial increase in current and capital expenditure within the maximum deficit agreed with IMF of 1.3% of GDP (excluding grants and international cooperation programmes executed by official entities).
In accordance with the guidelines of the central bank (Banque de la République d’Haïti), in 2006 —and to some extent in the current fiscal year— monetary policy was geared towards bringing down inflation by containing the monetary base and credit.
The nominal monetary base grew by 14.8%, but the increase was just 0.5% in real terms.
Net domestic credit shrank by 9.9% in real terms, affecting loans to both the public and private sector.
The preferred instruments for liquidity control were foreign currency purchases by the central bank, which amounted to US$ 64.8 million, central bank bond issues and the legal reserve ratio.
While the monetary policy stance has carried over into 2007, some degree of flexibility has been observed recently.
Thus, the interest rate on 91-day bonds —the benchmark for interbank rates— was reduced from 17.8% in December to 14.5% in May.
Bank lending rates remained stable, however, at 13% in the case of loans in dollars, and at a much higher rate, 33.6%, for loans in gourdes.
Domestic credit still shows no sign of recovery: between February 2006 and February 2007, it contracted by 9.6% in real terms owing to a sharp fall (29.2%) in loans to the public sector and a 0.2% decline in loans to the private sector.
In February, after lengthy bankruptcy proceedings, the commercial bank Socabank was formally taken over by another local bank —Banque Nationale de Crédit— following the central bank’s intervention in the rehabilitation process.
The more ready availability of foreign exchange in the local economy, thanks to remittances and external cooperation, facilitated the build-up of net international reserves in excess of those agreed with IMF and fuelled a real appreciation of the gourde against the dollar of 9.3% in 2006 and 16.6% in fiscal year 2007.
One of the key factors in this development was the rise in domestic prices.
The reduction in external debt servicing in 2007 and the higher projections for net disbursements will reinforce this trend.
The movement in the exchange rate up to March 2007 suggests that the national currency will continue to appreciate in both real and nominal terms during the year.
Consequently, the average annual exchange rate in 2007 should be around 38 gourdes to the dollar, considerably lower than the level contemplated in the government’s agreement with IMF (42 gourdes).
In March, central bank reserves stood at US$ 215 million not including the foreign currency deposits in commercial banks.
Foreign exchange purchases by the central bank, which amounted to US$ 65 million in October 2006-March 2007, contributed to this result.
The dollarization of the Haitian economy continues, reflected in the fact that foreign currency deposits account for 43% of M3.
In order to counter the spread of this phenomenon to commercial transactions, in March, the Ministry of Commerce and Industry ruled that prices of goods and services must be denominated in local currency.
The 2.3% expansion in GDP in 2006 was reflected in a 0.7% growth in per capita GDP.
The prolonged stagnation of the economy remains cause for concern, especially in terms of the country’s poverty indicators.
During 2006, the political and electoral situation and the uncertainty that prevailed up to the middle of the year hindered any further recovery and only a few sectors performed really well.
These include transport, storage and communications (4.5%) —thanks to the growth of the cellular telephone subsector— and, to a lesser extent, commerce (3%) and financial services (2.0%).
Meanwhile, the performance of the electricity sector, which resulted in a 28% fall in power generation, was the main factor in a sharp contraction (22%) in the basic services category.
Manufactures grew by just 2.3%, as the main activities under this heading —the food industry (47% of total) and the maquila industry (21%)— increased only slightly: by 2.3% and 1%, respectively.
Agriculture expanded by 1.7%, which was insufficient to meet the needs of the rural population (58% of total) and the island’s main cities, where the problem of marginalization has been spreading.
In 2006, import volumes of the main agricultural products expanded considerably, as demonstrated by the increase in imports of rice (14.5%), pulses (56.7%) and chicken (34.4%).
This trend is due to undersupply on the national market and the appreciation of the gourde.
The new government has given priority to the agricultural sector through projects geared to expand domestic supply.
Expectations of a better performance by the construction sector in 2006 based on public works were not borne out and growth of just 2.9% was recorded.
This was due to delays in the disbursement of international funding owing to the slow competitive tendering process, local contractors’ limited performance capacity and the insufficient management capacity of public entities.
The upturn in the sector in the first quarter of 2007 (3.6%) and in public-sector capital expenditure (26% in real terms) could counter this trend.
However, only 4% of budget allocations to the sector had been executed by March.
During the remaining months, the completion of a public works project and the start-up of others, including the remodelling of the Port-au-Prince airport and road construction, were expected to boost capital investment.
Estimates of GDP by type of expenditure in 2007 point to GDP growth of around 3.5%, underpinned by a slight recovery in consumption (1.1%), investment (2.9%) and exports (1.8%).
In keeping with official monetary policy, inflation stood at 10.2% in 2006, almost five percentage points lower than in 2005.
The economic authorities forecast a continuation of this trend in 2007, with prices (September-September) expected to vary by 9%.
The 12-month inflation figure to April was 8%, reflecting the decline in international oil prices up to January 2007 and demand restraint.
While the minimum wage showed a 12% decline in purchasing power, it should be noted that in the case of civil servants, the nominal wage adjustment of 17% awarded in December 2006 meant a recovery in real wages.
The low rate of job creation continues to be one of the most urgent challenges for the Haitian economy, even during growth phases.
The prospect of a substantial improvement in employment in the short term seems dim, although public works projects and the Social Appeasement Programme contemplate boosting labour demand as a source of income generation and poverty reduction.
In 2006, the balance of payments showed a currentaccount surplus of US$ 1.6 million.
Net remittance flows (US$ 1 billion) and grants (US$ 380 million) were sufficient to offset the trade deficit, which was largely attributable to a deterioration in the terms of trade.
In 2007, a further decline in the terms of trade is expected.
The concentration by destination and origin and the limited diversification of Haiti’s foreign trade, as well as the excessive weighting of primary products are factors that make the country extremely vulnerable in the face of external shocks.
In 2006, foreign direct investment amounted to an unprecedented US$ 160 million.
It is unlikely that flows of this magnitude will be repeated in 2007, although tourism is a new and promising target sector for FDI inflows.
The external debt balance of US$ 1.484 billion in 2006 will be exceeded slightly in 2007, but significant reductions should be recorded in debt-service payments.
Haiti’s inclusion in the HIPC group in November 2006 afforded access to various restructuring and debt-forgiveness mechanisms of international finance institutions.
In December 2006, the Paris Club creditors approved the restructuring of US$ 199 million of Haiti’s debt with member countries of the group.
This included the consolidation of US$ 69.2 million, that is, the immediate write-off of US$ 7.2 million in debt and the rescheduling of US$ 62 million.
In both cases, the measures are accompanied by a set of conditions, in particular the submission of a Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper, the fulfilment of the criteria agreed with IMF under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility for 2007-2009 and compliance with certain restrictions on new debt.
Jamaica’s economy expanded by 2.5% in 2006 which, although a modest performance, was the best for 11 years.
The growth was driven by good macroeconomic conditions, including a drop in the inflation rate to 5.8% (the first single-digit record since 2002), falling interest rates and a rise in net international reserves.
The economic expansion reflected the recovery in agriculture (15%) and a strong performance from tourism-related services, such as transport and communications (4.6%) and commerce, restaurants and hotels (3.9%).
In 2006 economic policy was guided by the mediumterm macroeconomic framework and the second memorandum of understanding (MOU II) between the central government and the Jamaica Confederation of Trade Unions.1 Policymaking was directed at creating an enabling macroeconomic environment by means of inflation targeting, interest rate reduction and containment of public spending.
The monetary authority lowered the 30- and 180-day benchmark interest rates and inflation dropped to half its previous rate, more than meeting the target of between 9% and 10%.
Monetary policy was loosened with the lifting of the secondary reserve requirement which had been applicable to commercial banks since 2002, and lending to the private sector rose.
The deficit was offset by foreign direct investment, however, leading to an overall surplus and an increase in net international reserves.
In 2007, economic growth is forecast to come in at between 3% and 3.3% of GDP, reflecting changes in most of the sectors of production and a balanced public budget for fiscal year 2007-2008.
The fiscal balance should help to lower interest rates and boost lending to the private sector.
The fiscal target is based on the premise of maintenance of the terms of MOU II and the government’s ability to contain spending.
The monetary authority expects inflation to remain within single digits and economic expansion will be driven by growth in domestic investment in tourismrelated activities and infrastructure development. of GDP.
The authorities also aimed to maintain the debtto-GDP ratio at 118.5% and achieve a primary surplus of between 10% and 11%.
The fiscal year runs from 1 April to 31 March of the following year.
Includes of payments. l Average rates. m Includes grants. n Includes statistical discrepancy. o The monetary figures are end-of-thehidden unemployment.
Nationwide total. p Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. year stocks. deviated from the targets for growth, the fiscal gap and debt-to-GDP ratio, the authorities adopted a looser policy stance in 2006.
This deficit was larger than the budgeted figure of 4.2% of GDP, reflecting lower revenues and higherthan-budgeted expenditure.
Expenditure grew by 3.6 GDP points to reach levels not seen since 2003, cancelling out the spending containment achieved in 2005.
Revenues and grants, though higher than the year before by 1.3% of GDP, did not suffice to accommodate expenditure growth.
Payments of interest and wages were the main items driving this result.
The deficit was financed by means of local-market borrowing, which translated into a more voluminous issue of debt instruments than planned.
Jamaica’s public debt stock increased to US$ 925.8 billion in the first nine months of the fiscal year.
This represented 133.2 % of GDP and an increase of 9.3% and reflected increases in both external and domestic debt.
Over this period domestic debt was equivalent to 77.2% of GDP and external debt, 56%.
The huge debt burden impacts greatly on the amount of resources available for non-debt expenditure.
The increased domestic debt was the result of a bond offer with a variable rate of interest, which raised the variable rate component of the total debt in comparison with the previous year.
In addition, the maturity structure of the debt was lengthened, thus reducing refinancing risks.
On the external side, the increased debt was the result of a rise in government-guaranteed debt, owing to a US$ 200million issue of Eurobonds.
Future debt management strategy will focus on diversifying the portfolio, minimizing interest-rate risk, lengthening and smoothing the maturity profile of the debt and building an efficient market for government securities.
The monetary authority pursued a looser policy regime in 2006 as the Bank of Jamaica eased monetary policy on several occasions.
The foreign-exchange market was supported by central bank interventions and remained relatively stable.
At the end of 2006, the monetary base —the Bank of Jamaica’s primary operating target— was up by one GDP percentage point, which was entirely due to an increase in net international reserves.
Net domestic credit contracted, as a result of a 5.5% decrease in lending to the public sector, while lending to the private sector was up by 2.8%.
The accumulation of external reserves was attributable to the decline in oil prices in the last quarter of the year, which reduced the impact of fuel imports on the demand for United States dollars.
There were also significant foreign exchange inflows from tourism, remittances and foreign direct investment.
The tight monetary policy stance was eased in the second quarter of the year and, as a consequence, interest rates tended to move downwards.
In addition, the financial sector registered growth of 2.2%, stemming partly from the lifting in May of the secondary reserve requirement imposed since 2002 by the Bank of Jamaica.
There was also increased mortgage activity as the National Housing Trust increased the upper limit on loans to contributors.
The goals of the monetary authority continued to be a stable foreign exchange market and the accumulation of international reserves.
This asset growth reflected the expansion of both external and local assets.
Bonds and other long term securities accounted for 70% of the increase in foreign assets.
All the sectors classified under services grew, but agriculture, forestry, fishing and mining were the only branches of goods-producing activity to show an expansion.
Banana production tripled and coffee production was up by 50%; nevertheless, neither regained the level seen four years earlier.
Fishing, which expanded by 50%, was the only segment to strongly outperform its historical trends.
One third of Jamaica’s economic growth in 2006 corresponded to the upturn in agriculture, which contributed 5.9% of GDP.
A significant decline was registered in the production of cigarettes,2 cement and paint.
The exception was the manufacture of petroleum products, with gasoline and diesel more than doubling the previous year’s output.
Installed capacity expanded in the bauxite and alumina segment, but labour disputes and weather conditions constrained growth in 2006.
The construction sector posted a decline of 2.2% in activity in 2006, after a 7.0% surge had made it one of the engines of growth in 2005.
The sector’s greatest difficulty during the year was the shortage of cement, due to quality control problems experienced by the country’s only cement manufacturer.
This shortage affected employment as a number of construction sites were forced to a standstill.
Steps were taken to make up for the cement shortfall by importing, but this took time and the matter was not resolved until the second semester.
Hotels, restaurants and clubs (12.3%) was one of the two fastest-growing branches of activity, driven by increased tourist arrivals (15.3%).
The numbers of air and cruise-ship passengers increased over the period, as did average expenditure per visitor.
The transport and communications segment also expanded (4.6%), with the main contributor being increased cargo movement due to rising imports of petroleum, cement and steel and increased exports of bauxite and sugar.
The factors holding down price increases were the expanding supply of agricultural commodities, which lowered the price of some food items, and, towards the end of the year, a slower rate of increase in international petroleum prices.
The consumer price index (CPI) rose in all three regions —Kingston Metropolitan Area, other towns and rural areas— but by less than it had done in 2005.
For example, the CPI for Kingston rose by 5.6%, while for other towns and rural areas the rates were No cigarettes were manufactured in 2006. 7.0% and 5.2%, respectively.
The corresponding figures A breakdown of the overall CPI shows that the largest increases occurred in the categories of fuels (8.1%), housing (9.0%) and food and beverages (5.8%).
A survey conducted by the Jamaica Employers’ Federation on pay and benefits found that, on average, wages rose by 7.9% in 2005 and 9.2% in 2006, with an increase of 10% in the modal wage.
The highest mean salary was paid in the utilities sector and the lowest in education.
Wage increases in the public sector are governed by MOU II, which aims to moderate excessive wage increases.
The national minimum wage, which is now reviewed annually, was increased by 16.7% to J$ 2,800.00 per week or J$70 per hour.
The labour force expanded by 3.5%, with males representing the larger percentage (57.6%).
In 2006 the balance of payments yielded an overall surplus for the third year running, matching the 2005 amount of US$ 230 million.
The current account deficit widened by US$ 87 million to US$ 1.097 billion, or the equivalent of 10.3% of GDP.
The deterioration was attributable chiefly to the larger deficit on the merchandise trade account, owing to higher prices for imported goods such as oil.
The goods trade deficit rose by US$ 363.5 million as a result of a 19.2% surge in import spending, which a robust 27.2% rise in export earnings was not enough to offset.
The current account deficit was by far the largest for the last five years.
Net outflows from the income account were US$ 4.8 million over the 2005 figure, owing to voluminous outflows of investment earnings.
The deficits were only partially offset by higher surpluses on the current transfers account, the increase in tourist services and alumina exports.
The balance on the services account expanded by US$ 132 million, driven largely by earnings from travel, which is the largest item on that account.
Travel receipts increased from US$ 1.3 billion in 2005 to US$ 1.6 billion in 2006, thanks to both increased numbers of tourists and higher expenditure per visitor.
Net current transfers reflected a large and growing surplus, thanks to a 9.4% increase in remittances from Jamaicans living abroad, which amounted to US$ 1.6 billion.
The current account deficit was easily offset by the surplus on the capital and financial account.
The country’s net international reserves expanded to US$ 2.318 billion at the end of 2006.
Gross reserves at the end of December were equivalent to four months of imports of goods and non-factor services.
The economy of Suriname has been improving steadily, with sustained growth since 2000.
GDP was up 5.8% in 2006 and inflation fell to 4.7%, showing that the abolition of the petrol subsidy in September 2005did not have a lasting impact on inflation.
This positive situation resulted from prudent monetary and fiscal policies together with favourable commodity prices, particularly for crude oil.
The debt to output ratio fell, and part of the overdue debt was restructured.
As a result, Standard & Poor upgraded the country’s sovereign debt for the first time, with ratings of B+ and B for bonds in local and foreign currencies, respectively, with a positive outlook.
Mining, which grew by over 60% over the previous three years and by 18% in 2006, remained the main engine of economic expansion.
The country’s President stated that the government would implement measures, such as the sustainable reallocation of State resources, to help the whole economy advance towards a more satisfactory performance.
Reforming the political system is a central plank in the government’s strategy, but the necessary political support is very difficult to muster with an eight-party coalition in power.
Rising commodity prices boosted tax receipts, but there are still structural problems in many agricultural subsectors.
Among other things, the crucial rice sector was hit by unexpected rainfall in early 2007, highlighting once again the poor state of productive infrastructure in the Nickerie area.
The authorities continued to apply restrictive monetary policies to strengthen the national currency and prevent further dollarization of the economy.
Changes were made to reserve requirements in order to stimulate housing construction.
The balance of payments showed an overall surplus thanks to the growing positive balance on the current account, on the back of climbing commodity exports and moderation in imports.
The economic boom is expected to continue in 2007 with a growth rate of 5.3%, based on the strong expansion of mining and construction.
Fiscal revenue remained mostly at the mercy of fluctuating world commodity prices.
Oil Company of Suriname (Staatsolie) contributed over US$ 100 million to the treasury, almost 17% of total fiscal revenue and 25% more than the previous year’s amount.
The transfer to the government of profits earned by the central bank in past financial years also contributed to the improvement in non-tax revenues.
There were also increases in direct and indirect tax revenue, the latter owing to tax hikes on tobacco and cigarettes.
The establishment of a mineral resource stabilization fund remained a subject of debate in 2006.
The prolonged and wide fluctuations of fiscal revenue from taxes on mining and ore-processing companies has been a matter of great concern, since it may lead to an imbalance between revenue and expenditure and destabilize public spending.
In early 2007, fiscal resources from petroleum were allocated to minor investments in the education sector.
A stabilization fund could ensure that such transfers were made in a more transparent and structured manner.
It would also help to moderate the pressure that public expenditure exerts on effective demand.
Five pilot districts have been identified and will be able to collect a proportion of the corresponding taxes.
The containment of all areas of public spending boosted the current surplus from 3.0% to 5.6% of GDP.
In late 2005, the prices of all petroleum products on the domestic market were liberalized through the abolition of a subsidy.
The number of central government employees rose by 2.9% in 2006; the implementation of the public sector reform programme has been difficult and many of the measures provided for remain pending.
The government also managed to reduce domestic public debt, staying within the legal ceiling of 15% of GDP.
In mid2006, 70% of that debt was short-term and the main creditors were the central bank (49%), commercial banks (27%) and other private agents.
Modifications to the ceilings for both external and internal public debt are being considered.
Monetary policies remained prudent, with particular attention to the management of liquidity, controlling money creation by regulating domestic credit.
The main objective was to maintain a stable exchange rate and low inflation, but no target was stated.
In view of the favourable macroeconomic trends, the legal reserve requirement for local-currency deposits was cut from 30% in 2005 to 27% in 2006.
Since 9% of the reserve (8% in 2005) can be used for financing long-term mortgage loans for social housing, the real reserve requirement was equivalent to 18%.
The growth of the money supply (M2) was slower than in the previous year.
This increase appears to be sustainable because it was mostly due to net capital inflows resulting from higher commodity exports.
Domestic credit to the public sector declined, owing to the strengthening of fiscal accounts.
The country’s economy remains highly dollarized, with foreign-currency credit outstripping credit in local currency.
Foreign-currency deposits by residents rose by 23.9% from Lending in foreign currency also increased much more rose much faster than local-currency lending in the same year (20.3%).
The increased demand for foreign-exchange loans was mostly motivated by the difference in interest rates for loans in Suriname dollars on the one hand and those for loans in United States dollars and euros on the other, given the stability of the exchange rate.
Responding to growing confidence in the country’s monetary orientation, inflation forecasts fell and commercial banks cut interest rates in local currency.
The unequal rates of change show that commercial banks have reduced the spread, which suggests that the system is seeing a decline in the costs and risks of financial intermediation.
The nominal exchange rate has remained unchanged over the past three years.
Nonetheless, pressure from rising import prices and growing foreign-exchange inflows suggest a real exchange rate appreciation which could be harmful for non-mineral exports.
In the first half of 2006, only 18% of the spending budgeted in the annual development plan had been executed. (c) Other policies The government is planning a broad programme of structural policies to improve the competitiveness of productive sectors.
In 2006, it sought to privatize a number of flagging public-sector companies —in sectors such as rice, banana and aviation— seeking to maximize the benefits for the country.
Negotiations for the sale of the state timber corporation Bruynzeel Suriname Houtmaatschappij (BSH) were broken off because the government saw the planned transaction as unprofitable.
A broad sectoral programme has been set up in the area of agriculture to improve competitiveness and environmental sustainability, provide reasonable incomes for agricultural workers and ensure food security for the country.
As for improvements to productive infrastructure, work has begun to equip the ports of Nieuwe Haven, in Paramaribo, and Nickerie, in the rice-producing region, for container traffic.
Also, the Ministry of Trade and Industry has acquired land for the creation of export processing zones and industrial estates.
GDP growth in 2006 stood at 5.8%, mainly boosted by the mining, transport and communications and construction sectors, which grew by 17.8%, 10.8% and 10.3%, respectively.
Technical problems prevented any increase in alumina output and production actually fell by 1.5%, but petroleum output expanded by 11.6% thanks to the start of operations at the new Calcutta oilfield, and gold output was up by 4.6% despite labour problems at the mine in early 2006.
There was no growth in agricultural output, owing to infrastructure problems combined with weather phenomena.
The estimated 8% growth of rice production in the first half of the year could not make up for the lost ground of earlier years.
Rising prices for fuels and fertilizers, among other essential inputs, made it impossible for the sector to overcome the debts inherited from years of mismanagement.
Rice production was also hurt by the incidence of the pyricularia grisea fungus and the low water level in the Nanni swamp, whose water is used for irrigation.
The European Union technical assistance programme which began in March 2006, together with a donation of 3 million euros, will give a new lease of life to the rice subsector, which is vital for the employment and nutrition of the population.
Owing to fluctuations in world prices, the incidence of pests, weather phenomena and the low productivity of the state-owned corporation, banana production was very unstable.
A 7% fall in the third quarter was followed by a 62% rise in the fourth quarter as a result of changes in European Union import quota policies.
The privatization of the state corporation should enable it to return to a level of competitiveness sufficient to compete in the world market.
Tourism, particularly ecotourism, was hurt by the floods in the country’s interior in May 2006.
The fact that cruise ships have begun calling at Paramaribo is encouraging for the tourism sector.
Despite steep rises in the rates of a number of indirect taxes such as the levy on tobacco, the monetary policy designed to contain the growth of aggregate demand succeeded in holding back price rises, which were significantly lower than in 2005.
Inflation fell from 15.8% The government reached an agreement with the public employees’ union on a 10% wage increase in two 5% steps, the first in late 2006 and the second in early 2007.
Real wages had been declining since 2003, but that wage deal and the bonus to compensate the rise in petrol prices in 2005 had a positive effect on average wages, whose purchasing power rose by 2.7% en 2006.
Unemployment is estimated to have risen by 12.1% despite the expansion of economic activity.
The balance of payments recorded an overall surplus with an increase in net international reserves for the third consecutive year; the reserves were equivalent to just over two months’ imports.
The balance shows a considerable current-account improvement, with a surplus of US$ 114.6 million owing to a significant fall in goods imports and higher remittances.
The cut in imports appears to be entirely due to fluctuations in foreign investment projects.
The financial account showed a heavy deficit of US$ 263 million, owing to the outflow of US$ 163 million under the heading of direct investments abroad.
These flows relate mostly to capital movements from mining companies’ subsidiaries in Suriname to their parent companies.
Suriname was able to completely pay off or restructure its entire bilateral debts with Germany, Italy and Japan, which was an improvement for its external debt situation.
There remain, however, a number of overdue debts, on which negotiations are being held.
The main driving force continues to be the energy sector, which includes oil, natural gas and related products.
Growth in the energy sector followed the positive trend of recent years and, thanks to its contribution to tax receipts, financed a considerable increase in public spending.
This in turn gave rise to rapid growth in the construction and manufacturing sectors.
Economic policy was characterized by fiscal expansion and monetary policy efforts to curb the rise in aggregate demand.
In consequence, a fiscal surplus was recorded for the fourth year running (6.5% of GDP).
Higher receipts were mainly due to the continued increase in income from the energy sector, but also to the general surge in economic activity related to the tax reforms of fiscal year 2005/2006, which involved cuts in income tax.
Given the increase in fiscal expenditure, monetary policy focused on controlling excess liquidity.
Commercial banks were asked to deposit 1.5 billion Trinidad and Tobago dollars (TT$) in an interest-bearing account at the central bank.
On three occasions, sevenand eight-year bonds were issued with interest rates of 7.8% and 8%.
Take-up was higher than expected, and the central bank captured and sterilized almost TT$ 2.4 billion (nearly US$ 400 million).
These measures changed the upward trend of the consumer price index, which had exceeded 10% in the 12-month period from October 2005 to October 2006.
The main short-term risk is overheating, as shown by its inflation and employment figures.
In the medium and long terms, there is a risk that the upturn in public investment may result in lower investment quality and that the economy’s heavy dependence on the energy sector might make it more vulnerable to external shocks.
GDP growth in 2007 is projected to stand at 8% as a result of the continued increase in gas and oil production.
Receipts continued to rise (to 33.6% of GDP), as did expenditures, which rose by 1.2 percentage points The rise in expenditure has been made possible by the persistent increase in economic activity and the greater revenues from the oil and gas sectors, which are benefiting from higher international prices and are taxed according to a special regime.
Nationwide total. m Weighted Nationwide total. n Refers to tax revenue from the non-petroleum sector. o The monetary figures are annual averages. p Refers to net credit average. extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. price on the United States market was 29% lower than the average of the previous year.
The volume of gas production, which is not price elastic in the short term, climbed considerably.
Fiscal expansion is largely associated with the activities of about 100 State-owned enterprises, such as the Urban Development Corporation of Trinidad and Tobago Ltd. (UDeCOTT),1 which carries out the country’s main urban construction works.
To improve the sustainability of the growth model, the government created the Heritage and Stabilization Fund based on the interim Revenue Stabilization Fund.
The new fund will receive 60% of non-recurring receipts when the prices of energy products exceed levels provided for in the budget.
When receipts are 10% lower than budgeted, on the other hand, the government may withdraw up to 60% of the difference from the fund, up to a certain ceiling.
In 2006, the government deposited US$ 500 million (3% of GDP) in the fund, thereby bringing the balance to around US$ 1.5 billion.
The authorities still have to finalize the regulatory framework governing the use of the fund, as well as appointing the team responsible for its operation.
Monetary policy was mainly focused on containing the excess liquidity generated by public investment in order to rein in rising prices.
The means used to achieve this in the first half of 2006 included raising the discount rate for repo operations by 1.75 percentage points to 8% in September, in line with the United States Federal Reserve rate.
This increase did not have the desired effect on the level of liquidity or on consumer prices, however.
More direct instruments were then employed, including open-market operations such as the sale of foreign exchange and the issue of treasury bonds to sterilize funds.
The legal reserve requirement was also raised, and commercial banks were asked to deposit funds in an interest-bearing account at the central bank.
The magnitude of these operations was stepped up over the course of the year.
The most effective means of absorbing liquidity was the central bank’s sale of foreign exchange on the market.
In 2006, the central bank sold almost US$ 1.5 billion, more than double the amount sold in the year-earlier period.
The absorption of liquidity had the effect of pushing up interest rates.
Rates on mortgage loans from commercial banks rose by between 25 and 125 basis points.
The lending rate posted faster growth than the borrowing rate, which increased the level of intermediation from 7 points to 7.8 points; this suggests greater perceived risk or higher operational costs.
Growth in consumer loans ground to a halt, while loans to production sectors rose sharply.
This development is a positive one in terms of sustaining growth in the medium term.
The increase in monetary aggregates also slowed during the course of the year as a result of monetary policy.
Annual growth in broad money (M2) fell from Trinidad and Tobago turned in an impressive economic performance during 2006.
GDP expanded by 12%, which is the second-highest figure in over a decade of elevated growth rates.
The driving force behind this growth was Government-owned private limited-liability company. the energy sector, which expanded by 20.6% in real terms during 2006, while non-energy sectors chalked up increases of 6.5%.
This was also the first full year of operations for module 4 of Atlantic LNG Company’s liquid natural gas plant in Point Fortin.
Production of natural gas reached a record 4.1 billion cubic feet per day in August 2006.
A major project of British Petroleum of Trinidad and Tobago (BPTT), Ibis Deep, failed, and the sector’s main enterprises showed no interest in its exploration rights during the two rounds of tenders.
Construction and manufacturing (not including refinery activities, which were up by 37.4%) continue to outperform the rest of the economy, with growth rates of 14.5% and 11.8%, respectively, in 2006.
Construction was boosted by projects involving public buildings, the rehabilitation of infrastructure and industrial zones being developed by the government.
The considerable expansion is attributable to the steps taken to bolster processing activities in the petroleum chain as part of the government policy to refrain from exporting unprocessed raw materials.
Petrochemical activity was considerably buoyant (15.9% in 2006), while that sector’s exports were up by 8.6%.
The growth rates for fertilizer and methanol production were equal to or above those from the year-earlier period.
By the third quarter of 2006, steel production volumes were already equal to the figures for the whole of 2005, and almost the same was true of cement production.
Given that domestic sales for these products did not rise, it can be assumed that the additional production was in response to demand from other Caribbean countries.
Agriculture continued to turn in a mediocre performance and now contributes less than 1% of GDP.
Although there was a slight upturn in the production of raw sugar (mainly used in rum production), refined sugar production plummeted.
Cocoa production was half that of the previous year’s volumes, and coffee production was virtually nil.
The agricultural sector has been hard hit by the structural transformation of the economy, and it will have to innovate and reinvent itself to ensure its survival.
The financial sector’s contribution to GDP is 14%, with higher growth projected following the government’s decision to develop part of the new Waterfront complex as an international financial centre governed by national legislation (“on-shore”), which would make it one of the main centres of its kind in the Caribbean.
The consumer price index (CPI) climbed by more than 10% in the 12 months leading up to October.
It was the first time in 12 years that double-digit inflation had been recorded.
Determining factors of these price increases include import costs and agricultural bottlenecks, combined with the major injection of liquidity associated with expanded public spending.
The most affected were food prices, which rose by 26%, as well as other retail prices.
Government initiatives to improve market efficiency included publishing prices and organizing country fairs on Sundays.
Wage agreements concluded during 2006 resulted in larger increases than in the recent past.
Basic wages rose Unemployment decreased considerably in 2006 following the creation of 12,000 new jobs throughout the year.
The unemployment rate dropped to a minimum of 5% in the final quarter of 2006.
This reduction has occurred in a context of rising domestic demand, resulting from an increase in banking credit and fiscal expenditure.
Inflation and employment figures support the idea that the country’s economy is operating beyond its capacity.
The balance of payments posted a surplus for the fourteenth year running: the surplus was US$ 1.249 billion (7% of GDP) in 2006, compared with US$ 1.893 million Positive external accounts are due to higher energy prices and an expansion of installed capacity.
International prices for crude oil were 16.8% higher than in the previous year, while production volumes were up by 15.2%.
Energy exports (which include oil, natural gas and petrochemical products) grew by 28% in 2006, thereby increasing the contribution of energy exports to total exports from 89% Booming economic activity, abundant liquidity and the government’s development of infrastructure works pushed up imports by 19.5% in comparison with the previous year.
Other components of the current account include the income balance, which posted a hefty deficit due to the repatriation of capital income by foreign energy companies, while the services balance and the balance of transfers continued to register small surpluses.
The current account surplus of almost US$ 3.318 billion (nearly 17% of GDP, which makes it the region’s largest) was invested in foreign assets and recorded as outflows from the capital account.
Commercial banks invested heavily in international assets, the level of which increased eightfold to stand at US$ 845 million.
The non-financial private sector also continued its strategy of diversifying its portfolio, thereby protecting itself from the risks of investing in assets abroad.
In the absence of any significant external-debt servicing commitments, the positive balance of payments pushed up the level of net international reserves to around US$ 6.5 billion, which is 33% higher than the previous year and represents 10 months of imports.
For 2007, the authorities predict a solid current account, although with a downward trend.
International prices for oil, methanol and ammonia are expected to dip slightly, with no guarantee that this will be offset by an increase in production volumes.
The authorities’ fiscal stance will remain expansionary in 2007, which is an election year, while the real appreciation of the exchange rate is expected to continue.
As a result, greater increases are projected for imports, and the current account surplus is expected to shrink.
Member countries of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union1 In 2006, the economies of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union (ECCU) recorded growth for the fifth consecutive year, following a contraction in activity in 2001, when tourism and FDI were dampened by fallout from the events of 11 September.
The 7.1% expansion exceeded the 2005 rate of 5.8% and was the highest for the five-year period.
This reflected the dynamism exhibited by the construction industry as the countries undertook to construct or modernize stadiums, road networks and other infrastructure, while the private sector expanded the capacity of hotels and other accommodation facilities in preparation for the Cricket World Cup.
The demand pressure associated with accelerated growth did not affect price levels, however, as inflation eased from 4.6% in 2005 to 1.4% in 2006.2 One of the major challenges for the ECCU economies in recent years —and 2006 was no exception— has been debt-fuelled fiscal expansion.
The aggregate central government deficit almost doubled, moving from 2.2% to 4.2% of GDP, following the marked increase in capital expenditure.
Monetary conditions tightened somewhat in 2006, despite the neutral monetary stance of the authorities, constrained as they are by the currency board arrangement.
Liquidity in the banking system contracted, as vibrant demand for credit outpaced growth in deposit liabilities.
The internal imbalance was partially offset by a stronger external position, as the overall balance of payments moved from a deficit equivalent to 0.4% of GDP to a surplus of 2.3% of GDP in 2006.
This improvement was due to FDI inflows for tourism-related and other construction projects.
Some of the growth impetus of the year 2006 has carried over into 2007, although growth is expected to slow to 5.5%.
Construction activity will lose momentum with the completion of some large projects, including the construction of stadiums, for the Cricket World Cup, but private-sector activity geared to the construction of hotels, villas and commercial properties will remain dynamic.
Inflation of between 2% and 3% is projected for 2007, in line with the movements in oil prices and, above all, with the removal of fuel subsidies in some member countries, where the price adjustments are now being passed on directly to the consumer.
New tax measures, which should lead to higher collections, will result in an improved fiscal outturn.
As the statistical information refers to the member countries of the Union and not of OECS –in other words, it does not include the British Virgin Islands– from this year onward, the chapter will be entitled “Member Countries of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union”.
The inflation figure may be linked to the use of an outdated basket of products, which fails to accurately track recent price movements.
The balance-of-payments current-account deficit is expected to remain stable as the increase in imports will be offset by higher visitor arrivals.
In 2006, the ECCU countries continued to grapple with fiscal consolidation and external debt management in an effort to boost macroeconomic resilience to economic shocks, while pushing ahead with structural reforms designed to create a more internationally competitive economy.
This is all the more crucial as traditional export crops, such as sugar and bananas, have been on the wane.
All economies recognize the need to bring wage settlements in line with inflation and public-sector productivity.
At its fifty-sixth meeting, the Monetary Council of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank agreed on a system of benchmarks aimed at improving coordination of fiscal and monetary policies.
The Council noted the fiscal targets of member countries and approved the development of quarterly indicators to track achievement of these targets.
To enhance transparency, it recommended that countries publish targets for primary balances and debt/GDP ratios.
Fiscal policy of the member countries of the Currency Union was expansionary in 2006 with the overall deficit doubling from US$ 217 million or 2.2% of GDP to US$ 449 million or 4.2% of GDP.
Although there was a marked improvement in the current surplus, this was offset by a sharp rise in capital spending.
Revenue jumped 15% to reach 28% of GDP, reflecting robust growth in both tax and non-tax receipts.
Current spending grew three times as fast as in 2005, and represented 26.2% of GDP.
Spending on transfers and subsidies was higher owing to greater transfers to statutory bodies.
Outlays on goods and services increased owing to the rise in international fuel prices and purchase of construction materials.
Interest payments were up by 13.4%, since most member countries had incurred higher debts.
Capital expenditure increased by 33% to reach the equivalent of 9.7% of GDP, the highest level in the past 10 years.
All the items were high-cost projects undertaken in preparation for the Cricket World Cup: stadiums, roads, security, basic services and the upgrade of airport infrastructure.
However, there is some doubt as to whether these islands have reaped direct economic benefits from hosting the matches.
Initial indications are that the tournament was somewhat lacklustre in terms of the number of visitors and spending and may even have scared away other tourists.
Countries will, therefore, have to focus on the legacy component by hosting other events in the stadiums and by stepping up tourism marketing overseas in order to reap future benefits from their investments.
The sustainability of debt in the ECCU countries is an important area of concern because of high debt/GDP ratios, limited diversification and lack of room for fiscal manoeuvre.
These factors present a challenge to growth in the event of economic shocks, such as natural disasters.
Central government debt increased by 5.9 percentage points to represent 83.6% of GDP.
In Antigua and Barbuda, the robust economic growth (11.5%) gave the government more leeway for applying reforms aimed at reducing the macroeconomic disequilibria caused by past fiscal excesses.
The reintroduction of personal income tax in 2005 resulted in high revenues.
The reform is part of a wider agenda for strengthening the fiscal position; reducing public debt; allocating resources to the development of physical infrastructure and social capital; and facilitating private-sector development.
Conscious of the need to reconcile economic reform, growth and poverty reduction, the Government of Dominica implemented an adjustment programme supported by the IMF poverty reduction and growth facility (PRGF).
Macroeconomic stabilization contributed to positive growth rates in the past three years, the highest being 4.6% in 2006.
The authorities accepted the Monetary Council’s target for medium-term debt (60% of GDP) and also that of achieving a current account surplus to offset in part capital spending.
In Grenada, economic policy was geared to implementing reforms and adjustments for consolidating growth.
The government continued to build up the capital stock, which had been badly eroded as a result of hurricane Ivan in 2004.
Tax administration has been strengthened with the establishment of the Recoveries and Collections Unit in the Ministry of Finance, whose role is to improve collections from delinquent tax payers.
In addition, the auditing systems have been enhanced with the recruitment of additional accountants.
The government also plans to reintroduce VAT 3 in October 2007, to replace the general consumption tax, the airline ticket tax and the motor vehicle purchase tax.
The idea is to make the VAT broad-based so as to tax more people at a lower rate, thereby increasing compliance and government revenues.
Policy in Saint Kitts and Nevis was geared towards fiscal consolidation and debt management.
The fiscal overhaul is focused on tax reform, improved expenditure management and strengthened tax administration.
In Saint Lucia, fiscal consolidation and debt management remain a major challenge for the authorities.
In 2006, above normal capital expenditure related to the Cricket World Cup led to a deterioration in public finances, with the overall deficit mounting to 6.6% of GDP.
The Government of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines continued its programme of infrastructure development and public-sector reform to provide a pivot for improved private-sector development.
Efforts are being made to revamp the public sector by strengthening human resource management and streamlining public administration through a reclassification exercise, designed to guarantee equal pay for equal work and to develop job classifications that reflect the duties to be carried out.
Constrained by the inability to engage in active monetary policy in the context of the currency board with an open capital account, the ECCU authorities have long adopted a largely neutral monetary stance.
However, with average reserves of over 90% of monetary liabilities for a Growth picked up in 2006 (7.1% compared with 5.8% in 2005), driven by construction activity, tourism and agriculture.
All the countries recorded higher growth rates than in 2005, except Saint Lucia and Grenada.
The construction boom continued (20.4% in 2005 and number of years (far exceeding the 60% requirement), it seems that ECCU countries have opted for exchange-rate stability at the expense of policy flexibility, especially as regards short-term countercyclical monetary policy.
Monetary developments in 2006 were influenced by the economic upturn and the private-sector credit boom that has continued from previous years.
As a result, growth was driven by strong private-sector activity, including the acquisition of property and consumer durables, construction and tourism as well as manufacturing and mining.
Privatesector credit expanded in all countries at rates ranging from 11.2% in Dominica to 24.5% in Saint Lucia.
Broad money (M2) grew by 9% and foreign currency deposits by 25.1%, reflecting FDI inflows channelled towards tourism capacity expansion.
With the strong demand for credit and slower growth in the money supply, liquidity in the banking system declined in 2006 relative to 2005.
Consequently, the weighted average interest rate on deposits increased by 0.1 percentage point to 3.3%.
However, the weighted average interest rate on loans and advances diminished by 0.3 percentage point to 9.9% as increased competition forced banks and non-banks to lower rates to retain customers.
Moreover, with strong FDI inflows, the net foreign assets of the banking system increased by almost 11%, compared with growth of 4% in the previous year.
The Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM) is now an important vehicle for raising government finance.
In 2006, gross funds raised by governments on the market increased by 80%, reflecting participation by the Government of Antigua and Barbuda in the bond markets.
The maturity of instruments has increased with the issue of more long-term instruments that should help governments to better manage their debt obligations. 15.5% in 2006), especially in Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Lucia (35% and 25%, respectively).
Private construction centred on expanded hotel room capacity in these two countries in preparation for their hosting of games for the Cricket World Cup.
The expansion was largely funded by FDI for international hotel chains and by commercial banks for some local investment projects.
Grenada was one of the first English-speaking Caribbean countries to introduce VAT in the 1980s, but this initiative failed for a number of reasons, including poor tax-payer education, the regressive nature of the tax in relation to incomes, and too hasty implementation, which led to low compliance and collections.
Commercial buildings and residential properties were also constructed; the latter benefited from tax incentives for building and expanding residential properties as part of the Home Stay accommodation programme for the Cricket World Cup, designed to spread the benefits of the tournament.
Tourism activity recovered with growth of 6.1% in 2006 compared with 0.2% in 2005, thanks to an increase in stay-over visitors, especially persons staying in paid accommodation.
A fall-off in arrivals from Europe was offset by higher arrivals from the United States and the Caribbean.
Grenada registered the largest increase (20.4%), linked to the reopening of a number of hotels that had been damaged during hurricane Ivan.
Agriculture posted a recovery, with growth of 10.8%, following a similar decline in 2005.
Improved performance was built on the turnaround in banana production in Saint Lucia and Dominica, which was up by 6.4%, thanks to the control of the leaf spot infestation, favourable weather conditions and strong demand for Fair Trade bananas, which fetch high prices on the European market.
Production of cocoa and nutmeg also rose thanks to the recovery following hurricane damage to trees in Grenada.
Meanwhile, in Saint Kitts and Nevis, sugar-cane harvests ceased with the closure of the industry in 2005.
Value added in the fledgling manufacturing sector increased by 3.4% in 2006, half the rate for the previous year.
Production of soap, concrete blocks, processed food, electronic components and paper board were up in response to stronger demand, while beer production in Dominica and soft drinks in Grenada were down.
In spite of the robust productive activity and strong monetary expansion, inflation declined to 1.4% in 2006, down from 4.6% in 2005.
Price pressures eased with the reduction in oil prices in the latter half of the year and government subsidies, which cushioned the impact of the high oil price on consumers.
Nevertheless, the outdated basket used to compute the index might affect the reliability of the result.
Public-sector wage and salary rises ranged from 4.5% in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines to 12% in Montserrat.
Average private-sector wages also improved, pushed up by construction-sector wages and labour shortages in some countries.
Improvements in the overall balance of payments of the ECCU group have long depended on the countries’ ability to attract FDI inflows rather than on their export competitiveness.
In order to put their external accounts on a more sustainable footing, the ECCU countries need to improve their export competitiveness in goods as well as in tourism and other services in order to narrow the structural current account deficit and not to simply rely on capital inflows to bridge the gap.
Reversing the outcome in 2005 (a deficit of 0.4% of GDP), ECCU achieved a balance-of-payments surplus (2.3% of GDP) in 2006 as a result of a sharp increase in capital inflows (US$ 850 million).
This surge in inflows consisted in FDI in tourism-related projects, including hotels and condominiums, particularly in Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Lucia, as investors strived to consolidate their positions in the up-market niche product in the islands.
The rest of the capital and financial account was less satisfactory, as commercial bank investments abroad led to net outflows, while inflows of grant finance were down by more than 50%, reflecting the termination of the assistance from the Republic of China for building sports stadiums and of debt forgiveness for Antigua and Barbuda in 2005.
The structural current-account deficit widened to following the acceleration in import-dependent growth and high international fuel and other commodity prices.
The expansion in imports was due to growth in construction and higher prices for inputs as well as to the greater demand for consumer goods fuelled by increased available income.
Exports declined, however, as higher banana volumes and prices were counteracted by the absence of sugar exports following the closure of the industry in Saint Kitts and Nevis.
The services account balance deteriorated by 1.2 percentage points as net outflows for insurance and other business services counterbalanced the 4.9 percentage-point increase in net travel receipts, stemming from higher visitor arrivals and expenditure.
Meanwhile, the income account deficit remained stable at around 6% of GDP.
Kanczuk (2007), “Firm-size distribution and cross-country income differences”, Harvard Business School, unpublished.
Scarpetta (2006), “Cross-country differences in productivity: the role of allocative efficiency”, University of Maryland, unpublished.
King (1999), “Measuring business cycles: approximate band–pass filters for economic time series”, Review of Economics and Statistics, Bello, O. and J.
Zejan (1996), “Is fixed investment the key to economic growth?”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 111, No. 1, February.
Lee (1998), “How does foreign direct investment affect economic growth”, Journal of International Economics, No. 45.
Schmidt-Hebbel (1991), “Public policies and saving in developing countries”, Journal of Development Economics, vol. 36, No. 1.
Paxson (2000), “Growth and saving among individuals and households”, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 82, No.2.
Levine (2001), “It’s not factor capital accumulation: stylized facts and growth models”, The World Bank Economic Review, vol. 15, No. 2.
Hakura, D. (2007), “Output volatility and large output drops in emerging market and developing countries”, Working Paper, No.
Klinger (2006), “Structural transformation and patterns of comparative advantage in the product space”, CID Working paper, No. 128.
Kumar (1997), “Public and private investment and the growth process in developing countries”, Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics, Khan, M. and C.
Reinhart (1990), “Private investment and economic growth in developing countries”, World Development, No. 18, January.
Rodriguez-Clare (1997a), “Economic growth: a review essay”, Journal of Monetary Economics, No. 40. (1997b), “The neoclassical revival in growth economics: has it gone too far?”, NBER Macroeconomics Annual.
Servén (2000), “What drives private saving across the world?”, Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 82, No. 2, MIT Press.
Dareshwar (1994), “A new database on physical capital stock: sources, methodology and results”, Revista de análisis económico, vol. 8, No. 1.
Reinhart (1995), “Saving behavior in low-and middle income developing countries: a comparison”, IMF Working Paper, No.
Olofsdotter, K. (1998), “Foreign direct investment, country capabilities and economic growth”, Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, No. 134.
Pack, H. (1994), “Endogenous growth theory: intellectual appeal and empirical shortcomings”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 8, No. 1.
Rogerson (2007), “Policy distortions and aggregate productivity with heterogenous plants”, NBER Working Paper, No. 13018.
Total net capital inflows correspond to the balance on the capital and financial accounts plus errors and omissions, plus loans and use of IMF credit and exceptional financing.
As such, they are not included in the total reported for Argentina.
From 2003 onward, figures refer to total external debt e Figures for 1998 refer to public external debt.
A country’s overall real effective exchange rate index is calculated by weighting its real bilateral exchange rate indices with each of its trading partners by each partner’s share in the country’s total trade flows in terms of exports and imports.
The extraregional real effective exchange rate index excludes trade with other Latin American and Caribbean countries.
A currency depreciates in real effective terms when this index rises and appreciates when it falls. b Preliminary figures, weighted by trade in 2003. c January-June average. d Simple average of the extraregional real effective exchange rate for 18 countries.
Latin America and the Caribbean’s export volumes soared at the same time as the terms of trade improved, which led to the region’s accumulation of large trade surpluses.
When the figures for 2008 are compared with the average for the 1990s, the terms of trade are estimated to have improved by around 45%.
But this improvement in the regional average conceals different realities among and within the various subregions.
In South America, for instance, the terms of trade strengthened by about 69%, while in Mexico the improvement was 25%, and Central America, by contrast, posted a deterioration of almost 17%.
Trends in international goods markets have affected the terms of trade of the region’s countries in different Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela (Bol.
The current account In South America, huge differences have also arisen between the countries of MERCOSUR, which have witnessed a 18% increase in the terms of trade, and the rest of the subregion, mainly the Andean countries (including Chile), which are hydrocarbon and mineral exporters and have enjoyed an improvement in their terms of trade of almost 163%.
Having lasted five consecutive years, this current account surplus in 2007 stood at US$ 18.6 billion (well below the figure for 2006) and was equivalent to 0.5% of regional GDP.
However, the other components of the balance of payments, the capital and financial accounts (including errors and omissions), ended the year with a staggering positive balance of US$ 104 billion, which brought the global surplus of the balance of payments to a historic high of US$ 122.7 billion.
This was reflected in the US$ 124.7 billion increase posted in the region’s international reserves, equivalent to 3.5% of regional GDP.
South America exports raw materials and commodities, for which demand has soared in recent years thanks to the growing importance of China and other Asian countries in the world economy.
South America also imports manufactures whose supply has increased for the same reason.1 Central American countries, on the other hand, have suffered from Asian competition in the United States market (the main destination of their exports of manufactures) and are also net oil importers.
Mexico is in an intermediate situation, as it also faces Asian competition in the North American market (like Central America) but at the same time is a net exporter of petroleum.
Another feature of the current international situation, which will be explored further below, has been the growing influx of remittances from emigrant workers, especially in Central America, Mexico, some Caribbean countries and Ecuador and Bolivia in South America, although these flows were less buoyant in 2007 and 2008 for reasons which will be described below.
The two predominant trends in the region’s balance of payments in 2007 were the decline of the current account surplus and the considerable surpluses recorded by the capital and financial accounts, as referred to in section 2.
The waning of the current account surplus was associated primarily with the shrinking of the goods balance surplus, which fell from US$ 97.5 billion in 2006 to US$ 71.8 billion in 2007 owing to weaker export growth and the steady increase in imports.
Also, the balance of current transfers (which had been extremely buoyant in previous years) posted only modest growth Although the deterioration of current account balances was widespread in the region, Current account deficits worsened notably in the countries of Central America, averaging 6.3% of GDP in 2007 compared with 4.4% in 2006.
Driven mainly by the extraordinary buoyancy of goods exports, the goods and services balance of Latin America and the Caribbean recorded a surplus for the sixth year in a row in 2007.
This historic achievement was accompanied by sustained economic growth and consequently a steady rise in imports as well.
This resurgence can be attributed to the stabilization of Mexico’s and Central America’s industrial exports (which had been falling) and to the price rises experienced by a large number of commodities.
Notably, price rises accounted for three quarters of the growth in the region’s total goods exports in 2007, which reached 12.6%.
This was not the situation in the countries of Central America and the Caribbean, however.
Larger sales volumes accounted for 60% of the improvement in their export results.
The year 2007 also proved to be a turning point for goods imports as, contrary to the pattern observed in the two preceding years, imports began to outpace exports in terms of growth.
This trend lasted throughout the latter part of the year and into 2008 and contributed to the decline of the goods balance surplus.
This fairly sharp and widespread decline has been fuelled by the rising prices of raw materials and by the appreciation of the exchange rate in several countries, which has pushed up import growth.
This was essentially due to poor performances by Trinidad and Tobago (whose surplus decreased) and Jamaica (whose deficit grew), since those two economies are the most weighty in the subregion.
If Trinidad and Tobago (whose surplus stood at 19.7% in 2007) is excluded, the Caribbean subregion (12 countries) shows a sizeable current account deficit for 2007, equivalent to 15.7% of GDP (see this box’s figure 1).
The first figure in this box shows that the subregion’s current account surplus in 2005-2006 was entirely due to Trinidad and Tobago which, as a net petroleum exporter, has benefited greatly from high world crude oil prices.
The other countries, on the other hand, are highly dependent upon energy imports.
This is the main reason for the worsening trend since 2004, which has worsened recently because of soaring international prices for foodstuffs.
Caribbean (13 countries) Caribbean (12 countries) excluding Trinidad and Tobago In the longer term, the English-speaking Caribbean has had a pattern of high deficits on its external accounts, with the exception of Trinidad and Tobago.
The table in this box shows that this trend has deepened in recent years, revealing a high and growing dependency on external financing.
The table reflects the link between high current account deficits and those countries’ high levels of public external debt.
There is a clear pattern of net inflows of current transfers (mainly migrant workers’ remittances and official aid) being insufficient to compensate for persistent trade and income account deficits. b It is also seen that the worsening current account situation since 2005 is essentially due to the progressive worsening of the net balance of trade in goods and services.
These countries are clearly very dependent on migrant workers’ remittances, and not only in terms of their external accounts; they have a considerable impact on the domestic economy and on social indicators.
In Guyana and Jamaica, net inflows from remittances are as high as 27% and 17% of GDP respectively, and the figures are also high in Belize (7%), Grenada (6%), Dominica (6%) and Saint Kitts and Nevis (%).
Trinidad and Tobago is in a different category once again, since its net surplus of transfers stands at only 0.3% of GDP The subregion’s two largest countries, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago, show contrasting situations in their external accounts.
These last two variables have, however, been depressed by the economic slowdown in the United States.
In 2007, growing inflows of private and official capital were insufficient to finance Jamaica’s swelling current account deficit.
As a result, international reserves fell sharply and the country’s vulnerability increased in relation to external financing.
Trinidad and Tobago, on the other hand, has enjoyed considerably increased natural gas and oil production in recent years.
This, together with high world energy prices, has added up to a significant export boom.
In 2007 export growth slowed, however, and with persistent growth in imports, the country’s large current account surplus dipped from 26% of GDP in 2006 to 20% in 2007.
The region spent US$ 43 billion on transportation services, 18% more than in 2006.
This reflected a notable increase in net foreign direct investment (FDI), which represented 2.3% of GDP, and a significant net entry of financial capital, which accounted for a further 0.7% of GDP.
This figure was obtained by combining the results for net portfolio inflows (1.7% of GDP, largely generated by events in Brazil) and net other-investment outflows (corresponding to 1% of GDP that reflect the mobilization of stabilization funds in certain countries, such as Chile and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela).
The confluence of these movements and the surplus recorded by the current account (0.5% of GDP) meant that the region accumulated reserves equivalent to 3.6% of GDP in 2007.
The equity in Latin American stock markets increased 46.9% in 2007, compared with expansions of 38.3% and 27.8% in emerging Asian and European countries, respectively.3 Latin America has not suffered as much as other emerging regions in 2008 from capital being diverted by the increased volatility of the international financial market.
The region’s equity market in fact expanded 8% in the first half of the year.
The capitalization indices of the emerging Asian and European countries, in contrast, depreciated 22.8% and 8.2%, respectively.
The region’s increased resilience was also reflected in the variations in the spreads of its sovereign bonds, as measured by the EMBI+.
This indicator of country risk went up as soon as the situation became particularly turbulent, specifically in August and November 2007 and in the first quarter of 2008, when the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States worsened and concerns rose about the impact that the slowdown in the United States would have on the world economy.
Since the end of March 2008, the EMBI+ has come down in all regions, and most steeply in Latin America, but seems to have started to rise again since July.
It should be pointed out that two countries in the region achieved investment grade status in 2008, Peru in March and Brazil in May.4 almost twice the level recorded in 2002.
The considerable reduction of the external debt of the region’s heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) is commented on in another section of this chapter.
Latin America and the Caribbean attracted considerable amounts of net FDI in 2007, equivalent to 2.3% of GDP, a smaller proportion, however, than at According to preliminary estimates by the World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) in 2007, international tourism arrivals rose 6.1%.
Tourism arrivals in Central and South America increased at above average rates of 11.1% and 8.1%, respectively (UNWTO, 2008).
The risk-rating agency Fitch awarded Peru a BBB (investment grade) rating in April 2008, and Standard and Poor’s did the same in July.
Brazil was also awarded a BBB rating by these two agencies in May 2008.
Chile and Mexico had already achieved investment-grade status in previous years. the end of the 1990s.
Direct investment in the region’s countries increased 45.9% and reached a new historic high of approximately US$ 106 billion.
The heavy influx of FDI, however, came at a time when the region’s direct investment abroad plummeted almost 45.4% (after reaching a record high in 2006).
The combined result of these external operations raised the level of international reserves in Latin America and the Caribbean by an amount equivalent to 3.6% of regional GDP in 2007.
The appreciation of the exchange rate in several countries and the increased use of monetary sterilization operations by central banks played a significant role in this process, which is examined in greater detail below.
The region’s external savings became less negative, however, moving from their 2003 level.
Investment has become the most dynamic element of demand, although it has not yet regained the level recorded prior to the crisis of the 1980s.
Private consumption, meanwhile, is picking up momentum, on the back of strong credit growth and the upturn in employment.
This growth was driven by a 12.6% increase in gross fixed capital formation and a 6.9% rise in private consumption.
Public consumption lagged far behind private consumption and expanded only As noted earlier, gross fixed capital formation has been the most dynamic component of demand since 2004.
This variable expanded 57.6% in 2004-2007 in relation to 2003, fuelled not only by the construction boom, but also by heavier investment in what is mostly imported machinery and equipment (42.1% and 86% over the same period, respectively).
As a percentage of GDP, gross fixed capital formation reached 21.1% in 2007, the highest percentage ever since 1990, but lower than the levels of about 25% observed in the 1970s.
Regional investment, when expressed as a percentage of GDP and in current dollars, reached 21.7% compared with 21.3% in 2006.
As in previous years, this investment was entirely financed by national savings because external savings in the region have been negative since 2003.
The most striking features of the current growth phase, which began in 2003, are buoyant job creation and falling unemployment.
The partial information available implies that there has also been an improvement in job quality in the region as many countries have reported significant increases in formal employment.
In what turned out to be the fourth consecutive year of economic growth rates of over 4%, employment indicators continued to improve noticeably in 2007 although wage rises remained modest.
The overall employment rate increased by 0.5 percentage points, accumulating a 2.5 point increase since 2002.
The labour force participation rate only increased 0.1 percentage point, which meant the region managed to significantly lower unemployment for the fourth year in a row.
By contrast, salaries exhibited only modest gains in most of the region’s countries.
The median rise in average real wages in the formal sector was 1.1%, while the weighted average rose 1.7%.
Inflation reached 6.4% in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2007 compared with 5% in 2006, ending the downward trend this indicator had exhibited since 2002.
This was largely the result of steep rises in food and transportation prices in the second half of 2007.
This improvement in fiscal terms stems largely from the surge in income that has been generated by more intense economic activity and improved terms of trade.
Also, unlike in other periods of expansion, public spending did not outpace public revenue growth.
Continuing the trend observed in recent years, the fiscal accounts of central governments improved in 2007 in relation to 2006 and recorded a global surplus of 0.3% of GDP (compared with a deficit of 0.2% of GDP in 2006) and a primary surplus (i.e., including debt service payments) of 2.3% of GDP (compared with 2.1% of GDP in 2006).
Primary spending (left axis) Income (left axis) Certain estimations of the impact of the economic cycle (changes in GDP and commodities prices) on public accounts, which are presented in chapters III and IV, suggest that the structural (or cyclically-adjusted) fiscal balance of the region’s countries is not, on average, as positive as the observed fiscal balance.
This applies to the region as a whole and particularly to the commodities-exporting countries.
In these countries, the gap between their structural fiscal position and the observed fiscal balance has recently widened even further.
Though difficult to project, the estimated cyclically-adjusted fiscal position shows that a portion of current fiscal income could be transitory in nature and is consequently likely to decline in the future.5 Primary surpluses together with economic growth have enabled countries to pay off substantial portions of their public debt.
Greater liquidity in international financial markets allowed them to restructure and improve the terms, rates and currency composition of the remaining debt.
The improvements in public accounts and the loosening of fiscal constraints has proved to be a double blessing for some of the region’s countries: it has diminished their vulnerability and endowed them with more freedom to tackle not only the historical problems they face but also the challenges posed by the present situation.
Some countries have improved their credit rating and, in the case of Brazil and Peru, achieved investment-grade status.
Under these circumstances, the countries of the region will not need to turn to the market for net financing in 2008.
Greater fiscal solvency has allowed governments to allocate more resources to capital- and social spending, and some countries, for the first time in the history of Latin America and the Caribbean, now have the fiscal tools they need to soften any blow that a further negative turn in the international situation could deal to the domestic economy.
Governments have been quick, for example, to employ mechanisms to mitigate the impact that rising prices (basically for food and energy items) have had on consumption levels, as shown in box I.2.
Their concern related to matters both macroeconomic, since these price rises affect the balance of payments, inflation and economic activity, and social, owing to the major redistributive effects they generate.
Although consensus has been reached about the need for public policies to address some of the consequences of rising prices for macroeconomic and social stability, there is some debate about the measures to be taken.
In macroeconomic terms, it is necessary to look, among other things, at each country’s goods trade position.
Whether they are net exporters or importers determines the type of policy challenges involved and greatly affects their capacity to take the necessary measures.
Countries that are net exporters of food and energy products and are therefore experiencing a terms-of-trade gain must establish how to make use of the fiscal According to Zambrano (2008) in a study of nine of the 19 countries in the region, conducted for this publication (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, revenues thus created.
They must also decide whether or not to increase public spending and to what degree.
The debate in countries that are net importers revolves around the pass-through of these higher prices to consumers and the fiscal impact of avoiding full pass-through of that increase.
Similar questions arise about the social impact of food and fuel price rises.
Ultimately, the discussion is over the possibility of allowing market forces to operate and the fiscal cost of protecting the real income of the population, and which social group’s interests to protect.
Peru and Trinidad and Tobago), direct commodity revenues account for 2% or more of GDP and therefore have a decisive influence on the observed fiscal balance.
Taxes on fuel consumption include both excise taxes and general taxes such as VAT.
In the current conditions, some of the region’s countries have reduced excise taxes on consumption, as shown in figure A.
Fuel-related subsidies may be applied to fuel costs directly, as in Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where they represent more than 3% of GDP or indirectly, by subsidizing the use of transport, as many of the region’s countries are doing.
With respect to specific funds, one example is Chile’s Petroleum Price Stabilization Fund, which incorporates a mechanism to determine the percentage of the rise in imported crude prices that may be passed through to final consumers of petroleum products (Jiménez and Tromben, 2006).
In June 2008 U$S 1 billion was injected into that fund to offset recent rises in crude oil prices.
In the case of foods, as figure B shows, economic policy offers a broad range of alternatives for intervention, including administrative measures such as a the use of fiscal or trade policy tools.
Among the measures considered, those most commonly used (measured by the number of countries implementing them) are those aimed at offsetting the impact of price rises on consumers, whether they benefit from transfer programmes or not.
The surge in fiscal income over the past few years has driven up the region’s average public resources to unprecedented levels.
Several factors underpinned this increase in fiscal income, most notably, buoyant economic growth, rising commodities prices and administrative improvements.
In the case of the Dominican Republic, several factors led to the increase in the central government’s total income: the Tax Amnesty and Rectification Law, administrative improvements that made tax collection more efficient, high international nickel prices and the rise in the taxes on dividends and corporate sales.
The rate of fall of the debt was maintained in 2007.9 Fluctuations in the macroeconomic variables (exchange-rate variations and volatile economic activity) and debt-restructuring processes largely account for this drop.
In 2007, the countries that recorded the sharpest decline (over 9% of GDP) in their public debt/GDP ratio were Bolivia, Honduras and Nicaragua.
Argentina,6 Chile, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic7 and Ecuador.8 Overall, public spending gained momentum again in 2007: as a percentage of GDP, it expanded 0.2% on average in relation to 2006, and this trend continued in 2008.
On average, this growth has been the product of a drop in current expenditures equivalent to 0.2% of GDP and a 0.4% increase in capital outlays.
As several ECLAC studies have highlighted in the past, public investment is one of the smallest spending items (see figure I.7).
Several countries are taking steps to increase capital spending but some are running into difficulty owing to the poor spending-management and project-implementation capacity of their public institutions (at the central or the subnational level).
As noted earlier, the ratio between the central government’s public debt and GDP, as a simple average, dropped again in 2007 to 33%, compared with 36% in 2006.
In 2002-2007, central government public debt, as a proportion of GDP, fell by over 25 percentage points a Projection.
Furthermore, as mentioned in earlier editions of the Economic Survey, the debt structure of the region’s countries has improved considerably in recent years, with lower foreign-currency balances and a trend towards longer-term debt in national currency.
Brazil was the only country in which inflation remained within the targeted range, although it is rising and has already surpassed the range average.
It should be noted that none of the central banks pursuing this kind of monetary policy changed their inflation targets for 2008 as these are usually fixed as medium-term goals that the economy is intended to trend towards.
The food segment of the consumer price index (CPI) has experienced larger price rises than the indicator as a whole, which suggests that the current inflation process has a supply component.
Despite this, the steep climb in inflation led most central banks to raise their policy rates in the first half of 2008 with a view to preventing, or at least mitigating, a rise in inflation expectations (see box I.3).
Although the rise in observed inflation is largely attributable to supply shocks linked to food and energy prices, as the situation has continued, most of the central banks have raised their monetary policy interest rates.
In Chile it rose from 6% to 6.25%, where it held steady for five months before rising to 6.75% in June.
In Peru the monetary policy rate has risen from 5% to 5.5% and in Brazil, the SELIC (Special System of Clearance and Custody) rate has been increased twice, from 11.18% to 11.63%, after eight consecutive cuts in 2007.
Notably, Brazil still keeps this rate high in real terms compared with other countries in the region.
In Paraguay, the rate on monetary regulation instruments (IRMs) began to rise in March, although the largest hike was in April, when the weighted average was 6.8%, compared with 5.6% in December 2007.
In May another slight adjustment raised the weighted average rate by 10 basis points.
While inflation is to a great degree linked to the rising prices of foodstuffs and energy products on world markets, the measures adopted by central banks relate to the need to restrain inflationary expectations.
Hence, the measures are not limited to countries that have inflation targets.
In Bolivia, for example, the central bank has stepped up its liquidity absorption operations; central bank security issues rose by 310% in 2007, and by a further 64% in the first four months of 2008 compared with the end of 2007.
In Costa Rica the monetary policy rate has fluctuated, dropping from 6% to 3.25% in February then rising to 7.61% at the end of May.
In Guatemala and Honduras, benchmark rates have risen twice, from 6.25% to 6.75% and from 7.5% to 8%, respectively.
The main source of the expansion of the monetary aggregates has been the upward trend in international reserves as a result of improved terms of trade in some of the region’s economies, but also interest-rate differentials between the region and the international market, together with the significant upgrading of the risk rating of certain countries.
At the same time it announced plans to issue short- and long-term debt instruments in national currency with a view to sterilizing the monetary impact of the foreign-exchange purchases.
The Bank of the Republic of Colombia, for example, established a 40% legal reserve in May 2007 for foreign capital holdings that must be left in non-earning accounts at the Bank of the Republic for six months.
Early withdrawals incur penalties of 1.63% and 9.40% according to how much time has transpired since the funds were deposited.
This reserve requirement was raised by ten percentage points to 50% in May 2008, and a new provision was introduced stipulating that foreign investment-related capital inflows must remain in the country for at least two years.
This measure was taken to prevent portfolio investments being registered as foreign direct investments in order to dodge the legal-reserve requirement.
In Peru, the Central Bank halted its foreign-exchange purchase strategy at the beginning of the year, strongly increased legal reserve requirements and discouraged short-term financial inflows in an attempt to stem credit growth and curb the appreciation of the exchange rate.
Brazil is the only country in which inflation has remained within the target range (which is wider than in the other countries), but even there inflation is accelerating and is already above the middle of the band.
A downward slope in the time series indicates that the central bank was aiming to sterilize the accumulation of international reserves, while an upward slope indicates that the growth of the monetary base was outpacing the accumulation of reserves.
The first consists of Argentina and Brazil, whose monetary base/international reserves ratio trended downward up to the middle of 2007 because their central banks were making large dollar purchases.
In the case of the countries of the second group, Colombia, Chile, Peru and Mexico, the central banks have allowed the exchange rate to appreciate more and their monetary base/international reserves ratio has risen slightly.
It should be noted that in Peru this ratio has remained almost constant.
Rep. of) The credit recovery under way since 2003 continued in the first quarter of 2008, which was not surprising given the strongly procyclical nature of credit in the region.
Colombia, Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, however, recorded slower growth rates for all types of credit.
Consumer credit was the most buoyant in the region, with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela registering, as it had in 2006 and 2007, the most notable increase in this type of credit (80.8%).
Argentina recorded the second largest rise in total credit (57.2%) thanks in part to rising prices in the real-estate market, which fuelled a steady increase in mortgage loans.
In the case of Peru, commercial loans were up about 32% and consumer loans about 55%.
Both rises reflect the booming activity of the country’s services and manufacturing sectors.
In Brazil, mortgage lending continued to expand at rates of over 20%.
On average, the real effective exchange rate in Latin America and the Caribbean in relation to the rest of the world appreciated 2.9% in 2007 (or 4.2% when the rate for December 2007 is compared with December 2006).
This exchange-rate appreciation averaged 5.1% in 2007 for the countries of South America, with eight countries posting appreciations on average in 2007.
The same indicator for the countries of Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean, meanwhile, was far lower (0.7%), with five countries recording effective appreciations in 2007.
In both South America and Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean, the effective appreciation of the exchange rate in relation to the rest of the world was greatest between December 2006 and December 2007 (6.6% and 1.7%, respectively), which implies that the process gathered momentum over the year.
Although the surge in inflation contributed to the effective appreciation of the exchange rate in 2007 and mid-2008, it was not the only factor.
Investors seeking to take advantage of interest rate differentials channelled enormous flows of capital into countries such as Brazil and Colombia, which fuelled the significant appreciations of the nominal exchange rate observed in those countries.
Changes in the international setting 11 Starting in 2007, certain significant changes began to occur on the international economic scene.
First, strong growth in world demand has been followed by a slowdown, especially in the developed countries, owing to the mortgage crisis in the United States.
Second, the worldwide rise in inflation over recent months represents an additional factor of uncertainty that is hampering growth as well as having a negative impact on poverty levels.
Financial volatility and the slowdown in world growth Unlike other episodes of financial instability that have affected emerging economies in recent decades, this crisis has been generated in the financial markets of the developed world (the United States in particular) and will have consequences for the growth rate of those economies.
This financial instability originated in the subprime mortgage market in the United States and then rapidly spread through the entire real-estate market there and in other developed countries.
The construction sector has therefore been affected and, more importantly, there is a serious threat to the value of the collateral behind many of the loans granted in those countries.
Uncertainty surrounding the solvency of financial institutions (and investment banks in particular) caused a run on their liabilities and serious liquidity problems.
As tends to be the case, the liquidity problems began to give rise to additional solvency problems as banks attempted to liquidate assets in the face of deposit withdrawals.
The timely intervention of central banks (especially the Federal Reserve) to inject liquidity into the markets, and the bailout of floundering institutions has brought the situation under control, but this does not mean that the problems of the financial system have disappeared.
The scale of the losses involved is not yet clear, although estimates by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) suggest they may amount to between 4% and 5% of GDP in the United States, with global losses that could be double that amount in dollars (IMF, 2008a).
The possibility that financial institutions will continue to report poor results and thus generate more episodes of turbulence cannot be ruled out, and this constitutes an additional factor of uncertainty.
In this context, one key indicator to watch (due to the implications for the solvency of financial institutions) is that of property prices, which have been falling continuously since mid-2006, but dropped even more sharply from mid-2007 (although the decline could be beginning to slow down).
As shown in figure I.11, property prices in the United States dropped 17% between May 2007 and May 2008, although the situation differs significantly from state to state.
This section and the next are based on Machinea and Kacef (2008).
Despite being the epicentre of the instability that has rocked credit markets and unsettled the real-estate sector, the United States economy has grown more than the European and the Japanese economies, especially in the second quarter of 2008, and all signs indicate that this trend will continue in the second half of the year.
The combination of a weakening dollar, lower interest rates and a fiscal stimulus package has softened the blow of the crisis in the United States, which originated in the mortgage market.
In Europe, on the other hand, where the main concern has been rising inflation (see below), the crisis has led to a contraction of credit, as well as a notable appreciation of local currencies.
In terms of the impact on the world economy, and on Latin America and the Caribbean in particular, everything points to a relatively prolonged weakening of demand for the region’s exports.
The global surge in inflation Over the past year, the deterioration in financial market conditions has gone hand in hand with faster rises in the price of some commodities (especially oil and food).
In the case of oil, as previous editions of the Economic Survey have shown, contractions in supply in recent years, which were often motivated or exacerbated by geopolitical tensions, coincided with a rise in demand that was fuelled by the growth of the global economy and the rapid industrialization of several Asian economies, most notably China and India.
First, there is the structural factor of increased world demand for food, due to the emergence of a large consumer market in developing Asian countries and Africa.
These include China and India, which together represent a third of the world population.
These countries have both witnessed not only an increase in the purchasing power of the poorest segments of the population in recent years, but also an expansion in the proportion of the urban population.
Unfettered by these constraints, the Federal Reserve’s strategy has therefore been to focus on reducing the threat of recession in an economy that has no recent experience of hyperinflation, but possibly still remembers the depression of the first half of the last century (Feldstein, 2008).
An excellent analysis of the trends in international food markets as a framework for recent tensions between the agricultural sector and the government in Argentina is presented in Piñeiro (2008).
The expanding production of biofuels is confirming the increasingly widespread belief that long-term influences in the food market account for a significant part of the rise in food prices.
In emerging countries, the lower average income means that food makes up a higher proportion of the basket of consumption and therefore the consumer price index.
In developed economies, a noted earlier, the slowdown is easing inflationary pressure.
The surge in inflation, especially the rise in food and energy prices, is having a direct and negative impact on world demand and has implications for income distribution and poverty (see box I.4).
This direct impact is combined with the indirect effect of inflation on the interest rate and the real exchange rate.
This has occurred mainly with products in which world trade represents a relatively small portion of production.
Rice is the clearest example of this, since world trade accounts for only 6% of world production, whereas 13% and 18% of maize and wheat production, respectively, are traded in world markets.
According to a recent report by the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (2008a), in a sample of 77 countries, over 25% had implemented export restrictions in order to secure supplies for domestic consumption.
To date, central banks have reacted with caution (as dictated by the circumstances), given that in most cases accelerated inflation is due to a supply shock rather than an imbalance resulting from an excessive increase in the demand for goods.
So far, the result has been a fall in the real interest rate, which has turned negative in many cases.
However, the higher the likelihood of price increases spreading to the rest of the economy (depending on the stage of the cycle and/or wage bargaining procedures), the greater the pressure will be on central banks to change their stance.
Thus, in a context where inflation is tending to rise, it will be no surprise if the monetary authorities begin to raise interest rates or implement other measures to tighten demand, as some of the region’s central banks have already done.
From the point of view of economic activity projections, rising food prices will have a contractionary effect on consumption, since the segments whose consumer baskets are dominated by food are also those who spend most of their current disposable income, given their small or non-existent savings capacity.
This adds another contractionary element whose effects may begin to be felt relatively soon.
This, together with the rise in oil prices, explains the widespread increase in inflation.
Estimates by ECLAC show that since early 2006, and especially since 2007, consumer food prices have been rising faster in most of the region’s economies, posting an annual rate of between 7% and 30% in the different countries, with an average of somewhere around 16%.
This combination of factors has a clearly regressive impact on income distribution.
Those who spend the largest proportion of their income on food are the worst affected by rising food prices.
The lower a family’s income, the larger the share of that income is used to purchase basic foodstuffs to meet their nutritional requirements.
This means that if basic food prices rise more than the prices of other goods, the poorest segments of the population suffer a worse deterioration relative to their real income.
As a result, the situation not only has a clearly inequitable bias, but it is also worsening the percentage of indigent (extremely poor) and poor in the region.
According to a simulation exercise conducted by ECLAC for 2007, an increase of 15% in the price of food raises the indigence rate by almost three points, million more Latin Americans will be driven into extreme poverty.
Latin America and the Caribbean and the slowdown in the global economy In terms of how the new context of slower world growth and increased volatility and uncertainty in the financial markets will affect Latin America and the Caribbean, what can be said is that the region is better prepared than before to face a situation of this kind.
However, this does not imply that there are no risks in the real or financial sectors.
One of the possible impacts of the slowdown in the United States economy is that Latin American and Caribbean workers employed in that country will send fewer remittances, which are an important source of external finance for many Central American and Caribbean countries.
In the five countries that receive the largest remittances (in relation to GDP) —El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica and Nicaragua— these inflows represented between 17.3% and 30.4% of GDP in 2007.
These are not the only countries that depend heavily on remittances, however.18 The largest recipient in absolute terms is Mexico, which received almost US$ 24 billion in 2007, or the equivalent of 2.4% of GDP.
Although this percentage was small in comparison with other, smaller economies, these flows exceeded the amount Mexico received in FDI that year.
Belize, Grenada and Guyana in the Caribbean and Guatemala in Central America are also major recipients of remittances. of Latin American and Caribbean workers remitting began to decline at the start of 2008, for the first time since the series began in 2001 (IDB, 2008).
The study also suggested that this year remittances may begin to fall in real terms, partly because of the downturn in activity levels in sectors that employ large numbers of immigrants, such as construction.
The drop in economic activity in the developed countries may be expected to lead to a contraction in demand for goods, which would hurt the region’s exports.
This will largely depend, in turn, on the types of goods being exported, since it is much easier to redirect a commodity with little differentiation than a manufacture produced to the specifications and technical requirements of the original destination market.
Remittances continued to climb in 2007, but at a markedly lower rate than in the recent past, as examined in box I.5.
Thus, the growth rate of foreign-exchange inflows from remittances is continuing to decline, at a time when those countries are going to find it more difficult to finance their growing trade deficits, owing to a soaring oil and food bill.
A conservative estimate puts it at the unprecedented level of US$ 18 billion, compared with US$ 12 billion in 2007.
In this way, for the first time in a decade, the oil bill would exceed the total inflows of family remittances.
In 2008, those inflows are expected to total about US$ 16 billion, but it is estimated that the oil bill for the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic will make up almost a quarter of goods imports. (Billions of dollars) Oil bill Family remittances a Projections.
A first look at the structure of Latin American exports by destination market and type of good shows that manufactures represent around 45% of exports and that 70% of these go to developed country markets.
Those percentages mask very different realities, however, which show up when the region’s largest manufactures exporter, Mexico, is considered separately from the rest of Latin America.
In fact, 74% of Mexico’s exports are manufactures and over 90% of these are shipped to developed country markets, mainly the United States.19 In the rest of Latin America, however, manufactures represent little more than 25% of total exports and just over 35% of these go to developed countries.
Slower growth in the developed countries may thus be expected to have a stronger impact on Mexico and Central America than on South America.
This is because South America’s exports are more biased towards commodities, are easier to redirect and have more diversified destination markets, with a larger proportion going to Asian markets, which are projected to continue growing strongly.
As discussed in box I.6, although commodity markets are now in a boom phase, it must be recalled that prices for these goods typically show large cyclical variations.
It is worth considering, therefore, that we might be witnessing a change in the patterns of some cyclical factors that could herald a reversal of the rise in commodity prices, which would affect mainly South America.
Although Mexico has made great efforts to diversify its export destinations, its exports continue to be highly concentrated in the United States market.
Up to the first quarter of 2008, however, United States imports had not shown any great slowdown. growth and the probable decrease in subsidies in some emerging economies.
Metals prices are also fairly vulnerable to a slowdown in global growth, but if demand from emerging markets —especially China— holds, then this could compensate, at least partly, for the downturn in the developed economies.
Some analysts think that the drop in petroleum prices observed since July 2008 could indicate the presence of factors such as those mentioned above.
On the supply side, such factors might include Saudi Arabia’s recent announcement of an increase in production.
Since 2000, the upward surges in various aggregate price series have resulted in cumulative real increases of over 100%; for example, the general commodity price index shows a real increase of 140% over a period of 25 consecutive quarters.
Some of the sharpest upswings have been observed in the series for oil (312%), steel (302%), copper (273%), silver (247%) and gold These percentage increases are not very far from those seen in the 1970s, but the great difference lies in the duration of the disturbance.
The price booms seen in the previous four decades lasted less than seven quarters on average, but the periods of price rises since 2000 have averaged 14 consecutive quarters in duration (simple average for the 27 commodities analysed).
In recent years, these periods of rising prices have lasted over 20 consecutive quarters in the case of aggregate indices, something that had never occurred during the period being studied.
Until the current price upswing began, abrupt price rises had been associated with temporary supply restrictions such as those which resulted from the oil crisis of 1973 and the frosts which affected the coffee supply in 1977.
The general and sustained nature of the present boom, however, suggests that it is based on growing demand from emerging economies such as China and India, whose share of these markets has grown.
The first commodities whose prices reflected these demand increases were oil and minerals and metals.
The steady rise of oil prices also spurred faster growth in demand for biofuels and this, together with growing preferences for clean energy sources, boosted demand for soybean, maize and sugar, pushing up their prices and those of their substitutes.
Rising commodity prices have pushed up inflation worldwide, especially in developing countries whose price indices allocate higher weightings to foodstuffs.
Nonetheless, higher demand does not suffice to explain the upturn in commodity prices which occurred in the first half of 2008.
Uncertainties in the world economy, together with the subprime lending crisis, encouraged investors’ interest in new financial instruments.
Historically, gold and silver have been considered as attractive investments, given their use as stores of value and means of diversifying risk.
Fuels, metals and agricultural commodities are, however, increasingly used as a new type of global assets with good medium-term returns.
Since 2006, there has been a surge in the creation and issue of commodity-indexed instruments, which are exposed to additional risks from possible commodity price trend reversals in future.
The influence of financial factors could make these falls deeper and more sudden than expected.
Although the market is currently in a boom period, it should be borne in mind that variability is not so much a particular trend as the stylized fact of this type of series.
Historical analysis of these price series shows that over time the trend is likely to be reversed to some extent.
However, although there is no empirical evidence to back up this hypothesis, in the case of some commodities, including certain foods, the higher prices observed in international goods markets may in fact be here to stay.
Regarding the behaviour of the Chinese economy, it should be noted that around 50% of the country’s exports go to the United States, the European Union and Japan.
A slackening of growth in those economies may thus be expected to impact on China’s export volumes and, hence, on its rate of growth.20 The potential size of China’s domestic market (and other large Asian markets) could, however, at least soften the contractionary effect of a possible decline in exports.
It may reasonably be supposed, therefore, that while a slowdown may occur, the growth rate of China’s economy is unlikely to drop below 10% in 2008.
The case of foods is more complex, since circumstantial factors combine with others which might have a more lasting effect.
Poor weather conditions in a number of major wheat-producing countries, such as Australia, in combination with the effects of increased financial market instability and the implementation of measures to restrict trade, represent a set of factors that should ease off and eventually disappear altogether, and could therefore contribute to a decrease in prices.
However, as noted earlier, other issues, such as the mounting demand for biofuels and the increased demand for food deriving from world growth, could continue to put pressure on demand and prices.
Briefly, then, it is difficult to predict prices for these goods in the international markets in the short term.
On the one hand, some of the factors that drove the recent price rises may be expected to gradually decline in importance, which will ease upward pressure on the markets in the short term, as, indeed, has occurred in the last few months.
In the medium term, price trends will depend on the volume and geographical composition of world growth and on the importance of cyclical factors, although prices for some items, especially foods, are likely to remain higher than they were three years ago.
Increased volatility in financial markets is usually accompanied by a process known as “flight to quality”, as international investors take refuge in lower-risk assets.
This is already happening to some extent, as reflected in the evolution of the emerging markets bond index (EMBI+), which measures the risk attached to emerging country debt, between the last quarter of 2007 and the first quarter of 2008 (see figure I.3).
In this case, however, it must be borne in mind that the situation has been generated in the markets of developed countries and the emerging country markets are better prepared than in the past to confront a downturn in the conditions in which international financial markets operate.
This could explain why the increase in risk premiums came to a halt in the second quarter of 2008, although at higher levels than the lows recorded in the first half of 2007.
A higher risk premium could affect the region by making financing more expensive, although this does not appear to be a problem in the short term.
International interest rates have decreased sharply over the last year, thus even though the yield curve has steepened, total financial cost has not increased proportionally with risk spread.
Also, the Latin American and Caribbean countries have relatively small borrowing requirements in the short term, so the higher country risk should have no major immediate consequences as regards liquidity or solvency, although some of the countries may begin to feel these effects next year.
Steeper inflation also poses risks The regional rate of inflation, measured as a weighted average, rose from 5% in 2006 to 6.4% in 2007 in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The higher inflation, which is caused largely by the increase in energy and food prices, reflecting developments in the international prices for these goods, has broken the gradual downward trend observed in this indicator since 2002.
Since food and energy are not usually included in core inflation indices, this indicator was showing a more moderate trend than the overall CPI.
However, since October 2007, core inflation also began to rise at the regional level, since prices rises for these products (basically internationally tradable goods) were beginning to be passed through to other prices in the economy (mainly services), probably through adjustment mechanisms that reflect past rises in the overall CPI.
As a result, as of May 2008 regional inflation, measured as a weighted average, stood at 8.4%, while the simple average was 11.3%.
Bearing in mind that the higher inflation originated largely in rising food prices and given the behaviour of those prices since July 2008, inflation indices probably peaked in the first half of 2008 and should start to decline from then on.
Higher inflation worsens the dilemmas central banks already face in crafting monetary and exchange-rate policies in a context of free floating currency and free capital movement, as they have to use monetary policy to offset mounting inflationary pressure at a time when the United Status Federal Reserve has sharply cut interest rates.
Rep. of) Overall CPI Food CPI If central banks decide to raise interest rates to rein in demand, in a context of lower international rates, capital inflows may increase and put additional upward pressure on the currency.
If they maintain a passive stance, however, expectations of inflation may end up being borne out.
In the context of the economic expansion in most of the countries in the region, the best way to deal with rising inflation seems to be through fiscal policy, in order to avoid undesired effects on the real exchange rate.
Public spending has exhibited a procyclical bias recently, however, and this, in combination with its relative shortterm inflexibility, makes it likely that monetary policy will negatively affect economic activity in the near future, as a result of both the direct effect of rising interest rates and the steeper exchange-rate rises that may occur in some cases.
Summary and conclusions The current international context is marked by extreme volatility in financial markets and greater uncertainty than the situation in mid-2007.
Consequently, the developed country economies are expected to experience a sharp slowdown which, contrary to initial expectations, may be more severe in Europe and Japan than in the United States.
The slowdown is also accompanied by higher inflation rates, associated in particular with the rise in prices for food commodities.
The rise in inflation is fairly widespread, but is sharper in developing countries, where food products account for a large proportion of consumption baskets.
These changes in global conditions will have real and financial impacts on the emerging countries, in general, and Latin America and the Caribbean, in particular.
Initially, the region may be less affected than in previous crises, because it has reduced its external vulnerability in recent years.
Nevertheless, the situation clearly poses risks for the economies of the region.
First, exports of manufactures to the developed nations are expected to slacken, with Central America and Mexico being the most affected.
Second, migrant workers may send fewer remittances, which may sharply reduce disposable income in several Central American and Caribbean countries.
Lastly, future commodity prices, though difficult to predict, should tend to decrease as a result of the slowdown in demand and this, in turn, could affect exports, the currentaccount balance and growth in South America, although it is highly likely that prices will remain above the levels observed in the first half of this decade.
Similarly, the distributive impact of rising food prices will have a contractionary effect on consumption and on economic activity, since it affects the poorer sectors of the population most.
It is also likely —though not always desirable— that central banks will raise monetary policy interest rates in order to contain the rising inflation, which will have further contractionary effects on regional GDP, although this will happen gradually.
Despite these possible impacts, ECLAC estimates that the region will grow at around 4.7% in 2008, one percentage point less than in 2007, but a high enough rate to mark up a fifth consecutive year of regional per capita GDP growth of over 3% per year.
In a context of a marked downturn in external conditions, this is very good news.
As has occurred in the last few years, South America will post higher growth rates than Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean.
Rising inflation in the region has clear regressive effects on income distribution that could impact negatively on consumption patterns.
It may also lead to a tighter monetary policy which will have a direct contractionary impact —though its effect on investment and demand for durable goods— and an indirect one, since it will probably translate into upward pressure on regional exchange rates.
This, combined with a decrease in demand from developed countries, could further slow growth in export volumes.
Although the effects of some of the contractionary factors described will not be fully felt this year, and hence the impact will not be that significant in 2008, the slowdown in the region’s growth is very likely to continue for some time, so the region’s growth rate may be expected to decline again in 2009, to under 4%.
Introduction “Anti-cyclical policies must be included in any programmes of economic development if there is to be an attempt, from a social point of view, to raise real income.
The spread of the cyclical fluctuations of the large centres to the Latin-American periphery means a considerable loss of income to these countries.
If this could be avoided, it would simplify the problem of capital formation.
Attempts have been made to evolve an anti-cyclical policy, but it must be admitted that, as yet, but little light has been thrown on this subject” (Prebisch, 1950).
As this quotation reflects, the question of how macroeconomic volatility impacts on economic growth and the well-being of the Latin American peoples has been present in ECLAC thought since the Commission first embarked upon its analytical work.
As may be appreciated in several of the Commission’s publications,1 the issue has returned even more strongly to the fore in recent decades, prompted by the situation in the region’s economies.
Continuing this line of work, here with an emphasis on the political economy challenges involved, chapters II, III and IV explore the interrelations between real volatility2 and economic performance in Latin America and the Caribbean.
This chapter looks at the significance of real volatility3 for the region, which lies in such as factors as recurring crises, the impossibility of attenuating fluctuations in consumption, and the negative effects of this volatility on income distribution and poverty.
Here, the concept of real volatility revolves around the analysis of variability in economic activity levels against nominal stability, the exchange rate and inflation.
Chapter III looks at the empirical evidence on real volatility in Latin America and the Caribbean, and the policymaking constraints and opportunities involved in reducing it.
Level of macroeconomic volatility is associated with different kinds of factors, which vary according to specific features in each country, such as international position, production structure, political economy, vulnerability to natural disasters and the institutional framework, among others.
In order to mitigate volatility, then, a strategy is needed to articulate an array of policies targeting each of the areas mentioned.
Obviously, it is no easy task to design and implement anti-volatility policies in keeping with this approach and that is probably why the region continues to be one of the most volatile in the world.
Chapter III emphasizes the role played by fiscal, monetary and exchange-rate policies in reducing volatility, not forgetting that the success of these also depends on the institutional and structural aspects mentioned.
Chapter IV complements the analysis of the relationship between volatility and performance with a study of five economies that are representative of the region, looking at the different policy responses and their distributive impact.
After the debt crisis of 1982, Latin America faced serious challenges born of macroeconomic instability, even as growth slowed.
This came about in a framework of major structural changes that were occurring as both the Bretton Woods system and the post-war development model were becoming exhausted, and authoritarian political regimes were coming to an end in many countries of the region.
In the 1980s and, especially, in the 1990s, far-reaching reforms were made in an effort to regain a higher growth path.
In macroeconomic terms, the reforms were based on a shared and increasingly firm premise that growth could not be reinstated without stabilizing the economy.
Stabilizing the economy meant, first, reducing inflation, for which it was necessary to place the fiscal accounts, monetary policy and relative prices on an orderly footing.
The outcomes of the reforms, however, fell far short of expectations as regards both growth and real volatility.
As has been noted in several publications by ECLAC, such as Stallings and Peres (2000) and Ffrench-Davis (2005), the reduction in nominal variables did not necessarily bring about a reduction in real volatility.
Although some progress has been made in this regard in the last 20 years, there have been errors of both diagnosis and implementation and much remains to be done to create an institutional and policy regime that can prevent excessive volatility from undermining growth.
It is difficult to understand why the reforms in the region have not produced more satisfactory macroeconomic results.
Not only because of the problem’s intrinsic complexity, but also because of major changes that occurred simultaneously and that changed the domestic and international context for policy implementation.
These changes included the following: • Structural reform programmes themselves become a source of turbulence and thus fuelled nominal and real volatility in the economies.
It became clear that it was not only the design of policies that mattered in achieving macroeconomic stability, but also the conditions in which they were implemented • Substantial changes took place in international conditions and in the way the Latin American economies were integrated into the world economy, and this also changed the sources of volatility.
The increase in capital flows and trade liberalization were particularly important in this regard.
In the process, the idea that the struggle against volatility could be won in a single battle gradually lost currency.
The reforms that were to have achieved stability came to be construed as processes of building markets, institutions and political consensus (ECLAC, 1998).
The literature produced in those years clearly signalled that the problem of volatility is linked to profound structural traits of the economies of the region, such as international trade specialization patterns, dualism, institutions and the under-development of markets, in general, and financial markets, in particular (ECLAC, 2004).
It also showed that these traits are difficult to change not only because they are associated with structural factors but also because little is known about how they interact, especially in a process of growth with structural change (Temple, 2005; Durlauf, Johnson and Temple, 2006).
A recession or even a sharp slowdown in the developed world could have serious repercussions on two of the key determinants of the recent positive performance: the upturn in the terms of trade and remittances.
A context of increased financial uncertainty and higher world inflation would certainly not help either.
As noted in chapter I, a number of changes have taken place in the region in the last year: an acceleration of public spending, lower export growth, higher inflation and a rise in country risk, in a context of shocks in the international financial markets.
In this new environment, the authorities face policy challenges involving both traditional and new elements.
The traditional concerns include how to manage the macroeconomy in the short term to minimize volatility.
Volatility and crises affect other dimensions of economic performance too, such as the stability of consumption or the well-being of the most vulnerable sectors of the population.
From this perspective, policies aimed at reducing volatility or the probability of crises form part of development policies in their own right.
The impact of real volatility in the region “The cycle is the typical form of economic growth under our present system, and, although it is a general phenomenon which must be explained by a single theory, it manifests itself in a different way at the cyclical centres and at the periphery.
Notwithstanding these differences, much has been written about the cycle at the centres, but very little regarding the periphery.
The brief comments which follow are not an attempt to fill the gap, but an outline of some ideas on anti-cyclical policy which, if accepted in principle, could constitute a suitable basis for the discussion of the problem” (Prebisch, 1950).
In fact, “The last period of sustained per capita GDP growth of over 3% per year was 40 years ago, during the regional growth phase that occurred between the late 1960s and the first oil price Much progress has been made on analysis of volatility and its implications since Prebisch wrote these paragraphs.
Starting with the pioneering work of Ramey and Ramey (1995), a number of studies have found evidence that volatility has lasting negative effects on growth (see, for example, Wolf, 2005; Easterly, Islam and Stiglitz, 2000).
According to Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) in the period 1980-2005 average GDP volatility in Latin America was greater than in the developed countries.
Although it is not easy to identify the channels through which volatility affects growth, a number of studies have concluded that investment channels are crucial.
Toledo shock in the early 1970s, when the region’s economy expanded at comparable rates for seven years in a row” (ECLAC, 2007b).
Edwards (2007) estimated the costs of those crises and, on that basis, underlined their importance in explaining the region’s low growth pattern (ECLAC, 2004).
A key point put forward by Catão (2007) and Loayza and others (2007) is that while aggregate volatility decreased in the 1980s and 1990s, extreme events, such as growth collapses, reversal of capital flows, banking crises and exchange-rate crises, became more frequent.
Second, consumption is more volatile than GDP in Latin America and the Caribbean.9 Highly volatile consumption implies a highly volatile poverty rate, especially when per capita income borders the poverty line in large numbers of households.
In these circumstances, a relatively sharp drop in consumption can leave many people below the minimum level necessary to satisfy their needs.
What is more, the effects of this type of volatility can become permanent, insofar as they affect human capital accumulation and, hence, growth (ECLAC, 2007d).
Conversely, in households that have some capacity for saving, consumption volatility can prompt suboptimal increases in precautionary savings and reductions in investment (see Loayza and others, 2007).
The same author found volatility of exports to be similar to that of GDP.
Owing to imperfect credit markets, investment can fall more during recession than it increases during boom periods, thus creating a net negative effect.
Greater caution on the part of investors during turbulent periods can also lead to the interruption of long-term investment projects, making investment less efficient.
Studies conducted in a number of countries have found a direct correlation between volatility and inequality (Wolf, 2005).
Latin America and the Caribbean is not only the most volatile region in terms of output, but also the most unequal in terms of income distribution.
Designing such a policy has not proven easy, however, even for countries of the region that have made significant progress, such as Chile.
For now it may be concluded that volatility affects ultimate policy objectives, such as growth, consumption and poverty.
These motivations are notable broader than the typical rationale given for counter-cyclical policies in developed countries, which tends to be limited to evening out temporary fluctuations.
These stylized facts tend to suggest that the volatility targeted by policy measures in Latin America and the Caribbean differs from that in developed countries.
The effort to reduce GDP volatility in Latin America and the Caribbean necessarily spans an array of policies aimed at reducing the frequency of crises.
In view of the effects of volatility on key aspects of economic performance, there is naturally a very lively debate on policies to manage fiscal, monetary and exchange-rate volatility in the region.
The following chapters aim to contribute to this debate by analysing approaches and policy options that may be useful both to manage the consequences of a certain level of volatility and to reduce that level when it impacts on well-being, poverty or growth.
In this approach, managing volatility is, first and foremost, about filtering shocks without reducing willingness to take risks, which is an essential factor in innovation and increasing profitability.
Volatility management is a difficult task with an inevitable quotient of discretionality, and its effectiveness depends on the coordination of policies handled by different public agencies.
For practical purposes, Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004) define such a period as a stretch of at least eight years in which per capita GDP growth is at least 3.5% per year and in which the average rate of growth is at least two percentage points higher than that of the immediately preceding period of equal length.
For practical purposes, the definition used is analogous to that used for crisis periods, i.e., a period with growth rates higher than the standard deviation from the mean.
Collapse: This refers to situations in which growth rates are negative and whose scope exceeds the recessions linked to the economic cycle.
For operational purposes, Hausmann, Rodríguez and Wagner (2006) define a collapse of growth as a period of decline in the absolute level of per capita GDP, lasting from the first year of decline until the point at which output regains the highest level before the decline.
In practical terms, Loayza and others (2007) define crisis as a situation in which growth rates are below the standard deviation from the mean in the country in question.
Permanent and temporary shocks: A shock is a random impulse that affects economic performance positively or negatively and may be classified as permanent or temporary depending on how long it lasts.
Technically, temporary shocks involve a process of regression to the mean, whereas permanent shocks occur through non-stationary processes.
Thus, temporary shocks do not affect long-term trends, while permanent ones do.
Turbulence and stability: Episodes of turbulence and stability are defined using the concept of crisis and are detected at the regional level.
An episode of turbulence in the region begins when at least two countries are in crisis and it ends in the first period after the onset in which only one country is.
Episodes of stability are defined as those in which there is no turbulence.
In this study it refers only to real volatility, which is defined in operational terms as the standard deviation from the per capita GDP growth rate, unless otherwise specified.
Another possible measurement is the variation of output in relation to a long-term trend.
In this case, it is necessary to identify the trend, which is a source of controversy since there are many methods for doing so.
In any case, studies on the topic show that for the type of issues discussed in this work, the use of one definition or the other makes virtually no difference.
Excessive volatility: This concept is used to identify the component of overall variability in the per capita GDP growth rate that does not reflect fundamental factors.
The problem is that excessive volatility cannot be observed empirically, so in this work it has been detected using standard complete markets model, according to which it is inefficient for consumption to be more volatile than income.
So when consumption is more unstable than output, this is attributed in principle to undesirable volatility on the part of agents and the existence of failures in financial markets.
Based on this simple rule, excessive volatility is considered to exist when the ratio between the standard deviation from the growth rate of private consumption and the GDP growth rate is higher than one.
Introduction This chapter analyses the available empirical evidence on real macroeconomic volatility in Latin America and the Caribbean in order to provide an updated picture of the related phenomena and of the constraints and opportunities for the design and application of effective policies to reduce that volatility.
To that end, the chapter begins by setting out a conceptual framework in order to construct and interpret the stylized facts to be described and analysed later.
The design of policies to reduce volatility which, without ignoring short-term stability, take into account long-term economic trends raises analytical problems which are difficult to solve.
One of the major obstacles is that the way in which instability and crises affect the various aspects of the functioning of the economy is far from simple; indeed, it often responds to indirect factors.
Given the complex relationship between volatility and economic performance, the following diagram is designed to clarify the logic to be followed in analysing the empirical evidence and presenting the analytical tools needed to interpret cyclical fluctuations in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Diagram III.1 provides a schematic view of the relationship between shocks, volatility and economic performance.
The top right-hand rectangle of diagram III.1 indicates that the processes which generate fluctuations —and sometimes crises— begin with shocks which lead to disequilibria.
Fluctuations and crises result from shocks such as an unexpected change in the evolution of key variables such as the terms of trade or fiscal policy which, after creating impacts on specific segments, tend to spread to the rest of the economy.
The rectangle corresponding to filtering mechanisms states that markets, countercyclical policies and structures of governance, both public and private, are the most important mechanisms used by the economy in dealing with the disequilibria resulting from shocks.
The quality and functionality of these mechanisms are central factors in the level of volatility and the probability of crises, since they can either limit or exaggerate the disequilibria resulting from a shock.
Thus, it is unsurprising that there is growing interest in understanding both the nature and the characteristics of the shocks which affect the region, as well as the dissemination mechanisms which result in a set of basic macroeconomic variables tending to move in harmony.
An improved understanding of these matters would certainly be helpful in assessing the validity of the filtering mechanisms by means of which the effects of a given shock are attenuated or amplified, in order to design policies and reforms to increase their effectiveness.
In terms of economic performance, the costs and duration of the adjustment process resulting from a shock vary widely.
This does not mean, however, that policies should aim to mitigate those impacts as quickly as possible.
Since shocks generally have both positive and negative effects, the mechanisms operating during the adjustment period should ideally help to attenuate the latter without weakening the former.
It must be remembered that not all volatility is harmful to the economy.
Although crises are always somewhat traumatic, they are also sources of appreciable benefits such as accelerating disinvestment in inefficient sectors.
Another reason for considering adjustment mechanisms as filters is that shocks tend to affect income distribution and possibly property rights, so that economic constraints will be encountered during the process of adjustment towards equilibrium.
This is why the quality of rules and instruments available for “filtering” the distributive impact of a shock play an important part in preventing conflicts among the parties from delaying the correction of disequilibria and increasing its cost.
There is a great variety of shock filtering mechanisms, which generally have distinctive characteristics and include markets, private arrangements and policies.
Given the characteristics of shock filtering mechanisms, policies adopted to mitigate volatility need to be sufficiently broad and include not only short-term countercyclical measures at the monetary and fiscal levels, but also more structural initiatives designed to reduce the economy’s vulnerability to shocks and strengthen institutions responsible for settling distribution- or property-related disputes.
Concern about volatility and crises should not, however, obscure the fact that such phenomena are important from the economic viewpoint only to the extent that they directly or indirectly affect the level, distribution and future evolution “Innovation includes the ‘creation’ of businesses, productive activities and sectors, but also the ‘destruction’ of others.
The way in which ‘creation’ and ‘destruction’ combine […] plays a vital role.
Creation is of course essential so that there can be buoyant growth, but this is only one of the possible outcomes at a particular time and place.
Hence the need to define the performance indicators to be used in measuring the impact of cyclical fluctuations and designing related policies.
In practice, the main indicators for that purpose are GDP growth and its behaviour in relation to shocks of different types.
This is confirmed by academic studies on the subject, although they also emphasize the influence of volatility on fixed capital investment and on the volatility of consumption.
The use of aggregate income and consumption to measure the impact of volatility sometimes tends to obscure its effects on other central aspects of well-being and its distribution in a developing region such as Latin America and the Caribbean.
These factors have been underlined in case studies on macroeconomic adjustment and on the repercussions of volatility and crises in distribution, social and political terms.
The first is the impact of instability and of episodes of crisis on vulnerable segments of the population, such as those which are below or close to the poverty or extreme-poverty line, or whose vulnerability is linked to ethnic, gender, cultural or geographical identity.
The second is the fact that, as mentioned above, shocks can lead to conflicts and produce a climate of political instability and increased uncertainty, with harmful effects on investment and other determinants of growth.
As will be seen below, the problems of property rights which arise from different kinds of shocks —especially depending on whether they are short-lived or long-lasting— are different.
Thus, it should not simply be assumed that shock filtering mechanisms will function in the same way when faced with disequilibria caused by conflicts of various types and magnitudes.
This relationship between shocks, disequilibria and distributive conflicts creates a link between the study of anti-volatility policies and the analysis of political economy.
The third factor is the fact that volatility and crises have negative repercussions on physical investment and other facets of growth, such as the accumulation of human capital and knowledge, the stability of economic institutions, financial soundness and income distribution.
This means that volatility affects growth not only via investment but also, indirectly, owing to its influence on structural factors of development.
Thus, the most abundant proofs of its negative effects come from the case studies.2 One of the problems described by econometric studies which analyse the effects of interaction between volatility and structural issues is that “too many” factors determining growth have been identified and there are few comparable data on international experiences.
Among other things, this makes it necessary to use a single set of parameters for all countries, and this does not permit examination of the specific interactions between volatility and the structural facets of growth.
In particular, case studies show that a volatile context endangers institutional stability and institution-building There are three particularly striking facts in this conceptual framework.
The first of these is that, although fluctuations are caused by shocks, the degree of volatility ultimately observed also depends on the effectiveness of the filters in place.
The quality and functionality of these mechanisms are central factors in the level of volatility and the probability that periods of crisis will occur, since they can either limit or exaggerate the disequilibria resulting from a specific shock.
Consequently, the better the quality of the filters, the lesser the cost to be borne by the economy in terms of worsening of performance in order to strike a new balance and deal with distributive conflicts.
Lastly, diagram III.1 underlines the fact that the relationship between volatility and performance is not direct, but depends on other factors such as investment, structural characteristics and conflicts.
Of course, the effects of instability in each of them differ according to the context, take place over differing periods of time and are known only approximately.
This is why figure III.1 emphasizes the need to deepen understanding of the channels through which volatility ultimately affects results.
It also underlines the various dimensions of volatility: growth, volatility of consumption and evolution of vulnerable groups.
Its purpose is to show in a nutshell the relationship between the conceptual elements discussed above in order to guide the exposition of stylized facts on volatility and related policies.
As in the earlier case, it sketches the process which takes place from the occurrence of a shock until the results are seen in relation to the various aspects of an economy’s performance: growth, volatility of consumption and the impact on vulnerable groups.
Its added value is that, on the one hand, it describes in greater detail the elements which affect the shock capacity (Fanelli y McMahon, 2006), as well as the ability to claim ownership of the fruits of investment (Hausmann, Rodríguez and Wagner, 2006).
Fanelli (2008a), for example, describes a series of case studies which show that volatility affects financial development, significantly reducing the economy’s ability to absorb shocks and fuelling instability by preventing efficient risk allocation.
Since it affects the quality of institutions, volatility tends to worsen policy effectiveness; this is emphasized in recent studies on growth (Fatás, 2002). filtering and absorption process and, on the other, it shows what structural and policy constraints govern it.
The latter is useful in specifying the role that could be played by structural reforms designed to improve antivolatility policies, which is essential for the analysis of the empirical evidence presented in the sections below and in the discussion of policy implications.
Diagram III.2 shows that shocks which are significant from the volatility viewpoint are those which place agents in situations of disequilibrium; in other words, those which create difficulties with decisionmaking in relation to their business.
On the one hand, uncertainty generated by shocks cause agents to make significant mistakes in terms of expectations, and on the other, the deficiencies of markets and institutions intensify their effects.
These weaknesses in the filtering mechanism mean that the process whereby the economy regains its equilibrium following a shock is more costly and likely to cause major distribution-related conflicts.
These deficiencies go from simple friction which decreases the flexibility of the response of wages to excess supply or demand up to the absence of key markets for risk management or segmentation of labour markets between formal and informal sectors.
Although market failures can theoretically be made up for by means of other institutional arrangements, in the case of Latin America and the Caribbean, most of the obstacles to expansion, such as the lack of an efficient judicial power, also obstruct the development of appropriate structures of governance.
When market and governance mechanisms are insufficient to filter shocks, countercyclical policies are needed.
Since filtering mechanisms are imperfect, lapses in coordination are usually seen and can cause the initial disequilibrium to spread through the markets, leading to a collective movement in a number of aggregate variables; for example, unemployment and increased financial fragility lead to a contraction in aggregate spending and lead to a recession.
The same occurs when, owing to the underdeveloped state of insurance markets and related activities, many agents are not properly covered for certain contingencies.
Lastly, the poor are usually in a situation of vulnerability to events which can cause considerable falls in levels of well-being and in the construction of human capital.
One example is this is the natural disasters which repeatedly strike the Central American countries.
During the period of propagation of the shock, collective impacts on variables go hand in hand with changes in the trends of certain indicators such as inflation and the nominal exchange rate and, sometimes, with reforms to regulatory systems such as the monetary or exchangerate regime.
Consequently, studies on macroeconomic stability in the 1980s emphasized the importance of a nominal anchor to keep the playing field level, particularly in respect of monetary and exchange-rate policy.
Since they influence the effectiveness of the filtering process, both are determining factors in what is usually known as an economy’s level of vulnerability to shocks.
Structural constraints include economic liberalization at both the trade and financial levels, export diversification, structural duality, levels of uncertainty and institutional quality.
Constraints related to political economy are also included, relating to the characteristics of policy and of interest groups.
These constraints help to determine the nature both of economic institutions and of countercyclical policies.
The arrows in the diagram show that structural constraints can generate market and governance failures, as well as generalized movement of variables in the aggregate fluctuations.
Constraints of this type can be lessened thanks to anti-volatility reform initiatives.
Policy constraints comprise the set of initiatives intended to manage the effects of a shock.
Such initiatives define the type of measures which may be implemented in order, on the one hand, to limit failures of coordination and, on the other, to adopt countercyclical policies.
The most significant policy constraints include the quality of the regulatory system, the availability of fiscal resources and the authorities’ capacity to design, apply and monitor the policies and deal with the conflicts of interest.
The arrows in the diagram show that the effects of the constraints are reflected mostly in the quality of the measures adopted and the interventions of the public sector to alleviate market and governance failures.
In the latter case, antivolatility reforms could also be implemented in order to weaken the constraints.
When the filtering process is seen from this perspective, it is clear that a programme to reduce volatility should not be limited to applying countercyclical policies.
Of course, policy constraints are not unconnected with structural ones, since the former are to a great extent rooted in the institutions.
There are also factors which affect policy and which do not depend on the institutional “playing field”, such as the existence of an efficient bureaucracy and of resources to finance policy initiatives.
To deal with the impact of volatility on poverty, for example, it is not enough to have transparent institutions; financial resources are also needed.
The adoption of appropriate policies requires good design, implementation ability and resources.
As has been suggested in studies on the Asian experience, effective policies can be implemented in institutional contexts that are less than optimal.
Studies on institutions and policies have been justly criticized for treating the relationship between institutions and growth as a black box (Fatás and Mihov, 2005).
The problem with many of the reforms applied in Latin America and the Caribbean was the assumption that changes in the “rules of the game” would automatically lead to quality policies.
One of the lessons of the process is that the black box must be opened in order to design the reforms.
The proposed approach involves an attempt to do just that in respect of anti-volatility policies.
To sum up, the filtering of shocks and, in general, the characteristics of volatility ultimately depend on the structural properties of the economy.
This is not a new idea in the region, because of the historical influence of Latin American structuralism on the macroeconomic level (Rodríguez, 2006).
The major contribution of recent studies on volatility in relation to that traditional view has been the use of more sophisticated techniques for modelling structural constraints.
Nonetheless, despite those advances, separate econometric calculation of the effects of each structural and policy factor is far from possible as yet.
Thus, the contribution of detailed case studies cannot be dispensed with in facing one of the major challenges currently existing in the area of antivolatility policies: relationships between structural factors, emerging phenomena of instability and insufficient policies still to a great extent add up to a black box concerning whose contents the information available is of uncertain reliability.
Thus, following a period of somewhat excessive enthusiasm in the post-war period and during the 1990s, more cautious attitudes are currently being adopted regarding the authorities’ policy application capacity.
The characteristics of volatility and cycles in Latin America and the Caribbean This section presents and discusses the stylized facts of volatility and crises in Latin America and the Caribbean, in order to detect changes which may be occurring in the current decade in the dynamics of aggregate fluctuations and the relationship between volatility and economic performance.
It will also analyse a number of performance indicators relating to consumption growth and volatility.
That disparity neither grew nor lessened in the 1990s; it improved slightly before the Russian crisis of 1998 and then began to worsen until it stood at 34%, the same level as in 1991.
Beginning in 2003, the region’s growth rate improved in relation to the rest of the world, as a result of which it gradually began to gain ground.
In 2006, the ratio between the incomes of the two groups reached 37%.
Geary-Khamis dollars at 1990 prices, 1950=100 In a classic study on this subject, Ramey and Ramey (1995) concluded that the relationship between the growth rate of per capita GDP and its standard deviation is negative.
The authors used a database containing information on low-, medium- and high-income countries.
The result depended on the first two groups because, as Fatás (2002) argues, the ratio between those variables in the developed countries is not statistically different from zero.
In considering the evolution of Latin America and the Caribbean in terms of convergence or divergence with the levels of development of the industrialized countries, there are three periods which stand out as possible breaking points in relation to the region’s macroeconomic growth: the late 1950s, the early 1980s —with the debt crisis— and the early 2000s.
As shown in figure III.1, between 1950 and 1957 the growth rate of Latin America and the Caribbean was similar to that of the developed countries, so that its per capita GDP —expressed in purchasing power parity (PPP) units— consistently stood at about 52% of that corresponding to those countries.
Some of the region’s major exports which were hit by this phenomenon were coffee, cocoa, sugar, cotton and wools.
The incidental growth in the volumes exported by some countries did not suffice to make up for the falling prices.5 These trends continued until the mid-1960s, while the prices of the region’s imports rose steadily, as shown in figure III.2.
Following that shock, the income gap with the industrialized world initially underwent a distinct jump and, subsequently, a steady deterioration.
In 1991, the average income of the Latin American countries in the sample stood at only 34% of that of the more advanced The ratio of the GDP of Latin America and the Caribbean to that of the world as a whole has a simpler history.
The only time when a visible break occurred was during the debt crisis.
In previous years, the region’s per capita GDP was 20% above the worldwide figure, but following the crisis that figure fell to 8%.
It is possible that situations of macroeconomic volatility occurred at the time of the aforementioned breaks in the trend.
On the basis of the definition given by Hausmann, Rodríguez y Wagner (2006), used in the glossary which appears in box II.1, some episodes of economic collapse and their duration have been identified.
Figures III.3a and III.3b show the proportion of countries in which a collapse began in each year of the series analysed and the duration of the collapse, respectively.
A record was set in 1981 as to their frequency, affecting almost half the countries in the region; • The duration of the collapses which began between the mid-1970s and the early 1980s is significantly higher, but they diminish as the data approach the current period.
These stylized facts show that the most significant breaks in the growth of Latin America and the Caribbean have to a great extent been due to external forces.
This does not suggest, however, that those are more important in terms of explaining volatility than internal factors, such as the filtering process and the structural and regulatory constraints affecting it.
In fact, internal circumstances are vitally important, since they determine the level of each economy’s vulnerability to shocks as well as the cost and duration of the adjustment process.
Until the early 1970s, the region’s economies in general may have been highly vulnerable to the type of shocks which occurred at that time and prepared the way for the sharp increase in volatility which took place in the 1980s.
The duration of collapse episodes —although not necessarily their intensity— tended to diminish after 1992, and this trend has continued to date.
While a high proportion of countries have suffered from a collapse in the 2000s, the duration has tended to be closer to those observed up to the early 1970s.
The factors underlying this change probably include improved macroeconomic policies in a large number of countries.
The most successful of those policies are thought to be those which provided a better institutional and policy response to the challenge of improving the macroeconomic system and, at the same time, achieving a minimum level of consensus on income distribution.
In assessing the validity of these conjectures it would help to inquire as to whether, in addition to situations of collapse, the dynamics of volatility could be analysed by identifying and comparing episodes of “turbulence” and “stability”.
Such an analysis would also need to determine the relationship between those periods and the acceleration of growth rates as defined by Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004).
Episodes of turbulence and periods of stability Based on the definition of crisis used in the glossary contained in box II.1, the years that have passed since 1950 can be classified into periods of “turbulence” —during which at least two of the 19 countries analysed were suffering crises— and “stability”, during which none, or at most one, was in crisis.
Also, 1978 saw the beginning of a long period of turbulence which may have been caused by the deepening of fluctuations in connection with the oil shocks of the 1970s and their repercussions on the stability of relative prices and international inflation.
These probably contributed to increasing the frequency and magnitude of the external shocks which afflicted the region, boosting the distributive conflicts which constrained the freedom to manoeuvre of policies.
The turbulent episode of 2002 is connected to the Argentine and Brazilian crisis, which affected other countries such as Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay.
Two further observations concerning 1995-2002 are warranted: first, unlike the turbulence of the 1980s, it was a period during which crises did not prevent growth accelerating in some countries; and second, once the turbulent stages had passed, an economic boom began (see table III.2).
Before the 1980s, crises were more isolated and do not seem to have had a great impact on growth.
See the glossary contained in box II.1. 1980s because many “candidates” were unable to sustain their initial impetus.
Noteworthy within that period were 16 years of continuous stability —that is, without episodes of extreme generalized volatility— from 1962 to 1977.
The period also saw several countries enjoying accelerating growth (see figure III.4a).
Paradoxically, it also coincided with the beginning of the widening gap between the developed and developing worlds.
In other words, it was a period when a combination of infrequent extreme episodes and swelling growth was combined with positive momentum from worldwide growth.
In any case, from the viewpoint of volatility and growth, the gap in the 1960s and 1970s was clearly different from that which followed the debt crisis, when growth episodes were nonexistent.
During all stages of stability, excepting 2000-2001, the annual growth rate of the region’s per capita GDP exceeded 1.2%.
First, it was the first time since 1977 that five consecutive years without turbulence were enjoyed; and second, the growth rate was the highest of all the periods of stability except for 1960.
Lastly, that five-year period saw boom episodes7 when growth rates were the highest since 1950.
It should be noted that the second most positive period in terms of less turbulent episodes is the current one, although the frequency of the growth episodes is not comparable with that seen in the 1960s.
As can be seen, there was never a period with as many candidates” as in 2003.
This leads to the same hypothesis as that which resulted from analysis of episodes of turbulence and stability: that the current period shows differentiated characteristics.
These two figures also reflect the devastating impact of major crises on their growth potential.
None of the countries of the region analysed here could resist the marked increase in macroeconomic volatility which was observed from the late 1970s to the late 1980s.
There was an almost complete absence of episodes of incipient acceleration during that period, with the exception of Chile in 1986.
Furthermore, all the “candidates” for beginning the process ultimately failed to do so.
This contrasts with the type of movements which characterized the crises of the 1950s, when the region experienced a mixture of episodes of collapse and recovery.
The 1990s were similar to the 1950s inasmuch as there were both collapse and recovery episodes, but also similar to the Actual growth This evidence shows that, beyond the quantitative criteria which have been used to classify crises, extreme episodes may have widely varying qualitative characteristics.
Careful analysis is needed in this regard, since it constitutes a guide to what anti-volatility policies should focus on.
If excessive volatility were due to the numerous external shocks, for example, since those impulses are exogenous, the strategic goal should be to reduce vulnerability.
If the filters were the source of the problem, then action would probably be needed at the level of market organization, governance structures and countercyclical policies.
The eight years necessary for applying the formula proposed by Hausmann, Pritchett and Rodrik (2004) have not yet passed.
This issue is also important from the growth viewpoint, since the shock filtering process should function in such a way as to attenuate the negative impacts of crises while retaining those which promote productivity.
It has been observed that the consequences of shocks in the 1980s were very different from those of the 1950s.
One hypothesis which arises naturally in that regard is that the crises of the 1950s not only did not prevent the growth episodes of the 1960s but probably contributed to some extent to that growth, by bringing about structural changes in relation to creative destruction.
On the other hand, the shocks and disequilibria of the 1980s were caused by failures of coordination brought about by the marked financial disequilibria which were reflected in the debt crisis.
This was not a shock which could ultimately have promoted productivity, but one which primarily acted through financial channels, causing much damage to the balance sheets of businesses, banks and governments and, by leading to bankruptcies and public-debt renegotiations, generated impacts in the area of property and the need to redefine related rights.
As will be seen below, redefining property rights is never free from conflicts which can make it hard for the economy to move quickly towards a new equilibrium of growth.
The succession of crises and reforms in the 1990s, aside from their cost, may to some extent have activated positive Schumpeterian mechanisms9 whose effects are currently being observed, since the region grew without experiencing episodes of collapse.
In relation to volatility, it was mentioned above that the negative statistical relationship between growth and its standard deviation appears to be diminishing.
This suggests that, with the passage of time, there may be a return to a period of lesser instability and greater growth, as seen before the 1960s.
In evaluating that period, this of course detracts from the fact that a number of countries’ growth has been helped by positive shocks resulting from improvements in the terms of trade.
It may be that some countries are better placed to filter the shock from the terms of trade in order to enjoy its benefits and minimize negative spin-off effects.
There must be a regulatory system which is consistent across time in order to cancel incentives for excessive increases in public spending which might result from favourable terms of trade, or to avert the threat of a significant rise in foreign-exchange supply for the tradable goods sector.
There have been advances in the management of macroeconomic equilibria, but there are also growing difficulties in preventing excessive appreciation of currencies, which would damage competitiveness.
There may also be conflicts in relation to the ownership of wealth generated by positive shocks, leading to problems with inflation and instability in the rules of the game.
Volatility of consumption and excessive volatility Excessive volatility is hard to measure, and identifying it poses problems which are very difficult to resolve.
A reasonable indicator of its existence, however, is when consumption is more volatile than income (see Fanelli, 2008a).
It is therefore useful to consider what relationship exists between consumption trends and excessive volatility in Latin America and the Caribbean.
According to Pallage and Robe (2001), volatility has a high cost for developing countries: to bring the volatility of consumption to the same level as in the developed countries would be equivalent to increasing the rate of per capita GDP growth to 0.34% in perpetuity.
This implies that consumption is more volatile than income and, according to studies conducted on this subject, indicates the presence of excessive volatility.
Figures for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries are grouped around the 45-degree line (see red triangles).
This means that in those economies there is less excessive volatility, probably owing to the application of better countercyclical policies and the existence of broader markets which contribute to averting crises.
The figures for the Latin American and Caribbean countries, however, are above the 45-degree line (see blue squares).
This temporal average conceals the fact that the capacity to stabilize consumption trends seems to have See the glossary contained in box II.1. improved significantly in recent years and also that GDP volatility has fallen.
The progress made by Latin America and the Caribbean in reducing the volatility of consumption can be seen clearly in figure III.6; it can be observed that since the 1990s this volatility has been lower than the worldwide average, and that in the 2000s it has even been comparable to that of the developed countries.
The evidence on the relationship between volatility and performance —relating to both consumption and growth— suggest that recent years have seen a certain moderation in the harmful effects of volatility.
Referring back to diagram III.2, there are a number of factors which may explain this development: good luck, that is, smaller or more benign shocks; improved filtering capacity arising from more effective functioning of markets and improved governance; fewer structural constraints; improved policies; or a combination of all these causes.
Nature and effects of shocks in The previous section, which identified periods of greater turbulence and of relative stability, also described certain changes which distinguish the 2000s from both the 1990s and the 1980s.
Two factors which were detected through the analysis of fluctuations were shocks and structural constraints, which will be analysed in this part of the chapter.
Diagram III.3, which complements diagram III.2, is designed to show the relationship between the elements which will be play a prominent part in this section.
In order to design anti-volatility policies it is vital to know the substantive characteristics of the impulses which affect the economy because they will determine the type of disequilibrium, the factors which will serve as the main filtering mechanisms and the nature of any conflicts of interest.
For example, if the shock is a fall in world interest rates which is seen as a permanent one, the initial effects are likely to be observed in financial markets.
The evidence relating to Latin America and the Caribbean shows that, while a permanent change in world interest rates can be expected to affect investment and consumption in real terms, the ultimate impact will depend on the functioning of financial markets and on regulatory capacities.
In particular, financial regulations will partially filter the negative effects of volatility relating to overinvestment in the real-estate sector, to loans to interrelated financial or corporate bodies or to excessive public debt.
The positive repercussions may be stronger if they help to channel funds towards innovative activities, avoiding the risks connected with the concentration of exports on a single product.
Similar instruments and events can have varying effects in contexts which differ in terms of policy coordination capacity, trade openness, the proportion of credit in the economy, the quality of regulations or the structure of property rights.
On the basis of the aforementioned aspects, this chapter will identify the shocks which have been important for Latin America and the Caribbean on an empirical level, and will then assess structural constraints and their relationship with economic vulnerability.
Shocks in Latin America and the Caribbean Diagram III.3 classifies shocks according to their substantive characteristics and their duration.
Firstly, a list is provided showing those shocks which appear the most often in economic studies, and then they are divided into three subcategories: external global shocks, shocks specific to one country, and policy-based shocks.
The origin of external global shocks of importance for the region may be real or financial.
The previous section mentioned that changes in key real variables —worldwide growth, the terms of trade and oil prices— were influenced by breaks between periods of turbulence and stability, and by variations in aggregate volatility.
Catão (2007) provides long-term evidence on shocks common to the whole region.
He argues that financial impulses of global origin are of essential importance in assessing aggregate disequilibria and periods of crisis; particularly important in the region’s experience have been shocks linked to United States interest rates and to phenomena of contagion, as in the case of the Russian crisis of 1998.
Idiosyncratic impulses comprise a broad range which, as in the previous case, includes real phenomena —productivity impulses, discovery of new activities and new markets, natural disasters— and financial phenomena such as foreign aid, remittances, changes in country risk perception or investment of capital flows.
Recent real events in the region have included innovative activities connected with the maquila and services sectors and foreign direct investment (Central America and the Caribbean), the opening up of new markets thanks to free trade agreements or demand for natural resources in Asia, biofuels, and natural disasters in the Caribbean subregion.
On the financial side there have been changes in risk perception resulting from assessments of the capacity to pay public debt, as in Argentina and Uruguay, and beneficial improvements in fiscal policies, as in the case of Brazil.
There are many examples of disequilibria linked to changes in macroeconomic policy —fiscal, monetary or exchange-rate— or in financial policy, as well as structural reforms.
To continue the proposed classification, substantive shocks can be long- or short-term; in other words, they may or may not bring about structural change in economic trends.
The aforementioned examples show that each of these types of shock has been of differing significance depending on its magnitude and the frequency with which they have taken place in time.
Taking account of the most recent studies and literature, the analysis will focus on the shocks which were considered to be the most important, to respond to questions on current trends in volatility and the related policy challenges.
The role of external shocks On the subject of external shocks, Catão (2007) argues that the influence of the external environment is a common element throughout the region.
Seeking the causes of this common factor, he concluded that interest rates and production trends in the advanced economies were very important in explaining the phenomenon and that their impact grew from the 1970s onwards.
Goyal and Sahay (2007) provided further evidence, concluding that in Latin America and the Caribbean, the volatility of economic performance and of policies is greater during low-growth periods.
Real and financial shocks, whether occurring during periods of strong or weak growth, have a similar impact in terms of the instability and turmoil they cause.
The exception to this rule is the trend of interest rates in the United States, which play a very important part.
The same authors also state that extreme episodes such as debt defaults and the “twin crises” (financial and exchange-rate) are related to low growth.
Titelman, Pérez and Minzer (2008) argue that trends in the region’s economic cycle have historically responded to variations in the terms of trade and financial flows.
The relative importance of these has varied across time: the correlation coefficient between the cycle of the region’s GDP and financial fluctuations increased significantly in the 1990s.
Between 1960 and 1995 the region averaged one boom or slowdown every four years, but from 1995 this frequency began to diminish.
The average amplitude of GDP cycles practically doubled from that same year onwards.
Given the significance of variations in the terms of trade and financial flows for economic cycles, the most extreme fluctuations of these two variables in Latin America and the Caribbean in 19802006 have been identified and described and impacts on economic growth have been assessed.
Shocks were identified using a statistical method which consists of decomposing the trend and cycle components of the series.
Then, by constructing empirical probability distributions and the corresponding confidence intervals, the years of financial and terms-of-trade shocks were determined.
This method made it possible to define each country’s history and particularities in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The range of variation of terms-of-trade shocks fell by 6% to 22% in In the case of positive shocks, the amplitude of 8%-28% in the first of those two periods fell to 7%-21% in the second.
Second, the results show that the frequency of financial shocks has increased with time.
In addition, their magnitude increased significantly in the 1990s, rising To compare the effects of financial and terms-of-trade related shocks, their repercussions in terms of absorption were measured.
The results, which agree with the analysis of the observed statistical trends, indicate that financial shocks are a greater danger for the region than negative terms-of-trade shocks.
In 1980-2006, financial shocks led to internal expenditure cuts of 6.99% of GDP (weighted average) whereas the figure for terms-of-trade shocks was 2.6% of GDP.
Contrasting with the trends described above, the average contraction of absorption which resulted from negative financial These results have considerable economic-policy implications.
First, the fact that economic cycles are of lesser duration, have become more frequent and show more pronounced variations underscores the importance of countercyclical policies.
Second, the fact that the cost in terms of falling absorption which results from financial shocks is greater than that from terms-oftrade shocks, and the fact that the latter have become fewer over time, suggests that the design of policies to mitigate the impacts of external shocks should focus more on the financial sector than on the terms of trade.
Temporary and permanent shocks Generally, an economic cycle is defined as a variation which occurs with a certain regularity, in relation to a longterm trend.
Thus, the study of fluctuations was traditionally allotted to economic-cycle theory, and analysis of trend behaviour was assigned to economic-growth theory.
As was seen in the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2006-2007, both phenomena, far from belonging to an abstract field, are representative of the collapse and boom periods proper to the economies of the region, and are not unrelated to the phenomena of volatility and crises.
Aguiar y Gopinath (2007) concluded that emerging economies, unlike developed ones, are relatively more exposed to permanent shocks than to transitory ones.
In other words, the real-income trend is more unstable in the developing countries.
Their conclusions were based on a comparison of the Mexican and United States economies.
According to the results of the observations made by Catão (2007) on four major economies in Latin America and the Caribbean, Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico, when they experienced shocks such as rising world interest rates the effects on production persist for a long time.
Toledo (2008) studied the persistence of shocks in the region in order to assess the extent to which the stylized fact detected by Aguiar and Gopinath is representative of macroeconomic trends in the region’s seven largest economies.
Although the evidence is mixed, he concluded that aggregate fluctuations in the Latin American and Caribbean countries are generally due to highly persistent or permanent shocks (see box III.2).
Otherwise, it would be difficult to design appropriate stabilization policies or to know whether these can in fact counter the impacts of shocks, especially macroeconomic shocks.
In a recent article, Aguiar and Gopinath (2007) analysed, from the perspective of real cycle models, the nature of shocks in the developing and developed economies.
They concluded that aggregate fluctuations in the emerging economies mainly respond to shocks of the permanent type —impacts on trends—, while in the developed economies they are due to transitory shocks.
On that basis, an important question for the Latin American economies is whether permanent shocks are more significant than transitory ones in explaining cyclical fluctuations in the countries of the region.
Following the methodology of Aguiar and Gopinath (2007), Toledo (2008) concluded that yearly data for 1950-2006 for the region’s largest economies —Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru— show that the aggregate productivity shocks which affect them may be permanent or temporary, but very persistent.
While in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia permanent income shocks account for 898% of the total, in Brazil and Peru they make up between 40% and 45%.
This explains two particular characteristics of the region’s economies: the relatively high volatility of consumption and the countercyclical behaviour of net exports.
Any exogenous shock which has occurred in the economies analysed leads to impacts on productivity in the Toledo (2008) model.
It should be recalled that the concept of shock includes both positive and negative events.
During the period analysed, a number of shocks occurred in those economies, whether in relation to the terms of trade or the debt crisis, to name the most significant.
Since 2002 some of those economies —especially the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile and Peru— have been experiencing a positive terms-of-trade shock.
In some cases, such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia, and to a lesser extent Brazil and Peru, this was reflected in trend shocks, whereas in Argentina, Chile and Mexico the shocks were transitory but highly persistent.
The relationship between shocks and structural constraints As already mentioned, structural constraints can strengthen or attenuate the impact of a shock, and thus can affect vulnerability.
Fatás (2002) stated that the repercussions of volatility on growth become greater when the economy is financially underdeveloped.
Loayza and Hnatkovska (2004) came to a similar conclusion, but for countries which are at a medium level of financial development.
Two other structural constraints which magnify the growth impact of volatility are the lack of institutional development and low levels of per capita income.
Catão (2007), however, found no clear positive relationship between the volatility of the economic cycle and liberalization.
Shocks, property rights and appropriability Post-shock adjustment processes are riddled with distributive conflicts which are due to changes in relative prices and complicated rehiring situations.
Inasmuch as the processes are affected by ownership rights disputes, the quality of institutional arrangements designed to deal with such conflicts will have an impact on the effectiveness of shock absorption and therefore on levels of macroeconomic volatility.
The “usual” kind of shocks are assumed to be the least conflictual, because institutions would be better prepared for dealing with them.
Situations linked to episodic or “unusual” shocks, on the other hand, can be more complex because it is much more likely that property rights will not be well defined for this type of contingency.
It could therefore be presumed that in this case, unexpected transfers of income and wealth would be more significant.
It seems obvious that the more efficient the solution to the distributive problem, the better condition a particular country will be in to deal with the impacts of shocks.
For example, improving the country’s net financial position through any means —stabilization funds, sovereign funds, increased reserves— will be reflected in pressure on the exchange rate which, combined with capital inflows, could produce symptoms of Dutch disease.12 For the specific case of Latin America and poverty traps, see Rodríguez (2007).
Machinea and Kacef (2007) and Machinea, Kacef and Weller (2007) analyse the current phenomena of disequilibrium in Latin America, their repercussions in terms of distribution and the labour market and the possible policy responses.
Introduction “If the discussion is not to take place on an abstract plane, the particular case of each country must be examined in order to determine whether its economic structure and existing conditions make those ideas practicable or whether other ways of dealing with the cycle must be found.
Let us briefly examine the various possibilities: in one of them, perhaps the most wide-spread, an attempt is made to lessen or counteract the effects of export fluctuations on internal activity by means of a compensatory policy in which investments, chiefly in public works, are made to vary in adverse ratio to the fluctuation in exports.
During the cyclical upswing, tax revenue increases and the market is favourable to the sale of public bonds.
Nevertheless, the State should not only abstain from using these additional resources to increase public investments, but should restrict them in proportion to the increase in private employment.
Thus during the upswing resources would be accumulated in anticipation of bad times or used to repay bank credit extended during the preceding contraction.
At the mere mention of these requirements the difficulty of fulfilling them is apparent.
For the very reason that the Latin American countries are in full process of development, their investment projects are always larger than can be carried out with the limited means available.
To maintain that, when those means increase and the opportunity of carrying out such projects presents itself, the authorities instead of seizing it should accumulate resources for the future, which may be enjoyed by their successors, would mean making the success of anti-cyclical action depend on attitudes not always compatible with sound political interest.
All this, if it does not lead to the exclusion of the possibility of anti-cyclical action, at least suggests the exploration of other means more suited to Latin America’s individual characteristics” Consistently with Raúl Prebisch’s arguments in the document quoted above, figures III.1 and III.3 show the great importance of policy constraints as factors that affect volatility.
The fact is that such constraints help to determine how much room for manoeuvre or “space” authorities have to make use of countercyclical policies and thus the effectiveness of their efforts to compensate for market and governance failures.
It must therefore be asked how suitable anti-volatility policies may be created at the same time as circumventing constraints in order to generate a space for autonomous implementation of policies.
Studies on reform and growth have found that good policies arise from competent institutions (see, for example, Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001 and 2004).
Accordingly, in the 1990s the great majority of the countries in the region undertook institutional reforms in the expectation that these would bring about better quality policies (Lora, Panizza and Quispe-Agnoli, 2003; Fanelli, 2007).
At the macroeconomic level, however, despite some positive outcomes, the equation between good institutions and effective policies proved far from automatic.
At the same time, the reforms implemented under the rules of play of institutional structure gave way to exchange-rate, monetary and fiscal regimes and policies of a different sort.
One of the lessons arising from the reform process is that, although institutions are important, there is room for autonomous action that does not stem directly from institutions, but depends on a series of policy-related aspects.
For example, a generation of exceptionally politically capable leaders can make a difference, as can progress in knowledge of fluctuations or of the political technologies that serve to handle them.
Random factors can also influence the process, since they can favour or impede policy implementation; contingencies can damage a good policy or, conversely, generate windfall resources to finance specific initiatives.
So, although competent institutions help to avoid poor policy implementation, they cannot guarantee that sound ground rules will automatically lead to greater availability of fiscal and financial resources to support initiatives, skilled leaders, economic knowledge or protection against policy errors if the economic situation should change unexpectedly.
It is certainly easier to correct errors in a good-quality institutional environment, but the process through which institutions discard poor policies or make good use of windfall resources depends on uncertain circumstances that can fuel macroeconomic volatility.
Without detracting from the importance of institutional aspects, the role that constraints play in determining the space for policy autonomy should also be considered.
Elements that impact on autonomy are shown in the space allocated to policy constraints in diagram III.2.
They include quality of the State apparatus and bureaucracy, the normative system’s provision of instruments to achieve the desired ends, the availability of fiscal and financial resources to finance public policies and the capacity of the authorities to manage any distributive conflicts resulting from anti-volatility initiatives.
When the authorities have new mechanisms to act on those elements or when constraints are eased by a positive shock, there is more room for manoeuvre to improve policies aimed at mitigating volatility, even in a deficient institutional framework.
So, a government concerned about external vulnerability could use the resources from a positive external shock to reduce that vulnerability by, for example, paying down public debt early.
If its concern is to relieve the vulnerability of the country’s poorest citizens, it could capitalize on good political conditions for seeking distributive consensus to adopt policies which, intertemporally, would guarantee those citizens a minimum standard of living.
In fact, if it were not for policy autonomy, it would not be possible to reform institutions.
Societies with inadequate institutions would be trapped in a vicious circle in which institutions could not improve without the right reforms and the reforms could not be implemented without adequate institutions.
This section examines the links between the stylized facts identified and countercyclical policies, in order to show the importance of crafting a space for those policies by acting on the constraints that affect them.
The first is to analyse fiscal policy’s countercyclical role, since this is closely related to volatility, be it in a context of fiscal and financial tightness or in a terms-of-trade boom with the distributive conflicts that arise from food and energy price rises.
The question of which policy is allowed to prevail over the others is crucial, since the margin of autonomy for policy implementation depends on the interaction between objectives, instruments and distributive conflicts.
The second stage is to study the relationship between volatility and policies in specific cases which have been selected as paradigmatic.
In these countries, the study looks at appreciable variations in the links between volatility and outcomes over time and changes in policy constraints that have led to different degrees of policy autonomy.
Economic cycles and fiscal policy Historically, the two greatest challenges that fiscal authorities have faced in Latin America and the Caribbean are government over-indebtedness and the procyclicality of fiscal policy.
ECLAC has emphasized on numerous occasions that excessive fiscal deficits and emergency measures to return public debt to a sustainable level increase the probability of fiscal policy predominating over monetary and exchange-rate policy, prompting unanticipated changes in the respective rules of play.
Since, as Titelman, Pérez and Minzer (2008) have pointed out, in recent decades strong negative external shocks on the financial front have severely tested the countries’ capacity to meet their obligations, it is no surprise that governments have repeatedly changed their monetary regimes during the episodes of turbulence that began with the debt crisis.
As shown in diagram III.2, studies which have attempted to explain the difficulties involved in fiscal solvency, economic cycles and the predominance of one policy over another have certainly not disregarded the role played by structural and policy constraints.
It has been extensively argued that the procyclicality of fiscal policy in developing economies reflects the weakness of policy instruments and the bias has been attributed to the insolvency of the fiscal accounts and a perverse interaction of external volatility with the particular features of the economic structure and elements of the political economy (Braun and Raddatz, 2008).
In these circumstances, it has been sustained that the proper fiscal policy tool for avoiding those problems is the adoption of structural deficit or cyclically adjusted measures and targets.
As will be seen later and in the respective box, however, the design and implementation of such a rule represents a challenge both technical and institutional.
It is important to consider not only the level of taxation and procyclicality of fiscal policies, but also their volatility.
According to Fatás and Mihov (2001), an increase of one standard deviation in the volatility of fiscal policy reduces growth by 0.75 percentage points.
Goyal and Sahay (2007) used an approach based on the identification of low- and high-growth episodes, analysing the behaviour of fiscal policy in each.
They concluded that variations in level of volatility by type of growth episode are more important than the procyclicality or otherwise of fiscal policy.
It has not proven easy, however, to evaluate the fiscal policy response to economic cycles.
This is because, first, it is difficult to choose the fiscal policy indicator to use for the purpose.
Since the early work of Gavin and Perotti (1997), it has been acknowledged as a stylized fact that fiscal policy is procyclical in emerging economies.
This is not a desirable trait, because it implies that during recession government consumption decreases and the tax burden rises, all of which deepens the contraction in economic activity.
The studies that followed that of Gavin and Perotti typically analyse the average cyclical properties of fiscal policy in Latin America overall and compare these with policies in other regions or groups of countries.
Thus, they disregard from the outset the possibility that Latin American experiences may be heterogeneous.
In a recent study, Bello and Jiménez (2008) concluded that in the period 1990-2006 fiscal policy in the countries they analysed behaved in a differentiated manner.
In “good times”, i.e., when GDP growth is above trend, the cyclical components of their spending definitions are positive, while in “bad times” the opposite occurs.
In short, none of the countries studied reflected the pattern observed in industrialized countries, since none ran a countercyclical fiscal policy in the period examined.
The question of how fiscal policy behaves in economic cycles is particularly important in the current conditions.
In the last few years, many of the region’s countries have experienced a macroeconomic boom driven by positive external shocks from upturns in the terms of trade and the financial situation (see ECLAC, 2007a and 2006b), greatly improving fiscal balances.
In the biennium 2006-2007, over 80% of the Latin American and Caribbean countries returned a primary surplus, something unprecedented in the last few decades.
These studies have in common the use of a database of annual data encompassing from the 1960s up to In order to assess the stabilizing properties of fiscal policy, it is necessary to properly identify the relations between this policy and macroeconomic cycles.
It is often argued that a procyclical fiscal policy can widen the fluctuations of important macro variables such as output, consumption, investment and net exports, whereas a countercyclical policy helps to stabilize them in a context of macroeconomic volatility.
This is particularly important in underdeveloped countries, where a higher proportion of business cycle volatility translates into well-being costs (Pallage The research of Bello and Jiménez (2008) was based on the cyclical properties of fiscal policy in nine Latin American countries taken individually, unlike other studies which have been based on average cyclical characteristics.
Since the cyclical characteristics of fiscal policy could have been altered by the economic reform processes that took place in many of the Latin American countries in past decades and, particularly, macro performance in the last few years, the analysis focused on the last 15 years and thus used quarterly data (whereas other studies used annual data).
The information available was used to analyse the performance of central government.
The economic conditions generated after the reform processes were very different from those before the reforms; for example, the climate of economic openness.
A number of fiscal developments also occurred in this period, such as the shift in the concentration of tax income from foreign trade to value added tax, the privatization of public enterprises, and the decentralization and modification of the pension system with the introduction of individual capitalization components.
These economic and fiscal reforms shaped a different kind of public sector and could thus have affected the cyclical characteristics of fiscal policy.
Bello and Jiménez (2008) used public spending as the fiscal variable to assess the cyclical characteristics of fiscal policy.
As noted by Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh (2004), this variable is an instrument, rather than an outcome like the fiscal balance, so the relations between its cyclical components and output can be used to establish the type of cyclicity of fiscal policy unambiguously.
Specifically, Bello and Jiménez looked at primary spending and current spending, excluding interest payments.
Having defined the cyclical stances of fiscal policy, they also examined the cyclical implications of other spending variables, such as income.
In effect, they used disaggregated fiscal components, unlike studies based on major aggregates such as income, spending or balances, and were thus able to identify the fiscal components most sensitive to macroeconomic fluctuations and offer some guidelines as to possible policy measures.
The main research finding was that in the period 1990-2005 fiscal policy showed differentiated trends in the countries analysed.
In “good times”, when GDP performs above the historical trend, the cyclical component of the spending definition used is positive, whereas in “bad times” the opposite occurs.
None of the cases studied reflected the same pattern observed in the industrialized countries.
Thus, none of the countries examined ran countercyclical fiscal policies in the period examined.
Zambrano (2008) studied the structural and cyclical components of the fiscal “bonanza” in the region, assessing the extent to which it reflected temporary or cyclical factors (see box IV.2).
He concluded that in most of the Latin American and Caribbean countries structural balances —as a measure of the related financial conditions— are weaker than observed balances.
First, because the countries have benefited from high prices for their main export commodities in the international markets, so that fiscal developments will depend on the evolution of the global market for such goods in the future.
Second, many countries are now in the expansionary phase of the cycle, which has endowed them with an increasing flow of fiscal income that will tend to diminish in the medium term.
In short, the evidence and research available indicates that fiscal policy plays a fundamental role in controlling the effects of shocks in the current conditions.
In order to prevent fiscal policy from opaquing other macro policies, however, it must be remembered that fiscal measures cannot be designed without considering, for example, their links with other objectives such as growth and poverty reduction.
It would be worthwhile, therefore, to examine specific cases in order to identify key aspects to bear in mind in implementing antivolatility measures and coordinating them with the rest of the battery of policies.
In order to examine fiscal performance, therefore, structural or “cyclically adjusted” measures or estimates are created.
Unlike the conventional system for measuring fiscal balances, the objective of this type of estimate is to filter out the effects on public revenue and spending of economic cycles —temporary fluctuations in economic activity that occur automatically during recession or economic expansion.
In general, such indicators are used to ascertain what the fiscal balances would have been if the economy were in its usual medium-term cycle.
This is based on the notion that economies move around a trajectory that reflects the potential or trend growth rate and that is affected by permanent and temporary shocks, the second of which generate cyclical variations in output, hence the divergences between real and potential or trend output.
Such measurements, then, are used to quantify cyclical deviations and the sensitivity of fiscal balances and their components to those fluctuations.
For a better understanding of the subject, it will be recalled that in traditional Keynesian economics, high public-sector surpluses generate a contraction in economic activity.
If the larger public surplus results from a process of economic expansion that has also generated higher public revenue, however, then it would be misleading to consider fiscal policy to be contractionary simply because the fiscal surplus is higher than envisaged.
Calculation of the structural fiscal balance thus improves understanding of the variations in the fiscal balance that are temporary by their own cyclical nature, trends in public-sector balances, the vulnerability of fiscal balances to external shocks and the short-term effects of fiscal policy on economic activity.
There are several methods for arriving at “cyclically adjusted” estimates, such as those developed by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and OECD.
These organizations use different techniques to “break down the series” of output to separate trend and cycle: these consist of filtering statistical series or making an approximate calculation of the economy’s potential GDP using aggregate production functions.
Then the effects of the economic cycle of the budget can be estimated.
Once that choice has been made, only the automatic components are cyclically adjusted, by estimating their output elasticity.
Lastly, cyclical components of income and expenditure are discounted from the observed or executed level in the budget, to arrive at the structural or cyclically adjusted fiscal balance.
There is no consensus in the specialized research about how to identify temporary and permanent shocks and, thus, how to separate cycle from trend.
Although it is extensively used in OECD countries, Chile is the only country in the region to have explicitly used the structural fiscal balance in formulating economic policy; in the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean, the availability of data and approximate calculations on the countries’ structural fiscal position is scarce and not systematic.
Zambrano (2008) constructed comparable structural fiscal balance indicators for 19 Latin American and Caribbean countries.
He began by calculating structural tax revenues in order to separate fiscal income from direct and indirect taxes from that percentage of permanent or medium-term income that could be attributed solely to the economy’s particular position in relation to the economic cycle.
A further adjustment was made to the fiscal income accounts to distinguish between inflows received by the public sector from the production of primary goods and other revenues such as direct taxation or export taxes, transfers, dividends or royalties of public enterprises.
The preliminary finding was that, after almost five years of solid economic growth in a context of rising international prices for the region’s main export commodities, on average the structural fiscal balance is less favourable than the fiscal results observed.
This is particularly noticeable in the cases of countries that produce raw materials for export.
There, the gap between structural and observed fiscal balances has been widening in the last few years.
The structural fiscal position shows that part of these countries’ income is transitory and will tend to decline once the economies and commodity prices regain their mediumterm trend.
Ruiz del Castillo, “Política fiscal, ciclo macroeconómico y la construcción de indicadores de resultado fiscal cíclicamente ajustados”, Santiago, Chile, 2008, unpublished; and O.
Differences in policies and trajectories The work of Bello and Jiménez identified Chile and Brazil as two countries whose fiscal approach to economic cycles could be described as acyclical, which suggests that they have adopted more consistent macroeconomic policies.
The development of these countries’ monetary regimes also reveals a constant concern for stability, since both have significantly reduced inflation, worked on the institutional level to establish inflation targets and moved ahead on fiscal institutionality.
The two countries have had very different results in the last few decades in terms of growth, however.
The countries that run a procyclical fiscal policy include some that have been highly volatile and had unstable economic institutions in the past, such as Argentina.
But they also include Mexico, which significantly improved the macroeconomic rules of play, implemented a system of inflation targets and achieved substantial progress in fiscal affairs, despite which its rate of growth is relatively low.
Lastly, there are cases such as the Dominican Republic which, along with Chile and Panama, registered the region’s highest growth rate in the period 1961-2006, but which has much greater macroeconomic volatility and much less stable rules of play than Chile.
Given the variability of relations between volatility, economic performance, rules of play and policies, these experiences warrant a closer look.
The last three columns report indicators whose behaviour is closely related to monetary, fiscal and exchange-rate policies.
The countries with the most frequent crises are Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Honduras, Guatemala and Brazil, although 11 of the 19 countries were in a particularly low-growth pattern —more than one standard deviation lower than average— more than 10% of the time.
The relationship between frequency of crises and the average rate of growth for the period was negative.
The countries at the top of the ranking also typically raised large amounts in inflationary tax and, with few exceptions, their financial markets were shallow, as measured by credit to the private sector.
The period used to construct this classification, however, is long enough to suggest that more differentiated patterns may exist over time.
It would therefore be interesting to break it down into shorter periods based on stylized facts identified in the analysis of episodes of turbulence and breaking points in chapter III.
Tables IV.2a, IV.2b and IV.2c show the performance of the countries classified respectively.
The figures are highly representative of the situation in each country, both as regards policies and in terms of their economy’s ability to deal with shocks and the consequences of volatility.
To illustrate this point, five countries that are considered to be paradigmatic cases will be examined in detail.
Rep. of) Economic growth b Macro volatility c Excessive volatility of consumption d Inflationary tax e Volatility of real exchange rate f Frequency of crises (percentages) a (Bol.
Rep. of) Economic growth b Excessive volatility of consumption d Inflationary tax e Volatility of real exchange rate f Credit to the private sector /GDP (percentages) Macro volatility c Frequency of crises (percentages) a Economic growth b Macro volatility c Excessive volatility of consumption d Inflationary tax e Volatility of real exchange rate f (Bol.
Interestingly enough, these two countries were to become the fastest-growing in the region in the following decades.
Since Chile had a low rate of growth as well as significant volatility, it could reasonably be supposed to be one of the worst affect by the debt crisis.
However, although the Chilean economy experienced several episodes of turbulence in the 1980s, it did not reduce levels of volatility or its propensity to crisis, but nor did it show a net contraction.
In fact, Chile registered the second highest growth rate in the region and, most importantly, saw this rate quicken from 1986 on.
It was one of the first countries in which this phenomenon occurred after the chaos of the early 1980s.
The extremely high volatility of consumption has translated into a considerable loss in well-being, especially in the sectors closest to the poverty line.
Inflationary tax was very high in this period too, although the real exchange rate was less volatile than the average and, despite a financial crisis of considerable magnitude, the level of monetization increased sharply.
After 1991, Chile was the region’s fastest-growing country and remained free of crises.
The spectacular development of credit generated very positive externalities in terms of policy autonomy, by making more mechanisms available to the central bank authorities.
It also suggests that the structures governing financial intermediation were increasingly solid.
Inflationary tax decreased as a proportion of output and real exchange rate volatility decreased.
This virtuous growth and volatility trajectory is clearly apparent in figures IV.1a and IV.1b: the growth rate rose strongly and volatility measured by the standard deviation of growth dropped considerably.
The shaded column shows the first year of the faster growth period.
It may also be observed (see figure IV.1b) that the reduced volatility reflected a notable increase in the investment ratio.
In principle, this supports the specialists’ arguments on the importance of reducing uncertainty and developing the financial sector from the point of view of investment.
All the indicators associated with this last point, such as the collection of inflationary tax, real exchange rate volatility and financial depth, have improved solidly.
Chile is also representative in terms of the autonomy of its policies and institutions.
Having started at a disadvantage in terms of institutional stability and excessive economic volatility, the country was able to overcome major episodes of turbulence and regain a growth track.
Although substantial reforms began in the mid-1970s in Chile, the development of the country’s macroeconomy would be difficult to explain without reference to its policy initiatives, which were highly autonomous in the sense that they were not an “automatic” result of the existing rules of play.
In fact, the leeway for policy implementation was essential in order to take measures to correct errors arising from the reform process.
The country’s performance indicators are quite modest compared with the rest of the region, however, and its trajectory in the period analysed was patchy.
In fact, Brazil went from being the country with the region’s highest growth rate between 1961 and 1980 to being one of the those with lowest growth in the period 1991-2006.
Later it surged again, driven by the debt crisis and, in these circumstances, Brazilian growth practically collapsed.
In the 1980s, the frequency with which the Brazilian economy recorded very low growth rates increased from 5% to 44%.
Together with the heightened volatility, the collection of inflationary tax increased and the real exchange rate was very unstable.
These two facts indicate inefficient and highly volatile monetary and exchange-rate policies.
In fact, the surge in volatility would ease only gradually over several years.
As for anti-volatility policy initiatives, the debt crisis imposed constraints so severe that it was not until the mid-1990s that the authorities could be said to have regained enough autonomy to implement a stabilization programme in the form of the Real Plan, which achieved great advances in terms of controlling volatility and inflation.
As shown in figure IV.2a, volatility fell sharply from the mid-1990s on.
As well as the Real Plan, this was undoubtedly a result of the increasing solidity of fiscal and monetary policies thanks to the modification of the exchange-rate and monetary regimes in l999 and the implementation of the Fiscal Responsibility Act in 2000.
This evidence suggests that the explosion of volatility in the 1980s reflected both a permanent break in the growth trend and a weakening of the Brazilian economy’s capacity to boost growth; the last phase of acceleration occurred in the 1970s.
This weakness is a matter for concern, given that it has arisen despite structural reforms and successful efforts to improve macroeconomic policy.
Closer observation of the performance of investment and Brazil’s fiscal accounts suggests that the poor growth may not be entirely divorced from the policies implemented.
More specifically, as shown in diagram III.2, the authorities need some degree of autonomy in order to create anti-volatility policies.
In Brazil, this was necessary after the debt crisis, first, to generate a primary fiscal surplus capable of servicing the public debt and, second, for the central bank to be able to implement a credible monetary policy consistent with the objective of reducing excessive inflation.
Today inflation is much lower and the burden of the public debt has gradually eased.
The profile of the debt has improved as well, in terms of maturities, currency composition and indexation (Luporini and Licha, 2008).
This suggests that the authorities were able not only to generate degrees of autonomy for their policies, but also to implement them successfully, preventing fiscal urgencies and the management of the public debt from predominating over monetary policy.
One hypothesis that cannot be ruled out is that initiatives designed to open up spaces —that is, reduce constraints— for implementing anti-volatility policies had undesired effects on incentives, in general, and investment, in particular, thus damaging the capacity to accelerate growth.
In short, a number of lessons on anti-volatility policies may be drawn from the Brazilian experience.
One of them is that growth is far from being an automatic consequence of lower levels of instability.
Suitable measures to mitigate volatility do not obviate specific policies aimed at increasing growth.
A second lesson is that major crises such as that of the 1980s result from structural breaks that can push a growing economy —like post-war Brazil— onto a low-growth, low-investment trajectory that can last for a significant length of time.
At the risk of stating the obvious, it is more difficult to craft credible fiscal and monetary policies after a lengthy period of high volatility and crisis.
Investment rate Unlike in Chile, where the decline in volatility coincided with an upturn in investment, in Brazil investment has not reacted or has done so only slowly and belatedly.
It may be that the creation of a suitable climate for anti-volatility fiscal policy reduced the fiscal openings for growth.
In a recent work, Luporini and Licha (2008) hypothesized that the decrease in volatility brought about by more solid fiscal and monetary policies may have had the undesired effect of weakening growth fundamentals.
As Castelar Pinheiro and Bonelli (2007) underlined in their assessment of growth in Brazil, the scenario of high real interest rates combined with the sharp rise in the tax burden and the low level of public investment could have discouraged private investment and the process of self-discovery.
But the Argentine economy became more unstable in the years that followed and actually become the region’s most unstable country during the debt crisis and in the 1990s.
Like in the case of Brazil, the financial turmoil seriously affected the country’s rate of growth, which turned negative.
The economy had already started to become more volatile before the debt crisis, largely because of the shocks that led to problems of political instability and would ultimately crumple the growth that had been accelerating since 1964.
This combination of low growth and high volatility left Argentina in a very vulnerable situation when the Mexican moratorium occurred in 1982.
As shown in figure IV.3a, a distinctive feature of the Argentine economy is the number of years of absolute and prolonged decline in per capita GDP.
This fall was due, in part, to the substantial variation in relative prices and, in part, to the destruction of wealth —especially financial wealth— and the structural changes that forced the reallocation of property rights (Fanelli, 2008a).
As a consequence, the distribution not only of income, but also of assets, was significantly altered.
It was time of highly volatile real exchange rates, in which inflationary tax represented 5 GDP points, with scant credit to the private sector.
It is not surprising that the financial shocks and policy instabilities had very negative effects on the investment rate, which plunged in the early 1980s.
Despite the heightened volatility, the investment rate was quite high in the second half of the 1970s.
This was mainly a reflection of the high level of public investment and the inordinate expansion of credit, which incubated the debt crisis.
This suggests that, when the effects of the economic cycle were disregarded, the public sector’s greater freedom for policy implementation —together with cheaper external credit and favourable terms of trade in the 1970s— contributed to increasing external vulnerability.
This opening was used mainly to implement structural reforms to reactivate growth.
The authorities attempted to avoid the need for countercyclical policies by creating a currency board, with the Convertibility Act.
This offered the advantage of requiring very little in the way of discretionality but was very demanding in terms of the efforts needed to avoid the occurrence of a phenomenon of fiscal and financial predominance.
The system proved very effective in reducing inflation —table IV.2c shows the sharp reduction in takings of inflationary tax— but ultimately caved in precisely because the fiscal policy acquired predominance over the convertibility regime.
According to Cetrángolo and Jiménez (2003), the dilemma between strengthening competitiveness through fiscal incentives and the need to show a surplus on the fiscal accounts translated into an unresolved conflict between fiscal and external equilibrium, and this worked against the sustainability of the fiscal policy of convertibility.
Flaws in the design of financial system regulations had a similar effect, since they exposed borrowers to excessive exchange-rate risk and allowed banks to take disproportionate risks with government liabilities.
The experiences culminated with a financial crisis and default on part of the public debt (see Chisari and others, 2007).
In the light of these developments, it is unsurprising that Argentina should not have become more financially solid, despite having reduced inflation.
The Argentine case, however, has a number of traits that should not be disregarded.
First, despite the effects of the crises from 1999 to 2002, the average rate of growth for the period 1991-2006 was higher than that recorded in the two preceding historical periods (see tables IV.2a, b and c).
At that time, moreover, the country experienced the first upturn in economic activity since l964.
So, from 2003 onwards, Argentina enjoyed an extremely high rate of growth, to the extent that the country now meets the conditions to be considered a candidate for beginning a process of acceleration.
Second, figure IV.3a shows how the episodes of acceleration of 1964 and 1991 both coincided with a marked drop in the level of volatility, but this did not continue and rising volatility ultimately caused a collapse in economic activity.
Putting these facts in perspective, it would appear that the main obstacle facing the Argentine economy is having failed to reduce volatility despite having regained the capacity to grow.
It may be that distributive conflicts play a particularly important role (Chisari and others, 2007).
As noted, the countries experienced a number of crises in which property rights had to be redefined and income distribution took a markedly regressive track.
Although there were no periods of acceleration, the growth rate was relatively high (3.5% per capita), exceeding the average for the region.
It was also a very stable economy, with no major variations in the real exchange rate and low inflation.
In a context in which the frequency of crises was equal to zero, consumption and output volatility were very similar, despite the lack of financial solidity.
As figure IV.4a shows, this favourable combination was turned upside down in the 1980s.
Although significant progress has been made as regards volatility and growth in the present decade, thanks to the implementation of more suitable policies, the fact remains that Mexico’s economy —like Brazil’s— has been hard put to regain the stable growth path characteristic of its post-war period.
The lack of capacity to accelerate growth is no small matter: Mexico is the only one of the five countries examined that has experienced no accelerated growth period at all since the 1950s.
Just as occurred in Brazil and Argentina, volatility began to increase in the mid-1970s, before the debt crisis, and then surged after it broke out.
Interestingly, like in Argentina, in the late 1970s the increased volatility coincided with an upturn in the investment rate.
This situation was unsustainable and ended with a sharp drop in that rate during the “lost decade”, partly owing to the strong adjustment in public investment (see figure IV.4b).
As occurred in much of the region, the adjustment policies significantly reduced the fiscal space for growth.2 The resulting problems translated into recurrent episodes of predominance which prevented the coordination of fiscal and monetary policies.
The most striking of those events was the implosion of convertibility in 20012002, prompted by fiscal and financial preeminence over the currency board regime.
It would therefore seem that one of the main challenges of the Argentine economy is to regain policy autonomy in order to seek distributive consensuses that can reduce the probabilities of predominance and thus allow better coordination of policies designed to exploit the opportunities for growth that appear to exist.
The positive shock provided by the terms-of-trade upturn of the last few years has helped in this direction by generating twin surpluses —on the current and fiscal accounts— and increasing the space for policy autonomy, although the debate on income distribution continues.
Investment rate In the 1990s, the Mexican economy was unable to steady volatility at a low level.
It was particularly affected by the 1994-1995 crisis, which was triggered by flaws in financial sector oversight and excessive exposure of the short-term public debt to exchange-rate risk.
These predominated over the exchange-rate regime, forcing the authorities to implement a traumatic devaluation in December 1994.
As Ramos-Francia and Torres García (2005) underlined, it proved impossible to make significant progress in terms of improving the monetary regime and instituting a system of inflation targets until after the fiscal accounts had been put in order, that is, once sufficient control had been gained over policy instruments in order to avoid fiscal predominance.
It was also important to improve financial arrangements to prevent problems in managing public debt or financial disequilibria from allowing the respective policies episodes (the shaded lines in figure IV.5 a and b).
This virtuous growth cycle, however, was interrupted at the start of the 2000s by a financial crisis that stemmed from oversight and regulation problems.
The immediate consequence of this was that financial predominance in the public accounts ate into the space for policy autonomy.
The central bank provided assistance to the system, which generated a significant quasi-fiscal deficit and threw the public accounts into disequilibrium.
In addition, the loss of policymaking space occurred at a particularly bad time, since the country had been hit by two major shocks: the oil price rises and pressure from China in the United States market weakening free zones’ competitiveness.
One very significant fact that distinguishes the Dominican Republic’s economy from Argentina’s, Mexico’s and Brazil’s and brings it closer to Chile’s is that it was, proportionally, less affected by the debt crisis; although volatility increased and the growth rate was low, it did not turn negative as it did in the region’s three largest countries.
The trait that most clearly marks relative performance during the crisis is, however, the investment rate (see figure IV.5b).
After a heavy fall, investment picked up towards the end of the 1980s and grew strongly in the 1990s, alongside reforms implemented to boost tourism and industrial production in the free zones.
Although figure IV.5a shows good results in terms of growth and volatility in the 1990s, it should be borne in mind that these aggregate figures mask a substantial process of structural change.
At that time, the Dominican Republic was seeking to change its international trade specialization profile and diversify exports, developing new comparative advantages that had little to do with its traditional strengths.
Foreign capital played a key role in this process, with investments in both tourism and free zones.
This would not have been possible, however, without the reform and policy initiatives which showed great flexibility to lock into opportunities.
Having avoided the collapse in the 1980s, the strategy of investment incentives enabled the Dominican Republic to achieve two growth spurts in the 1990s.
Notably, it was the economy to record most such to become preeminent.
Mexico has made considerable progress: the inflation rate fell from over 50% to around 4% and excessive consumption volatility decreased along with real exchange-rate variability.
Despite the favourable trends of these stability indicators, however, the financial market remains shallow.
Apparently, room for autonomous policy implementation is still significantly limited in Mexico.
One main constraint is the lack of resources, since the tax burden is relatively low in relation to per capita GDP, making public resources highly dependent on revenues from energy products.
It is thus more difficult to achieve a trade-off between fiscal leverage for growth and space for anti-volatility policies, while the resources to finance policy initiatives ultimately depend largely on the behaviour of petroleum prices.
Investment rate Despite these difficulties, in the most recent period the Dominican economy regained a growth path, but volatility remains high and policy constraints are still significant.
The growth of the economy shows a high standard deviation, although it has been able to stabilize consumption fairly well, perhaps thanks to the moderating effect of remittances.
Chinese competition for the country’s free zone exports in the United States market and higher oil prices have affected those results, but one of the root causes, as noted earlier, has been the financial crisis caused by the lack of regulation and oversight in the sector.
In short, the experience of the Dominican Republic suggests that sound policies can translate into good results, but institutional weakness —in this case, problems related to oversight and regulation shortfalls in the financial system— always represent a threat of volatility.
The country is also an example of structural constraints generating a vulnerability which, in the final analysis, can leave the government without enough room for manoeuvre to deploy policies to reduce the effects of negative external shocks such as oil price rises and competition in the United States market.
A comparative analysis The examination of growth and volatility trends in the five countries throws up some important similarities in the behaviour of three of the region’s largest economies: Argentina, Brazil and Mexico.
In all three cases, inability to handle the fallout from the shocks of the early 1980s had farreaching consequences.
In turn, the intensity of the crisis seemed to have to do with the fact that these economies were vulnerable, that macroeconomic volatility had been increasing since the mid-1970s and that, aside from the role played by oil shocks, erroneous use of spaces for policy autonomy also had an influence.
A second similarity between the three countries is that, unlike in Chile, the reform process of the 1990s was not enough to restore growth and reduce volatility.
The evidence suggests, however, that the tasks pending for achieving those objectives are different for the three countries.
A common feature of Mexico and Brazil, but not of Argentina, is that despite the reduction in volatility in both economies, growth remains low and well below the rates seen prior to the 1980s.
Argentina, conversely, shows a greater capacity for accelerating growth, even though its economy is slightly more volatile.
Whereas Brazil experienced its last rapid growth spurt in the mid-1960s and Mexico has had none at all, Argentina recorded one in the mid-1990s.
In addition, Argentina is now in its sixth consecutive year of high growth, and is thus a candidate for growth acceleration.
Between 1991 and 2007 the average growth rate of per capita GDP in the Argentine economy outstripped that of the other two countries by more than a percentage point.
Lastly, both Brazil and Mexico have shown a much higher capacity to improve the quality of their anti-volatility policies than Argentina has.
This is reflected in inflation indicators and, especially, in access to international capital markets.
Macroeconomic policy challenges in Macroeconomic policy and economic cycles Volatility is often exacerbated by macroeconomic policy design failings, attributable to political factors, conflicts of interest or errors in identifying shocks.
Such failings may also heighten distributive conflicts and disputes relating to ownership rights, which, in turn, may result in wealth destruction or in the loss of unique opportunities for accelerating growth.
Problems of this type have arisen on more than one occasion in Latin America and the Caribbean, when countercyclical policies have not only proved futile in reducing volatility but have often actually been the cause of it.
This section looks at three factors that are key to understanding the nature of the difficulties inherent in the countercyclical policies adopted in the region.
First, lack of coordination of the different policies that affect volatility is a fundamental problem (though this is not to deny the importance of technical errors or erroneous expectations).
This failing is often due to political economy constraints linked to problems of ownership, previously analysed, and to the uneven income distribution that is typical of the region (ECLAC, 2006b).
While public policy can affect volatility through a number of channels, studies on the macroeconomic problems in the region usually attribute such volatility, on the one hand, to the effects of the monetary or exchange-rate policy or both and, on the other, to fiscal policy.
In the context of monetary and exchange-rate regimes, the corner solutions (hard peg or managed float) favoured in the 1990s (see Frankel, 1999) have been losing ground to inflation-target and free-float systems (Mishkin, 2000).
The convertibility crisis in Argentina and the competitiveness problems experienced by some dollarized countries played a significant role, although the overall decline in inflation indices may well have had an impact.
There has been no shortage of reflections on the need to preserve the stability of financial markets and on the distributive effects of what are seen as excessive variations in the exchange rate.
Other central banks (including those of Argentina and the Dominican Republic) took a similar approach, opting for a monetary-target system as a means of containing inflation.
In analysing the issue of real exchange-rate competitiveness, Eichengreen (2007) maintains that countries whose level of development is equivalent to the regional average should be concerned with the exchange rate since, as he points out, acceleration of economic growth is practically unheard of without a competitive exchange rate.
It is justifiable to make the real exchange rate a policy objective, first because of political economy distortions, which usually hurt the export sector, and, second, because of the need to take advantage of externalities linked to export activities, for example, backward and forward linkages, and accumulation of know-how.
In the light of the Asian experience, however, Eichengreen notes that the exchange rate is endogenous and that this policy has a limit.
As exports and growth take off, it is natural that the currency should appreciate.
If policymakers wish to avoid too sharp an appreciation, they should use fiscal, rather than monetary, policy, and thus generate a larger surplus.
In short, although the regional experience points collectively towards the advisability of making the inflation target the pivot of monetary policy, this target is often opaqued by the importance attached to other objectives such as self-insurance, financial stability, competitiveness and equitable income distribution.
Problems of implementation also mean that uncertainty becomes a major constraint in decision-making.
Lastly, it should be recognized that monetary policy is, to some extent, dependent on fiscal policy, since if the latter does not contribute effectively to economic equilibrium, there is very little chance of achieving correction and stabilization through monetary policy.
Fiscal policy is generally recognized to be crucial for reducing excessive volatility.
In this regard, fiscal authorities are recommended to pursue two basic objectives: ensuring fiscal solvency and avoiding a procyclical bias.
One of the fundamental problems in managing volatility is the trade-off that generally exists between stabilization and solvency, since a single instrument usually has to achieve both objectives.
Thus, a discretionary fiscal policy may be effective for attenuating the effects of the business cycle, but it is also highly susceptible to pressures and liable to compromise solvency.
Moreover, although rules help to reduce the bias towards deficit, they limit the possibilities of using the budget to absorb cyclical fluctuations, thus reducing flexibility and fuelling volatility.
Clearly, just as the impact of the discretionary approach on solvency will depend on the quality of the institutions involved, so the repercussions of a given rule on volatility will be determined by the design of that rule.
Indications are that a structural rule which takes into account variations in the business cycle in calculating the permitted budget deficit, as in the case of Chile, or which makes provision for a stabilization fund will be more effective than one that merely sets a maximum deficit.
The main disadvantage of a stabilization fund is that it creates an incentive to spend when public revenues are rising, for example under the influence of a temporary positive shock or a growth spike of uncertain duration.
This may translate into a procyclical fiscal movement and increase pressure on policymakers to ignore the rule when the positive impetus disappears, as occurred in some countries of the European Union.
The type of macrofiscal rules that exist in several countries of the region, based on a maximum deficit or public borrowing limit, were designed to resolve solvency issues within fiscal policy that were not related to the economic cycle.
Moreover, they are considered more appropriate for coordinating policies applied by the different levels of government of decentralized economies.
Although a structural balance rule may be more appropriate because it includes information on the current phase of the cycle, one problem it presents is how to determine the likely duration of the current situation.
Cetrángolo and Gómez Sabaini (2007) show that the far- reaching structural changes introduced in fiscal policy in the region may make it difficult to estimate expenditure and taxation elasticities, since they affect the stability of the parameters.
Even a rule that factors in cyclical variations may be unable to adapt to uncommonly powerful shocks.
The authorities there had to make some alterations to their use of funds and modify the structural deficit target owing to an unusually sustained rise in terms of trade.
According to Jiménez and Tromben (2006), the difficulties could be even greater in the case of rules establishing a stabilization fund.
The incentive to keep fiscal policy tight at the top of the cycle is that resources will then be available during the downturn.
But when a positive shock continues over a long period, the incentive to spend the “excess” surplus increases.
Furthermore, countries with a federal or highly decentralized structure will find it difficult to implement rules of this kind, since the greater the number of subnational entities involved, the more the information required for implementing structural rules, and the more difficult it will be to identify the specific effects of shocks in the different regions and governments.
Jiménez and Tromben (2006) also point out that policymakers generally face two dilemmas when commodity prices are strong: how to make the most of the related increase in fiscal revenues and how to use the fiscal surpluses generated to avoid the macroeconomic problems often triggered by such windfalls.
As regards the first problem, the tools used will depend on whether the resources are in public or private hands.
The most direct way of converting commodities into fiscal revenues has been for governments to participate in mining and drilling operations through State-owned firms.
Conversely, when commodities are extracted by privately-owned enterprises, the government uses fiscal instruments ranging from royalties and income and profit taxes to withholding taxes on exports.
The problem does not end with securing the profits, however, since it is necessary to ensure that these are effectively allocated to maximize growth.
If the private sector has control over the resources in the context of an underdeveloped financial system, there is little to prevent windfall gains from positive shocks from pouring into overinvestment in the natural resource sector, a real-estate boom or consumption of luxury goods.
This problem of allocation also arises in the case of remittances to the countries of Central America and the Caribbean.
If the positive shock feeds into a fiscal surplus owing to State ownership of resources, the authorities have only to resolve the problem of what to do with the windfall surplus.
In the second case, clearly, the problem of coordinating the fiscal and monetary policies must be addressed.
But it is also clear that in order to allocate resources effectively, these policies must be combined with policies for financial development, investment in infrastructure and human capital, and for promotion of innovation.
To sum up, beyond the correct definition of the rules of the fiscal game, a number of questions must be borne in mind when evaluating the relationship between fiscal policy and volatility, including the need to identify the nature of the shock, the uncertainty facing decision-makers and the need for coordination.
Institutional transparency must be enhanced as this could be extremely valuable in avoiding solvency problems and would have positive effects on volatility by reducing the risk of crisis, which, as already seen, is one of the most damaging forms of volatility.
Anti-volatility policies and distributive conflicts Two important conclusions that emerge from this study concern the changes in the volatility dynamic and the type of shocks confronted by Latin America and the Caribbean.
As regards volatility patterns, there is reasonably convincing evidence to suggest that the region is now in a more favourable phase than in the 1990s.
Although volatility is still significant, it has abated somewhat, while the growth rate is high —comparable only with that of the period between the late 1960s and the early 1970s; moreover, the capacity to stabilize consumption seems to have improved, which is a further sign that volatility is no longer at excessive levels.
Analysis confirms that shocks of financial and global origin continue to be very significant, even though their profile has changed in the course of the decade, with greater fluctuations in relative international prices affecting the various countries in different ways.
Those countries that enjoy comparative advantages in natural resources have benefited from better terms of trade thanks to rising prices for minerals, energy and food products.
Conversely, this trend has been prejudicial to the countries of Central America and the Caribbean, which depend more on exports from free zones and are oil-importing economies, although remittances from migrant workers have helped to cushion external shocks.
Unlike financial shocks, which damage primarily monetary and financial stability and aggregate demand, energy and food price shocks put pressure on the inflation rate by pushing up costs and influence income distribution through changes in relative prices.
This suggests that vulnerability is now being generated by a new type of interaction between shocks and structural limitations, different from that seen in the past.
While in the 1990s, the structural features exacerbating vulnerability were poor financial regulation and excessive public borrowing, these are now being eclipsed by distributive conflicts.
The inability of institutions to manage these conflicts is therefore undoubtedly a risk factor.
The challenge for countries with a large raw-material endowment is to prevent the “natural resource curse” from fuelling volatility and increasing the probability of a crisis occurring.
Variations in relative food and energy prices have implications for vulnerable groups, an aspect that has not been studied in this document.
The structural duality typical of Latin American economies and the proportion of the population living in poverty and indigence are key constraints in any evaluation of social vulnerability to food and energy price shocks.
Antivolatility policies should be geared towards protecting those groups and reducing their vulnerability.
As stated earlier, measures to reduce the vulnerability of at-risk population groups should be viewed as anti-volatility policies in their own right.
Another important aspect of the shocks generated by variations in the terms of trade —and in the remittances received in Central American and Caribbean countries— is that they trigger currency appreciation in the countries.
The risk here is not so much of a macroeconomic nature (although this is always implicit if the appreciation is disproportionate) as one that discourages innovation and incorporation of knowledge, which are of paramount importance for accelerating sustainable growth.
Concluding remarks The foregoing chapters have explored the links between real volatility and performance in the Latin American and Caribbean economies and have highlighted some aspects that will be mentioned in this section in order to recapitulate and bring the analysis to a conclusion.
First, volatility is an important consideration in the region’s economy because it affects growth and consumption stability.
It also influences the income distribution and property rights and can therefore lead to distributive conflicts.
These factors can, in turn, affect the quality of public policies and generate episodes of fiscal predominance, threatening the stability of the rules of play.
The objective is not merely to manage volatility, but to reduce it: hence, as Prebisch noted in the document quoted, it must be considered in growth and poverty reduction strategies.
Reforms are needed, therefore, to attack the structural sources of volatility, such as failures in financial markets and in internal checks and balances, the lack of instruments to diversify risk at the international level, the pattern of international specialization and the competence of dispute settlement institutions.
The examples of Chile and the Dominican Republic suggest that policies are also important, since policymaking efforts helped these countries to move from the top of the ranking of most volatile economies to the list of the fastest-growing.
Conversely, the region’s three largest economies —Argentina, Brazil and Mexico— experienced recurrent episodes of fiscal and external predominance, although the latter two subsequently made substantial progress in macroeconomic management.
The three largest economies therefore face different challenges in relation to volatility and growth, since while Brazil and Mexico need to lock into a higher growth trajectory, Argentina’s economy is growing but has major difficulties in managing distributive conflicts and reducing volatility.
The fact that Chile has been more successful than the Dominican Republic in crafting a macroeconomic policy regime based on transparent rules seems to have greatly helped the country to improve its ability to filter shocks and reduce its vulnerability to financial crises.
In conditions like today’s, with surging food and energy prices, institutions responsible for managing distributive and ownership conflicts play a key role, since shocks of this type create and destroy wealth and, hence, property rights.
The foregoing chapters have identified factors that need to be taken into account in designing both countercyclical and volatility reduction policies.
In relation to countercyclical policy, the main lesson is that a suitable fiscal policy is essential to avoid Dutch disease, distribute over time the additional resources generated by a positive terms of trade shocks and ensure solvency and countercyclicity.
But since these represent many simultaneous objectives, it is necessary to create independent instruments to tackle them, which is not possible without acting at the same time on the structural constraints that limit space for policy autonomy: institutions, availability of tax resources and the quality of the State apparatus.
As well as helping to broaden the range of instruments available, anti-volatility reforms should act on structural constraints.
Some constraints are naturally “more” structural than others; geography, for example, is more difficult to change than institutions.
This implies that a strategy of anti-volatility structural reform should consider the trade-off between expected benefits and difficulties in changing particular characteristics, and it should be crafted bearing in mind that policy volatility can be as relevant as the policies themselves.
For example, from the point of view of volatility it is important to increase trade diversification to reduce dependence on a small number of products, insofar as the international financial markets are not an efficient means of diversifying risk.
The creation of the markets needed to manage risk would generate a double pay-off, since it would both heighten the private sector’s capacity to absorb shocks and increase the range of instruments available to the central bank, by expanding the frontier for open-market operations and neutralization.
From the point of view of growth and development, the importance of creating policy tools cannot be overstated.
Lastly, greater efforts are needed to improve coordination among policies and identify implicit interactions, since excessive emphasis on monetary or fiscal policy in isolation can end up worsening the problem of predominance.
The right conditions have to be created to make use of policy autonomy, whether by solving problems in order to free resources for other purposes or by acting on constraints.
An example of the first would be to promote the deepening of contingency markets so that the public sector can concentrate on attending to vulnerable groups which, give the income distribution in the region, have little possibilities of protecting themselves from shocks, especially during lengthy periods of low economic growth.
The development process implies the creation of institutions, markets, governance structures and policy instruments, but it also implies inclusion.
From the perspective of the analysis conducted in these chapters, this makes it all the more important to reduce volatility in order to enhance growth, create more employment and lessen the vulnerability of the worst exposed segments of the population.
Decisions, in the public and private sectors alike, depend on expectations, which are subject to error and not necessarily the same for all the agents.
Although there is no way of ensuring that the government’s forecasts are accurate, policymaking is explicitly or implicitly associated with consideration of future scenarios and, one way or another, it implies a judgment about the sustainability of macroeconomic performance as determined by the conduct of the agents.
Countercyclical policy (which, by its very nature, requires a perception to be formed about the components of the cycle and the trend observed) needs to have an element of compensation for possible biases in the behaviour of private agents, especially developments in financial asset markets and trends in aggregate spending.
Movements in aggregate demand linked to variations in credit largely reflect the behaviour of agents participating directly in the financial markets.
In economies like those of Latin America and the Caribbean, large groups of the population have limited access to these markets and little or no possibility of easing the consequences of temporary reductions in income.
Macroeconomic policies can have a significant impact on the well-being of those groups, which belong to the poorest segments of the population.
Governments that are able to generate or reallocate resources at times of cyclically low income would be in a position to use fiscal instruments to broaden the spending opportunities of those consumers and thus, operate as implicit suppliers of credit in the stead of the absent markets.
This role for fiscal policy would seem to be particularly important during deep recessions.
There may also be opportunities to implement countercyclical policies of the sort mentioned when the economic outlook is expected to improve and the government wishes to engage agents subject to liquidity constraints in the anticipated upturn right away.
The existence of sets of agents with different behaviours and situations may cause policy dilemmas.
Although directed towards the economic in general, macroeconomic instruments tend to have distributive repercussions.
In some cases, countercyclical policy would have different elements and directions is attention were focused on the behaviour or circumstances of particular groups.
Analogous dilemmas can arise in times of contraction, making policies a function of distributive weighting.
The possibility of implementing countercyclical policies depends heavily on access to financial resources, especially in times of recession, which requires the government to have a threshold of perceived solvency.
This emphasizes the importance of generating surpluses in times of relative prosperity and providing room for financial manoeuvre to take up at low points of the cycle.
Financial fragile governments face particularly acute problems when the economy enters severe recession at the same time as credit supply dries up: the pressure to make fiscal adjustments to loosen the constraints and decompress asset markets stands in opposition to the urgent needs of population groups with falling income and facing illiquidity.
Política fiscal y ciclo económico en América Latina”, document presented at the workshop of macroeconomic policy and cyclical fluctuations, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), April 2008, unpublished.
Introduction Ever since its creation at the end of the 1940s, the work of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean has been directed towards formulating a line of thought that is both academically rigorous and responsive to the specific socio-economic problems the region faces.
In the present chapter, it is referred to as the Economic Survey or simply as the Survey.
Though many of the problems of these countries are similar, no common effort has ever been made even to examine and elucidate them.
It is not surprising, therefore, that the studies published on the economy of Latin-American countries often reflect the points of view or the experience of the great centres of the world economy.
Those studies cannot be expected to solve problems of direct concern to Latin America.
Hence the emphasis on the observation and qualitative and quantitative description of the situation in the region, which is an inescapable necessity in any attempt to abstract historical patterns, as well as a field in which ECLAC has made notable scientific contributions.
The arguments expounded by ECLAC have not been underpinned by rigid doctrines or specific programmes, but rather by its vision of development as an economic, social and political process that will allow the people of Latin America and the Caribbean to live in societies that are not only more efficient and productive, but also more just and democratic.
The 1940s and 1950s: The internal and external factors affecting development in Latin America 4 The world in which ECLAC began its observation of the development process in Latin America was shaped by the aftermath of the Second World War, a conflict that had notably affected all the economies of the region.
It was also a time in which economic theory was still struggling to process the impact of the Great Depression of the 1930s, one of the events that had in fact created the conditions for war.
All over the world, a spate of historic incidents of momentous proportions had completely shattered confidence in the ability of automatic market mechanisms to guarantee economic and social progress.
The reigning consensus was that tight State control of the economy, and even of foreign trade, international capital flows and the exchange rate, had become a must.
History had shown that the intervention of public policy was essential for staving off the dangers that only a few years previously had plunged the world into a vortex of death and destruction.
The first Economic Survey revealed that supply problems were the main feature of the period encompassing the Great Depression, the Second World War and its aftermath in Latin America, especially as regards industrial goods, which had historically been provided by the core nations.
This led the region’s countries to adopt importsubstitution policies that would alter the periphery’s role as a raw-materials supplier in the international division of labour.
More intense industrial growth in fact reverted the outward stance of the region’s economies during the post-war years, many of which were enjoying a keen improvement in their terms of trade, i.e., in the ratio between the average prices of their exports and the average prices of their imports.
The growth of the primary export sector had been shrinking since the days of the Great Depression but new manufacturing jobs were absorbing the workers that sector could no longer employ in a process similar to the one witnessed previously in the core countries.
The Commission’s initial view of the situation was that the industrialization under way seemed to be the natural route by which the benefits of technical progress would spread among the periphery nations.
These countries would thus be able to overcome the constraints of being basically primary goods exporters in which the vast majority of the population eked out a living on miserably low incomes and productivity improvements were limited to activities with ties to the global market.
Import substitution ran into two types of obstacles that were clearly identified by ECLAC and subsequently referred to as the two “gaps”.
As had happened in the core economies, the accumulation of capital was largely dependent on the mass of savings that a country could generate.
In Latin America, the formation of domestic savings was hobbled by the low income levels of the masses and an exaggerated propensity of the population segment with the highest purchasing power to consume in general, and mainly imported goods in particular.
Insufficient savings immediately translated into low investment rates which dampened the possibilities of successfully pursuing technical progress and improved productivity.
ECLAC was aware that external savings, through foreign investments, could play a role in the process, but foreign investment flows were minimal in the 1940s and 1950s.
Also, it was not just the paucity of national savings that was blocking the industrialization process.
There was another obstacle, specifically linked to the external sector, that ECLAC began to analyse in greater depth.
It was clear during the first stages of growth in these economies that importing capital goods was practically the only way to incorporate innovation into local production.
Acquiring such goods required a solid flow of exports, however, and when the improvement in the terms of trade of the immediate post-war era turned out to be only transitory, it became increasingly difficult, yet increasingly critical, to meet this particular condition for growth.
On the technical front, ECLAC focused on export purchasing power, a key indicator of the trade balance’s behaviour.
The equation for export purchasing power is EPP= (PxQx)/Pm, in which Qx is the physical volume exported at a given moment, and Px and Pm are the unit prices of exports and imports, respectively.
This “import capacity” depends, therefore, on export performance, as expressed in terms of a mass of products (Qx), and on the terms of trade (Px/Pm).
This generated an “external gap” which proved almost impossible to close in a world suffering from a severe shortage of international capital flows, and the countries of Latin America, which were basically dependent on the relative evolution of the prices they obtained for their exports, were therefore prone to periodic balance-of-payments crises.
Although ECLAC focused its analysis on the “external sector”, it also noted that economic growth in the post-war years was being accompanied by inflation.
Prices were being driven up by monetary expansion (in turn fuelled by the accumulation of international reserves in some countries), the fiscal deficit and the currency devaluations that were induced by weak external accounts.
Inflation further discouraged savings, the shortage of which was the underlying cause of the specific problems hindering the region’s development.
Under the conditions of the day, inflation was as much a problem of demand as of supply.
The scarcity of imports (due to devaluation or to direct restrictions) at a time when demand was being stimulated tended to provoke sharp increases in domestic prices.
The situation was exacerbated by certain “structural factors” that affected some economic sectors.
The food farming segment in particular was incapable of increasing output to meet rising demand.
The series of each country were spliced and the respective regional aggregates then obtained.
For the period prior to 1930, variations of the regional total were taken from the Economic Survey of Latina America, 1949, page 19 (base 1937).
The year 2000 was used as a reference period for the spliced series.
The 1960s: development becomes a more complex process In the 1960s, the subject of development, which ECLAC had helped to place on the international agenda, assumed even greater significance when a large number of peripheral countries on other continents shed their status as colonies and obtained independence.
These arguments highlight the temporary and dynamic nature of these processes: “Every country […] tends to pass on any impulses received from abroad.
However, the time and the intensity with which it does so are of the greatest practical importance.
The time factor has not yet been ascribed all the importance it merits in dynamic economics” (Ibid., p. 36) “The classical theory regarding the balance of payments and the international the time when the debate on the social and institutional aspects shaping economic processes, which ECLAC had already begun to analyse in depth, moved to centre stage.
Political instability, inadequate income distribution, the traits of the land ownership system, weak educational movement of gold had the merit of perceiving the forces actually at work.
But [….] the theory has always tended to limit itself to the static, merely registering the fact that each disturbance represents transition from one period of equilibrium to another, without attributing any significance to the duration of such a transitional period.” (Ibid., p. 38).
There were no national policies to maximise the benefits of foreign investment, and the economic integration of the region seemed to have come to a standstill.
On the macroeconomic front, counter-inflationary measures were not introduced hand in hand with investment policies that would have been able to ease the bottlenecks in supply.
During this period, ECLAC started paying increasing attention to the phenomena associated with short-term fluctuations, in addition to traditional development issues.
ECLAC recommended reforms in all these areas and promoted the adoption of “development plans” and the use of certain types of planning instruments.
Regional economic integration was advocated as a means of expanding internal markets and boosting exports.
Special attention was paid to the problems that negative turns in the international commodities market posed to productive sectors, and ECLAC participated actively in the creation, in 1964, of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).
The considerable increase in international trade, financial capital flows and foreign direct investment had wrought major changes in the world economy.
Latin America fell behind in this process as the growth in world trade became increasingly driven by manufacturing rather than primary products, which continued to be the region’s main link with the world market.
The increase in international loans and direct investment added a new dimension to the “external constraints” the region faced, however, because it signalled a significant rise in interest payments and remittances abroad of returns on capital inflows.
In most countries, these payments accounted for half the balance-of-payments current account deficit in the 1960s.
Although the benefits of technical progress were more accessible than in previous decades, the mechanism for tapping into those benefits seemed to be propelling the region into a vicious circle of indebtedness and current account deficit.
The appraisal of the situation presented in the 1969 and 1970 editions of the Economic Survey was by no means complaisant despite the fact that growth in the 1960s had been similar to the growth recorded in the previous decade, industrialization had expanded and inflation had been kept by and large under control.
The region had fallen far behind in terms of productivity and in job creation, especially in the manufacturing sector.
Moreover, the “structural heterogeneity” afflicting Latin America was becoming even more pronounced as moves to modernize continued to clash with outdated economic and social structures.
Uneven income distribution was one of the lingering traits of this backwardness that hampered economic progress despite the changes that had been introduced in the region.
Although ECLAC judged State action to be necessary to speed up development in several areas, State intervention in practice was seen to be ineffective in many countries.
Key reforms in agriculture, taxation, banking and finance were not implemented with the necessary alacrity.
Public spending was inefficient and Balance of goods and services Financial capital d b Up to 1979, the series were obtained using the definitions set out in the fourth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual.
From 1980 onwards, the definitions contained in the fifth edition were used. c GDP was estimated in current dollars for Argentina in 1950-1960; Haiti in 1950-1960; d Balance of the capital and financial accounts (including errors and omissions) less foreign direct investment, or the equivalent in 1950-1979.
One of the most interesting aspects of several editions of the Economic Survey in the 1960s was the critical appraisal they made of the import substitution strategy that continued to frame development policy in the region.
From early on it became clear that the strategy could exacerbate pressures on the balance of payments and create extremely rigid and economically inefficient situations.
See also the edition of 1961, p. 365. markets and had created high-cost industries and distorted production structures.
Regional integration (and the market expansion and competition it entailed) was supposed to be a palliative to this shortcoming but continued to exist more on paper than in reality.
The goal was for industry to overcome what continued to be a key problem in the economies of Latin America: the sluggish performance of the region’s exports, which stemmed from its specialization in primary products.
The dynamics of the world economy at the time did not favour commodities exports, whose prices were highly volatile.
Development strategy therefore had to focus not only on strengthening domestic markets, but also on boosting manufacturing exports.
This would force industry to lower its exaggerated costs and increase its productivity.
Between 1961 and 1970, GDP grew at an accumulated annual rate of 5.5% (slightly more than in the previous decade), and per capita GDP increased 2.6%.
Despite an average annual 9.9% decline in the terms of trade, the region as a whole returned a positive goods balance because the sustained increase in export volumes ended up outpacing import growth.
In 1969, Latin America’s exports at constant prices were 53% higher than ten years earlier, while imports were up 40%.
The 1970s: a first attempt at modern financial integration Two crises marked the 1970s: the collapse of the monetary system instituted at the Bretton Woods Conference (1944) and the oil crisis that emerged when the conflict in the Middle East drove up the price of crude in 1973.
Monetary upsets and inflationary pressures interacted with recessive trends in the developed countries.
As the structure of the international financial market began to change, large flows of capital between countries heightened the instability of exchange rates.
From that moment on, the external sector of Latin America began to suffer from two types of cyclical fluctuations.
In addition to those that had historically affected commodities prices and external trade terms in general, new factors associated with the prevailing conditions and interest rates in the main world financial centres now came into play.
The editions of the Economic Survey at the time highlighted the region’s buoyant growth (6.6%) between 1968 and 1974 and its investment ratio, which reached nearly 25% of GDP in 1978.
This period was referred to as the “internationalization” of the Latin American economy because it received its impetus from a heavy demand for primary products and improved terms of trade that arose at a time when foreign direct investment and financial capital flows were on the rise.
The terms of trade had been improving since the end of the 1960s and made a qualitative leap in 1974 with the onset of the oil crisis.
This took place at a time when the United States dollar had been losing value against several currencies since 1971, which also pushed up the prices of other primary products.10 The average level of the terms of and remained relatively high until 1982.
This situation favoured some Latin American countries more than others and began to change in 1975 when inflation shocks in the global economy induced a contraction of the developed countries’ economies.
This crisis, which was both recessive and inflationary, affected the external sector of Latin America by lowering demand for exports and raising the price of imports.
Despite this negative turn of events, the economies of the region did not immediately have to deal with an insurmountable “external gap” because abundant financing was available.
It is natural that there would be a correlation of the prices of commodities in dollars with the price of currencies in dollars.” (Mundell, 2003).
Several economies in Latin America had made significant attempts at financial integration in the nineteenth century given that on several occasions lending operations had precipitated serious financial crises.
One notable example is the crisis triggered by the collapse of Baring Brothers in 1890 following a default on debt repayments by Argentina. countries’ exports to generate sufficient foreign exchange.
The Commission therefore advocated awarding priority to exports, which were to become the new engine for growth as part of an “opening-up” to the outside world.
Under this approach, the import-substitution era was considered as no more than an initial stage (similar to that undergone by other economies such as Japan) that paved the way for the development of export flows (mainly of manufactured goods).
This would consolidate the industrialisation process and permit a stronger form of linkage to the global economy than the fragile one achieved through the export of raw materials.
The availability of financial resources prevented the effects of stagnation in the core economies from having a profound impact on the countries of the region.
By borrowing, they were able to uphold their “import capacity”, and consequently, economic activity remained buoyant: between 1975 and 1980, the region’s GDP grew at an average annual rate of 5.2%.
The other side of the coin, however, was the astronomical increase of the current account deficit in the balance of payments.
In 1975, ECLAC warned the region of the problems that would arise in the future from taking out loans on commercial terms.
In fact, debt servicing as a percentage of exports of goods and services rose steadily, from 10% in the middle of the decade to 20% at the end of the 1970s.
From then on, the availability of capital to “close the external gap” became subject to the conditions on the international financial market, which made the economies of Latin America painfully vulnerable to any sudden changes in the market situation.
The Economic Survey during these years began to call attention to the way in which world inflation was being passed on through tradable goods prices and was thus acting as an external trigger of domestic inflation.
This “imported” inflation found fertile ground in Latin America and fuelled the galloping inflation that, in the next decade, unhinged the monetary systems of several of the region’s countries.
In 1976, inflation in Latin America averaged 60%, compared with 12% at the beginning of the decade.
The 1980s: the debt crisis and the “lost decade” Between 1981 and 1990, the average annual growth rate in Latin America and the Caribbean was barely 1.2%, and at the end of the decade, per capita GDP was 8.2% lower than in 1980.
It was, as ECLAC aptly put it, a “lost decade” in the development process, although it was also a time when many countries in the region witnessed a return to democracy.
The root cause of this disastrous economic performance was the situation that had arisen in the external sector during the second half of the 1970s and, in particular, the high level of indebtedness the countries incurred during those years.
In 1976-1981, financial flows (not including foreign direct investment) represented 33% of exports, compared with 9% in the 1960s when flows consisted mainly of official credit.
It had been possible to narrow the “external gap” during those years by incurring debts at mostly floating interest rates, but this arrangement came to an abrupt halt.
The restrictive monetary policy that the United States implemented to curb inflation (which had been rising again since the second oil crisis of 1979) triggered a sudden shift in voluntary external financing away from the region and made it more expensive.15 The reversion of capital flows was coupled with another blow associated with the evolution of the terms of trade.
The slowdown witnessed at the outset of the decade brought down the trade index to such an extent that in 1989, the average trade ratio was 20.5% lower than in 1980.
The crisis in the external sector thus widened the current account deficits and swelled the outflow of capital in the financial accounts.
This ushered in a period of extraordinary macroeconomic instability in which many countries had to cease their debt payments and found themselves forced to implement successive adjustment programmes under agreements with the International Monetary Fund or other international agencies that provided exceptional financing.
The heavy reliance on international financial flows during the second half of the 1970s led to high levels of indebtedness throughout the region, and countries were forced to allocate a staggering proportion of their external income to debt servicing.
In 1982-1989, the region was allocating the equivalent of 36% of its exports to the net The total of the capital and financial accounts, including errors and omissions, less foreign direct investment.
The adjustment process triggered by the debt crisis, however, began to be measured by another variable: the net transfer of resources abroad.
This refers to the net balance between all the financial flows the region receives and all the interest and profit payments it makes.16 The figure obtained thus indicates the net amount of resources that the region receives from abroad or transfers abroad in a given year.
Domestic saving reached high levels during the crisis owing to the restriction that the adjustment programmes imposed on consumption.
In the “lost decade”, domestic saving represented 24% of GDP but was largely absorbed by the transfer of resources abroad or used to offset the decline in the terms of trade, which was equivalent to 3% of GDP between 1982 and 1989.
This depleted the resources available for financing investment projects, and investment levels were seven percentage points lower than the 24% recorded between 1974 and 1981.
This affected public investment in particular, and important components of systemic competitiveness suffered as a result.
From a longer-term perspective, Specifically: Net external resource transfer = (capital account + financial account + errors and omissions + exceptional financing + International Monetary Fund loans) + (income).
When the region receives financial flows from non-residents to cover a current account deficit, the components inside the first set of brackets are positive.
The income balance includes payments of dividends and interest on foreign direct investment and financial investments, respectively, and usually has a negative net balance in the region.
In 1990, the weighted regional inflation rate stood at 1,400%, the culmination of various runaway and hyperinflation processes.
At first, countries implemented various heterodox policies focussing on wage and price controls to tackle the crisis.
Later a combination of orthodox adjustment measures and heterodox policies such as social pacts and deindexation schemes were introduced.
From 1980 onwards, the definitions contained in the fifth edition were used.
Inflationary pressure had been building up since the 1970s and several countries suffered from hyperinflation.
The difficulties in the external sector affected the availability of foreign exchange, and the constant pressure on the exchange market tended to push down the value of local currencies.
The impact of the recession and low commodity prices meant that governments were incapable of collecting The fact that the public sector took over the external debt when it was generally the private sector in the region’s countries that generated the foreign exchange needed to pay off that debt led to what was subsequently termed the “third gap”.
See Edmar Bacha, “Un modelo de tres brechas de las transferencias externas y la tasa de crecimiento del PIB en países en desarrollo”, El trimestre económico, vol. 57, special issue, Mexico City, December 1990.
Given the scale of the ongoing debt crisis, the resolution of structural problems that ECLAC had lobbied for since its creation seemed to be a very distant prospect.
This problem was only resolved towards the end of the decade through the Brady Plan, an international instrument that reduced the amount of the debt and converted bank assets into bonds that could be traded in the international financial market.
For a substantial part of the decade, Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 1988 States had to carry out major macroeconomic adjustment programmes and undertake profound structural reforms aimed at limiting the scope of State action and assigning the market the function of allocating resources.
These programmes were backed, or inspired, by the International Monetary Fund and other international institutions.
They varied in emphasis, orientation and sequence, but they all contemplated ambitious privatization campaigns, the liberalization of trade and financial flows and the implementation of fiscal and financial reforms.
In 1990, ECLAC noted that, “In the midst of great difficulties, Latin America and the Caribbean are still trying to overcome, once and for all, the crisis that has burdened them for almost a decade now.
They base their hopes on the results of the sweeping and irreversible structural changes taking place in the countries of the region.”21 F.
This new scenario led ECLAC to re-examine its theses on the factors and determinants of development on the periphery.
It must be stressed that these processes occurred at a time when profound changes were underway in global geopolitical arrangements and, as ECLAC had been commenting since the 1970s, the world economy was becoming increasingly internationalized.
International relations were gaining importance and, as a result, the role played by trade, financial flows, foreign direct investment and even migration as factors of economic success was expanding.
The introduction of certain institutional changes (greater openness to trade and integration schemes) and technological changes (improved communications and transportation) helped generate a new dynamic in the world economy and ‘globalization’ became the catchword for referring to this dynamic.
The assessments and observations made of the processes under way, which are reflected in the successive editions of the Survey, generated a new, updated theoretical matrix for the analytical work that ECLAC performed in this period.
On the geopolitical front, the weakening and subsequent demise of most of the centrally planned economies removed the main axis of conflict that had dominated international politics since the end of the Second World War.
The major political upheavals taking place in Europe, such as the dissolution of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and German reunification, occurred at the same time as the People’s Republic of China began to shore up its reforms and gradually engage more with the global economy.
All these events undoubtedly fomented the new preponderant viewpoint in economic analysis according to which the level considered acceptable for State intervention in the economy was at its lowest since the Great Depression.
Mindful of the changes underway, ECLAC subjected the new approach being adopted across the region to careful scrutiny and devoted a substantial portion of several editions of the Economic Survey to the examination of the regional version of this reform process.
Frequent reference was made to the tensions that were being generated and to the impact the process was having in terms of the macroeconomic situation (which was marked by huge fluctuations and one crisis after another) and the increase in social inequality in the region.
The marked inconsistency between some of the objectives that the reforms pursued (such as the improvement of the integration of the countries’ production sectors in the international economy) and the stabilization policies being employed was, in particular, analysed in great depth.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 1990 Macroeconomic performance and the crises: the volatility of financial flows and lessons for the region In the 1980s, the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean were beset by grave macroeconomic problems arising from adverse changes in the external situation.
Surges in international interest rates created excessively high levels of indebtedness in many countries, and falling prices for their exports reduced their external income.
This combination of events dampened economic activity, unleashed bouts of galloping inflation and forced governments to carry out strict procyclical adjustments.
At the beginning of the 1990s, economic policy in many countries of the region focused on debt restructuring and macroeconomic stabilization, coupled with the implementation of market reforms and the deepening of commercial and financial opening.
In 1991 and 1994, two ambitious trade integration schemes came into effect, MERCOSUR and the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Although regional growth was slight in the 1990s, the situation was a major improvement on the catastrophe of the previous decade.
This meant that the terms of trade improved at an annual rate of 1.1%, but on the back of declining import prices rather than thanks to improvements in export markets.
The huge effort to boost exports therefore proved insufficient to close the external gap.
Interest and profit payments tipped the scales even further, and the current account deficit gradually widened to 4.2% of GDP in the same year.
The confluence of counter-inflationary policies based on exchange-rate anchors and the massive influx of foreign capital induced a gradual appreciation of local currencies, which largely explains the widening of the current account deficit.
As events have shown, prolonged use of such a policy nearly always leads to higher current account deficits.
An overvalued currency discourages exports, especially of non-traditional products, thereby perpetuating a country’s dependence on primary products, which are especially vulnerable to price fluctuations.
At the same time, with more open economies, imports are encouraged and the trade gap widens.
In the financial sphere, a policy of exchange-rate appreciation encourages a preference for borrowing in hard currency, and this puts constraints on future policy-making.
Greater interaction with international financial markets ensured the availability of external resources but set economic activity in the region swaying.
The volatility of financing flows, influenced by the multiple causes that drive away investors, became a powerful exogenous force that undermined macroeconomic stability.
The real effective exchange rate index for each country is calculated by weighting the real bilateral exchange rate indices of each trading partner according to that partner’s participation in the country’s total trade (imports + exports).
The extra-regional real effective exchange excludes trade with other Latin American countries.
An increase in the index (an upward slope on the figure) reflects a real effective currency depreciation, and a decline in the index (a downward slope in the figure) reflects a currency appreciation.
In the case of the Mexican crisis in the middle of the decade, the collapse had a strong internal element and few external repercussions.
It originated in a single country (Mexico) and was therefore transmitted through financial rather than trade channels.
The devaluation of the Mexican peso in December 1994 triggered capital outflows from various countries and the virtual suspension of voluntary external financing but, ultimately, the only country other than Mexico to be seriously affected was Argentina, which then pulled Uruguay down with it.
Trade did, however, provide an adjustment mechanism for this crisis within an international environment marked by significant growth and massive financial assistance for Mexico and Argentina.
The abrupt change in risk levels in the wake of the Asian crisis “undermined their [investors’] previous interest in emerging markets, including Latin America.
The average of the major Latin American stock indexes fell by 44% between October 1997 and March 1999.
The plunge in stock market prices was closely associated with capital outflows from the region.
At the same time, capital inflows of other types also waned, especially on the bond market.
The central aspect of this phenomenon was a decline in commodity prices which was partially but not totally related to events in Asia.
The price outcome was exacerbated by a quantity effect as demand in Asia —both in Japan and in the developing Asian economies— weakened”33.
A second wave of instability thus hit the region after the Russian Federation was forced to declare a partial moratorium on its debt and to loosen its exchange policy in August 1998 as a result of the drop in oil prices.34 The impact of this crisis was particularly severe in some of the region’s countries.
Brazil, whose growth between 1998 and 1999 was practically zero, then became the focus of the crisis.
In October 1997, there was a speculative run against the real which was successfully fended off by the Brazilian authorities, but in January 1999, just two months after signing an agreement with the IMF, Brazil had to abandon the band scheme and allow the currency to depreciate, a step that was swiftly echoed in other countries throughout the region.
ECLAC viewed this loosening of exchange controls as a positive development: “Exchange-rate policy has been moving in a new direction during the past 18 months.
Except in the case of Ecuador, the resulting devaluations were generally successful in encouraging exports and restraining imports, thereby stimulating economic growth in those countries.
The decline in the value of local currencies —together with the upturn in growth rates— does not appear to be having a significant impact on inflation.”35.
The financial crises brought about a real depreciation of local currencies, making it possible to begin narrowing the deficit on the current account.
In the case of Ecuador, the currency depreciation was so dramatic that the authorities opted for the formal dollarization of the monetary system in January 2000.36 It should be pointed out that the abandonment of exchange-rate anchors was preceded by a clear policy bias towards reducing demand rather than adjusting relative prices, especially the exchange rate.
This choice has negative implications for growth rates in the region, at least in the short run, although it also has a positive impact on inflation.37 The series of financial crises generally meant that governments were “in the midst of The Philippines, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea and Thailand, among others.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 1998-1999, One notable victim of this situation was Long Term Capital Management, an important hedge fund that ended up going bankrupt.
See also the edition of 1998-1999, p. 15. stabilization programmes involving the use of exchange rate anchors– [which] took away much of the economic authorities’ manoeuvring room.
Until then, the South American economies had been the ones most affected by the Asian and Russian crises, the repercussions of which were still making themselves felt in the financial sector.
The currency conversion scheme in place since 1991 collapsed, the real value of the peso plummeted, and the government was forced to declare a partial moratorium on the copious external debt that had accumulated.
The upheaval in Argentina had repercussions regionwide, affecting growth, trade flows and financial flows.
According to the Economic Survey, “Events in Argentina and the other MERCOSUR countries have rekindled the debate as to what types of exchange-rate regimes are most suitable for emerging economies.
They have also, in particular, laid bare the practical limitations of the two “corner solutions” of dollarization or a pure float in a context of macroeconomic and institutional fragility combined with commercial and financial interdependence.
The need to align and coordinate macroeconomic policies within the region has also become evident.”39 ECLAC was quick to draw lessons for the region from the series of financial crises unleashed in the 1990s: “As a result of the liberalization of trade and financial flows in a context of uncompleted fiscal reforms, national economic policies became strongly procyclical.
During periods of expansion, and with the encouragement of creditors, external flows were channelled into a rapid upswing in both public and private spending.
These external flows also led many economic agents into lower saving rates and over-indebtedness.
Later on, mounting debts and deteriorating current accounts eventually prompted foreign banks to withdraw their loans as country risk indicators worsened.
At that point tight fiscal and monetary policies became necessary in order to boost the confidence of international investors and mitigate the downturn in capital inflows.
An additional objective of these policies was to keep domestic inflation under control.
To avoid this boom-and-bust cycle, it would therefore seem desirable to adopt fiscal and monetary policies designed to even out spending over time.
During periods of expansion, it is possible to exercise greater selectivity with regard to kinds and amounts of capital flows and to levy temporary taxes to discourage private spending.
Such measures can act as a brake on private spending booms in periods when there is a surge in external inflows, and vice versa.
The assessment presented in the Economic Survey of 1999-2000 of the changes under way opens as follows: “Over the last 15 years, countries in the region have made increasing use of structural reforms to turn their economies away from the closed, state-led economic model of the import-substitution industrialization period, toward greater market-orientation and openness to the rest of the world.
Complementary aspects of this process have involved a higher priority for macroeconomic stability —especially in terms of lower inflation (…).
Policymakers expected these changes to Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001-2002 Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 1998-1999, op. cit., p. 127; see also Economic Survey of Latin America and enhance productivity and boost economic growth, leading to job creation and greater equality.
To what extent have those expectations been fulfilled?”41 The Commission’s response to this question was based on the findings of several special research projects that had been carried out to weigh the successes and shortcomings of the structural reform process: “Overall, the reforms seem to have had a surprisingly small impact on average regional aggregates.
It is true that the reforms have solved some longstanding problems, such as excessive protection and inefficient public utilities.
They have also opened up unexpected possibilities, of which the most dramatic are the export potential demonstrated by the region and the dynamism of modern sectors —some of which, like telecommunications, have been radically transformed by technological progress.
Financial liberalization resulted in higher interest rates. (…) counter-inflationary monetary policies further increased (…) local interest rates (…) this was especially problematic for small firms (…).
Even more important were the problems that financial liberalization caused for the banking sector”.46 The third inconsistency syndrome involved fiscal policy: “Governments sought to reduce or eliminate their fiscal deficits, but several of the reforms actually made this more difficult, such as tax reform which lowered rates on individuals and corporations.
Another reform that interfered with the reduction of fiscal deficits was import liberalization; this was particularly serious for the smaller and less-developed countries that relied heavily on tariffs as a source of government revenue.
A third reform, decentralization, exacerbated central government fiscal deficits by shifting revenues to provinces and municipalities without always transferring the counterpart obligations.
Privatization, in turn, acted to support fiscal policy in the short run, but created its own trap later on.”47 The results of the structural reform process were thus highly ambiguous which rekindled concerns in many countries about how to ensure that their economies remained open and competitive.
Since then, economic policy in the region has generally focused on price stability, sound fiscal management and reducing the external vulnerability of the economy.
The emergence from the crisis at the end of the 1990s coincided with certain changes in the international setting that made it necessary to revise some of the basic premises underpinning the analytical work of ECLAC up to that point in time.
This research led to the publication of four books on specific sub-topics (innovation and productivity, investment, income distribution and employment) and one summarizing the findings in general.
Latin America and the Caribbean and the external The period of global financial instability, which had started in mid-1997, culminated between 2001 and 2002 when the world economy grew only 1.7% and trade expanded by only 2.3%.
Latin America and the Caribbean were directly affected by the series of financial crises that erupted during the period, and in the biennium in question the region suffered a 0.1% contraction of its GDP.
This five-year period was therefore no less frustrating (though certainly less devastating) than the lost decade of the 1980s (per capita GDP decreased 0.9% per year between 1981 and 1990).
Within a broad range of variation, economic policy capitalized on the positive aspects of the situation and pursued a certain level of fiscal sustainability, at least in comparison with previous boom periods.
Robust economic growth had a notable effect on labour markets in the region: between 2002 and 2007, the employed proportion of the working-age population rose from 52.0% to 54.6%, while unemployment fell from 11.0% to 8.0% over the same period.
Moreover, unlike in the 1990s, the improvement in employment figures as of 2003 was generated increasingly by wage work and by jobs in the formal sector.49 The fact that this expansion coincided with a steady surplus on the balance-of-payments current account is highly significant.
This unprecedented situation meant that, for the first time, regional economic growth was not accompanied by the external gap that had been a focus of ECLAC analysis over the years.
Gross fixed capital formation increased at an annual rate of 9.5%, and the investment ratio (in constant prices) thus averaged 18.7% of GDP over the period.50 National savings were therefore covered, and the internal deficits, which in the beginning were thought by ECLAC to act as a brake on regional development, never emerged.
This historic anomaly was generated by the behaviour of exports and the terms of trade during this period.
This meant that in several countries excellent export performances generated sufficient foreign exchange over those five years to finance imports as well as to stabilize the exchange rate and the monetary situation.
Buoyant economic growth generally translated into higher revenue levels, especially in the countries that were obtaining good prices for their exports.
More significant, however, was the authorities’ management of public spending during this situation.
In addition to also lowering their external vulnerability, this gave fiscal policymakers, in some respects, more room to manoeuvre.51 In other words, “Unlike what has customarily occurred during past periods of economic growth, public expenditure has not followed the widespread upturn in fiscal revenues (...).
This, in turn, has paved the way for a significant reduction in public debt levels”52.
The net transfer of resources abroad was negative for most of the five-year period but for different reasons than in the 1980s.
The negative transfer in 2003-2007 is largely explained by assets formation or the cancellation of liabilities towards non-residents, which generated a deficit on the capital and financial accounts but contributed to the current account surplus.
In the 1980s on the other hand, there was also a strong transfer of net resources abroad, but the deficit on the capital and financial accounts was generated by capital flight and was associated with the increased deficit on the current account.
At that time, both of these deficits had to be covered through the use of exceptional financing (increases in default or debt-service payments to international lending institutions) or by reducing net international assets (loss of reserves).
In 2003-2007, however, the region’s international reserve levels soared to 13.1% of GDP by the end of the period.
Countries also shed much of the debt they owed international lending agencies, and there was a general reduction in net external financing.
The governments of Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, which at the time were the International Monetary Fund’s three largest debtors, paid off their IMF loans in advance, which slashed the Fund’s outstanding loan portfolio by almost 50%.
This meant that “for the first time in many years, Latin America was no longer one of the main recipients of IMF funds.
The positive development of the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean between 2003 and 2007 was closely linked to the international situation at the time.
One was the United States economy, which recovered after the recession of 2001 thanks to a set of monetary and fiscal policies that stimulated investment in real estate and activity in the rest of the world by expanding the country’s external deficit.
The other was the extraordinary burst of investments embarked upon by certain Asian economies, especially India and China, which fuelled demand and steadily drove up prices in international raw-materials markets throughout the period.
This use of savings by China and the other countries that were recording surpluses kept down international interest rates.
Through trade and finance, the positive repercussions of growth in Asia were passed on to the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
China’s entry to the World Trade Organization in 2001 was a key factor in these new phenomena.
This new international situation met with favourable conditions at the national level, most notably the strong competitiveness of exchange-rates in the region that stemmed from the real depreciation of local currencies left over from the crisis period that started in 1998.
As “the region’s unsatisfactory export performance has long been a central theme of ECLAC documents,” this new macroeconomic situation was appraised in the Survey as an opportunity for diversifying export supply.55 One of the distinctive features of the situation in 2003 was that the lowering of the high real exchange rates reached was a very gradual process.
First, the combination of monetary policy and the deflationary pressure of the international market (in which China played a decisive role) kept domestic inflation rates down.
Second, more and more countries adopted the policy of actively intervening to keep the nominal exchange rate high by purchasing foreign exchange on the international market, which in turn enabled them to accumulate international reserves.
In addition to recognizing the threat that this downturn on the external front represents, ECLAC has pointed out that the crisis poses several policy dilemmas for the region.
First of all, “Excess supply in the exchange market has pushed down real exchange rates to varying degrees depending on the country.
In practice, the problem is very difficult to resolve”.57 Second, although fiscal consolidation has, by lowering public debt, reduced countries’ vulnerability to external shocks, there are “questions about its sustainability in the medium and long term”.58 These macroeconomic dilemmas also need to be approached, however, from a broader perspective.
The surge in activity was once again accompanied by a balance-of-payments current account surplus, while the primary surplus remained at almost 3% of GDP.
International financial shocks had repercussions for the country’s economy, although its buoyancy was not noticeably affected.
In addition, average export prices and the terms of trade continued to rise.
Amidst debate on the methodology and measurement accuracy of the consumer price index, public attitudes seemed to reflect growing concerns over inflation.
Following the presidential elections held in October 2007, which were easily won by the ruling coalition, the general direction of economic management remained the same.
The distribution effects of higher external prices became a source of debate that intensified in the first few months of 2008, following an amendment to the tax regime applied to exports.
The resulting dispute, which disrupted activities in agriculture, transport and goods distribution, generated considerable uncertainty and affected the financial and foreign-exchange markets.
There was also a slowdown in economic activity, although it was unclear what the extent and duration of the deceleration would be.
At the same time, there was a general impression that inflation was rising rapidly.
Lastly, the Senate refused to approve a law on the tax regime proposed by the executive branch, and this had serious political ramifications.
In this context, questions were raised on the possible future trends of the economy.
GDP growth of 8.7% in 2007 resulted in a level of activity that was around 25% higher than the previous cyclical maximum recorded nine years ago.
The rate of capital formation also began to increase again (reaching an annual average of almost 23%), while the volume of investment in durable goods as a proportion of GDP stood at 9.4%.
The ratio between private consumption and GDP remained fairly constant at 65.5%, which is several percentage points below the levels observed in the expansionary periods of the 1990s (68.6% in 1998).
In 2007, the nominal value of the major components of demand rose by between 23% and 30%.
Primary government expenditure expanded by a higher proportion than the rest (that is by around 50% excluding transfers to the provinces under revenue-sharing arrangements), with an increase above the total rise in social security benefits and subsidy transfers to the private sector.
At the same time, there was a considerable rise in public revenue, owing to higher social security contributions, VAT, profit tax and tax on foreign trade.
Despite the surge in the value of imports (31%), the merchandise trade surplus remained at around US$ 13.0 billion.
Exports of services were buoyant, and the growth of merchandise exports reflected a favourable variation in price (12%) and volume (8%), despite the sharp decline in fuel sales.
The continued improvement in the terms of trade helped to sustain spending capacity and facilitated the management of public finances.
However, external factors put pressure on food prices, amidst an escalating dispute on the fiscal and regulatory treatment of activities linked to agricultural exports (in terms of their effects on income distribution and production incentives).
The authorities gave priority to the domestic supply of goods such as meat and dairy products by imposing restrictions on exports.
In 2007, the variation in the consumer price index recorded in the metropolitan area was less than 9%.
Nonetheless, similar measurements in other parts of the country showed a noticeably higher increase, which seemed to coincide with the attitudes and expectations seen in large segments of public opinion.
Instead of measures aimed at curbing demand to affect prices, economic policy instead consisted of implementing regulations governing foreign trade and subsidies (for energy, transport and food), and reaching agreements with corporate groups.
The authorities also sought to lead wage negotiations: throughout 2007, the average wage increase was almost 23%.
The central bank oversaw a massive accumulation of reserves in 2007, except for a time during the second half of the year when concern over the international financial situation resulted in significant outflows of private capital.
In the second half of 2008, to offset the combination of greater demand and reduced liquidity in terms of export currencies at a time of uncertainty linked to the agricultural dispute, the monetary authorities took an active role in the foreign exchange market, which in turn brought down the nominal exchange rate.
In the background, the period as a whole was typical of the pattern seen in previous years of major currencypurchase operations that are then partially sterilized with bond issues.
Trends in prices and in the yield on financial assets pushed up the risk premiums implicit in the rates of return on public bonds.
Up to early 2008, this had only had a slight effect on the performance of domestic financial markets.
In the second quarter of the year, portfolio decisions reflected a greater degree of uncertainty that, at times, affected the withdrawal of funds from banks.
Interest rates also shot up, although the return on deposits remained below average predictions for inflation.
Growth of the current resources of the national public sector outstripped the increase in GDP.
In 2007, the management of public finances was influenced by the transference to the public sector of the account balances of pension system contributors who opted into the State pay-as-you-go segment.
This exceptional operation contributed to the increase of almost 1% of GDP in revenues from social security contributions.
Not including these funds, national tax receipts were up 33.2% for 2007 as a whole, which pushed up the tax burden by around two percentage points to a record high of 25% of GDP.
In the first six months of 2008, the growing expansion of public revenues continued (38%), although there have been some signs of a slowdown.
Social security contributions rose by almost 50% (to represent 18.1% of the total, almost two percentage points more than in the previous year), owing to the payment facilities granted to own-account workers, a rise in the taxable salary and a higher number of contributors.
Buoyant private consumption boosted VAT receipts (up 31%), while greater economic activity and higher prices resulted in increased receipts from the tax on profits (28%) and the tax on current account credits and debits (29%).
In the light of increased external trade flows, and to a lesser extent the nominal exchange rate, there was a rise in receipts from import tax (37%) and export tax (39%).
The rate of the export levy on hydrocarbons and certain agricultural products was also raised in 2007.
In the non-financial public sector, expenditure showed a higher-percentage increase than resources during 2007.
Primary expenditure climbed by 46%, not including transfers to the provinces under revenuesharing arrangements.
The primaryexpenditure-to-GDP ratio increased by almost three percentage points (to 18.2%), and this was mainly the result of outgoing transfers to the private sector (especially in the form of energy and transport sector subsidies), for which the nominal value rose by 60%.
There was also a considerable rise (57%) in social security benefits, owing to an increase in benefits and the number of beneficiaries.
Growth in the other main items of primary expenditure was slower but nonetheless significant: 33% in the case of capital expenditure and 30% for personnel expenditure, while transfers to the provinces under revenue-sharing arrangements also rose by almost 30%.
The primary surplus in the national public sector stood at nearly 26.0 billion pesos in 2007 (11% more than in the previous year), which is equivalent to 3.2% of GDP.
Not counting the portfolio transfer of social security contributors, the surplus would be 2.2%.
The financial result posted a positive balance of 9.3 billion pesos (20% less than in the previous year), which is about 1.1% of GDP.
Provincial accounts showed a shrinking primary surplus, which was the result of a sharp climb in expenditure.
In the first half of 2008, the primary result was considerably higher than in the year-earlier period (41%), as the contribution of resources from the central bank in the form of profit advances played a part in 2008.
In 2007, the government issued bonds to cover capital payments, as well as the borrowing requirements for the following year.
Direct issues to the government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela represented almost 30% of the bonds issued.
As of December 2007, public debt stood at US$ 145 billion, which is just under 56% of GDP (around eight percentage points less than In the first few months of 2007, the central bank continued to accumulate large quantities of reserves, and also made substantial bond issues in an effort to sterilize in part the monetary effects of that intervention.
By the middle of the year, the international financial shocks were having an effect on the supply of foreign exchange.
This interrupted the expansion of reserves, while domestic credit operations became expansionary in nature.
The level of international reserves nonetheless rose by just over US$ 14.0 billion for the year as a whole, and stood in excess of US$ 45.0 billion as of December 2007.
Excess supply of foreign exchange continued into the first few months of 2008.
However, in a more uncertain macroeconomic context, demand for foreign currency then picked up and supply was reduced, which prompted the central bank to intervene and make sales amidst rising interest rates.
In 2007, the monetary base expanded by 25%, at a rate comparable to the rise in nominal GDP.
The monetary aggregate M3 (means of payment plus interest-bearing deposits in pesos and United States dollars) grew by 22%.
In terms of private-sector deposits, particular increases were recorded in time deposits with a fixed nominal interest rate (28%), whereas there was a sharp decline of almost 50% in price-indexed deposits.
Loans in pesos to the private sector soared (40%), although they remained low in terms of GDP (just under 12%), as an after-effect of the deep crisis that had occurred at the beginning of the decade.
Although the credit expansion was spread throughout various types of operation, there were striking increases in consumer loans and secured loans (especially those based on collateral).
The number of loans to the public sector, on the other hand, dropped by more than 20%.
Throughout 2007 and the first few months of 2008, interest rates displayed an upward trend but remained at moderate levels.
In the market of interbank loans, rates rose by almost two percentage points in 2007 and the seven-day rate was just over 8% at the end of the period.
In late 2007, the nominal return on 30-day deposits was around 10% (almost three points more than one year previously), while average lending rates on advances and discounted bills stood at approximately 18%.
There was a dramatic drop in the price of public bonds in 2007.
By year’s end, the yield differential between a representative bond and an equivalent United States bond was more than 650 points (which constituted an increase of 370 points over the period), and this continued to rise into the first few months of 2008.
Net resource transfer (millions of dollars) Variation in wholesale prices Nominal lending rate l Central national administration m National administration debt n Money and credit o b Based on figures in local currency at constant 1993 prices. c Based on figures in local currency expressed in dollars at current prices.
The indicator of economic activity showed a considerable year-onyear increase in the first quarter of 2008, although the emergence of the agricultural dispute in March went hand in hand with a net slowdown in industrial activity.
In 2007, domestic demand rose by 10%, which was a faster growth rate than that of GDP.
This was accompanied by a fall in the physical volume of the goods and services trade balance from 2% of GDP to 0.7%.
In 2007, investment growth was modest but once more comfortably above (14.4%) total expenditure.
The slowdown was mainly concentrated in construction, which had been expanding quickly, although the 8.1% increase observed in 2007 was nonetheless significant.
Investment in durable production equipment was up by almost 25%, which was higher growth than in the previous year.
In the fourth quarter, the investment rate as a proportion of GDP stood at 24.6%, while the rate associated with durable equipment was 10.4% (both figures were historically high).
The agricultural sector also expanded (around 10%), while manufacturing output climbed by 7.7%.
Grain production in the 2006-2007 growing season reached a record of around 94 million tons, which was 23% higher than in the previous season.
This was the result of a considerable expansion in crop area (7%) and a recovery in yields in the absence of the adverse weather conditions that had affected the previous harvest.
Although the increase in soybean production (17.5%) was proportionally smaller than the total rise in production, soya once again represented over half of all tonnage produced.
The maize harvest also expanded significantly by more than 50% to reach 22 million tons, and this accounted for much of the 33% growth in cereals as a whole.
Within this aggregate, wheat production posted a significant if smaller increase (16%).
As international prices shoot up, the area planted with main crops expanded once more (by nearly 5%) in the 2007-2008 season, which points to an increased harvest.
Ongoing restrictions on beef shipments led to a fall in export volumes, while domestic demand climbed.
In 2007, the number of animals slaughtered increased to almost 15 million (11% more than in the previous year), and there was also a rise in the volume of meat produced.
During the period, the average weight of beef cattle arriving at market dropped, and the proportion of female animals increased.
Petroleum extraction continued its downward trend (falling by 2.5% this time), while gas production dropped by 1.3%.
This supply pattern was the result of the sharp drop in fuel export volumes and increased imports.
The volume of industrial production continued to climb well in 2007 (at an annual rate of almost 10%).
The automotive industry once again expanded considerably (by nearly 30% for the year as a whole), thanks to strong demand on the domestic and export markets.
Metal production (steel and aluminium) also posted impressive growth, while construction materials and metallurgical engineering products also expanded, but to a lesser degree.
In contrast, there was a decline in the production of dairy products, processed petroleum and chemicals derived from hydrocarbons.
In the first six months of 2008, the expansion of manufacturing output came to a halt.
It remains unclear whether this was a cyclical reversal or a sporadic effect related to the agricultural dispute.
Noteworthy increases were also recorded in air transport (especially international activity) and in rail freight services.
In 2007, average inflation as measured by variation in the consumer price index in Greater Buenos Aires fell to 8.5%.
Price patterns recorded using this statistic, whose methodology and data-compilation system were the subject of public debate, varied widely from increases of over 20% for items such as oil, rentals and recreational services to nominal deflations that the index observed in clothing and (especially) tourism – sectors where prices were reported to have fallen by 10%.
In some cases, consumer price variation measured in other parts of the country was considerably higher than the rate reported for Greater Buenos Aires, and included 18% in Mendoza and 21% in San Luis.
The wholesale price index, for its part, posted an annual increase of 16.6%, with growth of 20% in primary goods and 15.7% in national manufactures.
During 2007, the exchange rate in relation to the United States dollar rose by just under 3%; the rate of depreciation was higher in relation to the currencies of other major trading partners, such as the euro (around 14%) and the Brazilian real (23.5%).
The accuracy of indicators such as those related to real wages was affected by the uncertainty surrounding the measurement of prices.
Throughout 2007, nominal wages varied more quickly in the public sector (28% in nominal terms) than in the private sector.
In the private sector, the growth rate of the wages of non-registered workers (24%) was higher than that of formal workers (20%).
Information on income distribution in the first quarter of 2007 (compared with the year-earlier period) showed reductions in the gap between the two ends of the scale (with the difference between the average income of the tenth and first decile going from 26 to 23 times), and in the Gini coefficient (0.49).
For 2007 as a whole, the employment rate of the population in the main urban conglomerates again increased to stand at 42.2% (0.6 points more than in 2006).
The annual unemployment rate dropped to 7.5% in the fourth quarter (7.8% if people employed on official programmes and actively seeking work are included).
That figure is the lowest level since the beginning of the 1990s.
Although the current account surplus in 2007 was narrower than in the previous year, it remained in excess of US$ 7.0 billion (around 2.7% of GDP).
The goods trade balance stood at just over US$ 13.0 billion, owing to the climbing value of exports and imports, which in both cases surpassed the figures recorded in 2006 by almost US$ 10.0 billion.
There was also a surge in service trade flows, with a similar magnitude (around US$ 2.0 billion) in both exports and imports, thereby ensuring that the services deficit remained below US$ 1 billion.
As far as service sales are concerned, impressive performances were turned in by tourism and business and computer services.
The income account deficit (US$ 5.6 billion) was similar to the level observed in 2006, with a slight reduction in the negative interest balance being partially offset by a rise in outlays in the form of profits and dividends.
Unlike in 2006, when the payment of debt to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) played a decisive role, the financial account posted a positive balance of approximately US$ 5.5 billion.
The first half of 2007 saw huge capital inflows driven by the private sector, which added to the excess supply of foreign exchange generated by the current account and pushed up reserves dramatically (US$ 11.0 billion in that period).
In the second half of the year, private capital flows displayed a negative net balance of around US$ 4.3 billion, which made for net inflows of about US$ 1.5 billion for the year.
In the third quarter, this was associated with a fall in reserves, although these did pick up again in the final months of 2007.
For the year as a whole, the result of operations in the non-financial public sector amounted to net capital inflows of US$ 2.5 billion (compared with Goods exports grew by 20% in 2007 to stand at almost US$ 56.0 billion.
This export growth was due to an 8% rise in volume and a 12% increase in unit values.
The rise in exports was spread across various categories of goods, except fuels and energy, where higher prices failed to offset the continuing downward trend in volumes (down 20% in 2007).
Exports of primary products showed a strong increase (45%), in which prices and volumes played an equal role.
There was a rise in sales of oilseeds (89%), especially soya and cereals (58%).
Fruit and vegetables also expanded considerably, while the value of copper exports rose moderately (11%) and fish product exports declined.
Restrictions of meat exports limited shipment volumes, although export values increased (13%), while sales of dairy products fell by 17%.
The value of industrial manufacturing exports climbed by 17%, on the strength of motor vehicles (33%) and machinery (26%).
A smaller but nonetheless significant increase was observed in the sectors of machinery and chemical products (except plastics).
As for the geographical distribution of exports, there as a rise in the proportion of exports to China (48%), which now represent 10% of the total.
Above-average increases were also seen in exports to MERCOSUR and the European Union, with a standstill in exports to countries of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and a drop in exports to Chile (due to lower gas sales).
In 2007, imports expanded dramatically (31%) on the back of the surge in fuel purchases (64%).
Other headings, including capital, intermediate and consumer goods and vehicles, rose by around 30%.
In the first few months of 2008, imports posted a hefty increase: up by 46% in the first six months compared with the year-earlier period.
Given that the oil sector’s output shrank 4.2% that year, this growth was driven by the buoyancy of the non-oil sector, whose output expanded 9.5%.
Domestic demand continued to rise at a rate of 20%, the same pace as the previous year.
High oil prices on the international market meant that the terms of trade remained favourable and, as in 2006, the country’s economic growth was sustained by the continued expansion of gross national income.1 In the first quarter of 2008, GDP increased 4.9% in relation to the same period in 2007, reflecting the onset of a slowdown in economic activity.
Despite the introduction of a series of measures at the beginning of 2007 aimed at curbing inflation, which had been rising since mid-2006, the national consumer price index in December 2007 posted an accumulated increase of 22.4%.
According to the country’s economic authorities, growth will reach about 6% in 2008, and the exchange rate will remain at 2,150 bolivars per dollar.
The target for inflation, which had originally been set at an average annual rate of 11%, has been raised to 19%.
In February 2007, the National Assembly passed an enabling law granting the President special powers to issue decrees on various subject matters over the next 18 months.
The government used these powers to introduce several measures in the first months of 2007 that would change the country’s institutional structure.
As of 1 May, control of four strategic partnerships operating in the Orinoco oil belt was taken over by the State and the State-owned company Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A (PDVSA).
Also in May, the government decided not to renew the operating license of a long-established television channel.
Later on in the year, the President of the Republic proposed a constitutional reform that was adopted by the National Assembly but not approved by the electorate when submitted to a referendum on 2 December.
Among the most controversial measures were the decision to strip In 2007, the average price of the Venezuelan oil basket rose 14.9% compared with 2006.
In April 2008, the government announced the nationalization of all the cement companies operating in the country and of an important metallurgical firm.
As in the case of the strategic partnerships that used to operate in the oil sector, the authorities have stated their intention to created mixed-capital companies in which the State would hold a 60% stake through its enterprises.
Both in 2007 and 2008 the Venezuelan government has continued to supply oil to a number of countries at below-market prices in the framework of the Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America and the Caribbean (ALBA), the PETROCARIBE Energy Cooperation Agreement and individual agreements signed with several countries.
It has also promoted the creation of Banco del Sur, a multilateral lending institution for the region which is to be financed with resources from Latin American countries.
In addition, on 15 March, VAT was eliminated for a number of foods, and its rate was reduced for food transport services.
In October, the government announced higher taxes on alcoholic beverages and cigarettes and, as of 1 November, the entry into force for November and December 2007 of a tax on banking transactions, which levied 1.5% on corporate withdrawals and transfers.
In April 2008, the National Assembly passed the law on the special contribution derived from extraordinary prices in the international hydrocarbon market.
This law stipulates that oil companies must pay a special tax to the State when oil prices rise above 70 United States dollars per barrel of Brent crude.
This tax operates at two rates: companies must pay 50% of the price difference per barrel of crude when the Brent crude oil price rises above U$ 70/barrel and 60% when it surpasses US$ 100/barrel.
The tax is to be paid in foreign exchange, not in bolivars, and the proceeds are deposited in the National Development Fund (FONDEN).
In June 2008, the government announced the elimination of the tax on banking transactions.
Public spending slowed down considerably in 2007 in comparison with previous years.
Central government spending increased at an annual rate of 9.2%, which, considering the high levels of inflation, represents a decrease in real terms.
This was the result of fewer goods and services acquisitions and a significant reduction in the level of transfers to State agencies.
Despite the slowdown in economic growth, public income swelled 20.5% thanks to tax income from the oil sector.
The budgetary central government therefore posted a financial surplus equivalent to 3% of GDP.
The currency’s new name is “bolívar fuerte” and it is represented by the symbol “Bs.F.” Both currencies will be in circulation for a period of six months, during which the prices of goods and services are to be displayed in both denominations.
As in the previous two years, the government invested dollars in purchases of foreign bonds, continued to build up foreign-exchange funds outside the country and pursued its external debt renegotiation programme.
A number of bonds were issued in the course of the year: in early 2007, the Southern Bond II (US$ 1.5 billion) and the bonds issued by Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (US$ 7.5 billion); and in August, the Southern Bond III (US$ 1.2 billion).
These notes consist of dollar-denominated instruments, a high proportion of which are backed by Argentine, Ecuadorian and Brazilian public debt, that are sold to local financial institutions.
They were created as a placement mechanism for some of the resources deposited in FONDEN.
As part of its efforts to stem inflation, the authorities implemented measures in 2007 to contain the expansion of the monetary aggregates.
In the first few months of the year, it was decided that the tax payments made by PDVSA to the Treasury could be made in United States dollars via its overseas accounts.
The government also announced a US$ 6.77 billion transfer from the international reserves of BCV to FONDEN.
In July, BCV decided to raise the annual borrowing rate from 6.5% to 8% in the case of savings accounts and from 10% to 11% in the case of time-deposits.
It also raised the legal reserve ratio from 15% to 16%, and subsequently to 17% as of 1 October.
Also in July, BCV announced that it would revise the financial conditions of open market transactions as regards both rates and terms.
Fifty-six-day notes were reintroduced at a rate of 11%, and 14-day notes were eliminated, whilst the 10% rate for 28-day notes remained unchanged.
At the same time it announced a change in the legal reserve requirement for foreign-exchange operations commencing in January 2008, whereby financial institutions are obliged to set up a reserve in bolivars for these kinds of transactions.
In December 2007, the effective legal-reserve rate therefore reached 21.9% compared with about 17% in the same month the previous year.
In July 2007, BCV raised the minimum interest rates on savings and time-deposits from 6.5% and 10% to 8% and 11%, respectively.
In December, the minimum interest rate for savings was raised to 10%.
The average annual lending rate of the six main commercial and universal banks therefore hovered around 16.8% in 2007, while the rates on time-deposits and savings reached 10.5% and 7.4%, respectively.
In the first semester of 2008, the average lending rate was 23.3%, while borrowing rates averaged 14.2% in the case of time-deposits and 12.7% in the case of savings.
The minimum rates for savings and time-deposits were raised as of 1 May 2008 to 15% and 17%, respectively, and a maximum lending rate of 33% was imposed on credit-card loans.
In December 2007, liquidity (M2) was up 27.8% compared with December 2006 owing to the decline in savings and time-deposits.
The growth of the monetary aggregates has continued to be more subdued in 2008: in May, M1 and M2 had varied -4% and 0.9%, respectively, in relation to December 2007, and had increased by 21.8% and 31.2% in comparison with May 2007.
Driven by the notable 92% rise in consumer loans and mortgages between December 2006 and December 2007, bank credit mushroomed during the year, expanding 69% over the same period.
Like the expansion of the monetary aggregates, however, bank credit growth has been significantly less buoyant in 2008.
These transfers and the foreign exchange disbursements made by the Foreign Exchange Administration Commission (CADIVI) meant that the international reserves of BCV as of the end of June 2008 stood at US$ 33.56 billion (compared with US$ 34.286 billion in December 2007).5 Throughout 2007 and in 2008, the exchange rate was kept at 2,150 bolivars per United States dollar.
No changes were made to the currency regime that has been in place since 2003 or to the restrictions on capital outflows.
Despite the greater volumes of foreign exchange made available by CADIVI and the higher limits set for foreign-currency credit-card transactions in the last months of 2007, the rate on the parallel market was 200% higher than the official exchange rate.
At the end of December 2007, a new law on foreign exchange offences was passed.
This law, which came into force on 28 January 2008, broadened the concept of foreign exchange, made changes to the sanctioning authority, established the obligation of companies to justify the origin of the foreign currency they use to pay for imports and prohibited the spread of information on exchange rates other than the official one.
The restrictions on access to the foreign exchange supplied by CADIVI were loosened on 23 June 2008 for companies that had registered with the agency prior to 12 June.
Robust economic growth, which reached 8.4% in 2007, was driven by rising domestic demand.
Increases in private consumption (18.7%) and investment (26.6%) were reflected in the steep rise in the volume of goods and services imports (33.6%).
Exports fell once more, however, at a rate of 5.6% a year.
Figures for the first quarter of 2008 reveal a slowdown in economic activity, with GDP growing 4.8% in relation to the same period the previous year.
The sectors showing the most marked decline in activity compared with the first quarter of 2007 were construction (2.6%), trade (5.7%), manufacturing (1.4%) and financial institutions (6.4%).
Spending figures reveal a drop in gross capital formation (1.8%) and more moderate growth in private consumption (11.1%).6 The first of these aggregates had been expanding at rates of over 20% since the first quarter of 2004.
Accumulated inflation, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), was 22.5% in 2007.
The steepest price rises were posted by food and beverages, health, restaurants and hotels despite the price controls imposed on a significant number of products and services included in the basket of items used to calculate the CPI.
Towards the end of 2007 and in the first few months of 2008, there were certain food shortages.
In January 2008, BCV, together with the National Statistics Institute, began to publish a new national consumer price index (NCPI).
Unlike the CPI used up to December 2007, which only covered the city of Caracas, the new indicator has nationwide scope and incorporates methodological changes, including a modification of the base year (2007).
For the same period, the wholesale price index recorded an accumulated increase of 11.8% (12.5% for national products and 9.3% for imported products).
Despite these sharp rises, in comparison with the fourth quarter of 2003, in accumulated terms, real private-sector wages have continued to fall.7 In the first three months of 2008, the general wage index rose 1.6% compared with the fourth quarter of 2007, reflecting a 2.2% increase in the private sector and a 0.5% increase in the public sector.
This represents a 10.1% increase on the average for 2007, however, (7.8% and 14.9% in the private and public sectors, respectively).
On 30 April, 2008, the authorities announced that as of 1 May, the minimum wage in the public sector would be raised 30%.
The fourth quarter of 2003 corresponds to the period as of which the economy began to experience rapid growth after the crisis that rocked the country between the end of 2002 and the beginning of 2003.
In 2007, the balance-of-payments current account posted a surplus of US$ 20.001 billion, which was below the US$ 27.149 billion recorded the previous year owing to the 2.4% drop in non-oil exports and the sharp rise in goods imports (39.9%) that was mainly driven by the steep climb in oil-industry imports (54.7%).
The country’s external debt rose to US$ 52.949 billion on account of the increase in commercial credits, loans and other debt instruments in the public sector, while private-sector debt grew 4.3%.
In the first quarter of 2008, the current account surplus soared, thanks to the rise in international prices for oil (goods exports grew 59.4% in this period), to US$ 10.003 billion, compared with US$ 3.259 billion in the first quarter of 2007, despite the 20% increase in goods imports recorded during the same period.
In recent years, the Bolivian economy has been boosted by the rising prices of some its export commodities.
Beginning in 2004, the balance of trade in goods began to show positive results, and it swelled considerably in the last two years, climbing by 177% over the previous biennium.
All the above was reflected in sizeable balance-ofpayments surpluses, and these in turn generated an unprecedented rise in net international reserves in the hands of the central bank, which increased by 521% from 2002 to 2007.
In 2007 Bolivia posted positive results in terms of economic growth (4.56%), non-financial public sector surplus (1.8% of GDP),1 balance-of-payments surplus (US$ 1.952 billion) and a growing accumulation of international reserves, whose growth was US$ 437 million higher in 2007 than in 2006.
Bolivia has been affected by two climate phenomena, El Niño in 2007 and La Niña in 2008, which have depressed particular sectors, especially agriculture, most of all in the departments of Beni and Santa Cruz.2 This fiscal balance does not include the adjustments resulting from nationalizations.
If the latter were taken into account, the global balances for 2006 and 2007 would be 4.9% and 2.4% of GDP, respectively.
As for the impact of the La Niña phenomenon, the ECLAC disaster assessment mission presented its report on 28 The political scene has been dominated by a series of elections which began in the department of Santa Cruz in May 2008, when a referendum not approved by the National Electoral Court confirmed the autonomous status of that department.
The National Electoral Court approved the holding of a popular-initiative recall referendum on 10 August 2008, which may result in revocation of the mandates of the country’s President and of the prefects of departments.
Lastly, the new Constitution drafted by the Constituent Assembly in 2006 and early 2007 has yet to be approved by referendum.
The non-financial public sector (NFPS) posted a surplus equivalent to 1.8% of GDP.
In the first half of 2008, the NFPS posted a surplus of 2.5% of GDP.
In November 2007, in order to tax the extra profits resulting from rising international prices for metals and minerals, an amendment was made to title VIII of Act No. 1777, which controls the system of royalties and taxes for the mining sector.
The treasury is currently selling six-, eight- and ten-year debt instruments, and 89% of the debt has been issued in bolivianos.
In August 2007, pension fund managers were exempted from the obligation to buy treasury bonds.4 If the pension funds wish to do so, they must buy them by auction rather than by direct purchase.
The external public debt fell by US$ 1.048 billion in 2007, thanks to US$ 1.171 billion in concessional debt forgiveness by IDB and debt prepayments to the Andean Development Corporation and the International Monetary Fund, of US$ 30 million and US$ 14.6 million, respectively.
At the end of the year, the balance of external debt stood at US$ 2.228 billion, including US$ 43.3 million in short-term debt resulting from a bilateral loan from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to finance a purchase of diesel fuel.
Of the rest, 93.6% has terms of more than 10 year, consisting of bilateral credit or loans from international bodies such as the Andean Development Corporation, IDB or the World Bank.
The central bank’s objective is to maintain a low, stable inflation rate.
It therefore continued to apply a monetary policy based on a system of intermediate quantitative targets, establishing a ceiling on net domestic credit to ensure that the money supply is consistent with public demand for money.
As for institutional matters, in April 2008 the coordination agreement between the central bank and the Ministry of Finance was renewed.
Established in 2006, the agreement took the place of the financial programme with the IMF which had been in force until 2005.
Under the new instrument, the monetary programme and therefore the net internal credit target are kept in line with goals set in the national development plan and the annual fiscal programme.
Thanks to the favourable external economic environment in 2007, the monetary-programme targets were met easily.
The goal for the growth of international reserves had been US$ 500 million, but in fact they expanded by US$ 1.952 billion.
As a result, efforts to contain net internal credit were unsuccessful, and it rose by 862 million bolivianos to 10.162 billion bolivianos.
This trend accelerated the following year, and as of 15 April 2008 the total had increased by 652.6 million bolivianos (63.8%) over the figure recorded at the end of 2007.
The total of central-bank bonds rose from 31.1% of national treasury bonds in 2006 to 129.3% in late 2007 In 2007 and early 2008, the authorities maintained legal reserve rates of 14% and 12% for foreign currency and national currency (bolivianos and Housing Development Units (UFV)), respectively, and also retained the additional reserve requirement of 7.5%.
Beginning in February 2008, the percentage used in calculating it was gradually reduced, finally reaching 0% in June.
Following the modifications to the regulations controlling reserve requirements, the exemption for fixed-term deposits in national currency was abolished.
In the case of gold, the price has to exceed US$ 400 per troy ounce; the corresponding price for silver is US$ 5.55.
As for zinc, lead, tin, copper and bismuth, the prices have to exceed US$ 0.53, respectively.
In the case of iron, the price must exceed US$ 340 per ton, and for wolfram, US$ 80 per long unit.
An obligation contained in article 4 of supreme decree No. 25,722 The goal of the country’s exchange-rate policy is to sustain an appropriate rate in light of external and internal inflationary pressures.
Together with monetary policy, the exchange-rate policy aims to achieve stability in the purchasing power of the national currency.
The central bank is maintaining the crawling-peg exchangerate regime it has applied for the past 20 years, based on small unannounced depreciations or appreciations of the boliviano against the dollar.
The boliviano posted a nominal appreciation of 4.3% in 2007, an increase in its value well above the 2006 figure of 0.8%.
From 1 October 2007, in order to reduce speculative capital, the central bank created a 1% charge applicable to transfers to foreign countries made at the request of the financial sector, except in the case of transactions relating to exports and imports of goods and services.
The impact of this measure was indicated by the fact that average daily transfers fell from US$ 7.7 million to US$ 1.7 million, a fall of US$ 6 million.
The fiscal cost of this measure is expected to be 200 million bolivianos, to be funded using 30% of all receipts from the direct hydrocarbons tax collected by prefectures, municipalities, the Indigenous Fund and the national treasury, as well as dividends from capitalized public companies according to the proportion of the shares owned by Bolivians.
In November 2007, owing to rising food prices, the tariff on imports of the following products was set at 0%: rice, sugar, maize, soybean oil and fractions, other edible oils, wheat and wheat products, livestock, meat and meat cuts.
State bodies were given a greater role in the marketing of food.
The Empresa de Apoyo a la Producción de Alimentos (EMAPA – a public enterprise to boost food production) and the Special Projects Unit (UPRE) were authorized to engage in the controlled direct import, warehousing and sale of food, as appropriate.
A fund for reconstruction, food security and production support was created in 2008 and was initially provided with funding of US$ 600 million using a loan from the central bank to the Ministry of Finance.5 The funds will be used to deal with emergencies caused by natural disasters and to undertake an integrated rural development policy.
The fund’s resources will be used for transfers, loans and operating capital.
The country’s GDP expanded by 4.6% in 2007, a decline in the growth rate of 0.2 percentage points.6 The four most buoyant sectors were construction (14.3%), production of metallic and non-metallic minerals (10.0%), financial establishments, insurance, real estate and business services (6.3%) and manufacturing (6.1%); their shares in GDP growth were 0.4, 0.4, 0.7 and 1.0 percentage points, respectively.
The growth of construction was boosted by increased public investment and by housing repair and construction in connection with inflows of remittances.
The expansion of mining was due to the opening of the San Cristóbal mine in the second half of 2007.
The only sector experiencing a contraction in 2007 was crop farming, livestock production, forestry, hunting and fishing (down 0.5%).
This resulted from losses in cattle breeding and crop farming, mainly in the departments of Beni and Santa Cruz, caused by floods resulting from the El Niño phenomenon in the first half of 2007.
Financing will also be sought from other sources, such as the national treasury, external credit and grants.
In April 2008, the National Statistical Institute (INE) revised the quarterly series for 2006 and for the first three quarters of 2007; as a result, the figure for GDP growth in 2006 increased from 4.6% to 4.8%.
On the demand side, households’ final consumption expenditure was up by 4.1% of GDP and government final expenditure by 3.8%.
The former was the demand component that had the greatest incidence on GDP growth (3.0%).
Gross capital formation increased by 11.1%, higher than the rate in 2006, owing to rising public investment and an increase in mining investment in connection with the El Mutún project.
In international terms, however, the ratio of gross capital formation to GDP is low.
Nonetheless, given the impact of the La Niña phenomenon during the first four months of the year, mostly in the crop-farming subsector in the departments of Beni and Santa Cruz, ECLAC expects Bolivia’s GDP growth to be about 4.7%.
Economic activity continued to trend upwards in the first half of 2008.
According to preliminary figures from the National Statistical Institute (INE), GDP was up 6.07% in comparison with the same period in 2007.
The three sectors which showed the strongest growth were metallic and non-metallic minerals (53.8%), crude oil and natural gas (11.3%) and construction (8.3%).
The crop farming, livestock production, forestry, hunting and fishing sector grew by 2.1%.
The expansion of mining was due to rising production from the El Mutún project and small-scale mining, which was stimulated by high prices for metals.
From the demand viewpoint, the two components of spending that recorded the highest increases were gross fixed capital formation (19.3%) and exports (11.5%). (bolivianos per dollar) Lending rate e Interbank rate f b Based on figures in local currency at constant 1990 prices. e Bank operations (61-90 days); three-month average, in dollars. f Repurchase rate, in dollars.
The next three components in terms of rate of increase were household equipment and operation (8.5%), health care (6.8%) and clothing and footwear (6.5%).
The CPI component with the fastest-rising prices continued to be food and beverages.
The budget for 2008 projects a 7% inflation rate, a figure which is unlikely to be realized, given the price rises accumulated in the first four months of the year. 12.51%; communications, 3.47%; recreation and culture, 6.32%; education, 4.72%; hotels and restaurants, 11.07%; and various goods and services, 7.06%.
The rate of increase of this item moved into double digits as of This trend in the price index between December 2006 and June 2008 was due to a number of factors including exogenous shocks and pressure from internal demand.
Among the exogenous factors were the El Niño and La Niña phenomena which affected the economy in 2007 and 2008, respectively, limiting the supply of several agricultural products and therefore driving their prices higher.
International markets have seen increases in the prices of crops, such as wheat, whose price soared by 77.8% in 2007.
This may have resulted from increased activity in labour-intensive sectors such as construction and manufacturing.
In 2007, the incidence of these two items on the rate of price increases for food and beverages was 1.7 percentage points.
In terms of trade in goods, export growth was balanced by rising imports.
The trade balance posted a US$ 803 million surplus for the first five months, 93.7% more than the figure for the same period in 2007.
The central bank’s net international reserves rose by US$ 1.802 billion in the first half of the year, ending the period 33.9% higher than at the end of 2007, representing an increase of US$ 3.231 billion compared to 12 months earlier (83%).
However, the country may face some obstacles in 2008, given that changes in the external situation may affect the balance of payments, as well as the considerable increase in internal demand and higher international commodity prices pushing up inflation and altering the economic policy implemented by the authorities.
Within this new scenario, in 2008 GDP is expected to grow by 4.7% and cumulative inflation should be above GDP growth has been accompanied by a significant rise in employment, as 1.6 million formal jobs were created in 2007 and 1.4 million in the first half of 2008.
In May 2008 the real wage bill was 7.1% higher than one year previously.
The average unemployment rate between January and May 2008 fell to 8.3%, compared with 9.9% recorded in the year-earlier period.
These results show that the pace of economic activity has raised the level of consumption and boosted investment: in 2007 family consumption expanded by 6.5% and gross fixed capital formation by 13.4%.
The production of consumer durables grew by 8.7%, while capital goods production climbed by more than 19.1%.
Increased internal demand was reflected in the volume of imports, which increased by over 20% in 2007.
As a result of the positive performance on the external and fiscal accounts, increased employment and higher revenues, in April 2008 Brazil was awarded investmentgrade rating, which may improve the country’s access to external resources.
However, the management of internal demand calls for increased coordination of fiscal and monetary policy, so that demand can be matched to the internal supply of goods and services, thereby ensuring sustainable financing for imports.
While the monetary authorities have entered a new period of raising the interest rate, the fiscal authorities are assessing how to adapt public finances to the movements of the business cycle, especially when it comes to carrying out investments scheduled as part of the growth acceleration plan.
In 2008, economic policy will continue to include inflation targets, the fiscal responsibility act and the floating exchange rate that have characterized the Brazilian economy since 1999.
The public sector posted a significant primary surplus: a nominal surplus of 0.34% of GDP for the first five months of 2008, and a primary surplus of 4.34% of GDP for the 12 months between In April 2008, the central bank began the process of raising the interest rate, having reduced the rate almost continually since September 2005.
As for the exchange rate, the nominal appreciation of the real continued, with its value in relation to the United States dollar increasing by 10.1% in the first half of 2008 compared with December 2007.
In December 2007, the Congress in Brazil did not approve the renewal of the provisional contribution on financial movements that collected 0.38% on all debits from current bank accounts and that represented 9% of total federal government revenues (around 1.3% of GDP).
The resources thus raised had been used for social spending, mainly on health.
In order to offset some of the lost revenue, the federal government increased the tax rate and the tax base for financial operations, as well as the tax rate on net profits of the financial system.
The federal government also reviewed the expenditure planned in the 2008 budget and reduced it by around 20 billion reais.
Nonetheless, in the first five months of 2008, tax receipts and federal government contributions were up 16.5% on the year-earlier period.
This represents an increase of 23.4%, not including the provisional contribution on financial movements for 2007 (which is the equivalent of a 17.9% rise in real terms).
The significant improvement in receipts from the main taxes and contributions was due to a much higher pace of economic growth.
Revenue from income tax climbed by 25.8%, owing to higher wage income and company profits.
Increased sales of motor vehicles (30% in the first five months of 2008) and other manufactures led to a 25.6% rise in receipts from the tax on manufactured products.
Higher sales and wages contributed to a 24.3% increase in revenue from social security contributions, social contribution on liquid profit and the social integration programme (public services assistance plan), which together represent almost 29% of total receipts.
The continued expansion of public revenue will depend on the growth rate of domestic economic activity.
Within individual states, receipts from the tax on the circulation of merchandise and services also climbed significantly (16.4%) in the first five months of 2008 compared with the year-earlier period.
Federal government expenditure posted a cumulative increase of 9.1% between January and May 2008 compared with the previous year.
The fact that this rise was below the 12.6% recorded in the year-earlier period was due to the delay in approving the budget, which was eventually adopted in March once it had been amended to eliminate the provisional contribution on financial movements.
Spending on social welfare programmes was up by 18.2%, thanks to a higher number of participants and an increase in the minimum wage.
Capital expenditure swelled by 23.9%, owing to the implementation of projects as part of the growth acceleration programme.
Both types of expenditure represent only 7.6% of the total primary expenditure of the federal government.
One of the largest categories of expenditure was unemployment benefit, the payment of which has doubled since 2004 and increased by 22.1% in the first five months of 2008 compared with the year-earlier period.
The contrast between rising expenditure on benefits and the improved labour-market conditions is due to the increasing level of formal employment among the workforce, which enables workers to access social protection mechanisms.
Up to May 2008, the strong rise in revenue made it possible to curb the expansion of expenditure and significantly improve public finances to yield a nominal public-sector deficit of 0.34% of GDP (-0.77% in the same period of 2007) and a primary surplus of 6.55% of GDP.
Other contributing factors to this result included the lower expenditure on interest payments (6.7% of GDP in the first five months of 2007 and then 6.2% in the first five months of 2008).
The higher level of resources has made it possible to adjust to the need for higher incomes (resulting from wage agreements with civil servants, for instance) and the need to support pre-planned investment programmes without affecting the target of achieving a primary surplus of 3.8% of GDP in 2008.
At the end of May, the Government announced the creation of an anticyclical fund to finance expenditure in times of slower growth, using additional income from any increase in the primary surplus beyond the official target.
The continuation of the downward trend was attributable to the series of primary surpluses and the reduction in the cost of debt.
In April 2008, the central bank raised the basic interest rate in the Special System of Clearance and Custody (SELIC) to an annual 11.75%, thereby reversing the gradual reduction that had begun in September 2005.
Since September 2007, this rate had remained at 11.25%, the lowest level since inflation targets were introduced in 1999.
The central bank has given signs of having started a new cycle of increases for the SELIC rate, as it raised the rate again in June to an annual 12.25%, with a view to reining in inflation.
The annual inflation target is 4.5% for 2008 and 2009, with a margin of two points either side of that figure.
The higher basic interest rate should affect the considerable credit expansion observed in recent years in Brazil.
The ratio between credit and GDP rose from and reached 36.5% in May 2008 (the highest level since January 1995).
In the first five months of 2008, the financial system channelled more resources into industry and services.
Credit to these two sectors increased by 12.9% and 14.8%, respectively, compared with the year-earlier period (while total credit The monetary base and means of payment expanded by 19.2% and 18.4%, respectively, in the 12 months up to May 2008, and by 21.4% and 25.9% in the 12 months leading up to December 2007.
The main factor behind currency expansion has been the purchase of foreign exchange by the central bank (155.4 billion reais in 2007), mainly neutralized by the central bank’s sales of 74 billion reais worth of bonds and higher deposits in the Treasury (55.6 billion reais).
Although foreign-exchange purchases dropped by 77% between January and May 2008, they remain the main driver of growth of the monetary base.
The central bank’s purchases of foreign exchange in the first half of 2008 amounted to US$ 20.5 billion.
Although the aim of this policy is to influence the exchange rate, considerable inflows of resources have pushed the exchange rate to its lowest level since 1999.
In real terms, in June 2008 parity between the real and the United States dollar was only 55% of the value recorded at the end of 2003.
In real terms, the Brazilian currency appreciated by 18% in relation to the dollar in the 12 months up to June 2008, and by 15.0% in relation to a basket of 13 currencies.
Given the constant inflows of loans or investment capital, the wider current account deficit observed in 2008 has not had any effect on the appreciation of the real.
Projections for GDP growth in 2008 range between 4.2% and the 5.4% recorded in 2007, depending on which scenario is considered for the main variables such as interest rates, the exchange rate and inflation.
The arguments in favour of higher rates include the significant carryover from 2007 following the acceleration of economic activity in the second half of the year, and the buoyancy of internal demand and production in the first quarter of 2008 (when GDP was 5.8% higher than in the same period of 2007).
As for the performance of various production activities, in 2008 agriculture is expected to grow by around 4% (5.3% in 2007), while services are predicted to grow expand at a slower rate than the 4.7% recorded in 2007.
The largest growth will be seen in the manufacturing sector, which will expand at a rate similar to the 4.9% posted in 2007.
The positive results of the manufacturing industry in 2007 were mainly due to the rapid rise in the production of capital goods and consumer durables.
The intensity of the expansion in investment and consumption in the first quarter of 2008 suggests that both headings will once again be spearheading industrial growth, although more slowly in the sector of capital goods than that of consumer durables.
Growth in the production of intermediate goods, for its part, will be lower than the 4.8% recorded in 2007.
The supply of manufactures produced in Brazil has been outstripped by internal demand, which is increasingly met by imports.
In the first quarter of 2008, the export volume of goods and services was down 2.1% on the year-earlier period, while import volumes of goods and services were up by 18.9%.
Central Bank of Brazil. o Refers to net public external debt. p The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks. an increase of over 10% in investment as a percentage of GDP would exceed the 18.3% rise recorded in the first quarter of 2008 (the highest level since the beginning of the 1990s).
Investment was mainly channelled into construction, which grew by 8.8% between the first quarter of 2007 and the same period in 2008, thanks to a greater availability of credit that facilitated a rise in housing construction and self-builds.
Consumption is also expected to remain buoyant, although the growth rate will be somewhat lower than the 5.7% recorded in 2007.
The rise in real wages will depend on the increase in inflation due to higher food prices.
Given the high level of family borrowing, supply of this type of credit is also expected to be reduced.
The rate of inflation, measured by the extended national consumer price index (IPCA) was 4.46% in 2007, rising to 6.1% in the 12 months up to June 2008.
Cumulative inflation in the first six months of 2008 was 3.6%, compared with 2.1% in the year-earlier period.
According to market projections for 2008, variation in consumer prices will be 6.0%.
The prospect of more rapid growth in the wholesale price index was already a real one in 2007, particularly for agricultural products, which showed an annual increase of 24.5%.
Wholesale prices for manufactures began to rise at the end of 2007: in December, prices grew by 1.1%, compared with 4.43% for the year as a whole and 8.5% in the first six months of 2008.
The increase in wholesale prices will push up the general price index (used as a reference for setting various administered prices such as electricity and rent), which will in turn affect consumer prices throughout the year.
The price hikes have been accompanied by a general increase in income.
The real wage bill in the main metropolitan regions grew by 4.2% in 2007, with growth quickening in April 2008 to stand at 7.1% compared with the same month of 2007.
The main new development in the Brazilian economy during the first few months of 2008 has been the result on the external accounts.
Following the surpluses observed in 2007 in the most important headings of the balance of payments (US$ 40.028 billion on the trade balance, US$ 1.461 billion in current transactions and US$ 87.484 billion in the overall balance), in 2008 the trade surplus is expected to halve and the current account is predicted to show a deficit of US$ 20.0 billion.
The trade surplus of US$ 8.656 billion was only half the level recorded in the year-earlier period.
The growth rate of exports, which were up 19.9% between January and May 2008 compared with the year-earlier period, was considerably slower than that of imports (46.3%).
Export growth up to May 2008 was mainly attributable to the 23.3% increase in prices, as volumes fell by 3.0%.
Commodity exports expanded by 32.8% (which reflected a 36.0% rise in prices and a 3.1% fall in volumes), while semi-manufactured products grew by 19.9% (reflecting a 19.3% rise in prices and a slight increase of 0.5% in volume).
For imports, on the other hand, prices rose by 21.4% and volume by 20.4%.
Such import growth is due to buoyant internal demand and currency appreciation.
The value of consumer durable imports rose (with 65.6% growth in volumes and 4.1% growth in prices), as did the value of imports of capital goods (volume up by 34.0% and prices by 9.4%).
At the same time, increased domestic purchasing power funded the increase in imports of consumer nondurables (volume up by 7.3% and prices by 12.1%) and intermediate goods (19.7% rise in volume and 18.1% in prices).
The surge in fuel prices (54.7) and volume (8.2%) also contributed to the import expansion.
Net interest payments posted a deficit of US$ 2.669 billion, which was less than the US$ 3.928 billion deficit observed in the year-earlier period.
Net dividends and profit payments significantly increased to reach a deficit of US$ 15.996 billion (US$ 8.061 billion between January and May 2007).
Foreign direct investment as a percentage of GDP rose from 2.0% in the period January-May 2007 to 2.4% in the same period of 2008.
The investment-grade rating awarded by risk agencies is expected to have a positive effect on inflows of foreign exchange into the economy, in the form of either direct or indirect investment.
Outgoing foreign direct investment was channelled into new projects and, between January and May, revenue amounting to US$ 3.507 billion for inter-company loans changed to outgoings of US$ 7.575 billion (which was more than the US$ 7.067 billion in Brazilian investment recorded in 2007).
Against all expectations, however, it came in at the lower end of the projected range.
This slowdown, which became apparent towards the middle of the year and has continued into 2008, was caused by the emergence of certain risks in both the internal and the external situation.
The effects included, most notably: a rise in inflation, a decline in consumption, a drop in energy production, less activity in the natural resources sector, a real appreciation of the Chilean peso, and a loss of competitiveness of the sectors involved in import substitution.
Despite the turbulence in these areas, the foundations of the Chilean economy remained solid: significant fiscal surpluses, low levels of domestic and foreign public debt, prudent macroeconomic management and constantly buoyant export markets, which are, moreover, highly diversified.
Chile is thus well positioned for handling fluctuations in the external setting.
The main risks it faces are posed by the behaviour of international oil and food prices and the impact of a possible slowdown in the United States on other developed economies, which could affect Chilean exports.
Projections for 2008 situate GDP growth at the lower end of the 4%-4.5% range at the end of the year.
The medium-term growth prospects are somewhat better, if still modest, owing mainly to the ongoing complexity of the international situation.
Investment in the mining and energy sectors in particular have soared, reaching a historic high in the first quarter of 2008.
The lifting of restrictions in the energy sector in 2009 (which have been constraining growth) when the projects that were started a couple of years ago reach completion, and the end of a phase of low-grade ore in the copper mining industry will pave the way for significant expansion in two sectors that have so far experienced meagre growth.
The increase in copper revenues in 2007 and 2008 has enabled the central government to step up spending and has remained a key element of support for economic growth.
Higher levels of activity, which helped raise indirect tax revenues, and an increase in income tax receipts meant that the central government’s revenues grew 12.3% in real terms in 2007.
Despite higher international copper prices, tax revenue from copper sales fell 10.2% in real terms with respect to the previous year because the state company Corporación Nacional del Cobre de Chile (CODELCO), which generates most of this revenue, was affected by rising costs, the lower grade of the copper ore and labour disputes.
The 12.3% real increase in capital expenditures was fuelled mainly by the 23.7% increase in public investment.
The central government’s surplus for 2007 was therefore equivalent to 8.8% of GDP, the highest level ever reached during the 20 years for which comparable fiscal accounting records are available.
This surplus was used to reduce the central government’s debt, which in gross terms fell from 5.3% of GDP in 2006 to 4.1% in 2007, and to increase the accumulation of financial assets abroad.
Monetary policy continued to focus on maintaining annual inflation within a range of 2%-4% over the medium term (18-24 months).
An unexpected surge in inflation in April 2007 led the central bank to raise the monetary-policy rate by 25 basic points in July, August and September that year.
These adjustments were temporarily suspended in October because indicators revealed a slight slowdown in economic activity and there was little evidence of price rises spreading to other domestic prices or to wages.
Moreover, the medium-term expectations for annual inflation continued to be around the 3% mark.
In December, however, when inflation rose again, the decision was taken to reapply the adjustments to the monetary policy rate as of January 2008 in order to keep expectations in line with the government’s monetary policy objectives and to prevent the rise in external prices for fuel and certain non-perishable food items spreading to other sectors.
From February onwards, despite rising uncertainty about These resources are accumulated in three funds: the Economic and Social Stabilization Fund (FEES), which is used to finance counter-cyclical fiscal policies, the Pension Reserve Fund (FRP) and the Oil Price Stabilization Fund (FEPP). inflation projections, the monetary policy rate was kept at 6.25% as there were signs that inflation had peaked.
Higher annual inflation rates in May and June (8.9% and 9.5%, respectively), however, led to successive 50 basicpoint increases being made to the monetary policy rate, which reached 7.25% in July.
More upward adjustments may be made in the future as well if expectations diverge considerably from the inflation target set for 2008 or if there are more surprise surges in inflation.
Given the country’s deeper integration with international markets and its low-risk status, the central bank has implemented a free-floating exchange rate and generally refrained from intervening in the exchange market.
According to the central bank, considering the multiple factors involved and the value of the Chilean peso with respect to the numerous other currencies in which commercial and financial transactions are carried out, the exchange rate has maintained its equilibrium value for a long time, and intervention has therefore been unnecessary.
This diagnosis was modified and the central bank’s approach altered, however, in April 2008, when it initiated an eight-month foreign-exchange purchasing process aimed at boosting international reserves by US$ 8 billion (approximately 50%).
At the same time, short- and long-term debt instruments were issued in national currency with a view to neutralizing the impact of the planned foreign-exchange purchases on the money supply.
This move was mainly triggered by the rising risk of the crisis in the United States financial market spreading to other countries and worsening external credit conditions.
Such a scenario would affect all emerging countries, including Chile, regardless of its strong position, and the ensuing costs would be high.
The central bank therefore decided to acquire foreign currency holdings as a preventive measure that would enable the country to handle any eventual foreign exchange liquidity difficulties.
The domestic situation also made it possible to take this step inasmuch as the exchange rate had fallen to below its equilibrium level as a result of the huge spread between the monetary policy rate and the rate applied by the United States Federal Reserve (in April the gap reached 425 basic points).
Also, the United States dollar had been losing value against most currencies in the world.
It was thought that an increase in the nominal exchange rate would not undermine the fight against inflation as there were signs that inflation was already being reined in by the deceleration of the components of demand.
Although the central bank stated that its objective was not to push the exchange rate to a certain level, it was probable that the exchange rate would increase as a result of the intervention, as in fact happened during the first few weeks after the implementation of the foreign exchange purchasing programme.
The planned increase in reserves was enormous and, given the risks and uncertainty affecting international markets at the time, it seemed unfeasible that speculators would derail the central bank’s policy by taking short positions in pesos in such a large amount (US$ 8 billion).
In any case, the central bank reserved the right to suspend the programme if circumstances changed and such a course of action became justifiable.
After sluggish growth in 2006, domestic demand recovered in 2007 and expanded 7.8%, spearheaded by an 11.9% increase in gross fixed capital investment.
Export growth picked up thanks to steady international demand for the country’s main exports, and imports rose as well, owing to the real appreciation of the peso and a significant investment-driven increase in machinery and equipment imports (15.5%).
Despite efforts to soften the impact of high external prices for fuel through cuts in fuel taxes, the rising prices of other key products, such as food, meant that low-income consumers, who spend a larger proportion of their income on such items, suffered a drop in their real disposable income.
Consumption therefore fell as of mid-2007, and this affected the growth of related sectors as well.
At the same time, changes in demand composition slowed the growth of sectors engaged in import-substitution activities in 2007, and this trend continued into 2008.
The response of the United States monetary authorities to the mortgage crisis, which included the lowering of interest rates, increased the margin by which interest rates in Chile exceeded those in other countries.
The gap was widened further by the reaction of Chile’s monetary authorities to the unexpected rise in inflation in April 2007, which consisted of raising the monetary policy rate.
The Chilean peso therefore gained value against the United States dollar, which has harmed the competitiveness of import-substitution activities and certain non-traditional exports.
This has been partially reflected in a marked shift in consumption patterns.
The lower real exchange rate brought down the relative price of imported products, and these began to make up a larger proportion of regular consumption.
As far as supply was concerned, natural gas deliveries from Argentina suffered the worst restrictions ever in mid-2007.
At first, no significant reductions in electrical energy generation were foreseen as many of the natural-gas-powered generators could switch to diesel.
Electricity generation trended downward from then on, however, and this, together with high prices for the fuel used by thermoelectric plants, lowered the value added of the electricity, gas and water sector, which shrank at an annual rate of 10.7% in 2007.
This situation has not altered significantly in the first semester of 2008.
On the contrary, rising international fuel prices during the first half of the year mean that it will probably not improve.
Labour disputes disrupted production in 2007 at both State-owned and private mines and in some agro-industrial and forestry industries.
Labour problems arose again at CODELCO during the first quarter of 2008, and the sector’s growth is therefore expected to weaken during the first semester of the year.
Activity in the construction sector remained buoyant, however, particularly engineering works which were fuelled by the marked increase in investment.
Construction growth in the housing segment was more subdued, though, as tougher credit conditions limited the sales of new homes.
All these factors led to GDP growth falling short of original projections and coming in at 5.1% in 2007.
Although the rise in international prices for commodities benefited exports, it also raised the price of certain inputs that have a large influence on domestic prices, namely: fuels, wheat, milk and other non-perishables.
Also, the winter of 2007, which was one of the harshest in years and had a significant negative impact on fruit and vegetable production, was followed by a drought.
Consequently, both spot and trend inflation indices rose significantly and unexpectedly from April 2007 onwards and, by December, 12-month inflation stood at 7.8%, well outside the target range established by the central bank and three times as high as the previous year.
This trend has continued into the first six months of 2008, with annual inflation reaching 9.5% in June.
According to the central bank’s projections, inflation will gradually trend downwards over the next eighteen months towards the targeted 2%-4% range.
The indexation of salaries meant that the average annual increase in wages in 2007 was 7.3% in nominal terms and 2.8% in real terms.
The year-on-year increase in December was only 0.5%, however, owing to the rise in inflation.
This rise, combined with the delayed effect of the indexation clauses, resulted in wages posting a year-on-year increase of 8.6% in nominal terms in March 2008 and of 0.1% in real terms.
The unit cost of labour according to central bank calculations steadily increased over 2007 and into 2008 owing to the fall in productivity growth, which could raise costs in the future.
National unemployment figures reflect the slowdown of economic activity as of the second semester of 2007 but also reveal improvements in labour conditions.
From July onwards, unemployment rates began to rise, having fallen prior to then, owing to an expansion of the labour force —which had been stagnant— and to a slowdown in the pace of job creation.
Also, the seasonally-adjusted unemployment rate during the first quarter of 2008 was lower than for the same period the previous year because job creation picked up again.
Job creation in the salaried-jobs segment has been more buoyant than in the own-account jobs segment, which has tended to shrink, revealing an important improvement in terms of job quality.
In 2007, exports rose 15.7% and reached an FOB value of US$ 67.644 billion, thanks to a 7.1% increase in volume and an 8.0% increase in prices, which in turn reflected ongoing high levels of external demand.
The steepest climb was recorded by capital goods imports, which were fuelled by rising investment.
The balance-of-payments current account turned in a surplus of US$ 7.2 billion, equivalent to 4.4% of GDP.
This included profit reinvestments in the amounts of US$ 7.22 billion and US$ 9.78 billion, respectively.
In December 2007, the central bank’s international reserves reached US$ 16.9 billion.
The external sector will continue to be a major source of uncertainty in 2008.
The principal unknowns will be: the oil price; the possibility of world growth being significantly hampered by the adoption of anti-inflationary policies in some developed countries; the magnitude and duration of the crisis in the United States financial market; and the possible repercussion on demand for Chilean exports if the crisis spreads to other regions. real investments, however.
They may reflect a decision to keep resources under favourable financial conditions in Chile before transferring them abroad in the future.
The Colombian economy grew 7.5% in 2007, surpassing even the most optimistic projections.
Driven mainly by investment and private consumption, this fourth year of expansion marked a period of sustained growth unseen in Colombia since the 1970s.
Economic policy shifted away from the fiscal issues that had caused concern in previous years to focus on curbing rising prices and the appreciation of the peso.
Inflation was off target for the first time in years in 2007.
The consumer price index rose 5.7%, well above the upper limit of the 3.5%-4.5% range set by authorities.
The central government also continued to exercise tight fiscal discipline, which compensated the deterioration of localgovernment balances.
The pace of economic growth showed signs of slackening in the first months of 2008, especially in the manufacturing, construction and trade sectors.
Growth figures for the first quarter came in at 4.1% compared with 9.1% for the same period the previous year.1 Activity in the construction sector was down 5.8%, and the growth recorded by the manufacturing sector was weak (2.1%) compared with previous quarters.
Exports were unexpectedly buoyant, however, rising 39.5% in January-April compared with the same period in 2007.
Buoyant exports and high levels of foreign direct investment (FDI) are signs of a thriving economy and contrast strongly with those pointing towards a slowdown of economic activity.
Inflation remained high during the first semester of 2008 and threatens to surpass once more the target of 4.9% set by the central bank.
Several concerns are also looming on the external front, including the prolongation of the period of more moderate economic growth in the United States and the impact of possible trade restrictions in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
According to ECLAC projections, economic growth will be about 6.0% in 2008. into the country’s annual accounts.
Growth during the first quarter of 2007, according to the new bases, was 9.1% and during the whole year 8.2% (on the basis of provisional figures).
In economic policy, the particularly favourable international context made investment one of the main engines of the country’s recent economic growth.
High levels of investment, constantly buoyant exports, the expansion of private consumption and the control of fiscal imbalances have become the most influential variables in the economic expansion process.
The main challenge facing Colombia today is how to protect this new growth path in an increasingly less favourable international context that is largely shaped by its close trade links with the United States and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The slowdown of the United States economy and the fragile balance of the Venezuelan economy (not to mention troubled diplomatic relations between the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia) now pose a serious threat.
Moreover, the country’s monetary authorities need to tackle the dilemma of how to combat inflation without hampering economic growth.
This is a particularly complex task inasmuch as inflation responds not only to internal changes, but also to external factors beyond the reach of monetary policy, such as international food and fuel prices. 9.8%.
The primary surplus was equivalent to 1.2% of GDP, the highest recorded in over 10 years.
The combined balance of the regional and municipal governments and the decentralized entities, on the other hand, went from posting a surplus of 0.4% of GDP to returning a deficit of 0.2% of GDP.
This is a warning sign that the spending limit established in the law on fiscal responsibility is possibly being overreached.
At the outset of 2008, the deficit for the public sector as a whole was projected at 1.4% of GDP.
This figure took into account the negative impact that the implementation of the tax reform approved in 2006 (which introduced tax cuts and exemptions) and projected increases in spending would have on the central government’s balance.
In June 2008, however, concerns stemming from the interplay of a number of negative factors, such as rising inflation, a sharp appreciation of the peso and the first signs of an economic slowdown, led authorities to take steps in all areas.
In fiscal matters, it was decided to slash spending by 1.5 billion Colombian pesos to 1.0% of GDP.
Thanks to a solid economic performance in 2007, which boosted tax receipts, Colombia’s fiscal situation continued to improve in 2007.
The public-sector deficit represented 0.8% of GDP, as it had in 2006.
This was below the 1.3% target established in the government’s financial plan at the beginning of the year, but slightly above the 0.7% projected in the mid-term fiscal guidelines that are intended to direct the course of fiscal and macroeconomic policy over the next 10 years.
The good performance of the public sector as a whole reflected the improvement in the fiscal balance of the central government, which offset the worsening of the balances posted by regional and municipal governments.
The deficits racked up by decentralized entities around the country, especially those engaged in activities in the health sector, lotteries, liquor companies and regional universities, are becoming a new source of concern because their spending has been outstripping their income, which depends basically on transfers from the central government.
The central government’s deficit was lowered from 4.1% in 2006 to 3.2% in 2007 by the rise in income generated by sturdy economic growth and import/export activity.
Total income grew 14.8%, while total spending grew In April 2006, the central bank embarked on an effort to curb rising aggregate demand and inflationary pressures by raising its intervention rate.
Between then and the end of 2007, the rate was raised from 6% to 9.5%.
This hike was passed on slowly to the various market rates with an estimated time lag of between four and eight quarters.
External pressure, such as the high price of food and fuel and buoyant demand in China, India, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and other countries, however, meant that the government failed to achieve the inflation target of 3.5%-4.5% established for 2007.
Inflationary pressures continued at the beginning of 2008, and the central bank therefore decided to raise the intervention rate once more in February to 9.75%.
In addition to the frequent hikes in the interest rate, the central bank introduced a marginal nonearning legal reserve requirement for deposits in the first semester of 2007 with a view to reining in the expansion of the credit portfolio.
These measures helped raise both the market lending and borrowing rates by almost two percentage points in 2007.
As hoped, credit growth slowed, especially consumer lending, which had been expanding at an unsustainable rate.
The growth rates of both the monetary aggregates and credit were lower during the first months of 2008 than during the same period the previous year.
At its meeting in June 2008, the central bank eliminated the marginal legal reserve and imposed an ordinary legal reserve requirement of 10% on average (11.5% for savings and current accounts and 6% for fixed-term certificates of deposit).
Given the high level of uncertainty reigning in the present situation, the monetary authorities’ decisions have stirred up a heated debate in Colombia.
This uncertainty stems largely from the inability to predict with any accuracy what the fallout will be of a downturn in the economies of the country’s main trading partners.
It is also unclear how far-reaching and long-lasting the pressure of international prices will be, how long monetary policy measures will take to act on interest rates and what their final repercussions will be in terms of credit volumes.
The rising value of the Colombian peso became a major source of concern in 2007.
In order to contain its appreciation, the central bank used the discretional intervention mechanism at the beginning of the year to purchase foreign exchange (US$ 7.725 billion in the first four months of 2007).
As the progressive increase of the intervention rate counteracted efforts to halt the appreciation of the peso, the central bank ended its discretional intervention and in an attempt to deter shortterm capital inflows, introduced the obligation to deposit the equivalent of 40% of the value of foreign loans and portfolio investments as a non-earning reserve.
These measures did not manage to prevent the appreciation of the peso, however, and, the average annual exchange rate was 2,078 pesos per dollar in 2007.
This represented an accumulated 12% nominal appreciation and an average annual appreciation of 11.2%.
The peso continued to gain strength during the first few months of 2008.
The exchange rate remained below 2,000 pesos per United States dollar and appreciated 14% on average in nominal terms between January and June.
This was largely owing to buoyant FDI in the petroleum and mining sectors.
Fearing that speculative capital could drive down the exchange rate even further, the government passed a decree in May 2008 to raise the deposit requirement for portfolio investments from abroad from 40% to 50% and establish a minimum two-year stay on FDI.
The central bank also decided to step up the accumulation of international reserves by starting to buy twenty million United States dollars a day though competitive auctions. (d) Trade policy The central government continued to further trade negotiations and seek out new trading partners.
The trade agreement with El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras was completed and is now awaiting approval by Congress.
The final stages of the negotiations with Canada and the European Free Trade Association (EFTA) have been reached, and the next round, which will be held in June, is expected to be the last one.
Owing to the lack of coordination among the countries of the Andean Community and the fact that Bolivia and Ecuador oppose the agreement, Colombia has asked the European Commission to hold bilateral talks rather than block ones (with the Andean countries).
This problem should be resolved during the next round of talks scheduled for July.
The approval of the free trade agreement with the United States has been held up by opposition in the United States Congress.
In spending terms, the growth of the Colombian economy in 2007 was, as in previous years, sustained by buoyant investment, exports and private-sector consumption.
The increase in disposable household income, generated by favourable terms of trade, falling unemployment and high remittance levels, spurred private consumption.
The rise in investment responded basically to the increase in public works projects and the purchase of machinery and equipment, including transportation equipment.
Exports and imports both expanded thanks to favourable changes in the terms of trade in the case of the former, and to the brisk pace of economic growth in the case of the latter.
The construction, industry, commerce and transportation sectors spearheaded the rise in imports, posting increases of over 10%.
Alarm bells began to ring when signs of an economic slowdown appeared in the first few months of 2008, mainly in the industry and trade sectors.
The most significant business opinion polls in the country revealed a cool-down of economic activity, negative confidence levels and a drop in sales and jobs.
The downturn was confirmed by the growth figures for the first quarter of 2008 and the most recent sample results on monthly manufacturing activity that were published by the National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) in May.
According to the sample, real production, real sales and employment posted negative annual variations (decreases of 4.3%, 4.5% and 0.3%, respectively).
Growth was 4.1% compared with 9.1% during the same quarter the previous year.
On the other hand, and despite the appreciation of the peso, exports soared in the first months of the year thanks to the high prices fetched by petroleum sales and an over 30% increase in the prices of the country’s other exports.
FDI flows are expected to reach the same level as in 2007.
According to ECLAC projections, the Colombian economy will expand 5.3% in 2008.
The Colombian government and private-sector analysts expect growth of about 5.0% or between 5.0% and 5.5%, respectively.
After three consecutive years of meeting the inflation targets set by the central bank, the 4% target set for 2007 proved impossible to reach.
At the end of the year, inflation stood at 5.7%, well above the 4.5% upper limit that had been established.
The most important external factors were the steep climb in food and fuel prices on international markets and adverse weather conditions, which affected the local supply of certain agricultural products.
The country’s monetary authorities are aware, however, of risks posed by, among other things, the considerable rise in inflationary expectations and the slim probabilities of inflationary pressure easing, especially external pressure.
Projected at 4.9% for the whole year, accumulated inflation had already reached 6.0% by June.
Employment patterns up to the first semester of 2008 reflect more closely the pace of economic growth.
Real wages in industry posted a year-onyear negative growth of 0.5% in 2007, compared with a Unemployment continued to fall in the first months of 2008 in relation to the same period the previous year.
If an economic slowdown takes hold, however, unemployment could worsen in 2008.
The first mass dismissals at automobile assembly plants, which have been hurt by the restrictions imposed by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on vehicle purchases, point to this possibility.
Also, the latest figures show that industrial growth seems to have come to a standstill.
This was largely owing to buoyant import activity, which increased almost 26% thanks to high levels of investment and the execution of certain infrastructure projects in the country.
Exports, meanwhile, rose 21.4%: traditional exports 20.3%, and non-traditional exports 25.5%.2 This notable growth was spurred by favourable terms of trade and high Venezuelan demand, which offset the drop in sales to the United States.
In non-traditional exports, this growth was generated mainly by higher clothing and apparel and vehicle and vehicle parts sales.
The current account deficit is projected to reach about 3.9% of GDP and be financed by FDI in 2008.
FDI is expected to continue flowing into the country during the year as long as the external situation remains favourable.
The deficit is projected to be higher than in 2007 as the pace of exports growth will probably subside, and imports will probably pick up thanks to military equipment purchases.
Difficult relations with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the measures adopted by the Venezuelan authorities have been harming trade flows.
Several sectors have been affected by the most recent restrictions, but the worst hit has been the automobile industry, which suffered considerably when the Ministries of Finance, Light Industry and Trade, and Energy and Petroleum of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela issued a joint resolution limiting vehicle imports.
The quota for imports from Colombia was slashed from 60,000 to 24,000 units, which has had negative effects on employment.
One scenario analysis shows that a complete shutdown of exports to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would result in a 1.3% drop in Colombia’s GDP.
The economic growth rate in Ecuador was 1.7% for the first three quarters of 2007, and preliminary estimates from the central bank suggest that the figure for the full year will be 2.7%.1 This reflects a slowing of economic growth, which had stood at 6% in 2005 and 3.9% in 2006.
This figure, among the lowest growth rates in Latin America for 2007, was mainly due to falls in oil production and the investment rate, despite the favourable world situation in terms of the prices of the country’s exports and the depreciation of the dollar against the currencies of its trade partners.
The fiscal situation remained steady in 2007, although there was a deterioration in comparison with 2006 owing to growth in public spending.
A large part of that growth, however, was due to a large increase in public investment, which exceeded the levels seen in recent years.
Lastly, inflation picked up in the second half of 2007, reflecting the rising world prices of raw materials and the depreciation of the dollar.
The primary surplus of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) in 2007 was equivalent to 4.1% of GDP, while the overall NFPS surplus was 2.2%; this was a deterioration in comparison with the 2006 levels of 5.5% and 3.3%, respectively.
The falls were due to an upturn in spending, which increased faster than revenue: the latter rose by 19.4%, but spending was up 26.5% NFPS income rose by 3% of GDP, with two thirds of the increase due to the improved operating surplus of State-owned corporations.
The growth of revenue from VAT and income tax receipts and social security contributions also exceeded GDP growth.
NFPS spending rose by 4.2% of GDP, mostly because of a major upswing in gross fixed capital formation, which rose by 67%, equivalent to 2.5% of GDP, compared with 2006.
The gross fixed capital formation of the NFPS stood at 7.1% of GDP, the highest level in 10 years.
This rise in public investment reflects the economic role allotted to the State by the current government.
Expenditure on wages was up by 16.8% equivalent to 0.7% of GDP; the corresponding outlays rose to 8.3% of GDP, the highest level of the decade.
High oil prices during the first quarter of 2008 led to a sharp upswing in NFPS revenue from oil exports, compared with the first quarter of 2007 (261.8%).
Non-oil revenue was up 36.6%, led by income tax receipts and social security contributions.
Current spending rose by 55.3% in comparison with the first quarter of 2007, while accrued capital expenditure expanded by 111.2%.
In 2007, for example, the import and domestic sale of 11.8 million barrels of diesel fuel showed a loss of US$ 607.3 million, while PETROINDUSTRIAL produced 11.2 million barrels of number 2 diesel fuel, a similar quantity to the diesel fuel imported.
The rate charged on the most expensive vehicles was raised, taxation was widened to include more goods and services (social clubs), but the levying of ICE in the telecommunications sector was abolished. steeply.
Just as in 2007, when the budgetary allocation for that area was underspent, the figures on the execution of public investment in the first half of 2008, measured by sector, show that only 26.8% of the budgeted spending was implemented.
Among the main targets of planned public investment, the ones which lagged behind most in terms of execution were health care and communications.
As in the previous year, 2007 saw a continuing fall in the country’s external public debt-to-GDP ratio, including the central bank.
In the early months of 2008, external debt continued to fall; the country’s debt to the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR) was paid off in full, an outlay of US$ 166.7 million.
In July 2007 the country’s Congress passed a law for the regulation of the maximum cost of credit, and beginning in August of that year the central bank published effective lending and borrowing rates.
Lending rates these were broken down according to different types of credit.
By April 2008 figures were available for benchmark and maximum rates corresponding to the following segments: corporate commerce, commerce by small and medium-sized enterprises, consumption, retail consumption, housing, and microcredit for broad-accumulation, simple-accumulation and subsistence microenterprises.
Since these lending rates include the banking commissions which were charged separately until July 2007, it is not possible to make a comparison between 2007 and 2008.
First, as from mid-2007, preference for liquid assets increased, and the proportion of liquid assets swelled from 15.8% of total banking-sector assets in June 2007 to 22.6% in April 2008.
At the same time, the upward trend in loans to non-company resident sectors, observed since the first quarter of 2003, ended: in March 2003 such loans represented 15% of the total assets of open banks, but in July 2007 they amounted to 26.1%.
Subsequently, a slowdown in the growth of that category of loans and of lending to non-financial corporations was reflected in a fall in the share of such loans in total assets.
At the same time, the banks continued to show little interest in purchasing State bonds, which made up only 0.8% of total banking-sector assets as of March 2008.
Of particular note was the real depreciation against the Colombian peso and the euro, which reached 17.4% and 9%, respectively.
From December 2007 to May 2008, the real effective exchange rate experienced a further depreciation of 0.6%, despite the upswing in inflation during that period.
In late July 2008, official figures were not yet available for the country’s GDP in 2007.
The central bank announced its preliminary conclusion that the growth rate had been 2.7%, but this is still being reviewed.
GDP was up 1.7% in the first three quarters of 2007, compared with the figure of 2.6% forecast by the government.
This slowing of GDP growth was mainly due to a 4.6% fall in petroleum output compared with 2006.
The most active sectors during the period were services and manufacturing, while activity in the construction sector decreased.
Official projections for 2007 had forecast strong growth in construction, but this did not materialize, partly owing to poor levels of execution of public-works projects, which were below the originally planned figures.
On the demand side, the strongest boost in the first three quarters of 2007 came from household consumption, which was up 2.4%, while exports grew by 1.7% and gross fixed capital formation fell by 1.1% against the 2006 figure.
Thus, the ineffective behaviour of domestic investment became a limiting factor on Ecuador’s economic growth.
In April 2007, oil extraction by the State-owned Petroleum Corporation of Ecuador (PETROECUADOR) stood at 250,900 barrels per day.6 Since that date, apart from minor fluctuations, it has averaged 261,500 barrels per day.
In May 2008 the figure was 259,300 barrels, 93,400 of which were from the Block 15 oilfield which is managed independently although it comes under the Stateowned company.
This shows that PETROECUADOR’s other extraction activities stand at historically low levels, owing to administrative problems which were reflected in low levels of investment over many years, as well as natural productivity losses in the company’s main oilfields.
The situation of private oil extraction has changed little since the termination of the contract with Occidental Petroleum in May 2006.
Agricultural growth failed to come up to expectations in 2007, partly owing to weather phenomena which affected production.
Includes hidden unemployment. k Percentage of the economically active population, three cities. l In January 2000, the country adopted the United States dollar as its official currency. m Reference rate in dollars, monthly average. n Accrual basis. o Refers to the central government. p The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks.
The economy is expected to grow by about 3% in 2008, mostly driven by public investment and consumption.
The government has produced an ambitious investment plan for the oil sector, and its implementation will determine the growth of oil extraction activities in the course of the year.
In the early months of 2008, the government took steps to renegotiate existing oil-industry contracts with private firms to convert partnership contracts into oil servicing contracts.
In April the Constituent Assembly adopted Constituent Mandate No. 6, cancelling a large number of mining concessions without any financial compensation and placing a moratorium on the award of new concessions until a new legal framework for mining is adopted.
The inflation rate measured by the variation of the consumer price index (CPI) was 3.3% from December 2006 to December 2007.
Beginning in the second half of 2007, stronger inflationary pressures were felt, and this trend intensified in the early months of 2008.
In June 2008 the 12-month inflation rate was up to 9.7% and cumulative inflation for the first half of the year stood at 7.1%.
This was mostly due to factors such as rising world foodstuffs prices and the depreciation of the dollar against the currencies of Ecuador’s trade partners.
Since 2003 Ecuador has frozen the prices of petroleum products such as petrol, diesel fuel and liquefied natural gas, by means of heavy subsidies.
Given the importance of these fuels in the cost structure of the productive sector, the absence of subsidies might have brought about even greater price rises during this period.
Most of the job creation was in the informal sector, whose share in urban non-agricultural employment rise by 0.8 percentage points.
In 2007, Ecuador posted a current account surplus equivalent to 3.6% of GDP, somewhat lower than the 2006 figure of 3.9% of GDP.
There was a downturn in the growth rate of migrant workers’ remittances, which stood at 6.9% of GDP by the end of 2007.
This decline continued into the first quarter of 2008 in comparison with the previous two quarters, apparently owing to the sluggishness of the construction sector in Spain and the United States.
Net foreign direct investment (FDI) contracted in nominal terms for the second consecutive year, standing at US$ 182.7 million, or 0.4% of GDP, in 2007.
This was the third lowest figure in Latin America (only in Bolivia and Paraguay was FDI lower in nominal terms) and the second lowest when expressed as a percentage of GDP (only the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela registered lower net FDI as a percentage of GDP in 2007).
The financial account of the balance of payments recorded inflows equivalent to 0.6% of GDP.
Two thirds of the expansion was due to the increased value of exports of crude oil and petroleum products, especially fuel oil.
A closer look at petroleum-related exports shows that the volume of crude oil exports fell by 9.2%, but the 18% price rise compensated for it easily.
This reflects the aforementioned fall in petroleum production in the course of 2007.
Exports of petroleum products (fuel oil) were up 11.3% in volume terms and 26.7% in value terms.
A third of the rise in exports in 2007 related to non-petroleum exports, particularly bananas and plantains (7.9%), vegetable extracts and oils (6.1%) and cocoa beans and cocoa products (5.2%).
During the first five months of 2008, exports rose by 64.4% over the same period in 2007, thanks to rising prices for crude oil (85.1% on average) and an expansion in export volume (15.5%).
The growth rate of imports stood at 11.8%, well below the 18% recorded in 2006, and was mainly due to higher prices for commodity imports (16.2%) as a result of price increases on intermediate goods at the worldwide level.
The growth of capital goods imports was also above average, particularly in the case of those destined for industry.
In the first five months of 2008, as a result of higher prices, the value of commodity imports rose by 30%, led by industrial raw materials.
Despite the emphasis on infrastructure projects, imports of construction materials fell by 15.7% during that same period.
Lastly, in February 2008 the United States Congress approved the extension to the end of 2008 of the preferential tariffs provided for in the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA), under which Ecuadorian exporters can bring many types of goods into the United States market without paying tariffs.
Paraguay’s economy grew by 6.8% in 2007, driven by the output of an excellent year in crop farming and, in particular, by the soybean harvest, which was over 50% up on the previous year.
Livestock farming suffered from some adverse conditions and meat exports decreased, whereas exports of soybeans and related oils increased.
The balance-of-payments current account recorded a surplus equivalent to 1.1% of GDP which, combined with the capital and financial accounts surplus (5.0% of GDP, including errors and omissions), translated into a large inflow of foreign exchange.
The guaraní continued to appreciate strongly against the dollar, but depreciated against the Brazilian real.
The central government turned in a surplus of 1% of GDP, as income rose 13%, reflecting increased economic activity and offsetting an increase of almost 10% in spending.
The inflation rate is expected to remain high owing to rises in international prices and the fiscal accounts are expected to be in balance.
The presidential elections held in April 2008 were won by Fernando Lugo, the candidate of the party “Alianza Patriótica para el Cambio”.
This meant a change in the political party in power after 61 years of government by the Colorado party.
The central government recorded an overall surplus equivalent to 1% of GDP, thus marking up four consecutive years of positive balances in the fiscal accounts, the longest such period in Paraguay’s history.
The standby agreement signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 2003 marked a turning point with respect to fiscal performance hitherto, enabling the implementation of a set of reforms that greatly contributed to improving the public accounts.
Some previous traits of the country’s fiscal balance remain, however, such as a small tax burden and an inflexible current spending regime, particularly as regards wages, retirement benefits and pensions.
The tax burden, which represented 11.7% of GDP in 2007, has been offset to some extent by the contribution of royalties and compensations from the binational entities shared with Brazil (Itaipú) and Argentina (Yacyretá), which amounted Tax receipts benefited strongly from the increase in economic activity.
Of these receipts, 50% corresponded to income from value added tax (VAT), which rose almost 25% with respect to 2006.
VAT has gradually come to represent a larger proportion of tax income, reflecting the enlargement of the tax base.
Receipts from tax on net income and profits also rose sharply (28%), as did those from the excise tax on fuel (20.6%), owing to the rise in prices for these goods and the expansion of their tax base.
By contrast, income from foreign trade tax was down by 8.8%, partly because of the tourism-for-imports regime in force.
The tax on personal income, which was originally due to come into effect in 2006, was again postponed in 2007, this time until 1 January 2009.
In March 2008, the government established a tax regime to promote the production and development of high-technology goods.
This provides incentives for the production or assembly of such products incorporating value added in the country.
Spending on personal services represented 56% of current spending in 2007 (7.4% of GDP) and transfers to retirees and pensioners, 15.9% (2.1% of GDP).
General services spending rose by 13.7% over 2006 and transfers to retirees and pensioners increased by 4.7%.
In September the government established a voluntary retirement programme for civil servants, authorizing the creation of one position for every three vacated in the streamlining process.
The 2008 national budget prevents the filling of positions that become vacant and continues the voluntary retirement programme, although civil servants in the central government were granted wage rises in the first few months of the year.
Capital spending has historically tended to be unstable and has often been used as a factor of adjustment, despite efforts to increase it.
In 2007, this item rose by 4.8%, with a decline of 3.6% in physical investment and an increase of 36% in financial investment, which reflected a transfer of almost US$ 30 million to the Development Finance Agency (AFD).
The fiscal budget does not include the accounting of grants from the binational entities for social spending, which are in addition to royalty transfers, and this makes it difficult to record and monitor the application of such resources in social programmes.
At the end of 2007, the domestic public debt amounted to 2.9% of GDP, which represented an increase of 10% in comparison to 2006.
Conversely, external financial public debt recorded in the Debt Management and Financial Analysis System (DMFAS) of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development was equivalent to 18.7% of GDP, having decreased by 1.1% in relation to 2006.
In October, a debtfor-education swap in the amount of US$ 10 million was agreed with the Government of Spain.
As for the past three years, in 2007 monetary policy was based on a system of inflation targets.
The mediumand long-term benchmark for year-on-year variation in the consumer price index (CPI) remained at 5% with a margin of 2.5 percentage points on either side.
The central bank’s new board, appointed in March 2007, made some changes in monetary policy and in November approved a new instrument, a facility for short-term liquidity through the repurchase of monetary regulation instruments (FLIR).
The central bank began to auction instruments of monetary regulation (IMRs) in March 2007, then issued them again at referential rates starting in mid-April.
These rates decreased considerably, from an average of 11% in February 2007 to 8% in March and 4.1% in April.
The central bank began to raise them again in June, in view of price inflation, and the interest rate curve for IMRs rose and flattened, since the longer-term rate remained steady until March 2008.
Generally speaking, nominal interest rates rose in the banking system, particularly for certificates of deposit.1 On average, lending rates did not begin to rise until early 2008.
Thus savings certificates corresponding to the private sector again surged, this time by 45.3%, as did current account deposits (47.9%).
Returns on deposits were, however, negative or close to zero in real terms.
The analysis refers to nominal interest rates on deposits and loans in national currency, except where otherwise indicated.
Credit to the private sector rose by a nominal 41.1% and continued to increase strongly in the first semester of 2008.
Most bank lending went to the agricultural sector (26%), while retail commerce absorbed much of the credit granted by financial companies (32%).
Despite the guaraní’s appreciation against the dollar, private sector foreign currency deposits rose by 26.9% in dollar terms.
However, given the strong increase in local-currency deposits, the percentage of dollarization of private sector deposits fell from 50.3% in December 2006 to 45.2% in December 2007.
Foreign-currency loans rose by 54.4% in nominal terms, given the lower cost of dollar-denominated funds due to the effect of the exchange rate.
In 2007 the central bank continued to intervene in the exchange market and international reserves increased by 44.6% to reach 20.9% of GDP.
Net external assets were the main factor behind expansion of M0, which rose by 28.3% in nominal terms (21.1% in real terms).
Issues of IMRs, whose balance increased by 20.4%, were the main contractionary force acting on M0.
The monetary base expanded by 35.2% year-on-year, in nominal terms (27.6% in real terms), including a rise of 51.6% in reserves in the banking system, reflecting the increase in deposits.
All the monetary aggregates expanded in the first semester of 2008, leading to the rise in the rates on IMRs in March and April.
The central bank intervened strongly in the exchange market in 2007 and the first semester of 2008, in view of the upward pressure on the guaraní caused by sharply rising inflows of foreign exchange due, in turn, to the large balance-of-payments surplus.
Net purchases of foreign currency were up 76% in 2007 and 48% between January and May of 2008, compared to the year-earlier period.
As well as intervening in the exchange market, the central bank raised the daily limit on sales and purchases of foreign currency by banks. (d) Other policies Credit granted by the Development Finance Agency (AFD), a second-tier public bank, rose by 265% in 2007.
Most of it was extended to the livestock sector, followed by the crop farming and real estate sectors.
The performance of the production sectors closely reflect the upswing in crop farming, which recorded extraordinary This performance was due, in particular, to the excellent harvest of soybeans, whose production in tons increased by 58%, with yield up by 44.7%.
The areas freed up have been sown with other crops, such as soybean and sesame.
Sugar cane sowing was greatly expanded, particularly by small farmers, in step with increased manufacture of biofuels, and production of this crop was up by 28% in 2007.
The wheat harvest also climbed by a substantial 29%.The crop farming sector is expected to post another favourable performance in 2008.
By contrast, livestock farming suffered from the loss of certain markets, some poor natural conditions and the excessive slaughter of the previous year, which affected the stock of animals.
The result was an output contraction of 6.8% which affected the meat segment (-9.2%) and related industries, such as dairy (-4.2%).
This performance, together with a large increase in imports of capital goods, has contributed to the exceptional rise in gross capital formation (13.6%).
The output of the sugar industry also expanded, by 6.5%, thanks to increased production of sugar cane.
In 2008 the livestock sector should not face the same obstacles as it did in 2007 and should thus be able to recoup and return a positive growth rate, as should the industrial sector.
Services performed very well again, with a growth rate of 5.6%, led by communications (12%) and transport (9.5%), reflecting increased investment and, in the latter case, the buoyant crop farming sector.
The hotels and restaurants segment recorded the highest rate of expansion for a decade, 3.5%, thanks to an upturn in domestic tourism.
Commerce was up 5.2%, similarly to the previous year’s figure, on the strength of production activities.
Rising fiscal spending translated into a 6% increase in public consumption and private consumption posted a similar rate.
Gross capital formation rose strongly and exports were up by 9.6%, led by the upswing in soybean exports.
Imports increased by 10.8%, a smaller variation than in 2007, which helped to narrow the deficit in goods trade.
In 2008 Paraguay’s economy will continue to grow rapidly (5.0%), driven by crop-farming, an upturn in livestock farming and the maintenance of a good performance in services.
In January 2008 the central bank began to publish a new consumer price index (CPI) for the metropolitan area of Asunción, based on December 2007, in order to better reflect the current basket of consumer goods.
In 2007 the CPI registered a year-on-year variation of 6%, which was lower than the previous year’s figure (12.5%) and within the upper margin of 7.5%.
Core inflation (not including fruit and vegetables) came in at 7.7%, while core inflation X1 (not including fruit and vegetables, regulated services or fuels) stood at 8.7%.
These last two measures did not factor in the year-on-year variation in the prices of fruit and vegetables, which was negative by 8.4% despite some large increases during the year, and exceeded total price index variation.
In addition, the prices of regulated services and fuels, which are Stateregulated, were adjusted only slightly.
This prevented the petroleum price rise in the international markets from being fully reflected in gasoline prices and transportation fares.
Food and fuel prices began to put increasing pressure on the inflation rate in the first quarter of 2008 and in June the year-on-year rate reached 13.4%, driven mainly by food prices.
Further pressure was placed on the inflation rate by the depreciation of the guaraní against the Brazilian real (Brazil is Paraguay’s largest trading partner), amounting to 7.1% year-on-year in nominal terms in 2007.
The currency depreciation reflected the fact that the real appreciated more than the guaraní against the dollar, by 11% year-on-year.
In real terms, the Paraguayan currency depreciated by 8.9% against the real and appreciated by 13% against the dollar and 7.5% against the Argentine peso.
Overall, the guaraní recorded a slight year-on-year real depreciation of 0.1% with respect to its trading partners.
In October, the minimum wage rose by 10% in nominal terms to reach the equivalent of US$ 296 (at the March 2008 exchange rate), representing a real variation The urban open unemployment rate dropped considerably, from 8.9% in 2006 to 7.2% in 2007 nationwide, reflecting the upswing in economic activity.
The labour force participation rate rose from 59.4% to 60.8% and the employment rate from 55.4% to 57.4%, reflecting an increase in both supply and demand for labour.
Underemployment, however, was up from 24% to 26.5% in the same period.
In 2007 the balance of payments current account posted a surplus equivalent to around 1.1% of GDP, reflecting the surplus on the services account (3.3% of GDP) and on current transfers (3.1% of GDP).
The goods trade balance was in deficit by 4.5% of GDP, less than the 6.6% figure seen in 2006, thanks to a slowdown in the growth rate of imports (to 19.6%).
Imports of capital goods continued to climb strongly (46.9%), particularly machinery and equipment (46.3%).
Imports of consumer durables rose by 25%, mainly as a result of increased imports of automobiles (33.7%).
Exports expanded by 23.9%, driven by soybean seeds (103%), especially in the second semester.
All the main export products, except for meat (which was down by 13.3%), recorded an increase in sales abroad: vegetable cotton fibre (37.2%) despite a drop in output.
Exports of meat rebounded in the first semester of 2008 and should perform well during the year, in view of expectations of access to new markets.
The balance on the capital and financial accounts, including errors and omissions, reflected a surplus of 5% of GDP, driven by an increase of 13.8% in foreign direct investment (FDI), which was equivalent to 1.6% of GDP, and by movements of financial capital representing 3.4% of GDP.
FDI went mainly to commerce, finance and transport and communications, while financial capital largely reflected the repatriation of assets held abroad.
The inflows of foreign exchange resulting from the overall surplus of 6% of GDP placed considerable pressure on the exchange rate and led to a substantial build-up of international reserves, in a trend that continued into the first semester of 2008.
Favourable external conditions and a strong increase in domestic demand in 2007 boosted economic growth in Peru, bringing it to 8.9%, up from 7.6% in 2006.
With fiscal accounts reflecting this more robust growth, the financial public sector closed the year with a surplus equivalent to 3.1% of GDP.
This healthy out-turn, together with the strategy of debt interchange and prepayment adopted by the Peruvian authorities, resulted in a contraction in the external public debt and its restructuring under more favourable conditions.
The economic expansion continued to stimulate job creation, but the major challenge that persists is the need to channel growth towards broader sectors of the population at a time when close to 40% of the people are living in poverty.
Fuelled mainly by rising international prices for food and fuel, inflation breached the target ceiling and ended the year at 3.9%.
The value of the currency trended upwards, bolstered by the balance-ofpayments current account surplus, which stood at 1.4% of GDP, and the substantial financial inflows, as well as by the promising economic outlook for the country and the growing gap between interest rates in Peru and those in the United States.
The economic growth dynamic was maintained at the start of 2008, although the cooling of the global economy and the stricter monetary policy are expected to result in a somewhat slower expansion, approximately 8.3%, for the whole year.
Inflation continued to rise in the first few months of the year, and, although 12-month inflation is expected to moderate in the second half, it will probably end the year above the upper limit of the inflation target range, which was set at 3%.
The economic policy adopted by the authorities was part of a development strategy based on “sustained economic growth with social inclusion”.
With this in view, they hoped to maintain a favourable climate for investment and price stability and to tackle structural obstacles to growth in the long term such as the narrow tax base, poor infrastructure and the high level of dollarization.
From the end of 2007, the surge in inflation, triggered mainly by external factors but combined with high domestic demand, threatened to affect the overall price system.
At the same time, the balance-of-payments surplus, the widening gap in interest rates compared with those of the United States and favourable expectations for the country’s economic performance combined to push up the value of the currency.
While this appreciation has helped to curb inflation, it has undermined prospects for non-traditional exports and generated a growing uncertainty, so that authorities have sought to bring its causes, in particular speculation, under control.
The fiscal policy targets set by the authorities were to continue to reduce the vulnerability of the economy and, in accordance with its development strategy, to increase tax revenue, capital expenditure and social investment.
Some modifications to the tax policy were designed to foster long-term investment and investment in small and medium-sized enterprises.
The temporary tax on net assets was lowered from 0.6% to 0.5%, while, at the same time, the tax base for this charge was expanded and a timetable was established for reducing the tax on financial transactions from 0.08% to 0.07% in 2008.
Fiscal revenue benefited from the robust economic growth and especially from rising mineral prices, which contributed to a 24.1% increase in income tax, while the general sales tax went up by 17.4%.
Overall general government revenue grew by 15.6% in nominal terms to stand at 20.9% of GDP, up from 20.0% in the previous year.
A substantial increase in public investment had been considered, but met with serious management problems, especially at the decentralized level.
The easing of requirements for small projects and technical assistance granted by the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance helped to overcome some of these obstacles and, throughout the year, public investment was stepped up, resulting by the end of the year in a 20.7% increase in general government capital expenditure.
Current expenditure registered a smaller increase, so that total general government spending rose by 8.5% and accounted for a lower percentage of GDP: 17.5% compared with 18.0%, while the primary surplus went up from 3.6% to 4.7% of GDP.
The overall NFPS registered a significant improvement in savings on its current account, resulting in a simultaneous rise in capital expenditure, from 3.0% to 3.2%, and in the NFPS balance, from 2.1% to 3.1% of GDP.
Thanks to the fiscal surplus, public debt showed a further relative reduction: from 31.2% of GDP at the end of 2006 to 30.2% twelve months later and to 27.2% in March 2008.
Furthermore, public finances are less vulnerable; the debt repayment period has been extended, a higher proportion of debt is now in local currency and fixed-rate debt has been increased.
In October, a prepayment of US$ 1.754 billion was made to the Paris Club; this operation was financed mainly with 30-year local-currency sovereign bonds.
At the beginning of 2008, the authorities made a prepayment of US$ 166.6 million to the Andean Development Corporation and a similar payment of US$ 816 million, corresponding to Brady bonds.
In the first five months of 2008, central government income continued to increase (by 6.1% in real terms).
For the year as a whole, the NFPS surplus is expected to decline to approximately 2.0% of GDP, owing, mainly, to the increase in public investment.
As a percentage of GDP, public debt is expected to continue to decline. (b) Monetary and exchange-rate policies In early 2007, the inflation target was lowered by half a percentage point to 2.0%, with the range being maintained between one point above and one point below that rate.
This widened the gap in comparison with interest rates in the United States, which had been slashed in response to the financial crisis.
This gap stimulated short-term capital flows which reinforced the trend towards an appreciation of the new sol against the United States dollar.
Nevertheless, the currency continued to trend upwards and the real bilateral exchange rate against the dollar, which had declined by 5.5% between December 2006 and December 2007, fell by a further 6.7% during the first quarter of 2008.
As a reflection of the widespread appreciation of other currencies against the dollar, the real effective exchange rate declined by only 1.7% between December 2006 and December 2007, and the annual average even registered a rise.
These measures are estimated by the authorities to be equivalent to a 143 basis-point increase in the benchmark interest rate.
Consequently, up to the middle of the year, short-term capital inflows slowed and the currency appreciation was partially reversed.
Fixed interest rates continued to slide and lending rates for local currency loans were lowered from 17.1% in 2006 to 16.5% in 2007, while average deposit rates edged up from 3.4% to 3.5%.
The favourable economic outlook, together with the gradual drop in interest rates and demand from new groups of clients, boosted credit substantially towards the end of 2007 (by 25.5%).
At the beginning of 2008, negotiations for a free trade agreement with Canada were concluded, while trade negotiations continued with China, Mexico, the European Free Trade Association and, within the framework of the Andean Community of Nations, with the European Union.
At the beginning of 2007, tariff reductions for machinery and equipment came into effect and in October were supplemented by another reduction applicable to industrial inputs.
The tariff structure was simplified and now consists of just three levels: 0%, 9% and 17%.
While these measures were geared mainly towards strengthening the competitiveness of the Peruvian economy, at the beginning of 2008, tariffs on 571 food items were eliminated or reduced in order to cushion the inflationary impact of the rise in international prices.
In order to enhance competitiveness, the government reduced the cost of setting up legal corporations and established the national strategy CRECER in order to improve the impact of social policies on the high levels of poverty.
This programme replaces a number of earlier programmes, serves as a link with others and increases the resource allocations for the conditional transfer programme “Juntos”, which targets extremely poor households.
Gross fixed investment increased by as much as 23.3% and gross domestic investment soared to 23.0% of GDP, the highest rate since 1998.
Private consumption also picked up significantly (by 8.3%), fuelled by rising employment and better credit facilities; on the other hand, the thrust of fiscal policy referred to above was to restrain public consumption (3.9%).
The improvement in the terms of trade throughout most of the year, albeit at a more gradual rate than in previous years (3.6% on average per year), boosted domestic demand, leading to a 10.0% rise in available national income.
This strong domestic demand triggered a significant increase in imports (21.3%), which again outstripped growth in exports in volume terms (6.2%), although that growth was nevertheless higher than in the previous year.
The structure of aggregate demand was also reflected in production by sectors; indeed, sectors linked to domestic demand (construction; non-primary manufacture; commerce, among others) expanded by rates of over 9%.
The agricultural sector recorded slower growth than in the previous year, however (mainly as a result of less favourable weather conditions), while mining continued to expand at modest rates.
The trends observed in 2007 continued into the first few months of 2008, with significant increases in categories relating to domestic demand.
Growth in the mining sector was also more robust thanks to the coming on stream of new deposits.
Slower growth in the global economy and the monetary policy measures adopted by the government point to less buoyant growth in the second half of the year and 8.3% economic growth is projected for the year as a whole.
Soaring food and fuel prices on international markets had an impact on the price structure throughout 2007.
Locally produced food items also went up in price owing to weather-related disruptions in supply.
Consequently, the consumer price index (CPI) started to move up more sharply, exceeding the target range in October and closing the year at 3.9%, the steepest increase since 1998.
This trend continued into early 2008 and in June, the year-on-year inflation stood at 5.7%.
The fuel price stabilization fund was used to cushion the impact of international fuel prices.
These price trends suggest that inflation will remain above the target range during the year.
Even if the inflation rate in Peru is low in comparison with other countries, the increase in food prices has hit the lowest-income households particularly hard.
The vibrant economic growth has continued to be reflected in robust job creation, but not in any significant increase in real wages.
Specifically, employment in businesses with 10 or more workers increased by 8.2% on average in 2007, with this dynamism continuing into the first few months of 2008.
Consequently, the employment rate for metropolitan Lima increased from 61.8% to 63.0%.
Since employment opportunities were matched by a similar increase in the labour supply, the unemployment rate remained practically the same.
In any event, for a large proportion of the labour force, labour market conditions continue to be harsh, leading to high migrant outflows.
With the labour supply increasing more slowly, the unemployment rate fell by half a percentage point in the first half-year.
Real labour income in the formal sector did not reflect the stronger demand for labour and remained more or less stable.
In order to strengthen the purchasing power of low-income households, the minimum wage was raised in two stages (October 2007 and January 2008) by a total of 10%.
Peruvian exports continued to benefit from the high prices of many natural resources on global markets.
Specifically, fishmeal, coffee and a number of minerals (gold, copper, tin, silver, lead, molybdenum, zinc, among others) attracted higher prices.
Supply constraints meant that exporters were unable to take full advantage of this situation and export volumes of all the products mentioned above (except copper, lead and zinc) actually contracted.
Non-traditional exports grew by 19.3%, with agricultural products and textile showing the strongest gains.
In response to a vibrant domestic demand, imports of goods swelled by 31.8%, the highest growth coming from capital goods, inputs for industry and fuels.
As a result, the merchandise trade surplus diminished and, as the deficit of non-factor services had widened slightly owing to higher transport costs, the surplus on the trade balance contracted from 8.8% to 6.9% of GDP.
In GDP terms, only minor changes were noted in the factor income balance (which showed a deficit of close to 8% of GDP) and in current transfers (which registered a surplus of just over 2.0% of GDP).
Thus, for the fourth year in a row, the balance-of-payments current account reflected a surplus, albeit a smaller one at 1.4% of GDP, down from 3.0% in the previous year.
In comparison with the modest surpluses posted in both 2005 and 2006, the financial account recorded an inflow equivalent to 7.6% of GDP, reflecting mainly an increase in net foreign direct investment, which amounted to US$ 5.343 billion (almost 5.0% of GDP) and longterm loans to the private sector.
By contrast, the policy of reducing public-sector debt resulted in an outflow of US$ 2.473 billion.
Hence, public-sector external liabilities diminished from 23.7% to 18.4% of GDP, while privatesector liabilities went up from 6.8% to 10.2%.
For 2008, the trade surplus is expected to decline further following a surge in imports, which could wipe out the current account surplus.
Financial flows are expected to continue to be buoyant and, if so, would contribute to a fresh build-up of international reserves.
The Uruguayan economy continued to expand rapidly in 2007, with a growth rate of 7.4% of GDP.
This performance was led by transport, storage and communications, commerce, restaurants and hotels and manufacturing industry.
Both domestic and external demand were robust and investment and private consumption both increased.
Inflation exceeded the range forecast in the monetary programme, coming in at an annual rate of 8.5%, which led the authorities to take fiscal measures to mitigate the rise in domestic prices.
Even with those measures, the fiscal balance improved again, with the non-financial public sector (NFPS) deficit at 0.3% of GDP.
The current account deficit narrowed considerably owing to an increased surplus on the services balance.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) and financial capital continued to flow in, which substantially increased the level of reserve assets.
In 2008, GDP is projected to grow at a rate similar to the 2007 figure owing, among other things, to increased production of agricultural commodities, the full operation of major foreign direct investments in the area of food production, wood pulp and related activities and sustained growth in the transport, storage and communications sector.
The inflation rate is expected to reach or slightly exceed the ceiling of the authorities’ target range of 3%-7%.
The primary fiscal surplus is forecast at around 4.0% of GDP, while the overall deficit should represent under 0.3% of GDP.
Generally speaking, in 2007 economic policy was directed towards maintaining macroeconomic stability in a context of rapid growth.
The growth rate was higher than the Latin American average and its effects passed through to the labour market, which recorded the lowest rate of unemployment in over a decade.
Thanks to the agreements reached in the framework of the wage councils, pay recorded a real increase.
Economic policy objectives for 2008 include the maintenance of a high rate of economic growth, while keeping inflation under control in a context of upward pressure exerted by the strong rise in the prices of exportable goods.
The authorities will also face the challenge of supplying electric power when the hydroelectric generating stations are unable to produce much power, which has made it necessary to import electricity from neighbouring countries or produce it from fossil fuels, with the extra cost that this implies.
In 2007 the NFPS posted a primary surplus equivalent to 3.5% of GDP and an overall deficit of 0.3% after servicing of the public debt, which represented 3.7% of GDP.
The overall deficit was smaller than the target for the year, which had been 0.7% of GDP.
Tax receipts reflected the expansionary trend in economic activity, with the income of the Tax Administration Department rising by 6% in real terms and that of the Social Security Bank by 4.7%.
State-owned corporations recorded a substantial rise in their primary balance, which amounted to 1.1% of GDP at the end of 2007.
On the spending side, investments by the NFPS rose by a real 23.4%, and extraordinary payments raised central government transfers by 10%.
NFPS gross external debt increased again in relation to output, standing at 50.7% of GDP at the end of 2007 compared with 48.6% the year before.
The percentage of debt issued in local currency increased from 15% in December 2006 to 25% a year later.
Towards the end of the year, the government repurchased US$ 240 million in debt, representing 20% of all bonds eligible for this operation.
In mid-2007 a tax reform came into effect, whose main features were the implementation of a dual system of income tax for physical persons, the homogenization of employers’ social security contributions in all branches of activity, the elimination of some national taxes and the application of VAT economy-wide, and the modification and reduction of VAT rates.
As a result of the implementation of the new system and the tax cut implemented to contain inflation, the tax burden of the Tax Administration Department remained at close to monetary policy instrument used was the interbank overnight rate (call rate), which regulates interbank loans in local currency.
The call rate was set at 5% per year in early September 2007, then raised to 7% in October and to 7.25% in November, where it remained in the first Monetary expansion (M1) stood at 23% in real terms at the end of 2007, while base money increased by 16.5% as an annual average, reaching 5.8% of GDP.
This increase reflected a change in the definition of base money, to include central government funds obligatorily deposited in public-sector banks.1 In the year to December 2007, lending to the resident private sector in national currency rose by 33%, and that in foreign currency by 27%; the two add up to an increase of 29% measured in dollars.
Thanks to a policy of credit expansion on the part of financial agents, lending to the agricultural sector measured in dollars soared by 66%, followed by lending to wholesale commerce (64%) and to households (47%).
Non-financial private sector deposits in national currency were up 36%, while those in foreign currency rose by 6.4%, so for the year as a whole the deposits rose by 10.7% (dollar equivalent).
In December 2007, interest rates paid on 30-180 day dollar deposits stood at 2.25%, while those on fixed-term deposits in pesos were about 4.2%.
At the same date, the agreed interest rate for lending in dollars stood at 7% for businesses and 13% for household consumption, while the agreed rates for lending in national currency averaged 11.3% and 32.8%, respectively.
These figures reflected increases of close to 0.9 percentage points in the case of foreigncurrency lending rates and 1.1 points in the case of loans in national currency, in comparison with the rates recorded in December of the previous year.
The public-sector banks conducted open-market operations to purchase foreign exchange in order to cover the public sector’s requirements and to sustain the nominal exchange rate.
The In 2007 the authorities maintained a tight monetary stance in order to keep inflation, measured by the variation in the consumer price index, within a widened target range of 3%-7% per year, with an 18-month horizon.
Another This change came into effect on 1 September 2007 and meant that, in current terms, the average monetary base was 47% higher than in September 2006, whereas in August 2007 the same variation had stood 22 points higher than the 2006 value.
On this basis, a real growth of the monetary base of about 12% can be forecast when the calculation is based on a common definition. nominal exchange rate fell sharply in the course of the year, pushed down by inflows of foreign capital, rising income from exports and the worldwide fall of the dollar.
The Uruguayan peso appreciated by 12% against the dollar in 2007, and the real effective exchange rate showed an annual fall of 6.8%. (d) Other policies Measures were implemented in 2007 to contain rising internal prices using fiscal and financial instruments as well as agreements with members of the production and marketing chains of certain essential goods.
Mechanisms were also set up to stabilize the prices of certain staple foodstuffs such as liquid milk.
Additional measures were put in place in the first months of 2008, including higher reserve requirements for banks, new agreements on the prices of mass consumer goods for export, and the renewal of tax exemptions for a number of foodstuffs, intended to hold back not only price rises but also the downward trend in the real exchange rate.
In the area of social policy, the family allowance system was expanded, continuing the trend begun years earlier to remove the link between benefits and parents’ participation in the formal labour market.
This new expansion meant that in April 2008, 245,000 minors in disadvantaged situations received an allowance averaging US$ 25 per month, double the amount provided for previously.
Projections suggest that the number of beneficiaries will double under the new system, whose coverage is expected to exceed 600,000 people in 2009.
The output of goods and services rose to a record high in 2007, surpassing by 15% the previous maximum recorded in 1998.
This result was related to growth in all sectors of the economy, although 60% of the expansion was due to the performance of three sectors: transport, storage and communications, commerce, restaurants and hotels, and manufacturing, which achieved annual growth of 12%, 11% and 8%, respectively.
The share of the industrial sector stood at 19% of GDP for 2007 as a whole, while the transport, storage and communications sector took third place, representing 14% of GDP.
It was exceeded only by the financial sector, which was equivalent to 18% of GDP, and left behind others such as personal services (13% of GDP), and commerce, restaurants and hotels (13%) and the agricultural sector (12%).
Activity expanded in almost all segments of industry in 2007; the exception was the production of fuels and petroleum products, affected by the temporary closure of the refinery for maintenance.
The subsectors which had the largest shares in industrial output growth were food and beverages (with growth of 7% and a share in overall growth of 2.6 percentage points), chemicals (10.3% growth and a share of 0.8 points) and wood pulp, paper and paper products (41% and 0.8 percentage points).
The subsectors of wood and wood products and electrical products posted strong annual growth of about 25% each, but their share in the total was not very great.
The fall in fuel refinery output was about 13%, with a negative impact similar to that of the food industry.
The rise in output was stimulated by growing external demand, which was up 9.7%, while domestic consumption was 7.2% higher than in 2006.
Investment remained very strong, with a year-on-year expansion of 11.2%, but the growth of fixed-asset investment was weaker, at 5.8%.
This relatively small increase reflected the considerable amount invested in 2006 for the installation of a wood-pulp plant.
If that investment is excluded, the 2007 figure for investment in machinery and production goods is 12% higher than the 2006 figure.
The area where prices climbed the most was food and beverages, which climbed by 18% and made up about 5.5% of total inflation.
It was followed, in order of magnitude, by education (8.8%), housing costs (8.7%) and other consumer spending (8.5%).
At the same time, the national producer price index rose by 16.1%, pushed up by agricultural goods, whose prices soared by 24.4%.
Labour market trends remained favourable, with the employment rate in urban areas rising by 2.8 percentage points and attaining a yearly average of 56.7% in 2007, the highest level in 20 years.
These two processes combined to bring about a fall in the average unemployment rate, which was 1.8 percentage points down from the 2006 figure, at 9.6%.
Real wages rose by an average of 4.8% in 2007, an increase similar to that of 2006; public-sector wages increased by 5.2%, somewhat more than those of the private sector.
The trend towards greater formalization of the economy continued, and the numbers of contributors to social security have risen by an annual average of 8% over the past three years.
The current account posted a deficit of US$ 186 million (equivalent to 0.8% of GDP), which was more than covered by a US$ 1.191 billion surplus on the capital and financial account.
The latter was because financial investment stood at US$ 1.221 billion, including US$ 876 million in foreign direct investment.
This accumulation continued rapidly in the early months Deposit rate Lending rate e Interbank rate Sovereign bond spread (basis points) f Urban unemployment rate (pesos per dollar) b Based on figures in local currency at constant 1983 prices. e Business credit, 30-367 days. f Measured by J.P.
Morgan’s EMBI+ index. g Data to May. of 2008, passing the US$ 6.2 billion mark by mid-year, although US$ 700 million of that amount was due to changes in the reserve requirement system introduced The merchandise trade balance for 2007 showed a US$ 491 million deficit, offset by a positive balance in services of some US$ 513 million.
In f.o.b. terms and in dollars, external sales of goods were up 15.4% in 2007, exceeding US$ 5 billion in value.
Particularly strong in this area were agricultural exports —the dollar value of which rose by 36.2% over 2006— as well as dairy products (32.6%), wood and wood products (50%) and plastics (27%).
The diversity of export destinations continued to increase, but Brazil (16.7%), the United States (9.7%) and Argentina (8.4%) remained the biggest markets.
Service exports passed the US$ 1.75 billion mark in the course of 2007.
External purchases of intermediate inputs rose by a yearly 11.7% and made up two thirds of total goods imports.
Particularly significant in this area were oil, petroleum distillates and electric power, which exceeded US 1.1% billion for the year and made up 21% of the total.
The remainder of the country’s imports was made up of consumer and capital goods, which were up 24.5% and 36.5%, respectively.
Mexico and Central America The real rate of increase in the country’s GDP stood at 7.3% in 2007, compared with 8.8% in 2006.
While this was a significant decrease, growth was still strong and above the average for the current decade.
GDP growth was mostly due to the expansion of gross fixed investment and of exports.
Per capita GDP was up by 5.5%, growing for the sixth consecutive year.
The public-sector balance posted a positive result for the first time in 30 years and unemployment fell to the lowest level seen in the 2000s.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit was equivalent to 5.7% of GDP, one point above the previous year’s figure.
Another event that characterized 2007 was the gradual advance towards a monetary policy based on inflation targets which provides, in particular, for adjustments to interest rates and the exchange-rate band.
Activity in the productive sectors experienced a widespread upswing, with especially strong expansion in construction.
Economic growth, rising real wages and lower unemployment contributed to lowering the percentages of the population living in poverty and extreme poverty.
In 2008, according to ECLAC estimates, GDP growth will slaken to 4.3%, mostly owing to the slowdown in the United States economy, which will have negative impacts on exports, foreign direct investment (FDI) and tourism.
In 2008, the central bank will be faced with the challenge of holding down inflation without causing a substantial loss of momentum in the economy.
The inflation target for 2008 was set at 8%, with a tolerance of one percentage point on either side.
The current account deficit may widen, owing to rising expenditure on the oil bill and reduced growth of exports.
The official fiscalbalance target, a deficit of less than 1%, will be affected by rising social and infrastructure spending, especially on the road network.
Monetary policy in 2007 focused on gradually improving the conditions for transition to a system based on inflation targets.
To that end, adjustments were made throughout the year to the exchange rate —using the exchange-rate band system— and to interest rates, with priority being given to controlling inflows of short-term capital.
Fiscal policy was characterized by rising revenue and reduced spending, which resulted in a fiscal surplus.
The narrowly-defined global public sector posted a positive balance for the first time in 30 years, with a surplus equivalent to 0.8% of GDP (versus a deficit of 0.4% in 2006), continuing an upward fiscal-balance trend which began in 2003.
This result was due to higher revenue (8.9% in real terms) generated by a better tax take, and to reduced expenditure (down by 5.5%) thanks to improved streamlining and targeting of resource use.
Overall central government spending rose by 4% in real terms, compared with 5.7% in 2006.
This reduced growth was mainly caused by a 13.3% drop in interest payments and a decreased level of wage rises (5%).
The rest of the narrowly defined non-financial public sector maintained a surplus in 2007 (1.0% of GDP), although this was less than the 2006 figure (1.8% of GDP).
The fall in the surplus was caused by higher spending and investments by State-owned corporations and decentralized institutions.
The central bank deficit was lower in 2007 than in 2006 (0.7% of GDP, as against 1.1%), owing to lower interest rates and the transfer of government funds for recapitalization purposes, totalling 85 billion colones.
The growth of the economy and of the fiscal surplus led to falls in the ratios of external and internal public debt to GDP.
The band was adjusted on two occasions (January and November 2007), expanding its width in both instances because the exchange-rate depreciation was expected to lessen.
Monetary policy interest rates were lowered significantly in order to discourage capital inflows and thereby to prevent a greater appreciation of the currency.
The cuts were made in the context of growing inflation, worsening the dilemmas facing the central bank.
Despite these measures, demand for colones remained high throughout 2007 owing to capital inflows, and this helped to hold the exchange rate down at the lower edge of the band.
Foreign-exchange inflows led to an rise of US$ 999 million in net international reserves in the hands of the central bank, an increase of almost one third, as a result of which the end-of-year balance stood at US$ 4.11 billion.
Nonetheless, the colón experienced a strong appreciation following the second adjustment to the lower limit of the band, and in December the average exchange rate stood at 498.7 colones to the dollar.
On average, the real bilateral exchange rate against the dollar appreciated by 5%, while the real effective rate (with all the country’s trading partners) appreciated by 2.2%.
The central bank’s monetary policy rate was cut by 325 basis points in January 2007, when the lower limit of the exchange-rate band was modified in order to discourage interest rate arbitrage.
Similar goals led it to implement a further cut of 50 basis points in the second half of the year, against a background of rising inflation, and the year closed on a rate of 6%.
These measures by the central bank affected deposit rates in the private banking sector.
Lending rates in national currency also fell sharply: the average rate of the national financial system ended the year at 16.26% compared with 20.7% in 2006.
The falling rates and rising inflation resulted in negative real deposit rates.
This expansion was largely due to the monetization which resulted from open-market transactions by the central bank.
Term deposits in national currency increased less quickly (19.5%) than in 2006 (27.6%), discouraged by falling interest rates.
The rate of growth of foreigncurrency deposits continued to decline for the third consecutive year, standing at only 2.4% (15.6% in 2006).
This de-dollarization resulted from improved yields on national-currency instruments and the prospect of greater exchange-rate stability.
Lastly, credit to the private sector rose significantly owing to lower interest rates and strong economic growth.
The increase was particularly high in the construction and services sectors (61.9% and 57.3%, respectively), while consumer credit was up by 35.1% In 2008, the central bank is facing a growing dilemma between controlling inflation and the appreciation of the colón, against a background of rising prices.
A hike in the monetary policy rate would contribute to widening the differential with the Federal Reserve rate and thereby cause increased appreciation of the colón, and this, combined with the slowdown of the United States economy, would have a negative impact on economic activity.
It has been announced that monetary policy will continue to focus on creating the conditions for establishing an inflation target scheme.
The first months of 2008 saw an upswing in inflation, in the context of faster growth in broad monetary aggregates and lending than during the same period in 2007, as well as rising international prices for food and fuels.
In January, the annual monetary policy rate was once again reduced, to 3.25%, a cut equivalent to 275 basis points.
In late May, however, owing to pressure on the exchange rate and with a view to containing inflation, this benchmark interest rate was raised to 7.61%. (c) Trade policy CAFTA-DR became law in Costa Rica on 22 November 2007, the first step in preparing for its effective implementation.
The government of President Arias continued to apply measures designed to strengthen and improve market access conditions through new trade agreements and better use of the existing accords.
In 2007, negotiations began for an association agreement between Central America and the European Union.
Costa Rica also signed cooperation agreements on trade and investment with China, following the establishment of diplomatic relations in July.
It also continued to participate in the process of creating a Central American Customs Union and, in June, Costa Rica and Panama concluded negotiations on a bilateral protocol for the free trade agreement between Central America and Panama.
While that figure shows a slowdown in comparison with 2006 (8.8%), it is still higher than the average figure for the current decade (4.7%).
The real GDP growth rate was mostly influenced by the expansion of gross fixed investment and of exports.
Per capita GDP rose for the sixth consecutive year, with an annual growth of 5% (6.9% in 2006). with growth in all its components.
Private consumption rose by 6.1%, sustained by expanded real household incomes and improved access to bank lending, while external demand was up 9.1%, boosted by exports of manufactures and business services.
Gross fixed investment was up 15%, thanks to expansion in the construction sector and purchases of machinery and equipment.
Gross domestic investment, however, rose by only 0.7% owing to a smaller increase in inventory.
In 2007, as in 2006, productive sectors in general showed high levels of activity.
Manufacturing grew by 5.7%, the agricultural sector by 6.8% and the growth of the construction industry exceeded 18% for the second consecutive year.
The commerce, restaurants and hotels sector grew by 5.5%, and financing, insurance, real estate and business services expanded by over 10%, also for the second consecutive year.
Although the average rise in the monthly index of economic activity for the first four months of 2008 (5.9%) was lower than for the same period in 2007 (7.3%), it still reflected a solid performance by the productive sectors.
Those showing the strongest average growth included construction (20.3%), financial services and insurance (14.8%) and other business services (13.1%).
The rate of increase of the consumer price index picked up in 2007, closing the year at 10.8% (9.4% in 2006), 2.8 points higher than that called for by the central bank’s macroeconomic programme.
The main component of that inflation was the foodstuffs and soft drinks group (37.7%), followed by transport (17%).
The core inflation index, which measures price variations without taking into account the most volatile elements of the consumer price index (mainly foodstuffs and fuels) stood at 8.7%.
Two exogenous factors are essential in explaining the inflationary surge in Costa Rica: on the one hand, rising world prices for petroleum and foodstuffs, and on the other, adverse weather phenomena in the last months of the year, which were partly responsible for the fall in supply of agricultural products.
On the domestic front, monetary policy was more expansionary, characterized by steep cuts in interest rates, and growth in the money supply owing to participation by the central bank in the currency market.
The growth of the productive sectors led to a fall in the open unemployment rate, which stood at 4.6% in 2007 (6.0% in 2006), the lowest level seen in the current decade.
The economic growth of recent years has also had a significant impact on poverty reduction.
Adjustments to the minimum wage resulted in a 1.3% increase in real terms.
The inflation target for 2008, measured by the consumer price index, was set at 8% with a tolerance of one percentage point on either side.
In the first six months of 2008, the categories of foodstuffs and soft drinks, transport and housing rentals and services posted considerable price rises, mostly owing to the rising prices of fuels and land transport, electric power, milk products, edible oils and cereals.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit in 2007 was equivalent to 5.7% of GDP, one point above the 2006 figure (4.7%).
This worsening was due to an increased deficit on the balance of trade in goods and the income balance, despite solid growth in exports.
This resulted from expansion in non-traditional exports (14.6%), particularly those from free trade zones (17.6%).
Goods imports rose by 13.1% (17.1% in 2006), influenced by the rising world prices of foodstuffs and fuels, but also by rising demand for imported goods.
Services exports continued to contribute to mitigate the deficit on the balance of trade in goods.
They totalled while imports stood at US$ 1.811 billion, 12.1% up on the previous year.
Exports of other services performed very strongly (28.8%), including business support and data processing services and software.
The income balance posted a deficit of US$ 712 million in 2007, which contributed to the worsening of the current account.
That was due to repatriation of profits, mostly by companies operating in the high-technology sector.
The financial account posted a positive balance of US$ 2.548 billion, well above the current account deficit (US$ 1.499 billion), so international reserves grew by US$ 1.148 billion.
In late 2007 those reserves stood at US$ 4.11 billion, equivalent to four months of goods imports.
FDI flows were mainly into the industrial, real estate and tourism sectors.
The current account deficit may widen in 2008, owing to rising expenditure on the oil bill and slower export growth.
Central bank forecasts suggest a deficit equivalent to 6.3% of GDP in 2008.
As in previous years, this deficit will be financed mostly by FDI inflows; these are expected to total slightly less in 2008 than in 2007.
In the first five months of 2008 there were some signs of a slowdown in goods exports, especially those which come under special regimes.
Goods imports, on the other hand, grew by 28.2% (9% in 2007), with a particularly strong expansion in external purchases of raw materials and intermediate products for industry, and of fuels and lubricants.
As a result, the deficit on the balance of trade in goods for January-May 2008 rose to US$ 2.256 billion, compared with US$ 1.164 billion for the same period in 2007.
The main components of demand that were behind this buoyancy were investment and private consumption, which were both factors in the slight drop in unemployment.
Despite a slowdown, family remittances (18.1% of GDP) nonetheless helped to boost private consumption and mitigate the negative effects of higher oil prices on the balance-of-payments current account (which posted a deficit equivalent to 5.5% of GDP).
The deficit of the nonfinancial public sector stood at 0.2% of GDP, and inflation came in at 4.9%.
In December 2007, net international reserves chalked up annual growth of 20.9%.
According to ECLAC estimates, in 2008 economic activity is expected to grow by around 4%.
However, the slowdown in the United States economy is expected to have a negative impact on three key areas of the Salvadoran economy: volume of exports, remittances and inflows of foreign direct investment.
The growth rate of GDP in El Salvador is therefore likely to be around half a percentage point below the initial target, although the negative result would be spread out through 2008 and 2009.
This scenario might change if the economic authorities introduce measures to mitigate the slowdown in growth.
Given the absence of a monetary and exchange-rate policy since dollarization was adopted in 2001, and following the implementation of tax reforms approved in 2005, the main feature of economic policy in 2007 was a fiscal policy geared to increasing receipts.
For the third year in a row, central government receipts rose in 2007.
As a result of increased economic activity, improved management of domestic tax and customs, data sharing and the implementation of an enforcement plan, the tax burden weighed in at 13.4% (after tax refunds of 0.8% of GDP), which was slightly more than in the previous year.
The target for 2008 is a tax burden equivalent to 14% of GDP.
The real growth rate of income-tax receipts was 13.6%, followed by an 8% increase in wealth tax receipts and a 1.4% rise in VAT revenue.
There was a turnaround in the previous year’s positive performance of non-tax revenues, which were down 1.6%, whereas current transfers climbed by 13%.
In real terms, current expenditure rose by 4.3%, mainly due to the increase in purchases of goods and services and debt interest payments.
To ease the negative effects of price hikes in food, oil and petroleum products, US$ 166.4 million in subsidies (0.8% of GDP) were again allocated for public transport, electricity and liquefied gas.
As a result, total expenditure was up by 4.2%, to a level equivalent to 14.8% of GDP.
Overall, the central government deficit narrowed from 0.4% of GDP in 2006 to 0.2% in 2007, while the deficit of the non-financial public sector shrank from 1.1% of In 2007, external public debt (US$ 5.444 billion) fell by 4.4% thanks to the government decision not to take out any new external loans.
Nevertheless, given the low interest rates available, internal public borrowing was 19.8% higher than in 2006, at US$ 3.194 billion.
Public debt as a proportion of GDP fared well, dropping non-financial public sector fell to 38.7% of GDP, one percentage point lower than in the previous year.
This constituted a 13.5% nominal increase on the budget for 2007, and will be used mainly for health, education and public security.
Although variations according to the time of year are inevitable, in the first quarter of 2008 public finances posted a fiscal surplus equivalent to 0.1% of 2007 GDP.
No major changes are forecast in the implementation of economic policy during 2008, as attention will be focused on the elections to be held in 2009. (b) Financial policy Real interest rates dipped slightly.
Despite this reduction and the improved economic performance, net internal credit to the private sector (mainly used to cover housing and consumer loans) rose by just 2.1% in real terms, five percentage points less than in 2006.
Credit to the public sector picked up somewhat following a year of negative performance, although its share in total credit is low (4.2%).
Higher quality assets were reflected in increases in total deposits and in the loss provisions associated with non-performing loans.
As a result of the sale of considerable bank assets, between 2006 and 2007 the international integration of the country’s financial system and the presence of foreign banks were both further strengthened.
In addition, between October 2005 and December 2007, the Solidarity Network programme distributed more than US$ 10 million in education and health vouchers to 48,659 families in 47 extremely poor municipalities.
The Government plans to extend the coverage of this initiative in 2008.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) decided to extend the deadline for granting tax exemptions for exports from free zones to December 2015.
In 2007 the economic growth rate was 4.7%, driven by increases in investment (6.4%) and consumption (6.1%), especially in the private sector, where they rose by 7.7% and 6.5%, respectively.
Investment in machinery (9.6%) continued to climb rapidly, while construction was less buoyant owing to a lower level of remittances and the slowdown in the United States economy.
Exports and imports of goods and services expanded by 4.5% and 7.3%, respectively.
The agricultural sector performed positively for the fourth consecutive year in 2007, with a growth rate of 8.6%: the highest level in 30 years thanks partly to higher international prices for basic seeds, milk and meat.
In terms of products for domestic consumption, beans and maize were up by almost 10%, while there was a turnaround in the previous year’s negative trend in coffee and sugar-cane production (which grew by 9.3% and 4.9%, respectively).
Overall, crop production grew by 9.8%, while livestock production (including forestry, hunting and fishing) was up by 6.8%.
Manufacturing GDP (representing 22.7% of total production activity) expanded by 3.7%, which was half a percentage point more than in the previous year.
Value added rose considerably in food, beverages and tobacco (5%), chemicals, petroleum products and rubber (5.4%) and wood and paper products (6.3%).
Industrial maquila services, on the other hand, were stagnant following several years of decline.
Basic service activities grew by 4.9%, which was similar to the rate recorded in 2006.
The growth rate for transport, storage and communications was 5.1%, while electricity, gas and water expanded by 2.4%.
Other services (including finance, commerce, restaurants and hotels) increased by 4.2% (almost one percentage point more than in 2006).
Mining continued the expansion of the previous year to rise by 6.5%.
Construction grew by 1.2%, nearly four percentage points less than in the previous year.
The most buoyant sectors were transport (7.7%), agriculture (7.6%), mining and quarrying (7.5%) and Annual inflation stood at 4.9%, which was similar to the previous year’s figure but higher than the target of 4%.
This was due to high food and oil prices, which pushed up the prices of intermediate inputs for production and transport.
By December 2007, annual variation in the industrial price index stood at 13.9%.
Owing to constant hikes in oil prices, in June 2008 annual inflation rose to 9%, which exceeded the 3.7% recorded in the same month of 2007.
Despite subsidies for public transport and electricity, water and liquefied gas to ease price rises, it will be difficult to reach the inflation target.
In mid-November 2007, minimum wages rose by 3% in the maquila sector and 5% in other economic activities, resulting in a 2.5% average increase in the real minimum wage.
Consequently, the government and employers agreed to bring forward the 5% pay rise from November to March.
It is therefore likely that a significant number of the country’s families will be living below the extreme poverty line in 2008.
Following the incorporation of around 30,000 contributors into the Salvadoran Social Security Institute (ISSS) in 2007, open unemployment dropped to 6.5%.
Merchandise exports expanded by 7.4%, one percentage point less than in the previous year.
Although non-traditional exports grew by less than in 2006, they nonetheless posted a growth rate of 15.2% as plastic tags, sheets, strips, films and other products, sugar-cane molasses and domestic paper all expanded by over 30%.
Exports of traditional products, on the other hand, declined by 1.1% as volumes (unlike prices) fell, especially in the cases of coffee and sugar (4.8% and 14%, respectively).
Maquila exports, which represent 45.3% of total exports, halted their decline of previous years to display positive growth of 1.3%.
Export services (including travel and transport) se expanded by just 4.6%, compared with 26.5% in the previous year.
The oil bill came in at US$ 1.359 billion, which represented 6.7% of GDP and 13.8% of total imports of goods and services.
The consequences included a deterioration in the terms of trade for goods and services for the sixth consecutive year (-0.4%).
In 2007, the real bilateral exchange rate continued to rise (6.2% in relation to 2000), which caused a slight loss of competitiveness on the United States market, but also an improvement in the terms of exchange and trade with Europe.
The real effective exchange rate, which measures variation in relation to all trading partners, therefore depreciated by 1.4%.1 By May 2008, exports had increased by 19.4%, mainly due to higher non-traditional and maquila exports.
The growth rate of merchandise imports was 18.9%, with a particularly strong performance by intermediate goods.
By the end of the year, the oil bill is expected to be in excess of US$ 1.5 billion, which may lead to a widening of the trade gap.
In 2007, exports to Central America rose by 13.1%, while exports to the rest of the world (66.3% of the total) climbed by just 4.7%.
Merchandise imports from Central America grew by 13.6%, while imports from the rest of the world expanded by 13%.
Exports from El Salvador to the United States (50.8% of the total) increased by 2.2% in 2007 (including maquila).
Given that imports were up 14%, the overall result was a continued trade deficit of 5.2% of GDP with that country (one percentage point higher than in the previous year).
The economy was considerably boosted by inflows of family remittances (US$ 3.695 billion), despite the fact that their growth rate dropped from 15% in 2006 to 6.5% owing to the economic slowdown in the United States and a tightening of the latter’s migration policy.
These trends were reflected in a balance-ofpayments current account deficit equivalent to 5.5% of GDP, two points more than in 2006.
For 2008, remittances are expected to rise by less, and the current account deficit is forecast to be over 6% of GDP.
In 2007, tourism revenues amounted to US$ 840.5 million (4.1% of GDP), thanks to the presence of just under 1.6 million tourists.
The government predicts that tourism revenues will rise to US$ 1.0 billion and that visitor numbers will exceed 1.7 million in 2008.
This was because foreign direct investment (FDI) was 9.2 times higher than in the previous year, standing at US$ 1.390 billion (6.8% of GDP) as a result of the sale of banking assets (77% of total FDI) and investment in telecommunications, commerce and services, maquila and mining.
On the other hand, unlike in 2006, assets and liabilities associated with portfolio and other investments posted a negative balance of US$ 674 million.
The Guatemalan economy grew by 5.7% in 2007, the best performance in the current decade.
This was mainly thanks to the buoyancy of private consumption, boosted by large inflows of family remittances (12% of GDP).
Those inflows went some way towards financing the country’s large trade deficit (about 17% of GDP).
The current account deficit (5.1% of GDP) was more than covered by foreign direct investment and other capital inflows.
The yearly inflation figure was 8.7%, which to some extent was due to external supply factors; thus, the 2007 inflation target of 4%-6% was not met.
The new government which took office in January 2008 is committed to maintaining macroeconomic stability and give greater priority to social and rural-development policies.1 It will have to deal with the country’s publicsecurity problems and the weakness of the justice system, and establish legal standards to ensure access to stable and sufficient revenue.
The tax burden stood at 12.5% of GDP, well below the average for Latin America and the Caribbean.
According to ECLAC estimates, the economy will grow by 4.3% in 2008.
The central bank has projected an inflation rate of between 4% and 7%.
In the external sector, Guatemala has been affected by rising international fuel and food prices and the slowdown of the United States economy.2 The main consequences will be slower growth of income from exports and remittances and pressure from external supply.
Owing to a lag in the transmission of negative impacts, these will be felt more in the second half of 2008 and the first half of 2009.
The central government deficit was down to 1.5% of GDP from the 1.9% posted in 2006, thanks to cuts in spending, particularly capital spending.
Interest payments stood at 1.5% of GDP, so the central government primary balance was virtually in equilibrium.
Total government revenue rose by 5.7% in real terms in 2007, boosted by economic growth and the 2006 taxevasion law.
Tax revenue increased by 6.5% thanks to a Initially, the government will focus these measures on 44 highpriority communities.
A conditional transfer programme will also be implemented and the poverty map will be updated.
Some 45% of external sales go to the United States, where 1.3 million Guatemalan nationals are living. strong performance by indirect taxes, particularly VAT, which was up 13.2%.
Customs revenue fell by 6%, mostly because of the tariff cuts provided for in the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR).
Although income tax receipts exceeded that average, there was a drop in revenue from other direct taxation.
In 2007 the extraordinary tax imposed temporarily to support the peace agreements was extended until December 2008, generating extra revenue equivalent to 0.8% of GDP for the 2008 budget.
In order to have stable and sufficient revenue to support increased social spending, the new government is preparing a tax reform initiative which, among other goals, aims to strengthen income tax and eliminate exemptions and exclusions.
If the reform is approved, the tax burden will rise from efforts to improve tax administration must continue in order to reduce evasion.
Current expenditure was up 5%, led by goods and services, while spending on education, health care and social welfare diminished as a proportion of GDP.
The growth of physical investment was notable in this area (16%), owing to infrastructure works, but there was a sizeable fall in other capital spending.
The new government reported that significant amounts of public spending had been executed in 2007 without proper oversight, mostly through trusts or transfers to international organizations and non-profit bodies.
It also stated that, while the budget of the Ministry of Communications, Infrastructure and Housing had expanded considerably in 2007 (mostly through reduced allocations to other entities and expenditure items), it had issued bonds which were not recorded in the Integrated Government Accounting System (SICOIN), producing a floating debt equivalent to 0.8% of GDP.
The authorities are considering a set of measures to solve administrative and financial problems originated under the previous government.3 The monetary authorities continued to move forward with the adoption of an explicit inflation targeting regime.
A target of 5% was set in 2007, with a one-point margin on either side.
In 2007, in order to hold down inflationary pressures, the monetary authorities raised the monetary-policy interest rate —applicable to seven-day deposit certificates— by See Ministry of Public Finance, Primer informe sobre política fiscal en Guatemala.
Annual inflation stayed within the target range (4%-6%) until August 2007, but from September onwards it exceeded the upper limit owing to a marked upswing in the prices of fuel and food, especially maize and wheat.
One third of the total variation in the consumer price index (8.7%) is estimated to have been caused by external factors.
International reserves grew, mostly because of inflows of money borrowed externally by the government, resulting in an increase of US$ 268 million (0.8% of GDP) in the external public debt.
Since some of these funds were retained as central-bank deposits, fiscal policy contributed to restraining liquidity growth.
From late 2007 to April 2008, international reserves remained practically unchanged at 3.8 months’ worth of goods imports.
On the other hand, M2 money expanded by 9.5%, less than the nominal increase in GDP.
Broad money (M3) rose by 11.4% owing to a strong upturn in foreign-currency deposits (25.9%).
These percentages show that preferences are moving towards deposits in foreign exchange, as a result of interventions in two banks and increasing inflationary expectations.
The year-on-year growth of credit to the private sector stood at 17%, and credit in local and foreign currency grew by 12% and 31%, respectively.
The latter figure exceeded the range set in the monetary programme, owing to lower financial cost and the relative stability of the nominal exchange rate.
In 2008, the size of the real growth of credit is a cause for concern given the slowing of the economy.
In the case of credit in foreign currency, there is also an underlying exchange-rate risk.
Exchange-rate volatility in 2007 was only moderate, so the central bank did not intervene in the foreignexchange market.
The real effective depreciation of the quetzal was slight compared with 2006 (0.1%).
In April 2008, the monetary authorities purchased US$ 132 million in order to contain the appreciation of the quetzal.
Despite the suspension of two banks, one in October 2006 and the other in January 2007, the national banking system benefited from stable interest rates.
There have been a number of bank mergers since October 2006, partly owing to the national banks’ strategy of strengthening their position in the banking system by improving their solvency.
In the first quarter of 2008, three major international banks which were already operating in the region joined the national financial system.
Non-performing loans and arrears as a percentage of total Despite the progress achieved, the Guatemalan population still has limited access to financial services, compared with other countries of the region.4 In recent years, “bancarization” —the channelling of remittances through financial institutions— has increased somewhat in Guatemala.
The depth of the financial system is still low; measured as the proportion of total deposits to GDP, it climbed from 12% in 2004 to 15% in 2007.
A free trade agreement with Panama was signed in February 2008, and trade negotiations are also under way with Canada and Chile.
Strong expansion of external demand (11%) and gross fixed investment (9%) contributed to this result.
The growth rate of public consumption, which represents 8.5% of GDP, was higher than that of private consumption.
Construction, transport and communications and banking and insurance all achieved two-digit growth, at 12%, 19% and 16%, respectively, continuing their expansion of recent years.
In the communications sector, in particular, the number of mobile telephone lines soared from two million to 10 million.
Activity in construction was also vigorous, boosted by private projects and public works.
Commerce was up 4%, partly owing to consumption of imported goods stimulated by inflows of remittances.
The expansion of industry remained modest (3%), relying on growth in the foodstuffs industry and the demand for products needed in construction.
The monthly index of economic activity has reflected a gradual but steady slowing, declining from a maximum of 7.2% in July 2007 to 6.0% in December of that year and 5.1% in February 2008.
The year-on-year variation in the consumer price index stood at 8.7% in December 2007, compared with 5.8% in late 2006.This was due to supply factors such as rising prices for oil and petroleum products and for foodstuffs.
The latter posted a year-on-year price increase of 14.0%, partly because of crop losses caused by the heavy rainfall which struck the country.
In December 2007, the cost of the basic basket of foods was 55.49 quetzals a day, and the minimum daily wage was 44.58 quetzals for agricultural activities and 45.82 quetzals for non-agricultural activities.
The government intends to create a national employment network in place of the job fairs organized with little success by the previous administration, and also plans to establish regional minimum wages.
Labour force participation rate Open unemployment rate i h Nominal deposit rate j Nominal lending rate k Central administration Central-government public debt Money and credit l b Up to 2000, based on figures in local currency at constant 1958 prices.
The goods and services deficit continued to grow in absolute terms, but as a proportion of GDP it remained unchanged (17.3%), as did net payments of profits and interest (2.3%).
Once again, the current transfers surplus (14.5% of GDP) helped to mitigate the trade deficit.
As a result, the balance-of-payments current account deficit stood at 5.1% of GDP, a proportion close to the 20042006 levels.
The terms of trade declined again (1%), as had been occurring since 2003.
Goods exports were boosted by an appreciable rise in sales of certain traditional products (banana sales were up 35%, coffee by 15%) and significant hikes in the prices of sugar and a series of non-traditional products.
The export products which commanded particularly high prices included shrimp (up by 300%), other foodstuffs (45%) and vegetables and legumes (35%).
The prices of other non-traditional products declined, however, as in the case of clothing; this was mostly due to the restructuring of international markets following the termination in 2005 of the Multifibre Arrangement.
Exports to Central America continued to grow (19%), particularly foodstuffs and chemicals.
Under this heading, fuel prices were particularly significant; the oil bill made up 21% of total purchases in 2007.
Acquisitions for the construction sector grew by 28%, and those for agriculture and industry also posted high growth rates.
The deficit in non-factor services fell to US$ 300 million, influenced by increased income from other services and tourism.
Tourism income increased to US$ 1.055 billion, continuing the trend of the past ten years.
Tourist arrivals from Europe have been tending to stagnate to some extent owing to problems with public security.
This highlights the need for active promotion of tourism in the region.
The deficit on the income account rose by 16% owing to increasing outward profit remittances, which had doubled in the space of two years.
Net payments of profits stood at US$ 670 million and net interest payments at US$ 17 million.
Current transfers, mostly of family remittances, continued to mitigate the deficit in factor and non-factor services.
Inflows from remittances rose by 10% in the first quarter of 2008.
Given the slowing of the United States economy, the growth of remittances is likely to have declined further from April 2008 onwards.
The financial and capital accounts posted a positive balance of US$ 1.913 billion.
FDI inflows continued to increase, rising to US$ 724 million, but they remained only modest as a proportion of GDP (2.2%) and were mostly oriented towards communications, banking and commerce.
With net capital inflows exceeding the current account deficit, the balance of payments posted a surplus of US$ 216 million.
In 2007 the Honduran economy grew by 6.3% and per capita GDP by 4.2%, which means that the past four years have seen average growth rates of 6.2% for GDP and 4.1% for per capita GDP.
This performance is mainly due to the effects of family remittances (22% of GDP) on private consumption, as well as the boom in private construction driven by the expansion of bank credit.
Inflation edged up and annual price variation stood at 8.9% (5.3% in 2006), partly due to supply factors.
The inflation target of between 4% and 6% was therefore not met.
This trade gap, along with the factor payments deficit, was only partially covered by family remittances and grants.
As a result, the balanceof-payments current account posted a deficit of 10% of GDP (the highest level since 1994).
The reduction in external debt servicing was completed thanks to the debt forgiven by the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) as part of the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI).
Inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) (equivalent to 6.7% of GDP) have been at their highest level this decade.
The main problem in the external sector has been the increases in food and fuel prices.
In February 2007 the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was concluded, and in April 2008 a stand-by agreement was approved.1 This funding is a precautionary arrangement for the authorities.
According to government projections for 2008 announced in April, the GDP growth rate will be between 4.5% and 5.5%, the inflation target between 8% and 10%, the central government deficit The agreement covers 12 months and provides for SDR 38.8 million (special drawing rights equivalent to US$ 63.5 million).
The main objectives are to consolidate and reorient the fiscal stance and strengthen the energy sector.
See International Monetary Fund, “IMF Executive Board Approves a Stand-By will stand at 1.5% of GDP and international reserves are expected to increase to four months of merchandise imports coverage (not including goods for processing).
The external context in 2008 will not be favourable, owing to the slowdown in the United States economy and increases in the food and oil bill.2 According to ECLAC, growth figures should be towards the lower end of the official projections.
The Honduran economy will be affected by a lower growth rate in export revenues, family remittances and, to a lesser extent, tourism.
At the same time, the country will be faced with greater financial challenges in the form of rising fuel and food prices.
The effects of the economic problems of the United States will be more keenly felt in the second half of 2008 and the first few months of 2009, as they take some time to trickle through.
This was mostly the result of a considerable rise in total expenditure, mainly owing to a higher wage bill and transfers from central government to public enterprises.
Revenues rose significantly (although less than expenditure), due to higher economic activity and an increase in tax receipts thanks to improved tax management.
Current revenues rose by 9.5% and tax revenues by 11%, while non-tax revenues fell once more (this time by 5%).
As for direct tax receipts, the positive performance seen in recent years continued, with income tax receipts growing by 17% (although this was less than in 2006), and net asset and property tax receipts recovering some of the decline recorded in the previous year.
Indirect tax receipts increased by 8%, one percentage point more than in 2006, due to the rise in general sales tax (12%) and the tax on carbonated beverages (20%), whereas revenue from cigarette tax stood still.
Revenues from imports posted a recovery (12%), following a drop in 2006.
Total real expenditure increased by 15%, with current expenditure up by 14% and capital expenditure rising by 21%.
This represented an almost complete recovery from the loss in 2006 (24%).
The rise in current expenditure was due to the increase in the wage bill, which went from 8.3% of GDP in 2006 to 9.2% in 2007, and to transfers to public enterprises (especially State electricity companies) and fuel and electricity subsidies.
The recovery of real capital expenditure was mainly due to higher capital transfers, particularly to municipalities.
In terms of GDP, however, capital expenditure did not reach levels recorded prior to the decreases seen in 2005 and 2006.
The fiscal performance in 2008 will be largely dependent on the reduction in transfers from central government to State electricity enterprises, hence the need to make significant progress in administrative and financial management, target subsidies to the poorest groups and readjust electricity tariffs.
In terms of wage policy, commitments undertaken for the period 2008-2009 may give rise to an increase in public wages that may be unsustainable in the medium term.
External public debt shrank from US$ 3.031 billion in 2006 to US$ 2.044 million in 2007, largely due to the debt forgiven by the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) as part of the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI).
In 2007, debt service relief for external public debt amounted to US$ 233 million, of which US$ 119 million had been earmarked to fund spending associated with the poverty-reduction strategy.
However, following the 2004 reform of the law covering the poverty-reduction fund, by 2007 70% of the resources originally committed to fighting poverty had been used mainly to cover current expenditure.
In the first six months of 2007, the monetarypolicy rate remained stable at 6%, while the band of interest rates (permanent credit and investment facilities) narrowed by 300 basis points to bring the interbank rate closer to the monetary policy rate.
In the second half of the year, monetary policy became more restrictive, as the authorities increased the monetary policy rate four times, taking it from 6% to 7.5% by the end of the year.
To ease inflationary pressure, in June a temporary yield-bearing reserve of 4% was added to the legal reserve requirement of 12%, which resulted in a 60% increase in commercial banks’ deposits held in the central bank.
The entry into force of this compulsory investment and the redemption of bills by social welfare institutions resulted in a 30% reduction in the amount of bills issued by the central bank.
In the first half of 2008, the monetary policy rate rose four times to stand at 9%.
This consequently mitigated the rise in broad liquidity, which swelled by 16.5% compared with 22.5% in 2006.
Credit to the private sector expanded significantly (33%), which was the result of local-currency operations, given that foreign-currency credit showed little variation (despite the stable lempira).
In 2007, the nominal exchange rate remained stable, although there was a real appreciation of the lempira in terms of both the bilateral real exchange rate in relation to the dollar (3.5%) and the real effective exchange rate (1.6%).
Indicators of solvency, asset quality and banking-system profitability all improved during 2007.
Non-performing loans and loans in arrears as a percentage of total credit (c) Trade policy In August 2007, along with El Salvador and Guatemala, Honduras signed a free trade agreement with Colombia.
In addition, with Guatemala, Nicaragua and El Salvador, the country began the first round of negotiations for a free trade agreement with the countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
In September 2007, Honduras and Finland approved an agreement for the promotion and reciprocal protection of investments (to be signed in 2008).
In October 2007 negotiations were opened for a comprehensive agreement of association between the European Union and Central America. (a) Economic activity 3 The Honduran economy grew by 6.3%, in what was the fourth consecutive year of solid growth (6.2%).
Per capita GDP rose by 4.2%, with a cumulative variation of more than 17% since 2004.
This result is unprecedented (at least since 1980) and has helped to reduce poverty.
Nevertheless, if food prices continue to rise more quickly than wages, this achievement could be partially reversed in 2008.
In a context that continued to be marked by abundant liquidity and low interest rates, growth was spearheaded by internal demand (9%).
Consumption grew by 8.5%, with both private and public consumption posting the largest increases in five years (8% and 11%, respectively).
Private investment was up 19%, which was similar to the level seen in 2006, whereas public investment appears to have stagnated.
Construction grew by 9%, thanks to the boom in private activities (especially in residential and agroindustiral construction).
Transport was also highly buoyant, while the crops sector expanded by 5.0%.
In terms of exports, coffee sales climbed by 9% after recovering in 2006, and sugar sales were up by 7%.
In terms of products for domestic consumption, positive performances were turned in by maize and beans, whose share of the total rose by 16% and 9%, respectively.
However, some crops were affected by climatic conditions, especially the tropical storm Felix that battered the north west of the country in September.
Growth in manufacturing (3.5%) was driven by non-metal production and cement production.
However, there was a drop in the level of activity of the basic metal industry.
The data correspond to new national accounts statistics published in December 2007 with a new base year (2000).
Inflation increased at a faster rate to yield a 12-month annual variation of 8.9% (5.3% in late 2006).
This was mainly due to price rises for fuel, maize and wheat, which were partly offset by the real appreciation of the lempira.
The price of food and non-alcoholic beverages posted an annual increase of 13.7% (the highest variation for 10 years), with the corresponding effects on the basket of staple goods.
The price of transport, on the other hand, climbed by just 6.7% thanks to subsidies.
Although nationwide open unemployment dropped from 3.3% in 2006 to 3.0% in 2007, there is still a high proportion of informal employment in the form of temporary and low-productivity jobs.
The total underemployment rate is estimated at 26% in Tegucigalpa and 23% in San Pedro Sula.
At the beginning of 2007, the average daily minimum wage rose to 101 lempiras, with nominal variation of 9.6% and real variation of 2.5%.
Since January 2008, there has been an 11% adjustment in the minimum wage.
Merchandise exports increased by 7,7%, which was double the growth rate recorded in 2006, thanks to a higher volume of sales of traditional products.
Merchandise imports expanded by 23%, with the most active component being capital goods.
For the fourth year in a row, growth in merchandise exports was led by buoyant sales of traditional products, which increased by 17% in 2007.
Coffee and banana, with rises in both volume and unit value, made the greatest contribution to the total value of exports.
Export products for which external sales picked up in the wake of higher prices The data correspond to new statistics from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Balance of Payments Manual, fifth edition, 1993. included silver, lead and zinc (although the latter posted a significant decrease in terms of quantity exported).
Sales of pineapple climbed by 9%, while shrimp and melon sales stagnated and lobster sales dropped for the second consecutive year due to lower export volumes.
Exports of tilapia fish were up 30%, owing to an increase in prices and volumes, while palm oil exports rose by 67% thanks to high prices.
The value of exports of goods for processing (maquila) was US$ 3.3 billion.
Despite competition from Asian countries, in 2007 this category grew by 6% following a standstill in 2006.
According to the Honduran Manufacturers Association, in 2007 the country exported 150 million dozen garments to the United States market, which is almost 10% more than in 2006.
Sales of electrical harnesses for motor vehicles in the United States rose by 12%.
Honduras is the world’s Goods exports, f.o.b. (millions of dollars) b Lending rate g Interbank interest rate (lempiras per dollar) b Does not include maquila activities. e Weighted average rate on time deposits. f Data to April. g Weighted average rate on loans. second largest exporter of harnesses, which generated US$ 400 million in foreign exchange during 2007.
Factors in increased imports included buoyant purchases of machinery and equipment for agriculture and transport (up by 37%) and the significant import volumes of consumer goods.
As for raw materials and intermediate goods, a noteworthy performance was turned in by fuel imports, with an 11.5% increase in prices and a 7.5% increase in volume.
In 2007, spending on petroleum and its derivatives accounted for 23% of total imports.
Imports of other raw materials were also highly buoyant, including construction materials in demand because of the private construction boom.
The non-factor services deficit (almost US$ 300 million) was similar to the balance recorded in 2006.
Tourism revenues, which have doubled in five years, were 14% higher than in 2006.
Although the number of visitors climbed by 15%, spending per international visitor remained at US$ 750.
It should be pointed out that the outlook for the tourism sector is extremely bright, thanks to tourism development and promotion measures adopted at the end of 2006 to boost tourism in the country’s Bay Islands in the Caribbean.
This amount included a net outlay of profit remittances of US$ 740 million, net interest revenues of US$ 110 million, and revenues from employee wages.
While interest payments decreased by US$ 30 million thanks to the forgiveness of external debt, interest received by the country increased by a similar degree.
Family remittances and grants significantly helped to ease the deficit of factor and non-factor services.
The economic problems in the United States have resulted in a fall in the remittances sent home by Hondurans, who have seen their employment and income levels fall.
Despite the slower growth of family remittances, they will nonetheless represent almost 20% of GDP in 2008.
Foreign direct investment stood at US$ 816 million, which is 21% more than the total received in 2006.
The investment capital was channelled into communications, transport, tourism and maquila enterprises.
For the first time since 2003, there was a fall in the level of international reserves (US$ 109 million).
Given that extraordinary financing represented US$ 53 million, the global balance posted a deficit of US$ 162 million.
The growth of the Mexican economy fell from 4.8% in 2006 to 3.2% in 2007 owing, in part, to the drop in external demand generated by the slowdown of the United States economy, which receives slightly over 80% of Mexico’s exports.
The economic situation was characterised by a general decline in the buoyancy of private consumption, gross fixed capital formation, job creation, household income and private-sector credit, which resulted in slower growth as the exchange rate appreciated.
A rise in imports widened the trade deficit (1.2% of GDP) and pushed up the balance-of-payments current account deficit to 0.6% of GDP from 0.3% in 2006.
Though less buoyant, remittances still accounted for 2.5% of GDP in 2007, and this prevented the current account deficit from widening further.
The public sector as a whole managed to almost achieve a fiscal balance (as it did in 2006) thanks to the country’s oil income, which accounted for 9% of GDP.
Economic growth in Mexico in 2008 will depend on how heavily the country is hit by the cooling of the United States economy, which will lower demand for Mexican goods and reduce remittances.
Sustained by domestic demand, GDP growth is expected to slow down to 2.7%.
The Government launched an infrastructure investment programme to prevent further deceleration, but the impact of this programme in terms of economic reactivation has yet to make itself felt.
High international food prices will continue to influence local price levels, and inflation is therefore expected to reach about 5%, compared with Economic policy in 2007 generally aimed to maintain macroeconomic stability, keep inflation at about 3% and attain a zero fiscal deficit.
The implementation of fiscal reforms, which had halted during the previous administration, resumed.
The law on budget and fiscal responsibility, which obliges the Treasury to maintain a zero deficit, resulted in public finances recording a virtual balance in 2007.
Public- sector income rose 5.6% in real terms and represented 25.5% of GDP, while non-oil revenue was up 10.1% on 2006 levels.
Total oil income fell 1.7% in real terms, owing to lower oil extraction volumes and export levels and the drop in the domestic price of natural gas, but still represented 35.4% of public revenue.
The income of the State oil company Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) increased 13.4%.
In 2007, the average price of Mexico’s oil mix fetched US$ 61.6 per barrel, or US$ 18.8 more than the figure projected in the general economic policy guidelines for 2007.
The federal government deficit, however, rose slightly from 2% of GDP in 2006 to 2.2% the following year.
Revenue increased 5.8% in real terms, while spending swelled at a rate of 6.8%.
The 8.4% expansion of tax income was sustained by income tax revenue, which accounts for half of tax income and increased 13.2% in 2007.
Revenue from value added tax grew more moderately (3.6%), in line with the level of economic growth.
Current expenditures in real terms were 6.6% higher than in 2006 owing to an 8.2% increase in salary payments.
Social spending also rose, while debt service and interest payments were lower than the previous year.
Capital expenditures grew 8% as more resources were channelled into investment projects.
Gradual but constant increases meant that capital expenditures, as a proportion of GDP, were two percentage points higher in 2007 than extremely low level recorded in 2000 (1.5% of GDP).
The fiscal reforms undertaken in 2007 included the amendment of the law governing the Social Security and Social Service Institute for State Workers (ISSSTE), which will enable the State to increase spending to cover personnel expenses, and new fiscal reforms approved in September that year.
The three pillars of these reforms are the introduction of a singlerate business tax, the reform of the tax regime applicable to PEMEX and the introduction of a 2% charge on cash deposits in the banking system when these exceed 25,000 pesos a month.
In addition to the fiscal reforms undertaken in 2007, in 2008, several measures aimed at increasing the tax burden were implemented, and provisions governing the distribution of tax income between the federal government and federative entities were modified with a view to increasing the resources available to the latter without eroding the income of the former.
Steps were also taken to increase the shared responsibility of local governments for tax collection and to boost transparency and accountability in the tax system.
In order to shore up local budgets, a compensation fund was created for the 10 federal entities with the lowest per capita GDP.
Additional resources are to be obtained through the sales tax on diesel and gasoline.
These three measures, together with the federation’s spending budget for fiscal 2008, which was approved at the beginning of the year and contemplates a real increase of 9.8% in public spending, form the backbone of the Government’s policy for tackling the negative effects of the current international situation.
The resources of the national infrastructure fund represent 1.6% of total government spending and about 0.3% of GDP, while the resources of the economic support programme represent 0.6% of GDP.
This programme includes measures such as tax discounts, tax incentives, tariff simplification measures, discounts on the contributions employers make to the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS), reduced credit costs and improved access to credit for marginalised communities, lower electricity rates during peak and working hours, and the allocation of additional resources to guarantee funds and financing initiatives for small enterprise.
The goal of monetary policy continued to be to keep inflation down to about 3%.
Given the pressure generated by rising international prices for grains and certain raw materials and the high price of hydrocarbons, Banco de México raised the one-day interbank rate (the anchor rate) in April and October 2007 by 25 basic points on both occasions in order to lower inflationary expectations.
Monetary policy remained unchanged during the first five months of 2008, but became more restrictive as of June that year.
Reflecting more sluggish GDP growth, the money supply rose 4.8% in real terms in the first quarter of 2008.
M3 growth was slightly more buoyant (8.3%) and was channelled mainly into government securities.
Credit continued to be widely available to the private sector, although it expanded less than in 2006.
In December 2007, total financing to the non-financial private sector represented 32.6% of GDP, which reflected a real annual variation of 9.6% on the previous year.
Total lending by commercial banks to the private sector rose 25% in 2007, although the growth of household loans (consumer loans and mortgages) declined.
Non-performing loans accounted for 5.48% of consumer loans, which is 1.40 percentage points higher than in 2006.
Banco de México announced the formal elimination as of 21 January 2008 of the so-called “corto” instrument (whereby commercial banks had to keep a certain level of their balances in the central bank) and the adoption of the one-day interbank rate.
The Governor of the bank stressed that the elimination of the “corto” was a mere formality as the interbank rate had been in use since April 2005.
The move therefore in no way affected monetary policy. remained relatively stable in relation to the United States dollar, at about 10.9 pesos per dollar.
In the first semester of 2008, however, the exchange rate fell to 10.6 pesos per dollar as a result of the capital inflows generated by the difference between interest rates in the United States and Mexico.
This, together with the relative abundance of foreign exchange generated by remittances, foreign direct investment and hydrocarbon exports, brought about a 3.0% real appreciation of the Mexico peso against the United States dollar in addition to the 0.8% appreciation already recorded in 2007.
Banco de México continued to take measures to reduce the build-up of international reserves.
This made the country’s exports less competitive but helped lower inflationary pressure.
Despite this, international reserves swelled by over US$ 10 billion in 2007 and continued to increase into 2008.
At the end of June 2008, they had reached US$ 85.671 billion. (d) Other policies Exchange policy continued to be based on the floating exchange-rate regime implemented at the end of 1994.
The international financial market experienced some periods of volatility in 2007 as a result of uncertainty regarding the depth of the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States.
In 2006-2007, the value of the Mexican peso In April 2008, the Executive Branch submitted an energy reform bill for the consideration of the Senate.
The bill contemplated changes that would grant PEMEX more autonomy in the management of its budget and its debts.
Given its significance and the debate it stirred up nationwide, the country’s three main political parties agreed to hold discussions on the proposal between May and July 2008.
Economic activity was less buoyant in 2007 mainly due to the fall in external demand and, to a lesser extent, to the deceleration of domestic spending.
A sluggish job creation rate, less dynamic credit activity and slower remittance growth meant that total consumption growth fell from 4.8% in 2006 to 3.8% in 2007, public-sector consumption growth increased from 0.3% to 1.0%, and private consumption growth fell from 5.6% to 4.2% over the same period.
Internal demand is expected to continue to drive the economy in 2008 but at a more moderate pace than in 2007.
The effects of the slowdown in the United States economy have already made themselves felt in the first months of 2008, and GDP grew just 2.6% in the first quarter.
This also occurred because the volume of remittances was down by slightly over 3% in relation to the same period in 2007.
Between January and March 2008, gross fixed investment was 11% higher than in the same quarter the previous year, which compares favourably with the 5.6% expansion recorded for the whole of 2007 (22% of GDP).
A 35% increase in capital goods imports, driven by increased foreign purchases by the mining industry, and the weight and dynamism of transportation equipment purchases were two of the factors behind this growth.
Gross ﬁxed capital formation Terms of trade for goods (index: 2000=100) Variation in the national producer price index Nominal lending rate l Non-ﬁnancial public sector Primary balance m Overall balance m Public-sector debt Domestic n Money and credit o Currency outside banks and local-currency deposits (M2) b Up to 2003, based on figures in local currency at constant 1993 prices.
Activity in the agricultural, mining, manufacturing and construction sectors slowed in 2007.
Construction is expected to pick up in 2008 with the implementation of the 2007-2012 national infrastructure programme and the expansion of the housing construction programme.
The growth of the transportation, storage and communications segments increased by 6.1%, and the growth of the financial services, insurance, real-estate and rental segments also increased 6.1%.
The manufacturing sector as a whole posted only moderate growth in 2007 owing, in part, to the slowdown in the textiles, clothing and leather items segments (4.5%), which have been affected by waning demand in the United States and stiff competition from Asian manufacturers.
Automobile production dropped in 2007 as a result of shrinking domestic demand and the increased importation of used vehicles.
This figure reflected the contraction of demand in the important United States market because sales to Europe and South America soared 58.5% and 72.5%, respectively.
Between January and June 2008, however, the automobile industry’s output was 8.4% (81,590 vehicles) higher than during the same period in 2007, and vehicle exports had risen 12.5%.
Exports to the United States grew 3.5%, while exports to the European Union increased 58% and those to Asia rose from 512 to 16,748 vehicles.
Inflation in 2007 was slightly lower than in the previous year, but this situation started to change at the beginning of 2008.
The relative drop in inflation in 2007 (in the housing sector, for example) was helped by the mitigation of some supply problems observed in 2006.
In January-June 2008, annual inflation reached 5.3%, spurred by rises in international food and fuel prices.
The slight deceleration of the economy meant that the nationwide rate of unemployment rose from 3.6% in 2006 to 3.7% in 2007 of the economically active population.
Almost 12 million people, or the equivalent of 27.4% of the employed population, now work in the informal sector.
The number of workers holding permanent jobs has grown more slowly than the number of workers holding temporary ones, who now account for 11% of IMSS affiliates.
Commerce, mineral and hydrocarbon extraction activities and business support services have generated the largest number of jobs.
In January-June 2008, the construction industry, business, personal and household services, and social and community services recorded the largest increase in permanent employees.1 Manufacturing employment was up 0.4% in 2007, while labour productivity rose 0.7% (compared with 3.3% in 2006).
Productivity recovered notably, however, in the first two months of 2008 (4.9%).
Real average wages rose 1.1%, more than twice as much as in 2006, and the combination of the two factors translated into a slight increase (0.3%) in unit labour costs which, nonetheless, fell sharply in January and February 2008.
Exports volumes increased only 5.6%, far less than in 2006, and the unit value of exports fell to 3.2%.
Of the latter, the products obtained from extraction activities recorded the highest growth (31.9%), while agricultural and manufactured goods exports increased 8.4%.
In 8 of the 11 branches of the manufacturing sector, exports increased between 2006 and 2007, most notably in the mining-metallurgy, chemicals, iron and steel, metallic products, machinery and equipment segments, as well as in other manufacturing activities.
The growth in goods imports (10.1%) outpaced the growth in exports, which contributed to the widening of the trade deficit.
Import volumes increased more slowly (8.2%) than in 2006, however, while the unit value of In May 2008, the IMSS announced that it had revised the methodology used to calculate the number of workers insured by the institute.
The new figures show that number of temporary jobs created had been overestimated in the past two years and that the percentage of workers holding permanent jobs was actually higher than the figures obtained through the previous methodology implied (89% instead of 80%). imports only rose 2.4%.
As this increase was less than the increase in the unit value of exports, the terms of trade improved slightly (0.9%).
A 53% rise in the value of gasoline imports, which was spurred by growing demand, high prices and a reduction in domestic refining activities, widened the trade deficit.
Imports of consumer goods, intermediate goods and capital goods increased 16.5%, 8.8% and 10.1%, respectively.
The increase in consumer goods imports consisted, in addition to gasoline, of increases in concentrated milk imports (62%) and petroleum gas and other gas hydrocarbon imports (24.3%).
Because the trade deficit almost doubled, the balanceof-payments current account deficit doubled compared with 2006 although it remained small in terms of GDP (0.6%).
Exports were remarkably buoyant in the first five months of 2008 and increased 17.1%, largely thanks to high oil prices.
The transfers account, which consists mainly of remittances sent by Mexicans residing abroad, continued to perform well in 2007, posting a balance of US$ 24.433 billion dollars.
This represented a slight increase on the previous year (0.9%) and surpassed the volume of foreign direct investment (FDI) received during the year.
The financial account registered a surplus of US$ 18.307 billion, owing mainly to the record volume of portfolio investment (US$ 14.773 billion) and FDI flows, which were the highest seen since 2002.
The Government paid down US$ 336 million of its debt, while the banking sector and other sectors took out loans for US$ 1.766 billion and US$ 7.451 billion, respectively.
Direct investment by Mexicans abroad reached US$ 8.256 billion, 43% higher than the previous year.
FDI in Mexico mainly targeted the manufacturing industry (49.7%) and financial services (24.3%), and came mostly from the United States (47.3%), the Netherlands (15.1%) and Spain (9.6%).
Driven by buoyant exports, domestic investment and consumption, Nicaragua’s real GDP grew 3.8% in 2007, compared with 3.9% the previous year.
Nominal inflation climbed sharply and reached 16.2% towards the end of the year.
The central government fiscal deficit trended downwards (3.1% of GDP, not including grants), as did unemployment (4.9%).
Having won the national elections held in November 2006, Daniel Ortega assumed the presidency in January 2007.
During the first year of his five-year term in office, the economy was affected by cuts in the electrical energy supply, setbacks in the completion of public investment projects and, in the second semester, the considerable damage and losses wrought by hurricane Felix and heavy rains in the north-western part of the country.
The increase in inflation in 2007 was triggered by rising international prices for fuel and food, as well as by domestic factors (underlying year-on-year inflation was 11.7%), such as the contraction of agricultural output, which was affected by adverse weather conditions, the expansion of the monetary base and inflation expectations.
The rise in inflation had a direct impact on average real wages (which fell 7.4%), on real interest rates (the lending rate turned negative during the last few months of the year) and on the real exchange rate (which appreciated 2.4% on average).
According to ECLAC projections, GDP growth in 2008 will be 3.0% owing to a less favourable national and international context.
The slowdown of the United States economy will have a negative impact on exports and remittances, and consumption will be affected by the decline of real wages.
On the other hand, public investment in infrastructure and transportation projects and public spending are expected to increase.
In June 2008, the yearon-year inflation rate reached 23.1%, and accumulated inflation reached 11.8%, which is already higher than the single-digit inflation target set for 2008.
In 2007, the new Government continued to pursue an economic policy aimed at guaranteeing macroeconomic stability, within the framework of the three-year agreement recently signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the amount of US$ 111.3 billion, by using the exchange rate as a nominal anchor for prices.
The fiscal deficit fell in 2007 owing to the increase in income and the under-implementation of the budget.
Monetary policy became more expansive as legal reserve levels fell and the monetary aggregates increased.
The central government’s fiscal deficit, excluding grants, fell, as a proportion of GDP, for the fourth year in a row, from 3.9% in 2006 to 3.1% in 2007.
Tax revenue rose 5.1% in real terms thanks to economic growth and the measures taken to improve tax administration.
Grants continued to be a major source of income for the central government (16% of total income), although they fell in real terms (by 4.6%) in comparison with the significant increase (24.3%) they experienced in 2006.
Total government spending grew 1.6% in real terms, while accounting for a slightly smaller proportion of Two thirds of government outlays consisted of current expenditures and the other third of capital expenditures.
Salary adjustments and the transfer of the payroll of staff employed by autonomous entities to the payroll of the national treasury meant that wages increased more than any other expenditure item (24.7%).
External interest payments recorded the sharpest decline (27.8%) thanks to the debt cancellation programmes that Nicaragua has benefited from in the last few years.
Capital expenditures declined slightly in real terms (0.1%), with 85.9% of the annual amount allocated in the budget being actually implemented.
The outstanding balance of the external debt was reduced by US$ 1.164 billion in the first semester of 2007 when the country’s debt to the Inter-American Development Bank was cancelled.
In the country’s economic and financial programme, the consolidated public deficit, without grants, is projected to reach 1.8% of GDP in 2008, 0.8 percentage points above the level recorded in 2007.
In 2007, the central bank of Nicaragua carried out a series of previously-announced mini-devaluations at a rate of 5% per year as a means of anchoring inflation expectations.
Towards the end of the year, the average nominal exchange rate therefore reached 15.35 gold córdobas per United States dollar.
As a result of the sharp increase in inflation, the average real exchange rate of the córdoba to the United States dollar appreciated 2.4%.
The real effective exchange rate, however, which measures the variation of a country’s currency against the currencies of its main trading partners, depreciated 2.1%.
These opposing movements reflect the general decline of the United States dollar vis-à-vis other currencies.
M1, which includes cash in circulation and current account deposits, posted a nominal increase of 23.6% with respect to the close of the previous year, compared with a 17.5% rise in 2006.
Time deposits in national currency expanded 9.5% in nominal terms (compared with 10.5% in 2006) as preference for foreign currency holdings and instruments offering more immediate liquidity grew.
Despite inflationary pressure, on 15 October 2007, the legal reserve rate was lowered from 19.25% to 16.25% in keeping with the commitments previously assumed with the banking sector.
This reduction made it possible for credit operations to expand considerably during the last quarter of the year.
In the financial system, deposits grew 17% in nominal terms in 2007.
Rising inflation led depositors to invest mainly in foreign-currency instruments and in instruments that offered more immediate liquidity.
The loan portfolio grew 31.6% in nominal terms, which is similar to the expansion observed in 2006 (30.8%).
Lending operations to the livestock sector and the credit cards sector recorded the largest growth.
At the end of 2007, the nominal borrowing rate for national-currency deposits was 6.6%, 140 basic points higher than at the end of 2006.
The nominal lending rate for national currency operations rose to 12.9%, 130 basic points above the December 2006 level.
This increase occurred just as international interest rates were falling and can therefore be attributed to domestic circumstances, such as inflationary pressure.
The real lending rate remained negative throughout 2007, while the real borrowing rate turned negative in October when inflation began to pick up speed.
Larger net purchases on the foreign exchange market pushed up net international reserves to US$ 970.7 million by the end of 2007, which represents an annual increase of 20.6%.
This figure surpasses the US$ 843,8 million projected as one of the country’s monetary policy objectives in the economic and financial programme.
The new Government awarded priority to the negotiation and signing of free trade agreements, including investment and cooperation agreements.
In March 2007, the National Assembly of Nicaragua approved the country’s adhesion to the Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America and the Caribbean, which aims to further regional integration and trade cooperation.
A series of agreements were signed covering a number of subjects, including energy, oil supplies, product sales, housing construction, scholarships and technical assistance.
In 2007, Nicaragua continued to participate in the multilateral talks of the Doha Development Round at the World Trade Organization (WTO) and in the process to establish a Central American customs union.
An additional protocol to modify the free trade agreement between Nicaragua and Mexico regarding textile accumulation was signed within the framework of the Dominican Republic - Central America - United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) to allow the incorporation of Mexican textiles in exports to the United States.
Sustained by increases in domestic gross investment (14.5%), exports (9.6%) and, to a lesser extent, total consumption (4.5%), GDP grew at 3.8% in 2007, slightly less than in 2006 (3.9%), continuing the slowdown that started three years earlier.
Buoyant domestic demand meanwhile fuelled imports, which rose 14.2%, and per capita GDP expanded for the fourth consecutive year, at a rate of 2.4%.
The expansion of the manufacturing industry (7.6%), transportation and communications services (6.7%) and financial establishments (7.8%) drove GDP growth, while the mining and construction sectors posted negative results (-8.8% and -3%, respectively).
The construction sector in particular was affected by the incomplete execution of the public investment programme and falling demand for housing.
ECLAC has projected a growth rate of 3.5% for 2008, which is slightly below the rate observed in 2007.
One of the key factors in this slowdown is the deceleration of the United States economy and its impact on Nicaraguan exports, which have been a fundamental factor of growth in recent years.
Moreover, remittances will be affected by the crisis in the United States housing market, which employs large numbers of immigrants, and by the increasing difficulties immigrants have in entering the United States.
On the domestic front, the fall of real wages in the face of soaring inflation will have an adverse effect on consumption.
Public spending on reconstruction work to repair the damage caused by hurricane Felix and torrential rains, together with increased investment in electricity generation and the upgrading of the urban transport system, should, however, boost economic activity.
The first figures available for 2008 in effect point to a slowdown and the continuation of the downward trend witnessed in the monthly index of economic activity during the last months of 2007.
Average year-on-year growth in the first four months of 2008 was 3.8% compared with 5.1% for the same period the previous year.
Year-on-year inflation rose much higher in 2007 than in the previous year (16.2% compared with 9.4% in 2006) and far exceeded the projections contemplated in the economic and financial programme (8.2%).
This is the highest inflation Nicaragua has seen this decade and the highest in Central America in 2007.
Food, beverages and tobacco products suffered the largest year-on-year price rises (24.9%), followed by transport and communications (17.6%).
For 1999 the figures refer to the nationwide total. k Relate to the Managua Consumer Price Index. l Weighted average rate on 30-day deposits. m Weighted average rate on short-term loans. n Includes grants. o The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks. prices at the international level.
Core year-on-year inflation, which exclude perishables and energy, also reached double digits in 2007 (11.7%), fuelled by domestic factors: the decline in agricultural output (caused by adverse natural phenomena), the expansion of the monetary base and greater inflation expectations.
One of the core challenges facing the Government in 2008 is to bring down inflation without harming economic growth.
During the first semester, the national CPI recorded an accumulated increase of 11.8%, 5.7 percentage points higher than during the same period in 2007.
Approximately 80% of the increase in the CPI was generated by rising prices in the food and beverages and transport sectors, especially by the rise in international prices.
In June, year-on-year inflation reached 23.1% compared with 9.5% for the same month the previous year.
The loss of capacity to produce sufficient volumes of food to cover domestic demand and rising food prices have aroused concerns about a possible food crisis.
The nominal open unemployment rate fell for the fourth year in a row in 2007 (to 4.9% from 5.1% in 2006) thanks to the continued expansion of economic activity.
Household surveys revealed that informal employment had also come down from 64.4% to 62.7% of the working population.
The rise in inflation meant that the average real wages of workers covered by social security fell at an average annual rate of 1.7% after increasing 1.4% in 2006.
Goods exports, including those exported from the free zones, reached US$ 2.313 billion in 2007, which represented an annual increase of 13.7% with respect to 2006.
This growth continues, driven by the concessions that Nicaragua enjoys under CAFTA-DR.
Export growth in 2007 was slower, however, than in the three preceding years when exports increased at over 20% per year.
For the first time since 2003, import growth (18.2%) outpaced export growth, most noticeably in the cases of capital good imports (18.4%) and raw materials and intermediate goods imports (21.2%).
This deficit was 24.6% greater than the deficit recorded in 2006 and reflected the worsening, for the seventh consecutive year, of the terms of trade index (1.4% with respect to the previous year).
Income from family remittances, which reached US$ 739.6 million in 2007, continued to help mitigate the current account deficit.
The annual growth rate of these transfers (6%), however, was significantly lower than in 2006 (13.3%) because of the economic slowdown in the United States (about 65% of the remittances received by Nicaragua come from the United States), and, from being equivalent to 13.2% of GDP in 2006, remittances fell to levels equivalent to 13% of GDP in 2007.
The financial account returned a positive balance of US$ 356.3 million, of which US$ 335.3 million were accounted for by foreign direct investment flows.
This represented a 16.9% increase in the financial account with respect to 2006.
The current account deficit is projected to continue increasing in 2008 as a result of slower export and remittance growth and an increase in the consumption of imported goods.
In the first quarter of 2008, merchandise exports expanded 26.3% with respect to the same period the previous year (23.2%), and imports soared 40.4% (compared with 6.9%).
The current account therefore posted a deficit of US$ 311.4 million, compared with a deficit of US$ 137 million in 2007.
In 2007, the economy of Panama expanded by 11.2%, in what was the fourth year of intense growth in a context of consolidation of the fiscal and employment situation.
The non-financial public sector posted a surplus equivalent to 3.5% of GDP, and the unemployment rate stood at 6.3% in August (compared with 8.7% a year earlier).
The favourable macroeconomic performance facilitated compliance with several of the central targets set for 2009 within the current government’s programme.
However, inflation rose substantially (6.4%) and the balanceof-payments current account deficit widened to 8% of GDP.
The driving forces in the economy were gross fixed investment (32%) and exports (12%), although consumption also expanded considerably (8%).
Gross fixed investment was given a great boost by both the public and private sectors.
The programme of public works has been particularly relevant in this regard, as work began to widen the Panama Canal in the middle of the year, with the project expected to be completed in 2012 following an estimated investment of US$ 5.2 billion (25% of GDP in 2007).
The local and foreign private sector made investment efforts, especially in residential construction, as well as in other activities within and outside the Colón Free Zone.
Besides the business-friendly climate, the availability of bank financing at low interest rates promoted a rapid expansion of investment and private consumption.
Bank credit rose by 19.6% over the year, and was geared towards a wide range of activities.
This credit growth and the increase in foreign and domestic deposits reflect Panama’s position as a regional centre for financial intermediation.
Owing to the nature and orientation of its operations, by mid-2008 the banking sector was showing no signs of suffering in the wake of the financial crisis in the United States.
Nevertheless, the growth rate of the Panamanian economy is expected to drop slightly in 2008 due to the negative effects of the slowdown in the United States and rising domestic inflation.
Buoyant implementation of public works projects and a stepping-up of work to widen the Panama Canal point to an expansion of around 8% in real GDP.
Inflation should be at least two percentage points higher than in 2007, owing to high international prices for oil and food.
Sustaining high economic growth in the medium term will require eliminating potential or current bottlenecks in the availability of electricity, skilled workers and infrastructure.
It will also be essential to halt rising inflation, otherwise the purchasing power of the population will be eroded (especially among low-income groups), and the viability and funding of various investment projects would be under threat.
According to indicators available for the first two months of 2008, Panama’s economy has continued to grow strongly, with the most buoyant sectors posting growth of over 10% (construction, sales of cars and trucks, banking and tourism).
This year saw the concession to use US$ 600 million of investment to build a new container port in Farfán granted to one Chinese corporation and one United States enterprise.
The feasibility and cost of building an oil refinery in Puerto Armuelles with funding from Qatar Petroleum are also under discussion.
In June 2008, the consumer price index climbed by 9.6% in 12 months, while the food price index rose by 15.1%.
Price hikes were also recorded in transport and, to a lesser extent, in housing, water, electricity and gas.
In 2007, economic policy concentrated on implementing the ambitious programme of public works, in a context of consolidated public finances and efforts to protect low-income groups.
Measures introduced in this regard include efforts to reduce the cost of the basket of staple foods by importing rice and other products and selling them directly to poorer consumers.
The non-financial public sector posted a surplus of 3.5% of GDP (compared with the original projection of a 2.9% deficit), thanks to a wider primary surplus, lower interest payments and non-recurring receipts from the concession of duty-free shops in Tocumen international airport.
Other contributing factors included the positive operating balance of public institutions and enterprises and the current savings of the central government.
The latter was due to a 12.2% increase in total revenues in real terms and a 4.2% reduction in current expenditure, following a cut in domestic interest payments (56%).
Such savings made it possible to fund the massive surge in capital expenditure (72%).
Furthermore, in real terms tax revenues increased (by 11.6%) and so did non-tax revenues (11.3%), on the strength of the buoyant economy and employment situation.
Indirect taxes (up 18.3%) rose by much more than direct taxes (6%).
Consolidated public debt climbed by just 0.2% to stand at US$ 10.471 billion (61% of GDP).
This was due to a deliberate policy of replacing consolidated internal debt with external debt, which brought the two categories to 12.8% and 48.3% of GDP, respectively.
This form of debt management was aimed at reducing interest payments, encouraging risk agencies to classify the country as investment grade and providing more leeway for obtaining further external resources to fund public works as and when necessary.
In May 2007, Standard & Poor’s raised the classification of Panamanian debt from BB/stable to BB+/positive. (b) The international banking centre and credit policy In 2007, the assets of the international banking centre continued to increase (20% compared with 18.4% in 2006), within both the national banking system and internationally licensed banks.
Credit for the domestic market was up by 16% (13% the previous year) and followed the usual pattern of being mostly concentred (96%) in the private sector.
The private activities that absorbed the most finance were trade, construction (including mortgages), personal consumption and financial entities.
In 2007, those aforementioned activities received 88% of all loans granted to the private sector, with loans to trade and construction (not including mortgages) posting the largest increase (of over 30%).
Personal loans were up by 17.7%, which was three percentage points more than in the previous year.
Following several years of strong growth, mortgage loans increased by just 2.5%, which may be a reflection of the cautious stance taken by national banks.
Banking reserves swelled by 29% to reach the equivalent of 2.6% of total loans to the domestic private sector.
Loans to industry, micro enterprises, fishing and mining all grew by over 30%, although they remained less significant overall.
Generally speaking, the country’s banking system continued to present a low level of risk.
Following a slight increase in the proportion of non-performing loans, the percentage then began to trend downwards in the final quarter of 2007 to stand at around 1.2% of the total by the end of March 2008.
In 2007, the share corresponding to the official banking system dropped sharply to over two percentage points lower than the 5.5% recorded in December 2006 (with the trend continuing into March 2008).
Capital adequacy remained at almost 14%, and the position of private banks with national capital was particularly strong.
In the context of this positive performance, however, it is vital for the Superintendency of Banks to avoid any unwise expansion of consumer loans.
Deposit-taking was up for the year in terms of demand deposits (29%) and time and savings deposits (23%), and particularly in respect of foreign deposits.
In 2007, nominal interest rates edged up slightly, except for a fall in the local mortgage rate.
The three-month borrowing rate rose to 4.12%, compared with 3.35% in 2006, while the lending rate for commercial loans increased to 8.3% (from the 8.1% recorded 12 months previously).
These changes were cancelled out by inflation, which caused a decline in real terms.
The real commercial and consumer interest rates dropped by one and a half percentage points to 3.96% and 6.09%, respectively.
For its part, the real benchmark mortgage rate fell from 4.43% to 2.66%, while the real three-month borrowing rate went into negative figures (-0.05%). (c) Trade policy agreement with Guatemala therefore became particularly important for reducing such risks.
By mid-2008, the United States had yet to ratify the free trade agreement with Panama, for which bilateral negotiations had concluded in early 2007.
It is difficult to see how this situation could be resolved during 2008, given the upcoming Presidential elections in the United States.
The preferences granted under the Caribbean Basin Initiative will expire in 2008, and the implementation of the Dominican Republic —Central America— United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) could either undermine some of the competitive advantages of Panama within the United States market, affect foreign direct investment, or both.
The conclusion of trade negotiations with other Central American countries and the signing of a trade (d) Other policies In the first few months of 2008, discussions began on the Social and Fiscal Responsibility Act, which includes a series of rules for ensuring fiscal discipline and transparency by establishing a maximum of 1% of GDP for the non-financial public-sector deficit.
The Act also establishes the public-debt target of less or equal to 40% of nominal GDP in January 2015.
Also pending approval is the Consumer Support Programme (PAC), which aims to increase the purchasing power of middle-class waged workers by reducing income tax for 85% of taxpayers and granting preferential interest rates to home-buyers for properties priced up to US$ 80,000.
The real increases in gross fixed investment (32.2%) and exports (12.1%) provided a major boost to GDP in 2007.
Private consumption climbed considerably (8.3%) (by two percentage points more than public consumption), due to higher personal income, employment and credit facilities.
The sharp rise in demand (12.3%) fuelled a 13.9% increase in imports, almost double the rate of increase recorded in 2006.
The fastest growing production sectors were transport, storage and communications, construction and mining —with increases of almost 20%.
Panama Canal activities lost some buoyancy and their real GDP rose by only 3% (14% in 2006), as the Canal nears its maximum capacity.
In addition to widening the Canal, an attempt is also being made to increase the value added of services provided to vessels in transit.
Although the number of transits climbed by just 3.7% and net tons by 5.6%, Canal revenues were up 15% due to a rise in toll prices.
In 2007, transfers from the Panama Canal Authority to the public budget grew by US$ 218.5 million.
Transport-sector GDP was up by 26.7%, thanks to the country’s role as a hub of interoceanic trade and a regional centre of air travel (with flights growing in number and frequency).
In terms of telecommunications, rapid expansion (17.4%) continued, as part of the mobile telephone and Internet boom.
Given that hotel occupancy is considerably higher than the regional average, major investments are planned to cater for the growing number of tourists.
Retail trade (13.6%) and wholesale trade (10.6%) expanded at similar rates to the economy as a whole, and grew more quickly than trade in the Free Zone (5.1%).
In 2007, construction was even more buoyant than in the previous year, thanks to the rapid transformation of the urban landscape of Panama City, including tall towers and ambitious public works projects to clean and enhance the bay.
The boom in the construction of low-cost housing continued, due to credit facilities and higher incomes.
The renovation of estates and properties by foreign residents intensified, including those in rural areas.
All of the above increased the area of built-on sites by 46% and pushed up housing construction by 59%, in a context marked by increasing real-estate prices.
Fishing declined by 2.2% due to high fuel prices, while the GDP of all other agricultural activities increased by 4.4% (with particularly strong performances by sorghum, melon, watermelon, pineapple and other fruits).
In terms of livestock, pig farming and poultry breeding picked up, while beef-cattle rearing declined.
Manufacturing grew by 5.7%, driven by non-metallic minerals, electrical machinery, furniture and construction materials.
Food and beverage production expanded by 3.8%, while textile and footwear production dropped by more than 3%.
Electricity generation climbed by 7.4%, with a strong emphasis on thermal energy sources.
The electricity sector has already experienced problems relating to a lack of installed capacity.
At the beginning of 2008, businesses and hotels were ordered to turn off neon signs between 11 p.m. and 6 a.m., and air conditioning was rationed in government offices.
The hike in the international prices of oil, food and raw materials, combined with the pressure of rapidly rising domestic demand in some oligopolistic markets, pushed inflation up.
The sectors to post the highest annual increases in consumer prices were transport (11.7%), food and beverages (10.4%) and housing (5.1%).
The average cost of the basket of staple goods was 8.3% higher than in 2006, despite government intervention to supply rice and other goods more cheaply.
The results of the household survey conducted in August 2007 confirmed the steady improvement in the labour market.
Indeed, between 2004 and 2007 the working population expanded by an average 3.8%, the waged population by 5.6% and the number of people contributing to the social security system grew by 8.8%.
Measurements carried out in March 2008 showed that employment has continued to rise, while nationwide unemployment fell from 7.3% to 6.3% in 12 months.
There are some signs of shortages of skilled workers, executives and other employees in the hotels, restaurants and tourism sector.
According to certain indicators, in some sectors such as construction wages are beginning to soar beyond levels originally agreed in collective negotiations.
The minimum public-sector wage was adjusted in 2008 and exceeded US$ 300 per month for the first time.
In 2007, faster economic growth produced a turnaround in the trade balance.
This combined with the deficit in the factor income account to give a current account deficit of US$ 1.577 billion (8% of GDP), which is more than three times wider than in 2006.
The US$ 488 million trade surplus recorded in 2006 became a deficit of US$ 481 million, as merchandise imports shot up by 23.8% (compared to growth of only 9.9% for exports).
In terms of exports, there was a decline in sales to Central America (6.6%), but increases in reexports from the Colón Free Zone (9.7%) and national exports to the rest of the world (11.9%).
Within the latter, the most buoyant exports were non-traditional products (11.8%), including fresh tropical fruit (21%).
Sectors that have struggled more in their exports are fishing and traditional exports, with a striking drop in sales of fresh beef (-20%) and sugar (-17%).
Purchases of construction machinery doubled, while imports of intermediate and consumer goods also climbed considerably (by 35% and 42%, respectively).
Particularly strong performances were turned in by imports of fuels and lubricants (46%).
Rapid import growth (30%) continued into the first quarter of 2008, especially with regard to consumer goods (50%).
Merchandise exports, on the other hand, expanded by 1%, compared with 26% in the year-earlier period.
High repatriation of profits associated with stronger sales and increased efficiency in various foreign enterprises generated a deficit in the factor services account.
The considerable upturn in flows of liabilities to the banking sector, combined with more moderate income from foreign direct investment (lower than in 2006 when the Primer Banco del Istmo was sold), led to a wide surplus on the financial account that comfortably covered the current account deficit.
The Caribbean Economic growth remained solid but slowed in 2007 despite sound macroeconomic management in recent years.
Real output grew by 2.8%, compared with a 4.6% increase in 2006.1 A decline in construction activity and reduced credit expansion partly offset the impetus from improvements in the tourism sector.
December-on-December inflation rose to 2.8%, which, though still moderate, surpassed the 2.3% registered in 2006, reflecting higher costs of furniture and household goods and the steep rise in, and pass-through of, international fuel and food prices.
Government finances weakened during fiscal year 20062007 as the overall fiscal deficit increased to 2.6% of GDP.
Fiscal performance was undermined by the slowdown in economic activity, which led to sluggish revenue growth that was outpaced by the rise in spending.
Meanwhile, the net external position improved as resurgence in tourism receipts, higher local expenses for offshore companies and lower outflows for construction services more than offset wider deficits on the merchandise and income accounts.
However, foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows, a major driver of activity, slowed with the completion of certain large-scale tourism projects.
The prospects for the economy in 2008 are mainly affected by the downside risks of a stronger-than-anticipated slowdown in the United States economy.
Growth is expected to decline in the first half of the year and is projected between 2.0% and 2.5% for 2008.
Reduced FDI inflows could further dampen construction and tourism activity and weaken credit conditions.
However, the close proximity of the Bahamas to the United States market and the pegged exchange rate arrangement make it a choice destination for United States travellers.
This, combined with more intensive marketing efforts in Europe and Canada, whose relatively strong currencies should favour tourism demand and lower price sensitivity in high-end segments, might lead to a more favourable outcome.
The fiscal position might deteriorate somewhat, however, owing to the tax relief, subsidies and salary increases provided for in the 2008-2009 budget.
Broad policy was focused on maintaining macroeconomic stability, especially a sustainable medium-term fiscal position, a positive investment climate based on premium credit ratings, and the pegged exchange rate.
Structural policies centred on improving the dynamism and competitiveness of the mainstay tourism sector by enhancing products, marketing the Bahamas as a tourism destination, especially in Europe and Canada (a supplementary allocation of B$ 12 million was earmarked for this in the budget), and boosting domestic investment in the sector.
Includes hidden unemployment. g Deposit rate, weighted average. h Lending and overdraft rate, weighted average. i The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks. j From 1999 to 2003, figures refers to fiscal years. k Includes grants. l Includes net lending.
Even though the overall fiscal position and debt dynamics of the Bahamas remain relatively stable, particularly by the standards of most of its Caribbean counterparts, they have worsened slightly in recent years.
The authorities are nevertheless committed to making a medium-term fiscal adjustment to balance the budget and to reducing central government debt to 30%-35% of GDP in five years.
It will be a challenge to attain this target, however, given the recent growth in primary spending.
During fiscal year 2006-2007,2 fiscal policy was expansionary, and the overall deficit increased to 2.6% of GDP, partly driven by economic stimuli and partly by the higher costs of operations, which were generated by increased fuel and materials prices and election spending.
The slippage reflected an accelerated growth in spending of The fiscal year runs from 1 July to 30 June. 14.6% relative to 9.3% in 2005-2006, especially on transfers, goods and services and debt servicing, alongside smaller growth in revenue.
Allocations for education also increased to galvanize the repair and rehabilitation of schools.
Debt interest payments also increased, in line with the accumulation of Bahamian dollar debt.
Capital spending maintained its strong growth trend from the previous year, rising by 35%.
There is no immediate change in the tax structure, although the introduction of VAT may be considered, especially under the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the European Union.
Border taxes may also begin to be eliminated, following an analysis of whether the benefits would outweigh revenue losses from trade taxes and the costs of administration and compliance.
The government has announced a number of tax and subsidy measures to ease the burden of the high costs of living on citizens.
There will also be a B$ 750 salary increase for public officials and a B$ 1,250 raise for teachers.
Moreover, the 2% stamp tax will be removed from 160 food items, and the customs duty and stamp duty on the fuel imports of the Bahamas Electricity Corporation will be suspended for two years to the benefit of consumers.
There was some fiscal slippage during the first eight months of the current fiscal year.
The fiscal deficit increased by 24% to B$ 92.7 million, which will make it difficult to meet the full-year target of 1.8% of GDP.
Expenditures grew more in both absolute and relative terms than revenue receipts.
Higher wage and salary bills and increased outlays for transfers and subsidies drove current spending, while capital expenditure decreased as a result of lower spending on infrastructure projects.
Tax receipts rose on account of higher proceeds from taxes on international trade, hotel services and business and professional fees, but these were still outweighed by the growth in spending.
A timing-related decrease in other miscellaneous income, meanwhile, was the main factor in the significant decline in non-tax revenue.
The debt situation remains manageable, although there is a risk of a recession in the United States economy lowering public-sector tax receipts.
Public-sector foreigncurrency debt grew marginally in 2007 to B$ 638.8 million, largely reflecting debt acquisition by public corporations.
Meanwhile, the ratio between debt service and total revenue doubled to 3.8% during 2007.
Despite an increase in the inflation rate from 2.3% in 2006 to 2.8% in 2007, the monetary authorities maintained a relatively neutral policy stance.
This did not lead to an expansion in credit to the public, however, because demand was low and banks were rebuilding their liquidity positions following a surge in credit in 2005 and 2006.
Broad money posted its strongest growth in three years as a result of a build-up of private-sector deposits that reached 77.5% of GDP, compared with 73.6% of GDP in 2006.
The largest component of total deposits continued to be domestic–currency-denominated fixed deposits (55.9%), followed by demand deposits (18.8%) and savings deposits (17.7%).
Resident foreign-currency deposits rose sharply (25.8%) buttressed by the improved balances of public corporations.
Domestic credit growth slowed marginally to 12.3 %, reflecting a slowdown in credit to the private sector and a decline in lending to public corporations.
Private credit decelerated in line with the decline in activity and probably reflected some caution on the part of investors regarding a possible recession in the United States.
The bulk of the credit granted continued to consist of housing loans (50.5% of total credit) and consumer loans (31.5%) and dwarfed the proportion of credit extended to smaller-scale boutique tourism projects, fisheries and other services.
With the demand for credit outstripping supply, the spread on commercial bank loans and deposit rates widened by 33 basis points to 6.94% during the year.
In a measure to improve the exchange control regime, the Monetary Policy Committee allowed residents to transfer monetary gifts and other overseas payments up to a value of B$ 500 per transaction, which seems to have caused a modest deterioration in asset quality in the banking system during the year.
The government remains committed to the pegged exchange rate as it provides certainty in transactions and thus stabilizes the investment climate.
Moreover, given the Bahamas’ high dependence on the United States market both for exports and imports, the peg to the dollar has proven beneficial over time.
This process will need to be supported by appropriate macroeconomic policies, an adequate level of international reserves and a strong and prudential regulatory framework.
In the Bahamian economy, the predominant sectors continue to be tourism (roughly one third of GDP) and the financial sector (20% of GDP), which includes a dynamic offshore centre.
Notwithstanding the Western Hemisphere Travel Initiative, which requires United States citizens returning from the Caribbean to hold passports, and the slowdown in the United States economy, tourism value added increased on the heels of higher aggregate visitor expenditure and longer lengths of stay.
Total visitor arrivals actually decreased, however, by 2.9% to 4.6 million, of which 1.52 million were stay-over visitors.
Developments in the sector saw the launch of an additional high-end property and appreciated room rates.
About B$ 10 billion of investment is earmarked for the tourism sector in the medium and long terms.
A number of major projects are planned or have started, including the B$ 2.6 billion Baha Mar project, the Kerzner Phase IV Atlantis resort and the Royal Oasis project.
Activity in the off-shore financial services sector was buoyant as indicated by higher receipts from international business companies.
Regulatory quality in the sector has also been improved to cope with competition from other jurisdictions.
By contrast, construction activity slowed rapidly, recording a meagre growth of 0.1%.
This stemmed from the completion of a large-scale tourism project and from the fall in demand in the residential construction and commercial sectors, brought about, in turn, by negative expectations of the United States economy.
Similarly, value added in the fisheries subsector also decreased, with fish landings falling by 27% in weight and 11.7% in value.
On the expenditure side, growth in consumption expenditures slowed sharply (to 2% in 2007 compared with 13.2% in 2006), partly reflecting reduced economic activity.
Similarly, as a number of large hotel projects were completed in the course of the year and residential construction picked up only marginally, gross capital formation grew by only 4.1% relative to 19.3% in 2006.
At the same time, exports increased slightly (2.4%), while growth in imports of goods and services slowed markedly to 2.4%.
The inflation rate, as measured by the retail price index, shifted upwards to 2.8% from 2.3% in 2006, propelled by the impact of higher international goods and fuel prices.
Leading the rise in prices were furniture and household items (6.8%), transport and communication (4.6%), recreation and entertainment (4.4%) and food and beverages (4.0%).
Local automotive fuel and electricity prices also contributed to the increase in costs, with the costs of gasoline spiking by 17.8%.
Preliminary data indicate that the rate of unemployment increased marginally by 0.3 percentage points to 7.9% as the growth of the labour force (5,850 workers) outpaced the number of jobs created (4,985).
This account was bolstered by higher tourism receipts, which swelled the services account surplus by 23.5% to B$ 1.020, contrasting with the 33% decrease in 2006.
The services account benefited from an almost 6.4% rise in travel receipts and the recovery in the offshore financial sector.
At the same time, net outflows for construction services dipped with the deceleration in activity in the sector.
The merchandise deficit posted a moderate increase as slower growth in non-oil imports, in line with reduced economic activity, helped to offset the effect of higher oil prices.
The income account deficit continued to widen (6.2%), underpinned by higher dividend and interest payments, while net current transfers remained at the same level.
Similarly, the capital and financial account surplus narrowed by 21.8% to B$ 951.4 million (13.2% of GDP) mainly due to the significant reversal in commercial banks’ transactions to a net outflow and a very moderate increase in foreign direct investment.
In 2007, Barbados recorded overall GDP growth of 3.2%, driven once more by a solid performance in the services sector (namely tourism and financial services).
The unemployment rate has fallen to its lowest recorded level (7.4%) since 1991.
Inflation was at a three-year low (4%), despite a context of high food and oil prices.
The external sector posted an impressive result on the capital and financial account, thanks to strong net capital flows that generated a balance-of-payments surplus of 7.9% of GDP, and an increase in net international reserves of more than 30%.
There remain ongoing concerns, however, with respect to a persistent deficit in the current account (7% of GDP in 2007) and how to contain the overall fiscal deficit.
The maintenance of government debt at around 70% of GDP and the ongoing poor performance Preliminary information indicates that, as of September 2007,1 the current central government surplus was 40% lower than in the year-earlier period and stood at US$ 62.1 million (8.9% of GDP).
This result is mainly attributable to slower growth in tax revenue and a faster increase in current expenditure.
Capital expenditure was US$ 102.9 million of other foreign-exchange-earning sectors outside tourism and financial services could pose a challenge in terms of a future liberalization on the capital account with a fixed exchange rate.
Maintaining the sustainability of the peg will be a key objective in the future.
Following lower public sector demand and a likely decrease in tourism demand from the United States, the economy is expected to grow by 2.7% in 2008.
The new government of the Democratic Labour Party, elected in January 2008, is committed to ensuring economic-policy continuity, with a focus on the rising cost of living in Barbados.
Figures in this paragraph are for the calendar year January 2007 to September 2007. and the overall deficit amounted to US$ 76.9 million at the end of September 2007, compared with US$ 41.7 million one year earlier.
In 2007 the deficit was financed primarily from domestic sources, thanks to a surge in domestic bank liquidity last year.
Domestic financing amounted to US$ 105 million, with the non-bank private sector contributing US$ 56 million, commercial banks US$ 50 million, the central bank US$ 22 million and the National Insurance Scheme US$ 12 million.
About US$ 39 million was paid abroad in amortization payments on debt, while foreign inflows of project funds amounted to US$ 21 million.
Includes hidden unemployment. k Prime lending rate. l Interest rate for savings. m Includes net lending. n The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks.
For the fiscal year 2007-2008,2 original projections pointed to a central government deficit (excluding amortization) of 2.2% of nominal GDP at market prices on a cash IFI basis, and a net operating surplus of 1.5% of GDP on an accrual basis.
The deficit projection was later revised to 3.5% of GDP at market prices on a cash basis, which will exceed the normal target range of 2.5% of GDP.
Interest payments on debt are expected to amount to US$ 182.8 million, which is higher than in the previous fiscal year owing to new debt issued in 2007 and a repayment for new prisons.
Amortization payments for total public debt are estimated at US$ 243 million, including US$ 52 million for external debt.
Over 90% of the total deficit (including amortization) is expected to be financed by domestic sources and the rest by foreign inflows from externally funded projects.
Total debt outstanding at the end of 2007 was US$ 3.7 billion, or 108% of GDP at current market prices.
Domestic debt stood at 67.2% of GDP and external debt at 41.2% of GDP.
Central government debt amounted to 70% of GDP (of which 24.7% was external debt).
The central government debt-service-to-revenue ratio was at its lowest in 12 years (17.3%).
In the 2007 budget, the Government of Barbados announced its intention to reduce the public-debt-to-GDP to 60% by 2012.
However, this will require fiscal surpluses at a time when fiscal policy is the only expansionary tool available to the government in a fixed exchange rate environment where exchange rate and monetary policy are ineffective.
The removal of exchange controls, originally planned for December 2007, was postponed until 2009.
However, with the advent of the Caribbean Single Market Economy (CSME) and thus a liberalized capital account environment, monetary policy will need to remain focused on mitigating future vulnerability of the 32-year-old exchange-rate peg regime.
This objective is particularly important for a small island without a fully developed financial surveillance and regulatory system.
There will be a need to focus on fiscal prudence and debt sustainability and on financialsector regulation and supervision to mitigate the risks of speculative attacks on the peg.
The central bank may consider introducing indirect monetary-based instruments to manage excess domestic liquidity and international reserves in a less controlled environment.
The central bank is also currently in the process of enhancing its information system to improve the surveillance of capital flows, among others.
In 2007, there was a significant increase in bank liquidity owing to a surge in capital inflows.
This was reflected in a 23.4% rise in domestic deposits at commercial banks, compared with 4.7% in the previous year.
Loans by commercial banks, however, grew by only 8.1%, compared with 15.5% in the previous year.
This indicates that most of the additional deposits were invested by banks rather than loaned to the non-bank private sector.
For the year as a whole, however, the central bank projected a slowdown in the overall growth rate to 3.2%, suggesting a tapering-off of the impact of the Cricket World Cup, which ended in April.
As in previous years, imbalances between the tradable and non-tradable sectors continue, thereby maintaining concerns over the need to generate foreign-exchange reserves.
Growth in the non-tradable sector, which constitutes 75% of total economic activity, was 3.8% compared to 4.5% in 2006.
On the other hand, growth in the tradable sector was 1.6% in 2007.
Such output growth in the non-tradable sector, especially in construction, was linked to preparations for and staging of the Cricket World Cup (including public refurbishment projects), as well as private residential developments and tourism-related construction.
Mining and quarrying continued to decline in the non-tradable sector, contracting by 6.2% due to a depletion of onshore oil production associated with dwindling reserves.
Another monetary policy measure was the lowering of the reserve requirement ratio to 21% in 2007, with 5% on domestic cash reserves, 6% on foreign cash reserves and 10% on government securities (down from its original 12%).
The reduction in the securities component of the reserve requirement is part of a move towards indirect monetary control.
Driven by an expansion in demand deposits, money supply expanded by 20% in 2007, following a contraction in the previous year.
M3 jumped by 28.4%, the highest rise on record since 1990, and this was attributable to a 46% increase in time deposits.
M3 as a share of GDP Non-residents’ foreign-currency holdings rose by a record 90% in 2007, as a counterpart to the surge in net capital flows.
The minimum deposit rate set by the central bank was adjusted downwards from 5.25% to 4.75%, in line with the fall in the United States federal funds rate.
The weighted average lending rates by commercial banks on total loans also fell accordingly but to a limited degree, from 10.87% to 10.68%, reflecting a reluctance on the part of commercial banks to erode their profit margins.
Total stay-over arrivals amounted to 572,937 at the end of 2007 (representing a 1.8% increase on 2006), while total arrivals (stay-over and cruise) reached 1,190,887 The impact of rising oil prices on cruise tourism in Barbados was partly cushioned by the island being a “home port” destination.
In October 2007, an agreement was signed between the Barbados Tourism Authority and Carnival Cruise Lines that will guarantee a minimum of 1.2 million cruise passengers and US$ 78 million for Barbados over the next three years.
Outside of tourism, the tradable sector continued to be marked by feeble performances in the sugar, agriculture and manufacturing sectors, in the face of structural and competitiveness challenges and amidst waning preferential treatments.
The international business sector, the second foreignexchange earner behind tourism, expanded further in 2007 and a new strategic plan for 2007-2012 was also launched.
The annual average inflation rate fell to 4% in 2007, compared with 7.3% in 2006.4 The lower rate of inflation could be ascribed to a slowdown in the rate of increase in oil prices in 2007 compared with 2006.
This was due to the presence of petrol subsidies, various price controls on basic items, the removal of a cess tax on imports and a slowdown in credit expansion by commercial banks (8.1% in 2007 compared with 15.5% in 2006).
The highest increases were in the fuel and light category (9.9%), followed by food (8.9%).
Unemployment (7.4%) was at its lowest rate since 1991, with female unemployment standing at 8.5% and male unemployment at 6.4% (the lowest figures on record for both categories).
Both domestic exports and retained imports, which exclude re-exports, grew modestly by approximately 4%.
However, in 2007 imports of capital goods contracted by 8% after experiencing double-digit growth in 2006 in the wake of the Cricket World Cup.
Imports of consumer goods rose by 8% in 2007, after contracting in the previous year.
The latter may have benefited from the removal of the cess tax on imports in 2007.
The capital and financial account registered its highest surplus since at least 1992, with an estimated US$ 475 million (6.7% of GDP).
Net long-term capital flows to the public sector amounted to US$ 19 million, reflecting the proceeds of bond issues on behalf of the Barbados Investment and Development Corporation and the Barbados Agricultural Management Company Ltd.
Net long-term private capital flows were estimated at US$ 331 million, and this was associated with tourism-related projects, real-estate transactions and loan proceeds for the construction of a new prison.
Short-term net inflows, estimated at US$ 33 million, were linked to loan inflows for the airport project and pre-shipment financing for the sugar harvest.
Other net inflows of US$ 92 million were recorded, and these were largely responsible for the exceptional performance on the financial account relative to other years and stemmed from deposits made by non-residents and other foreign entities.
The strong performance on the financial account accounted for the increase in net international reserves from US$ 930 million in 2006 to US$ 1.2 billion in 2007, the equivalent of 29.9 weeks of import cover.
Overall, the balance-of-payments surplus stood at 7.9% of GDP at market prices, up from 1.3% the previous year.
The economy’s expansion was held back by lower output and exports in the critical agriculture sector, which was buffeted by Hurricane Dean.
The damage caused by that disaster, together with insect infestation in sugar and bananas and a decrease in marine and other exports, led to lower commodity trade volumes.
Despite the slowdown in activity and reflecting the strong impact of import prices, inflation rose to 4.1%, relative to 3.0% in 2006.
Reflecting the hike in international oil prices and poorer harvests in various countries, inflation was largely driven by higher fuel and food prices.
On the policy front, the fiscal deficit narrowed in 2007 thanks to dynamic growth in bilateral grants, significant returns from the general sales tax (GST), petroleum taxes and the sale of crown land.
The debt problem eased, as the government secured a debt restructuring agreement in February 2007, which provided liquidity relief and potential means to restore fiscal and external stability.
The economy is expected to recover somewhat in 2008 with growth projected at around 2.3%, propelled by an upturn in agriculture built largely on increased banana production, sustained oil production and services.
Fiscal consolidation should continue with constrained growth in spending and efforts to improve revenue efficiency.
Meanwhile, with the continued pass-through from international fuel and food prices, inflation is expected to increase by around 2.5 percentage points The United Democratic Party (UDP) was elected to office in February 2008 after 10 years in opposition.
Its election mandate focused on improving living standards, tackling crime, re-establishing proper and transparent management and reducing taxes.
However, with the tight fiscal position tax reductions are likely to be reconsidered as fiscal prudence takes priority.
The fiscal out-turn in 2007 benefited from a fortuitous inflow of grant receipts, complemented by an upsurge in proceeds from the GST, petroleum taxes and land sales, which more than compensated for substantial growth in spending.
As a result, the overall deficit fell from 1.9% of GDP in 2006 to 1.1% in 2007, while the primary surplus rose to 4.1% of GDP from 3.9% of GDP in the previous year.
Nationwide total. h Rate for savings. i Weighted average rate for loans. j The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks. k Includes grants.
Current receipts registered dynamic growth to reach 25.5% of GDP, reflecting improved returns in both tax and non-tax revenue.
Tax proceeds were bolstered by a change in the tax structure, as the newly introduced GST turned in a good yield, accounting for substantial growth in receipts.
Tax yield from income and profits shot up by 19.4%, mainly associated with receipts from petroleum income taxes.
Meanwhile revenue from taxes on international trade and transactions rose by 5.4% almost in line with growth in imports.
Capital revenues received a boost from land sales, while the government garnered substantial grants from bilateral and multilateral sources, including Taiwan Province of China, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Basic Needs Trust Fund.
There was some slippage on the expenditure side, consequent on higher outlays on goods and services, the usual increases in wages to adjust for inflation, spending on relief and rehabilitation in the wake of Hurricane Dean and election spending.
Outlays on goods and services catapulted 52.3% to 6.3% of GDP, reflecting reclassification of some capital spending and procurement of supplies in the aftermath of the hurricane.
Meanwhile, capital expenditure expanded by almost 62.3% to reach Mindful of the need for sustainable management of petroleum resources, Parliament established a petroleum revenue management fund in 2007.
From fiscal year 2008-2009 all government revenues from the exploitation of petroleum will be paid into the fund.
A portion of the funds will be invested to generate a revenue stream for the benefit of the population, while part could be used for government projects and budget support, but not for current outlays or debt repayments.
The debt situation remains the critical macroeconomic challenge to growth and stability.
Debt restructuring during the year extended the maturity profile of the debt, which provided fiscal space for a structured programme to regain debt sustainability, and improved the country’s sovereign- credit rating, thus opening up potential access to credit at favourable terms on the market.
Under the mechanism, US$ 1.134 billion of government debt was restructured by paying down an initial portion and converting the remaining $ 1.082 billion into a ‘super-bond’.
Importantly, this new debt will be subject to step-up interest rates over time, and this underscores the need for a ‘front-loaded’ fiscal consolidation programme to guarantee medium- to long-term debt sustainability.
To achieve this goal, the authorities are targeting a primary surplus of over 3% of GDP in the medium term and attempting to increase external reserves. (b) Monetary and exchange rate policy Despite the slowdown in economic activity and rising but moderate inflation, there was significant monetary expansion during the year fuelled by a surge in credit and foreign-exchange inflows.
Money and credit expansion was facilitated by the fact that the central bank’s cash reserve requirement remained stable at 10%.
Despite the expansion in the money supply, monetary policy was relatively neutral in 2007, following the tightening Major monetary aggregates expanded in 2007, as evidenced by a 17% rise in broad money to 68.5% of GDP.
Both the foreign and domestic components of the money supply expanded, as net foreign assets were boosted substantially by tourism receipts, remittances and foreign direct investment (FDI), while domestic credit increased by over 14% to 70% of GDP.
Notably, the net foreign assets of the commercial banks more than doubled in spite of the spike in credit growth.
The M3 money supply (up to 68% of GDP from 62% of GDP in 2006) was driven by a rapid accumulation of time deposits held by individuals and the Belize Social Security Board (BSSB).
Credit growth was boosted in part by demand for loans to households, which tend to feed through into imports, worsening the balance-of-payments position.
However, in a welcomed development, credit to tourism, banana production and marine products also increased, providing a boost to productive activity.
After easing as a result of tourism receipts and other inflows in the first quarter of the year, banking system liquidity tightened during the rest of the year.
Weighted average interest rates on deposits rose during the year, associated with more intense competition in the banking system, as banks sought to attract large depositors.
The weighted average interest rate spreads narrowed by 20 basis points to 8.3%, the lowest margin in 16 years.
A favourable outcome during the year was the pickup of activity in the nascent interbank market, marking the year as the most active since the start of the market in 1995.
An incentive for activity on the market was provided by a cut in rates from 17% to 11% in 2006.
The development of the market suggests that monetary policy will make more use of market-oriented instruments in the future and will also be an important pillar for the development of money and capital markets.
Meanwhile, the external assets coverage ratio, which provides protective cover for a fixed peg exchange rate and has a stipulated benchmark of 40% of currency notes and coins issued, stood at 47.3% at the end of the year.
The central bank made net foreign exchange purchases of US$ 6.7 million during the year.
Inflows were bolstered by loans and grant receipts, but were offset by a large payment on the restructured external debt.
Belize’s exchange-rate peg continues to provide an important anchor for macroeconomic policies and expectations.
The real exchange rate depreciated in line with its nominal anchor, the United States dollar.
Despite a pickup in services and increasing oil production, the steep decline in agriculture and fisheries dampened overall activity.
The critical agricultural sector was buffeted by Hurricane Dean and its real output fell by 20.7%.
Sugar production also fell because of poor crop quality, owing to heavy rainfall and froghopper infestation.
Fisheries were badly affected following a bankruptcy in the aquaculture industry, resulting in lower output particularly in shrimp farming.
On the other hand, citrus output expanded slightly and oil production increased by 250,757 barrels or 31.5% thanks to more intense exploitation; however, it did not boost the economy as much as in 2006.
The nascent manufacturing sector was dealt a further blow in 2007 with the imminent closure of Williamson Industries Ltd., a producer of clothing for the United States market.
With the end of the Caribbean Basin Initiative on the horizon, the company complained that without preferential access and with higher costs in Belize, its operations would not be profitable.
Tourism has the potential to provide an important additional pillar for a diversified economy.
The authorities have recognized the potential of the sector, serving a highend niche market, and have embarked on a programme to strengthen the sector, including the upgrade of the main airport, more intense marketing and the creation of a tourism development fund.
In 2007, stay-over arrivals increased by a modest 1.6%, while cruise passenger arrivals posted a decline for the third consecutive year, partly reflecting the active hurricane season that led to home-porting and deployment of ships to the Mediterranean.
The subprime mortgage crisis in the United States and higher fuel costs also affected this sector.
All sub-indices registered higher prices, but the major drivers of inflation were fuel and power, transport and communications and food and beverages.
Rent, water, fuel and power rose sharply by 5.9%, reflecting the hike in butane costs, although rent and water rose only marginally.
Transport and communications costs rose by 3.4%, mainly on account of a surge in costs in the last quarter, as price increases were contained in the first three quarters.
Food and beverage costs increased by 5.8% propelled by a significant increase in the price of maize, wheat and other staples, partly associated with the use of grain for biofuels.
Meanwhile, more modest price increases were recorded for household goods (1.7%), personal care (0.8%) and recreation and education (0.3%).
Agriculture remained the largest employer with 19.8% of the employed labour force, however, job growth was most dynamic in the distribution sector (up by 39%).
Nevertheless, the seasonal nature of many jobs in some primary activities is a cause for concern and measures are needed to provide more stable jobs for workers in that area.
Growth in imports slowed in line with reduced economic activity and merchandise exports were up by a mere 0.3%, compared with a 31% rise in 2006.
All the major domestic exports contracted, with the exception of petroleum, reflecting hurricane damage in the agricultural sector.
Pinned back by the slowdown in domestic accumulation, import growth slowed in 2007.
Imports of the Corozal Free Zone (CFZ) were up by 18%, while those of the export processing zone (EZP) companies declined sharply on account of slacker demand and lower capital investments.
The services account improved thanks to a 7.2% rise in tourism receipts, caused by an increase in stay-over visitors and higher average daily spending.
In contrast, net payments on the income account expanded by 19% due to higher profit repatriation, private-sector interest payments and reinvested earnings.
There is a clear need to use these funds more productively so that a sizeable portion goes to improving the capital stock in the country’s production sectors.
The capital account surplus contracted to US$ 4.1 million or 0.3% of GDP (from US$ 9.2 million or 0.8% of GDP in 2006) as there was no repeat of debt forgiveness by the United Kingdom government as in 2006.
The surplus on the financial account increased, however, reflecting inflows of FDI into tourism, real estate, electric power and aquaculture projects and higher reinvested earnings by the banking sector, which suggested a vote of confidence in the economy, especially in view of the debt restructuring.
Meanwhile, the overall balance-of-payments surplus more than halved to US$ 22.9 million.
Gross international reserves increased to US$ 108.5 million, covering 2.3 months of imports of goods and non-factor services.
In 2007, the Cuban economy posted GDP growth of 7.3%, with a similar growth rate in per capita GDP, since population growth was almost nil.
The rate of inflation rose by 2.8%, which was half the previous year’s rate (5.7%).
The balance-of-payments current account showed a surplus equivalent to 0.8% of GDP.
Having contracted sharply in the two preceding years because of drought, the agricultural sector was the fastestgrowing in 2007 (18%).
Community, social and personal services expanded at a lower rate (14.5%) than agriculture, but contributed more to overall growth since they account for a high proportion of output.
Conversely, construction and commerce, which had led GDP growth in 2006, lost momentum, shrinking by 8.6% and 0.5%, respectively.
External conditions were less favourable than in previous years owing to the tightening of the United States embargo and rising food prices.
The authorities estimate that, since it began, the economic blockade has had a direct cost of over US$ 90 billion.
The rise in international food prices pushed up the value of food imports by almost 24%.
A wide-ranging debate was held in 2007 to identify the population’s main problems and compile their recommendations.
In response to some of these, a number of measures were taken in the first semester of 2008, such as the lifting of the prohibition on buying cellular telephones, computers, digital video/versatile disks (DVDs) or videos and other electronic articles.
Citizens were also allowed to stay in international tourist hotels and hire cars.
The most significant event thus far in 2008 has been Fidel Castro’s resignation as President of the Council of State of Cuba; the National People’s Assembly elected Raúl Castro in his place for a five-year term.
The new President’s first measures have been aimed at phasing in changes aimed at improving the Cuban model.
The basic purpose is to increase economic efficiency by forging a closer link between income and performance.
For 2008, the government authorities project GDP growth of close to 8%, driven mainly by exports of goods and services.
Agriculture is also expected to continue to perform well, thanks to production incentives and the policy of substituting food imports, which has been given a high priority this year.
The excellent performance of the tourism sector, which posted an expansion of around 15% in the first four months of the year (high season) bodes well for the rest of the year.
GDP growth in 2008 could be lower than forecast, however, given slacker economic activity in the world economy and in Cuba’s two main training partners, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the People’s Republic of China.
The main objective of economic policy in 2007 was to continue with efforts to reduce the imbalances built up during what is known as the “special period”.
Specifically, the authorities maintained the medium-term objective of de-dollarizing the Cuban economy and creating the economic conditions for monetary unification.
The budget deficit widened slightly, from 3% of GDP in 2006 to 3.1% in 2007.1 The central government’s primary balance, which excludes interest payments, improved and the deficit narrowed from 2.0% of GDP in 2006 to 1.8% a year later.
The central government’s total revenues were up by 11.1% in real terms; they rose from 40.6% of GDP in 2006 to 43.7% in 2007, reflecting non-tax income and capital revenues.
Non-tax income was up by 42.8% thanks to the price differential on external trade, the item “other business contributions” and net external revenues.
This last item is significant, since it was equivalent to 11.7% of GDP in 2007.
Capital revenues were less substantial (2.2% of GDP), although they expanded by over 50%.
Indirect tax receipts were down by 10% in real terms, owing to a sharp 12.3% drop in their main component, circulation and sales taxes.
Receipts under this heading had increased by 52.6% in real terms in 2006 because of mass sales of household appliances as part of the energy restructuring programme, but once this process was finished, in 2007 the extraordinary results of the previous year were not repeated.
Income from direct taxes rose at a similar rate to total income.
Receipts from profits tax, which represents almost half of direct income, expanded by 51.9% in real terms, as against a reduction of over 10% the year before.
Generally speaking, these receipts are volatile because they depend on enterprise results.
Conversely, income from social security contributions, which represent the other half of direct income, usually increases at much more stable rates not exceeding single digits in real terms.
Last year was no exception, with income in that category rising by 2.6%.
The concept of budget deficit is much broader in Cuba than in other countries.
It refers to the totality of State income and expenditure, which amounted to 61.7% and 64.8% of GDP, respectively, in 2007.
Although these data are not comparable to those of other countries, since their coverage is wider, they are included in this report as crucial macroeconomic indicators in the Cuban economy.
Current spending expanded 14.6% owing to a significant rise in outlays on education, health, culture and art, and science and technology.
For the second year running, there was a decrease in subsidies for losses (-26.4% in 2007).
By contrast, subsidies for price differences and on particular products rose (13.8%), breaking the downward trend of the previous four years.
Spending also included outlays to repair losses caused by flooding in the country’s eastern provinces in the last quarter of 2007, which the authorities estimate at some US$ 500 million.
Efforts were made to increase spending efficiency and sanctions were introduced for misuse of budgetary funds.
As well as the flooding, another factor pushing up expenditures was the rise in storage prices for some of the major food products.
One important step has been the adoption of measures to improve investment efficiency and links between labour productivity and wages, and this remained one of the government’s priorities in 2008.
Strenuous efforts have also been made to solve some of the basic problems in the agricultural sector, in order to increase production and improve supply.
For example, the price of storage for such products as milk and beef doubled.
Lastly, in the second half of 2007, a nationwide consultation was carried out on mechanisms to improve the operation of the economy and solve the worst problems faced by the population, some of which were identified as wages, housing, transport and monetary duality.
The Communist Party is examining the proposals that arose from this process.
This involved an unbudgeted expenditure of 837 million pesos, which represented around 1.3% of the GDP forecast for the year. (b) Monetary and exchange-rate policies Monetary policy continued to be directed towards de-dollarizing the economy and reducing the imbalances built up during the previous period.
No new measures were taken, so the rules of play remained stable in 2007.
The Central Bank of Cuba continued to use legal deposit and credit controls, as well as interest rates, to administer liquidity.
Lending rates in Cuban pesos remained the same as in previous years, while the annual average rate in convertible pesos decreased from 9.8% in 2006 to 9.4% in 2007.
M1 increased by a mere 1.2%, basically because cash in circulation increased by 9.9%.
Both monetary aggregates continued to decrease in GDP terms, however, which reflects efforts to contain surplus liquidity in the economy.
In the same period, M2 declined Conversely, lending to the private sector, which includes credits to loans and services cooperatives, agricultural cooperatives, basic units of cooperative production, private farmers and households, expanded by a significant 56.3%.
Even so, this was a smaller increase than that seen in 2006, when lending doubled in comparison with 2005.
The sharp reduction in liquidity put some pressure on the exchange rate.
The monetary authorities therefore increased the rate of liquidity expansion, which reached 20% in this period. (c) Trade policy Trade policy was directed towards promoting ties with the countries of the Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America and the Caribbean (ALBA) and the People’s Republic of China.
Relations between Cuba and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have developed in an extraordinary fashion, both as regards trade —making the latter country Cuba’s largest trading partner— and in relation to culture, sport and other areas.
In 2007, 352 projects representing a value of some US$ 1.5 billion were carried out in the framework of the integrated convention on cooperation between Cuba and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Once the first phase was completed in December 2007, the refinery began to process 65,000 barrels of petroleum per day and this quantity is expected to increase to 150,000 barrels per day in the second phase.
In 2008 other projects were begun around refining activity, in an effort to increase the value added of Cuba’s petrochemical output and make it the development hub for that part of the country.
Although the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is Cuba’s largest trading partner, trade between the two countries is concentrated in just a few goods.
Cuba trades a much larger range of goods with the People’s Republic of China, its second-largest trading partner.
The economic growth rate (7.3%) was lower than the figure for 2006 (12.1%) and trends in external and domestic demand switched with respect to the previous year.
The strong momentum in domestic demand slackened in 2007 (4.1%) owing to smaller expansion in consumption (4.4%) and investment (2.4%).
Exports, on the other hand, left behind the standstill of 2006 and posted a strong 13.8% gain.
Imports decreased slightly (-1.1%), as against the sharp rise of the previous year (20.4%).
The measures adopted to reduce delays in paying producers, together with the rise in storage prices and very favourable weather conditions after a drought of several years, translated into strong growth in agricultural output (18%), breaking the strong downtrend of the previous two years.
The upswing was seen in a range of products including beans, maize, bananas and sugar cane, while the harvest of potatoes, tobacco, vegetables and some fruits was smaller.
In the livestock sector, production of pork was up 77% and cow’s milk, 16.8%.
The 2006 performance had reflected the conclusion of housing projects begun in earlier years and thus represented an exceptional situation that was not repeated in 2007, bringing about a drop in activity levels in the sector.
A number of organizational problems and lack of skilled labour also affected the sector’s performance.
The manufacturing industry (except the sugar segment) saw a significant upturn of 9.9%, compared with 2.7% in 2006.
The value added of the transport, storage and communications sector rose by 6.7%, owing to advances made in road transport, urban transport in Havana and maritime transport.
The rationalization of transport, through substantial reductions in the number of buses produced in local factories, contributed to the positive result in this sector.
The production of electricity, gas and water increased by 7.9%, thanks to the modernization of the energy system, as a result of which the power blackouts that used to occur on a daily basis were almost completely eliminated.
Commerce, however, recorded a slight downturn (-1.8%) in 2007 after the exceptional results of 2006, when the sector expanded by over 20% thanks to the massive sale of household appliances as part of what was dubbed the “energy revolution”.
The number of visitors decreased by 3.1% and average income per visitor stagnated (0.1%).
This largely reflected a drop of 60% in the number of visitors from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela owing to the decline in “health tourism”, since new clinics with Cuban doctors were opened in that country.
The variation in the consumer price index, measured from December to December, was 5.7% in 2006, but a year later had returned to levels more usual for the Cuban economy (2.8%).
One of the factors driving the rise in 2006 and early 2007 was the sharp increase in wages and pensions.
This effect was absent during the rest of the year, however, so inflation is forecast to remain low in 2008, despite the strong rise in international prices for petroleum and foods.
These represent the sum of income in non-convertible and convertible pesos received by around 19% of the employed as a stimulus.
The real average wage of employees paid only in nonconvertible pesos decreased by 1% in 2007.
Employment rose by 2.4%, with the result that the unemployment rate decreased slightly from 1.9% in 2006 to 1.8% in 2007. (c) External sector There was a turnaround in the external position in 2007, since the recorded surplus of US$ 488.5 million contrasted with a deficit of US$ 214.6 million in 2006.
This reflected faster growth in exports and a notable reduction in the growth rate of imports.
After the excellent results of the previous year (35.4%), merchandise exports posted growth of 26.6% in 2007.
This was due to a rise in prices (which surged in the case of nickel), since the volume exported increased at a lower rate (6.2%).
The total value of sugar exports decreased by 10%, even though there was a slight increase in the volume exported.
The value of nickel exports was 27.8% higher than the figure for 2006.
The largest increases in export values were recorded in alcoholic beverages (96.5%), iron and steel (34.4%) and medicines (28.9%).
This last category became the second largest in merchandise exports, after minerals.
Goods imports were up only 6.2%, after rates of over 20% in the three previous years.
Contrasting with this general picture of slower import growth, the food bill rose 24%.
Imports of consumer goods (-0.3%) and capital goods (-1.8%) were down, reflecting the impossibility of repeating the extraordinary leap of the year before, when millions of household appliances and hundreds of diesel generators were imported.
Imports of intermediate goods, conversely, rose by 11.5% owing to the higher prices for oil and foods.
Exports of services climbed by 22.9%, reflecting an increase in professional and technical services.
In 2007 Cuba conducted two bond issues on the London Stock Exchange, both with a two-year maturity: one for 150 million euros (€), with an interest rate of 9%, and another for € 50 million, with a rate of 8.5%.
In 2007, the Dominican Republic recorded a real 8.5% increase in its GDP, continuing the sharp upward trend observed in the previous biennium (10% per year on average).
Inflation stood at an annual rate of 8.9%, and a fiscal surplus equivalent to 0.1% of GDP was achieved, while the balance-of-payments current account deficit increased significantly to reach 5.4% of GDP.
These positive results were achieved in a context marked by high international oil and commodity prices and by the ravages caused in the agricultural sector by tropical storms Noel and Olga, which struck the island in quick succession towards the end of the year.
During the second half of 2007 and the first months of 2008, the electoral process played an increasingly influential role in the economic situation, the former culminated with the re-election of President Fernández to a second term in office on 16 May 2008.
Having obtained a majority in both houses in Congress, the Government is expected to press ahead with the implementation of the 2004-2008 structural reform programme.
Given the slowdown of the international economy, the Dominican economy is expected to grow by 5.5% in 2008, the slowest growth rate the country has seen since 2005.
Annual inflation is projected to reach 15% or more if the pressure on the prices of certain strategic import items continues to rise.
In the first quarter of 2008, accumulated inflation with respect to December 2007 was 4.7%, compared with 2.9% in the same period the previous year.
A small fiscal deficit is expected to be recorded at the close of 2008.
Economic policy continued to be pursued in accordance with the guidelines set out in the agreement concluded with the International Monetary Fund, which was in force until January 2008.
Rising international prices and contingency outlays to mitigate the effects of natural disasters created some fiscal pressure, but this was absorbed without undermining the country’s macroeconomic stability objectives.
The non-financial public sector recorded a surplus equivalent to 0.1% of GDP in 2007.
The quasi-fiscal deficit fell to 1.8% of GDP, which brought the consolidated public-sector deficit down much further than the previous year (1.7% of GDP compared with 3.7%).
Income tax, which accounts for a quarter of tax revenue, recorded a real increase of 28.1% thanks to economic growth, the modernization of procedures for submitting tax returns and the greater effectiveness of the campaign against tax evasion.
Revenue from indirect taxes rose 6.7% in line with the increase in economic activity, and revenue from sales taxes on goods and services, which represent three quarters of tax income, increased 13.7% in real terms.
The 2% tariff hike was insufficient to offset the loss of income generated by the elimination of foreign exchange commission charges two years ago.
Also, the economy was beginning to feel the first effects of the tariff reductions introduced with the implementation of the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR).
Generally, as a proportion of GDP, it remained within the level contemplated in the Government’s programme, rising from 17.1% to 17.2%.
Public spending picked up towards the end of 2007 in response to the need to mitigate the devastating social and economic effects of the tropical storms Noel and Olga which, according to the assessment performed by ECLAC, caused damages equivalent to 1.04% of GDP.
Current expenditure remained constant as a proportion of GDP, but recorded a shift in spending to the acquisition of goods and services from allocations to personal services.
Current transfers recorded a real increase of 2.5% due to the rise in liquefied petroleum gas subsidies, although subsidies to the electricity sector, which still receives the most significant amounts, actually fell.
Capital expenditure was the most buoyant budget item, growing 38.3% in real terms and increasing its share in GDP from 3.2% to 4.3%.
The two main components of capital expenditure both recorded substantial annual growth: fixed investment rose 48.6%, and capital transfers rose 36.6%, both in real terms.
The increase in fixed investment reflects the high volume of public works undertaken, such as the construction of the metro of Santo Domingo, which was concluded in the first quarter of 2008.
The increase in capital transfers reflects the increased number of transfers made to decentralized institutions and State-owned enterprises.
Monetary policy aimed to ensure that inflation remained below the 6% target set in the monetary programme.
The strong pressure generated by the rise in international prices for oil and commodities, however, meant that inflation in fact exceeded this limit by almost three percentage points.
Open market operations were the main monetary policy tool used throughout the year to manage liquidity in response to demand for money and the increase in economic activity.
As monetary stance was less restrictive than in 2006, the central bank placed fewer bonds on the market in 2007 than in 2006.
The volume of securities issued increased 11.9% compared with 18.1% the previous year.
The M1 aggregate increased 26.9% and grew from 7.7% to 8.5% as a proportion of GDP.
Sight deposits held by individuals were the main factor behind this increase.
For most of the year, inflation remained within the expected limits, and the central bank therefore lowered the interest rates on short-term deposit earnings from 8% to 7%.
The drop in the central bank’s rates affected interest rates in the banking system.
At the end of the year, the lending and borrowing rates of multi-purpose banks had fallen 1.1% and 1.05% in nominal terms, respectively, compared with the previous year, although the intermediation margin had remained practically unchanged (8.7%).
Towards the end of 2007, the rates of the central bank’s securities fell significantly, especially its zero-coupon bonds, whose weighted average rate fell to 11.09% (3.8 percentage points less than the previous year), while the one for fixed-term investment certificates dropped to 17.02% (2.84 percentage points less than the previous year).
This made it possible to lower the quasi-fiscal deficit by four tenths of a percentage point of GDP (from The total assets and liabilities of the financial sector rose 4.7% and 6% in real terms, respectively, thanks to the expansion of the loan portfolio and the increase in savings and sight deposits.
The real growth of loans from multi-purpose banks to the private sector rose notably (16.8%).
The remainder consisted of personal loans, which posted the highest level of growth in 2007 (29.5% in real terms), as a result of the sharp increase in mortgages (143% in real terms) and the slightly gentler increase in consumer loans (21.5%).
The central bank intervened to prevent an excessive real appreciation of the Dominican peso.
The nominal exchange rate appreciated 0.38%, while the real bilateral appreciation of the peso to the United States dollar was 3.5%, owing to the general weakness of the latter.
The effective real exchange rate of the peso, on the other hand, which measures variation with regard to the currencies of all the country’s trading partners, depreciated 3.5%.
Slower GDP growth (8.5%) meant that production grew at a more moderate pace in 2007 than in the previous biennium, converging towards historical levels.
The Dominican economy has thus recorded three consecutive years of per capita GDP growth averaging 7.5% per year, one of the highest rates in the region.
The most important factors driving economic growth were private consumption and gross capital formation, which increased 12.0% and 12.5% in real terms, respectively.
Domestic demand therefore rose 12.0%, which was partially reflected in the 11.7% increase in imports, while exports grew only 2.4%.
With the exception of the free zones and the mining sector, all production sectors posted positive growth in 2007.
Agricultural output recorded a slight annual increase of 1.2%, compared with 8.6% in 2006.
Rice and traditional export crops, livestock production, forestry and fishing activities accounted for this increase, while the production of other crops (which had recorded a real growth of 16.2% in 2006) shrank 4.6%.
This was almost entirely due to the havoc wrought by the tropical storms Noel and Olga in October and December, which affected the planting of several crops and destroyed rural infrastructure in many parts of the country.
Mining activity declined 1.4% because flooding (caused by tropical storm Noel) hampered ferronickel extraction operations during the last quarter of the year.
Manufacturing output rose 2.4%, driven by activities directly linked with products for household consumption (milled items, dairy goods and meat products, animal and vegetable oils and fats) or for use in the construction industry (paints and cement).
The output levels for some traditional products, such as sugar, coffee, beverages and tobacco products, fell compared with those attained in 2006.
This drop was largely caused by the steep decline (23.8%) in textiles and apparel manufacturing in 2007.
Its competitiveness problems were worsened by the dismantling of the Multifibre Arrangement in 2005, and the decline of the textiles and apparel industry has been having serious effects on employment and exports.
After recording rapid growth in 2006 (24.6%), construction activity expanded 3.2% in 2007, largely owing to the central Government’s investments in the sector, which rose 52% in real terms.
Much of this investment corresponded to reconstruction projects undertaken by the Government to repair the damage caused by the tropical storms Noel and Olga to the country’s basic infrastructure.
Loans granted by the financial sector to private construction firms recorded a real increase of 5%.
In the services sector, the output of the hotel, bars and restaurants segment rose at an annual rate of 3.7%, 1.2 percentage points less than the previous year.
The hotel room supply continued to increase as did the income obtained from the arrival of foreign visitors.
The high level of economic activity in 2007 meant that the performance of the basic services segment, which accounts for 20.4% of GDP, was relatively dynamic (12.3%) though less buoyant than during the previous biennium when its output growth averaged 17%.
Consequently, the sector’s share in GDP (3.4%), which had fallen in the wake of the financial crisis of 2003-2004, not only recovered, but actually exceeded the level reached at the beginning of the decade.
This occurred parallel to improvements in the regulatory framework and prudential supervision of the financial system.
The trade sector recorded its third year of doubledigit growth (13.9%) in 2007, This growth was generated by a soar in imports and larger private-sector spending in general, which was, in turn, fuelled by the increase in employment and income levels accumulated during the last three years.
According to the variation in the consumer price index, year-on-year inflation was 8.9%.
This figure, which is higher than the 6% target established in the monetary programme, reflected the rise in international prices for oil and imported commodities and the impact that natural phenomena had on the supply of staple agricultural products in the country.
The core inflation rate, which excludes more volatile elements, was close to 4%.
This shows that inflation in the Dominican Republic has a strong imported component.
Moreover, inflation mainly rose during the last quarter of 2007, which was when the country was hit by two tropical storms.
The open unemployment rate fell again to 4.5%, the lowest level recorded in the past nine years.
Interbank rate Goods imports, f.o.b. (millions of dollars) International reserve assets (millions of dollars) c Real effective exchange rate (index: 2000=100) d (pesos per dollar) b Based on figures in local currency at constant 1991 prices. e 90-day certificates of deposit. f Average of the benchmark rate. g Data to May.
The broad unemployment rate (15.6%) fell to its lowest level in the past six years.
The nominal minimum wage remained at the 2006 level in the public sector and in the free zones, which represented an 8.2% decline in purchasing power for workers.
In the rest of the economy, the minium wage rose at a rate of 11.3% per year, which was equivalent to a real increase of 2.2%.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit increased in 2007 to the equivalent of 5.4% of GDP.
The widening of the external imbalance was mainly brought about by the increase in the trade deficit, which was, in turn, generated by the notable increase in imports.
The financial and capital account returned a surplus of US$ 2.554 million, reflecting a large inflow of foreign direct investment.
The value of goods imports (including imports to the free zones) was 13.5% higher than the previous year.
Both consumer goods imports and imports of raw materials and intermediate goods posted increases of 18.4%.
The country’s oil bill rose US$ 479 million, equivalent to almost 28% of the increase in the non-maquila sectors’ imports.
The increase in capital goods imports in 2007 was 16.5%, far less than the 30% increase observed in the two preceding years.
Imports to the free zones, on the other hand, dropped 3.3%, reflecting the low level of output of this sector in 2007.
The free zones’ share in the economy fell again (by 2.5%) although they still constitute the main source of external sales in the country’s trade balance: 63% of total exports in 2007, compared with 70.8% in 2006.
Among traditional exports, tobacco and coffee recorded the steepest declines in export value (52% and 28%, respectively), while ferronickel exports were 60% higher than in 2006, and cacao exports were up 36%.
In the case of sugar and tobacco, exports declined both in terms of volume and price, while the fall in value of coffee exports was caused by the drop in export volumes.
Increases in international prices boosted foreign ferronickel sales despite the lower volume actually exported, while increases in both prices and volumes pushed up the value of cacao exports.
Net current transfers in the balance of payments increased 8.4% in 2007.
Family remittances rose 10.8% to reach US$ 3.033 billion, which is equivalent to 7.5% of GDP.
The capital and financial account (including errors and omissions) posted a positive balance equivalent to about 7% of GDP.
Foreign direct investment rose to US$ 1.698 billion, a 16.4% increase on the previous year.
During 2007, the economy of Guyana continued on a path of recovery and expansion, recording growth of 5.4%.
This was a record high for the last decade and followed a period of stagnation between 2000 and 2005, when growth averaged less than 0.2%.
New investments and projects in several productive sectors (sugar processing, hydroelectric generation, gold and bauxite mining, oil extraction, etc.) are intended to boost and sustain economic growth over the next few years.
A major financial event for Guyana in 2007 was the drastic reduction in the level of external debt, thanks to a broad multilateral debt-forgiveness programme.
The current primary fiscal surplus widened to 10% of GDP, while the overall deficit narrowed to 7.4% of GDP.
Efforts to keep the Guyanese dollar’s nominal exchange rate stable were fairly successful, with an accumulated annual nominal depreciation against the United States dollar of just 1.2%.
However, there are concerns about the stability of the Guyanese economy, in terms of the impact of external negative factors such as the sustained rise in food and oil prices or the sub-prime crisis currently affecting the United States.
Particularly worrisome are the large current account deficit (which amounted to US$ 232 million (21.5% of GDP)), fuelled by the increase of expenses on imports, and the steep rise in the inflation rate to 14.1% (which is a major concern for the Government because of its direct influence on economic and social welfare and development).
The expectation for 2008 is that the positive trend of economic growth will continue, and that inflationary pressures will also be kept under control.
GDP growth for 2008 has been projected at 4.7%, which is lower than the figures for 2007, while the inflation-rate target is 6.8%, less than half the level recorded in 2007.
In order to be able to achieve those objectives, Guyana’s economy needs to be strengthened against external shocks, and efforts should be made towards fiscal consolidation and diversification of the economy.
The main objectives of economic policy during 2007 were to ensure sustained GDP growth, keep inflationary pressure at bay and improve the public accounts balance by increasing revenue and narrowing the fiscal deficit.
Real GDP growth (5.4%) was above the initial projection made by the authorities (4.9%).
Likewise, public revenues benefited from a considerable expansion, while the fiscal deficit narrowed.
This reflected a worrying situation in terms of future economic stability and sustainability.
In 2008, the Government is widely expected to continue applying policies aimed at ensuring long-term growth and poverty reduction, while improving the fiscal accounts and maintaining macroeconomic stability.
In that sense, the Government’s commitment to the objectives established in the Poverty Reduction Strategy Paper (PRSP), agreed with several multilateral organizations, will be fundamental in undertaking structural reforms and addressing infrastructure shortcomings, regulatory weaknesses and fiscal limitations, among others key issues.
Ties with China, India and Brazil are also expected to be further strengthened as a result of planned cooperation on trade and infrastructure projects.
The introduction in January 2007 of a Value Added Tax (VAT), which netted 21.329 billion Guyanese dollars (G$), swelled current public revenue to G$ 80.293 billion (a 28.6% increase on the previous year).
The income generated by the newly introduced VAT contributed to a positive central government current balance of G$ 15.572 billion.
In addition, capital revenue and grants amounted to an accumulated G$ 11.136 billion, which was considerably less than the G$ 17.525 billion recorded in 2006.
This resulted from a review of the process of extending non-project grants by specific donors leading to lower disbursements, a significant reduction in grants under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI) and a decline in flows from the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
Consequently, accumulated current and capital revenue reached G$ 91.430 billion On the other hand, current and capital expenditure1 increased by 4.1% and 2.6% to represent a total of G$ 107.614 billion.
The moderate increase in public expenditure, which rose at a slower pace than public revenue, served to improve the overall balance, with the fiscal deficit narrowing from G$ -24.016 billion in 2006 to G$ -16.185 billion.
The current primary balance therefore widened to 10% of GDP, while the overall fiscal deficit narrowed from 13.1% to 7.4% of GDP.
Capital expenditure was linked to the implementation of various social and public infrastructure projects, including ones to improve electricity coverage, upgrade generation equipment and build a modern sugar factory and a cogeneration plant as part of the Skeldon modernization programme.
The fiscal gap between revenue and expenditure was financed mainly through external borrowing, which amounted to G$ 16.588 billion net and was primarily allocated to project loans.
However, as a result of the debt-forgiveness process undertaken as part of MDRI, outstanding external debt decreased by 31.2% between December 2006 and December 2007 to stand at US$ 718 million or 66.8% of GDP.
Interest rates applied by the Bank of Guyana were subjected to slight reductions throughout the year, with the bank rate falling from 6.75% in December 2006 to 6.5% in December 2007, while the Treasury bill discount rates sustained similar reductions.
However, whereas the borrowing rate of commercial banks was lowered slightly, lending rates edged up, with the prime lending rate of commercial banks increasing from 14.54% to 14.71%, thereby widening the spread between lending and borrowing rates.
In 2007, there was a marginal expansion in domestic credit, which reached an annual average equivalent to 20.5% of GDP, and this was mainly driven by private loans to households.
Liquidity, as measured by money plus quasi money, also increased gradually, reaching a level equivalent to 75.1% of GDP by December 2007, when the total level of money and quasi money in the economy amounted to G$ 163.399 billion, a 13.6% increase on the G$ 143.776 billion available at the end of 2006.
During 2007, the Bank of Guyana continued its efforts to improve the monetary framework and encourage market competition and transparency.
Thus, bank supervision was restructured and a more flexible and focused risk-based approach adopted to replace the old transaction-based system.
Other central objectives of monetary policy included the improvement of liquidity management, the development of inter-bank money and Treasury bill markets and the promotion of a secondary market for Government securities.
Guyana’s monetary authorities continued with their policy to stabilize the local currency in 2007, allowing for only minor variations in the nominal exchange rate against the United States dollar.
Therefore, the Guyanese dollar gradually moved to an exchange rate of G$ 203.5 to US$ 1 at the end of the year, with accumulated nominal depreciation of 1.24%.
However, if the inflation rates recorded in Guyana (14.1%) and the United States (4.1%)2 during 2007 are taken into account, the net outcome is equivalent to a real appreciation of the local currency.
In relation with this policy of keeping the Guyanese dollar loosely pegged to the United States dollar, it should be pointed out that the persistent depreciation of the dollar against other world currencies meant that the Guyanese dollar also depreciated against those same currencies, thereby increasing the comparative cost of imports while raising the competitiveness of the country’s exports.
The economy of Guyana continued to expand in 2007, recording real GDP growth of 5.4%, a positive outcome that was slightly above the 5.1% posted in 2006.
The sectors leading this favourable development were those related to the exploitation of mineral resources: mining and quarrying grew by 22.5% in 2007, reversing the negative results from the previous year, when the sector’s output had fallen by 21.6%.
Strong increases in bauxite and gold production were the factors fuelling this performance.
Transport and communication (13.0%), engineering and construction (5.7%) and financial services (7.1%) were other sectors with favourable results.
The development of several major public projects and increased activity in the private sector are behind the positive performance of the engineering and construction sector, while expansion and diversification of services offered by commercial banks and new investments in telecommunications explain the growth in transport and communication and financial services.
Forestry was the sector with the most negative results in 2007, with a decline of 11.0%.
A considerable fall in output was the main factor behind this outcome.
Furthermore, the impending adoption of stricter environmental parameters and rules could dampen the sector’s recovery over the Accumulated variation in the United States Consumer Price Index (CPI) (December 2006-December 2007). next few years.
The agricultural sector grew by just 0.7% and displayed mixed results, mainly due to poor weather conditions.
On the other hand, sugar and other crops increased their output, as did livestock and fishing.
Manufacturing activities grew According to the variation in the Georgetown Consumer Price Index, accumulated inflation for 2007 (Decemberto-December) was 14.1%, which is much higher than the 4.2% posted in 2006 and considerably higher than the official target of 5.2%.
This reflects the higher costs of essential supplies like oil and food.
Consequently, the sub-group indices of foods, beverages and tobacco recorded a 20.6% price rise during 2007, the highest annual increase in the last decade.
Other categories to record major increases included medical services (18.8%), educational services (16.1%) and clothing (14.9%), all of which have a significant social impact.
An additional key factor influencing the consumer price index was the introduction of the 16% VAT in January 2007, which had an overall impact on costs and prices.
Consequently, inflation in that month was 6.6%, while for the rest of the year cumulative inflation was only 7.0%.
Similarly, continuous increases in international oil prices considerably affected production and transportation costs, generating a chain reaction of price rises.
According to official estimates, the overall labour force stood at 280,200 workers in 2007, compared with 279,100 in 2006 (an increase of 0.4%), with economic growth driving some moderate improvements in private employment.
However, employment in the public sector experienced an overall decline of 3.4% during 2007, with central government employment falling by 17.7%.
The growing trade gap continued to be a major matter of concern, rising by 27.3% in 2007 to reach an accumulated level of US$ 382 million.
In fact, although exports increased by 16.4% to US$ 681 million during this period, imports increased by an even higher margin (20.1%), to stand at US$ 1.062 billion, mainly as a result of the rising cost of key imports such as fuel, food and manufactured goods.
It is worrying that import expenditure for consumer goods in particular rose by 30.5%, while expenditure rose by 19.4% on fuel imports and by 16.2% on capital goods.
Bauxite, gold, sugar and rice were the leading domestic exports in 2007, and accounted for 72.2% of the total value of exports.
The overall result was a current account deficit of US$ 232 million (21.5% of GDP), which was a moderate improvement on the US$ 250 million deficit recorded in 2006 (27.3% of GDP).
This was the result of substantial increases in short-, medium- and long-term capital outflows, and was in spite of net private investment rising to US$ 152.4 million.
Capital transfers to the public sector expanded to US$ 414.1 million, reflecting the considerable financial support received by the Guyanese Government through MDRI.
Overall, the outcome for the balance of payments in 2007 was a deficit of US$ 1.4 million, down from the US$ 42.9 million surplus in the previous year.
However, exceptional financing in the form of debt relief, debt restructuring and debt forgiveness operations generated an accumulated US$ 38.7 million, offsetting the deficit in the balance of payments.
Consequently, the Bank of Guyana’s net foreign assets increased by 20.5% between December 2006 and December 2007, the month in which net international reserves topped US$ 254 million, an amount equivalent to 2.9 months of import cover.
General trends1 Haiti’s economy posted a GDP growth rate of 3.2% in 2007, with a fiscal deficit equivalent to 1.6% of GDP.
However, the institutional crisis that engulfed the country as a result of the disturbances in April 2008, whose immediate political outcome was the removal of the prime minister and his cabinet, compromised some of the economic expectations for fiscal year 2008 (October 2007 to September 2008).
Indeed, the Haitian economy will be affected as much by domestic circumstances as by international economic factors such as surging fuel and food prices and the slowdown in the United States economy.
Political instability in the country and social demands for employment and better wages, manifested in the recent mass demonstrations, call for a series of adjustments in both economic policy and the stabilization parameters used to steer macroeconomic achievements thus far.
High food prices, which have spread throughout the world, have been particularly deleterious in Haiti because of the meagre purchasing power of the population, which is mired in structural poverty.
Year-on-year price rises (as of April) for some products such as rice (42.2%), (38.3%) and milk (45%), among others, were substantial and brought about a grave decline in living standards.
They also triggered a rise in the inflation rate, which had decreased up to August 2007, but in December reached a level similar to that recorded 12 months earlier (9.9%), before rising to 15.8% in June 2008.
It will probably be necessary to reduce the official GDP growth projection (3.7%) and raise the inflation target (9%) for 2008, since these are expected to come in at 2.5% and 16%, respectively, even though some negative factors, such as the food and fuel prices rises, had already been factored into the original projections.
Other real-sector and monetary and financial variables will have to be modified too.
Even under these conditions, however, some indicators should make a positive contribution: net resource transfers —income balance, financial accounts, errors and omissions, loans from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and exceptional financing— and remittances, which amounted to US$ 284 million and US$ 1.125 billion, respectively, in 2007.
In both cases, disbursements under way and trends for the first half of 2008 suggest a slight upturn.
Cumulative levels of remittances (US$ 594 million in the period October-April) were 12.4% up on the previous year, despite recessionary signals coming from the United States economy.
The international donors’ conference for Haiti, which was to be held in the country at the end of April to integrate medium-term resource needs with the National Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, was postponed and efforts will be made to consolidate new options given the existing challenges, established programmes and new urgencies.
In general, the analysis refers to fiscal years 2007 (October 2006 to September 2007) and 2008 (October 2007 to September 2008); however, to facilitate comparison with regional data, some of the statistical data are presented by calendar year.
Given that macroeconomic variables have been reasonably stable in the last few years, in fiscal year 2008 the authorities had intended to continue to apply the main policy lines established in 2007, as stated in the letter of intent submitted in January 2008 to IMF, which emphasized the increase in income and the level of spending.
The objective for this second year of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, after decision point was reached in 2006, was to reach completion point of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative in 2009.
In the last three years, however, the country has been unable to make the shift from stabilization to economic reactivation and the discontent expressed in April in the so-called “hunger riots” reflected that situation.
Although much of this may be attributed to a whole range of factors, from structural rigidity to circumstantial or political factors, the economic policy stance has also been repeatedly cited as a cause.
Some adjustments are likely to be made in remaining months of the fiscal year in response to the demands expressed in the April demonstrations.
The focus of the budget may be shifted and spending increased; hence, some of the criteria set forth in the agreement with IMF are likely to be revised.
The authorities’ immediate response was to put in place an “assisted” cut of 16% in the cost of rice, by means of a mechanism that combined a State subsidy with a commitment from importers to reduce their profit margin.
Haiti imports around 26,000 tons of rice per month, generating an annual bill of some US$ 110 million.
Under these new conditions, the authorities are also likely to revise the economic policy associated with the National Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy, particularly given the absence of job-creation measures and the need to boost agricultural production.
The April crisis underscored the importance of this latter aspect, not only for ensuring greater food sovereignty, but also for increasing the income of the most disadvantaged groups of the population.
As far as structural reform is concerned, in May 2008 a number of adjustments were made to the State-owned National Port Authority, with a programme of voluntary early retirement for almost 1,400 workers of a total of 1,860, which will involve outlays of some 500 million gourdes.
This is the second enterprise to implement this process, following the telephone company Télécommunications d’Haïti S.A.M. (TELECO) in July 2007, which reduced staff by two thirds.
The two cases are likely to herald more privatizations of this type of institution in the future.
The main aim of fiscal policy was to continue the process of fiscal rationalization and avoid monetary financing of the public deficit.
To this end, efforts were made to strengthen the treasury’s collection programmes —to broaden the tax base and control tax evasion and fraud and so forth— and to implement very strict spending management.
The late approval of the rectified budget (August 2007) was one of the factors that contributed to the underimplementation of planned spending, with some items even being moved to fiscal year 2008.
For example, 35% of operating expenditure and 53% of investment were disbursed in the last quarter (July-September) of the fiscal year.
The central government’s fiscal accounts showed real surplus in 2007, as regards both total income (5.2%) and current and total spending (6.3% and 23%, respectively), but the most significant contribution undoubtedly came from capital spending, which tripled under the public investment programme.
As a result, the fiscal balance shifted from a small surplus in 2006 to a deficit of 1.6% of GDP in 2007.
The structure of the fiscal system is still based on indirect taxation, which contributed 36%.
Trends in the first half of fiscal year 2008 (OctoberMarch) reflected real growth in income (5.5%), with a significant increase in grants, both in amount (64%) and as a proportion of overall income (11% compared with 7% in 2007).
On the spending side, most notable was the variation in capital spending (78%) and wages (36%), the latter linked to the wage rise (between 20% and 35%) awarded to public servants.
In the current conditions, following the crisis caused by the April disturbances, the bulk of the adjustments are likely to be made on the spending side, although income from grants will possibly rise in view of the commitments announced by the international community.
In effect, the subsidies the government offered to reduce the price of rice will be covered by special contributions or early disbursements of grants from multilateral and bilateral sources and should not, therefore, affect the fiscal balance.
Generally speaking, the authorities have adopted a cautious monetary policy stance, both in 2007 and in the present fiscal year, seeking to avoid even greater surges of inflationary pressure.
In the last few years, this criterion has steered the administration of the Banque de la République d’Haiti (BRH) and the Ministry of Finance and the Economy and has prevailed in the debate about mechanisms for facilitating greater reactivation of the domestic economy.
Starting in July 2007, however, there were some signs that monetary controls were being loosened, particularly the strong downtrend in the nominal benchmark rate of interest (91-day BRH bonds), which fell from 16.7% to 4%.
Credit to the private sector, which had contracted in real terms the year before, stood still (0.1%).
Credit to the public sector was down by 17.3%, thus net domestic credit in the economy shrank in real terms (-6.9%).
As a percentage of GDP, credit was down by four percentage points to stand at 21.3%.
In nominal terms, the expansion of the monetary base (11.1%) remained below GDP (14.8%).
Liquidity (M1) showed moderate real growth of 2.5%, or a decline of 1.5% in the case of M3, but the main profitability ratios in the financial system remained high, although trending downwards with respect to 2006.
Around 22% of net revenues in the banking system overall come from interest on central bank bonds.
In the first quarter of 2008 the monetary base expanded slightly in nominal terms (1.2%) and M1 liquidity increased by 1.6%.
Meanwhile, the downward trend of the benchmark interest rate was reversed, and it rose from a nominal 4% in December 2007 to 8% in June 2008.
The central bank took the opportunity to increase its net reserves to US$ 308 million, through net purchases of US$ 45 million.
Although the gourde tended to depreciate slightly in nominal terms from mid-2007 onwards and has continued to do so in 2008, the central bank acted to limit currency speculation by modifying the legal reserve ratio for dollar deposits in February and auctioning dollars on several occasions in April.
Despite nominal currency depreciation of 5.5% in the first semester of 2008 (from 37.19 gourdes to the dollar in January to 39.24 in June), the real exchange rate showed an appreciation of 4.2%.
Net interventions by the central bank consisted of sales of foreign currency for US$ 5.1 million, but nevertheless reserve assets rose to US$ 268 million, in conformity with the criteria of the programme agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The trend towards real currency appreciation will continue to be dampened by the rise in the import bill, which increased by 19% in the first semester, largely due to the surge in food and oil prices.
This bill is also one of the factors on which the authorities have relied to contain inflationary pressure.
The economic upswing in 2007 was modest, with GDP growth of 2.5%, which translated into a rise of 1.5% in per capita GDP.
The lethargic output was due, among other factors, to delays in disbursement of public investment funds, which prevented the multiplier effects from being felt during the fiscal year.
Expectations of GDP growth (3.7%) for the current fiscal year continue to be modest and were revised down owing to poor first-quarter results in the agricultural sector (which was hit by natural disasters) and possible repercussions of the world agrifood crisis.
The upturn seen in 2007 in agriculture (2.9%), construction (3.8%), transport and communications (4.4%) and commerce (5.8%) sustained a small recovery in output.
Structural constraints remain, however, associated with the bottlenecks caused by lags in power generation (-1.9%).
Growth in manufactures (1.3%) fell short of expectations that the maquila segment would rebound more strongly thanks to the United States Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership Encouragement Act (HOPE Act).
Expectations for the construction sector, associated with public works, were not borne out in 2007, but the momentum seen in the sector towards the end of the fiscal year could continue during 2008 and thus underpin a more sustained rise in investment.
The positive expectations for this indicator are based on trends in remittances, since it is unlikely that domestic creation of jobs and income will be sufficient to support a rise in household purchasing power.
Despite the slowdown in the United States economy, up to April remittances were showing no signs of decreasing.
The annual average rate of inflation in 2007 was 8.5%, which was within the target the monetary authorities had agreed upon with IMF.
Towards the end of the year, however, there was an uptick in inflation largely reflecting the combined effect of price rises for food products and petroleum in the international market.
This took the inflation rate to 9.9%, only just below the figure for December 2006.
Haiti is a net food and fuel importer and the high prices and widespread shortages of these goods caused disturbances in April.
The purchasing power of the minimum wage, already at a critical level, having dropped by 7.9% in 2007, showed a further 12.7% deterioration in June 2008.
Although debates on a desirable level for the minimum wage predate the onset of the current conditions, authorities, employers and trade unions have yet to reach a consensus on raising it from 70 gourdes per day, its level since 2003.
During fiscal year 2007, the balance-of-payments current account deficit was relatively stable at US$ 80 million (1.3% of GDP), since net inflows of remittances (US$ 1.125 billion) and grants (US$ 380 million) offset the increase in the trade deficit (US$ 1.593 billion) caused by the 2.5% downturn in the country’s terms of trade.
On the capital account, foreign direct investment (FDI) amounted to US$ 75 million and the balance of external debt (US$ 1.541 billion) increased by 8.5%, owing to substantially larger disbursements (US$ 151.5 million) than in previous years.
In 2007 the nominal value of exports overall increased by 6.1%; the gross value of maquila goods was US$ 452 million, up by a mere 0.8%, with a reduction in volume (1.8%).
This was a modest result, bearing in mind the expectations for the sector following the approval of the HOPE Act.
This trend has continued in 2008 and in the first semester the value and volume of exports were down by 10.6% and 15.7%, respectively.
The best-performing traditional export products were cacao (38%) and essential oils (23.5%), which both benefited from international prices, while exports of coffee decreased by 66% and of mangos, by 10%.
Imports recorded a nominal increase of 4.5% in 2007, to which foods and hydrocarbons contributed strongly (22.5% and 19.8%, respectively), in an international context that was showing a steady rise in prices.
In the current international conditions, 2008 is expected to bring an even greater downturn in the external sector, given Haiti’s marked vulnerability to external shocks.
Jamaica posted a moderate GDP growth rate of 1.2% in 2007, which was well below the level expected by the government (3%)..
The current account deficit widened significantly and annual price inflation rose to 16.8%, three times the 2006 level.
The slowdown in the economy was mainly due to a combination of negative externalities, such as Hurricane Dean and the continually rising international prices of Jamaica’s main imports.
A general election held in September 2007 resulted in a change of government, with the Jamaica Labour Party taking office after 18 years of uninterrupted rule by the People’s National Party.
The new government set as the main objectives of its economic and financial policies an increase in GDP growth, reduction of the public debt burden and controlling price inflation.
However, with just over 50% of the budget already dedicated to servicing the external and domestic public debt, there is little room for fiscal and economic manoeuvre, so priority must be given to implementing structural measures such as comprehensive tax reform, controlling spending and reducing debt-service obligations.
The challenging international environment, especially important because Jamaica’s economy is so vulnerable to external shocks, complicates the outlook for 2008.
That exposure to external shocks requires caution in the setting of economic goals, and this has been reflected in the government’s official forecast for real GDP growth for 2008 in a range of 2.5% to 3.5%, and the expectation of a recurring current account deficit and a negative central government balance.
The government’s success in combating criminal activities will be another key factor in bringing the country economic, political and social stability.
Nationwide total. k Average rates. l The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks. m Includes grants. n Includes statistical discrepancy.
The fiscal targets set for 20072 aimed primarily to maintain a controlled current account deficit of 2.2% of GDP, a positive primary balance of 4.5% of GDP, an interest-payments-to-GDP ratio of 10.3% and non-interest expenditure of 18% of GDP.
Although better-than-expected results were achieved in the primary balance (a cumulative 4.8% primary surplus to December 2007) the current account deficit was 2.5% for the same period, reflecting increased recurrent expenditure.
Between April and December 2007 the proceeds of the bauxite levy (26.8% higher than the target) and capital revenue (36.4% over the target) led the increase in budget income against a serious drop in revenue from grants (-34.5%), while on the spending side, the programmes account increased the most (21.27% over the target).
Given Jamaica’s considerable domestic debt, however, the overall debt stock to GDP ratio (including both domestic and external debt) as of December 2007 Corresponding to the first three quarters of fiscal year 2007-2008.
In December 2007 the outstanding amount on this bond was US$ 500 million.
In fiscal year 2007-2008 the servicing of the external and domestic public debt rose to over US$ 3 billion or 28.8% of GDP.
A successful renegotiation and reduction of the debt burden would make it possible to free public resources, redirect them to social and infrastructure investment, stimulate economic growth and social development and make the economy less vulnerable to negative external shocks.
Monetary management in 2007 faced growing challenges from adverse international and domestic conditions.
The global rise in prices of vital commodities and the unrest in the international financial markets fuelled by the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States were the main external causes of instability in the money and foreign-exchange markets and of rising inflationary pressures.
On the domestic front, the impact of Hurricane Dean and the political uncertainty surrounding the change of government were the key factors in the monetary and financial instability during 2007.
The monetary authorities’ response to this challenging environment focused on the stabilization of the foreign exchange and money markets, while keeping inflation at bay.
The Bank of Jamaica intervened regularly using a number of tools such as sales of foreign currency, offerings of its regular open-market instruments, and the issue of special variable-rate instruments in order to support the exchange rate and control inflationary pressures, which intensified in the second half of 2007.
This monetary policy, based on stabilizing the Jamaican dollar, caused a significant reduction in the level of international reserves.
These diminished by US$ 493 million in 2007, as a result of continuous interventions in the foreign-exchange market to support exchange-rate stability.
The nominal depreciation (December to December) of the Jamaican dollar against the United States dollar rose to 6.2% in 2007, compared with 3.6% in 2006.
The average annual exchange rate6 was J$ 69.06 per United States dollar for 2007, while the real effective exchange rate (multilateral) depreciated until November 2007 and then started to appreciate.
The growth of the monetary base was caused by a net increase of 11.6% in currency in circulation and 16.5% in the local-currency cash reserves of the banking system.
Domestic credit continued to grow, with a 13.7% rise between December 2006 and December 2007, while commercial bank liquidity declined.
At the same time, the Bank of Jamaica kept the rates on its regular open-market instruments unchanged in order to prevent a widening in the interest rate differential in the case of interest cuts by the United States Federal Reserve.7 However, interest rates on the Bank of Jamaica’s special instruments were progressively increased during 2007.
Real growth slowed in 2007, largely as a result of several adverse internal and external events such as Hurricane Dean, which hit the country in August and was followed by heavy rainfall and flooding, heavily affecting the agriculture and mining sectors.
Other negative factors were the continued increases in the prices of several key imports such as oil and grains, and the political tension and uncertainty surrounding the general elections held in September.
The sectors which led economic growth in 2007 were construction, financial and insurance services, real estate and business services.
With 5.2% growth, the construction sector was able to recover from its decline in 2006 thanks to sustained expansion in the country’s tourism and telecommunications infrastructure and residential construction.
Financial and insurance services, real estate The average annual exchange rate is calculated as a simple average of all daily exchange rates for the respective year.
Between January and December 2007 the United States Federal Fund Rate decreased from 5.25% to 4.25%. and business services grew by 3.5% in 2007, reflecting the dynamic performance of financial institutions, especially the commercial banks.
The sector with the most negative performance was agriculture, suffering from the impact of Hurricane Dean, which destroyed and extensively damaged domestic and export crops.8 Prolonged rains and floods during the following months worsened the damage, resulting in a 4.8% contraction in the sector.
Mining and quarrying was another sector considerably affected by the hurricane, which forced the temporary halt of activities in the bauxite and alumina industry and damaged production facilities.
The productive recovery was led by food and beverage processing activities, with increased production of poultry meat, condensed milk, sugar, beer and stout, as the result of improvements in production process and product innovation.
Similarly, the cement industry increased its output during 2007 in response to rising demand from the construction sector.
On the other hand, the petroleum industry suffered a decline because of higher production costs and the temporary closure of the country’s sole processing plant for maintenance at the end of the year.
The weak performance of the tourism industry during 2007 is a major concern for the Jamaican economy.
Disappointing levels of tourist arrivals during the Cricket World Cup in the first quarter of the year were further exacerbated by the revitalization of competing tourism destinations, and a marginal reduction in the number of visitors from the United States.
As a result, the output of hotels, restaurants and clubs increased by just 0.2%.
The annual December-to-December inflation rate for 2007 was 16.8%, a steep increase from the level recorded in the previous year (5.7%) and the highest rate recorded in 12 years.
This negative development can be largely explained by the global rise of oil and food prices, which directly affected domestic production costs and consumer prices.
The damage to agricultural production caused by Hurricane Dean also lowered the food supply and fed inflationary pressures.
Other inflationary factors were the depreciation of the exchange rate and the adjustments made to the national minimum wage (raised by 14.7% in 2007) and administered prices.
It has been reported that 85% of the banana crop and 45% of the coffee crop, two key export products, were destroyed during The largest price increases during 2007 were in the categories of food (25.2%), housing (19.8%) and electricity, gas and other fuels (25.3%).
There were steep increases in the prices of some essential food items such as bread and cereals (30.9%), vegetables (35.5%) and starchy foods such as rice, pasta and potatoes (40.4%).
A new and revised Consumer Price Index (CPI) was introduced in 2007.
The new index base period is December 2006 and incorporates information and parameters from household surveys conducted between 2004 and 2005.
As a result, the revised CPI uses an expanded and improved consumer goods basket with 480 items, while the previous basket comprised only 280 products.
The unemployment rate averaged 9.9%, a marginal reduction over the previous year.
The male unemployment rate averaged 6.2% in 2007, a slight drop from the 2006 level (7.0%), while the female unemployment rate averaged 14.5%, a value similar to that of the previous year.
The overall result for the balance of payments was a deficit of US$ 410 million, making 2007 the first year since 2003 with an overall deficit, a sharp deterioration from the positive result yielded in 2006 (a US$ 230 million surplus).
The current account deficit increased dramatically to US$ 1.803 billion (17% of GDP); a significant rise from the previous year’s deficit of US$ 1.182 billion (11.4% of GDP).
This drastic worsening was mostly due to the increased deficit in the merchandise trade balance, as a consequence of the growing cost of imported goods.
Spending on imported goods rose to US$ 5.77 billion, a 13.7% increase on the previous year, while the cumulative value of exports increased by 9.9% to US$ 2.344 billion.
The income account recorded a deficit of US$ 806 million (7.6% of GDP), an increase of 30.9% over the 2006 figure, explained by growing outflows of investment earnings.
These adverse developments could not be totally compensated for by other sources of income since the service balance suffered a serious decline during 2007 as a result of strong expansion in transportation costs and a marginal slowdown in revenues from tourist services.
Adverse weather conditions during the second half of 2007 and the recovery of competing destinations were the main forces explaining this fall in tourism earnings.
The current transfer balance performed positively during 2007 with a net surplus of US$ 1.969 billion (18.6% of GDP), driven by growing remittances from Jamaicans living and working abroad.
However, unlike past years, the surpluses on the services and current transfers accounts were insufficient to offset the deficits on the merchandise trade and income accounts.
The current account deficit was financed with a capital and financial account surplus of US$ 1.39 billion (13.1% of GDP).
The result was a contraction in Jamaica’s international reserves from US$ 2.399 billion in December 2006 to US$ 1.906 billion in December 2007, corresponding to an import cover ratio of approximately four months as at December 2007.
The economy of Suriname grew by 5.3% in 2007, led once again by increasing mineral production, with expansion of 10.5% in the mining and quarrying sector coupled with increasing international commodity prices.
An overall fiscal surplus of approximately 3.1% of GDP was recorded, making 2007 the second consecutive year with a surplus.
In response to perceived macroeconomic stability, the Central Bank lowered its reserve requirement from 27% to 25% and cut its deposit rates; as a result, the M1 money supply increased by 22%.
Expanding credit coupled with externally-driven increases in food and fuel prices pushed the year-end inflation rate up to 8.3% (4.7% in 2006).
The current account posted another year of surplus, with the merchandise trade surplus expanding by 8.1% in 2007.
The government continues to focus on prudent fiscal policies in order to maintain a stable exchange rate and control inflationary pressures.
The overarching economic policy aim is to maintain economic growth, export growth and sustainable debt levels.
At the end of fiscal 2007 there was a slackening of some of the monetary and fiscal variables in response to the worsening international situation.
Current revenue increased for the fourth year running, mostly because international prices for minerals and metals remained favourable.
Total expenditure increased by 10.3% to the equivalent of 35.8% of GDP, and current expenditure increased by 16.9% to 31.0% of GDP, marking the fourth consecutive year of increases.
Direct taxation revenue increased 29.7% over the 2006 figure, to 15% of GDP, mostly as a result of the increased tax take from the alumina, gold and oil companies.
The gold mining company Rosebel alone paid US$ 13 million in income taxes in 2007 and US$ 12 million in tax will come from the bauxite industry, although this is less than the expected amount.
In light of the current fuel and food price concerns, some fiscal and other intrinsic regulatory measures have been taken to shield the most vulnerable groups in the country.
Civil servants have been given a 10% salary increase; the personal income tax threshold has been increased from SRD 1,890 to SRD 2,946, duties on Caribbean Community (CARICOM) goods were cut to zero and rice exports are being regulated as a precaution against internal shortages, with only surplus amounts being exported.
The prudent debt management policy embarked upon by the Suriname Debt Management Office continued in 2007, with emphasis on keeping overall debt levels sustainable.
Government domestic debt to the Central Bank decreased by approximately 7.2% over the 2006 figure.
The government’s total general outstanding debt fell by almost 16% during 2007.
External debt levels dropped by nearly 24%, reaching low levels (16% of GDP) not seen since the beginning of the decade, and well within the constitutionally mandated range.
There was a significant reduction of medium- and long-term debt because of the early repayment in full of a loan from the Netherlands Investment Bank for Developing Countries (NIO Bank) and also because of the settling of arrears to Spain and the start of payments of loan arrears to the United States.
Debt should be used not for recurrent expenditure, but only for productive or infrastructure projects.
Specific limits have been placed on the amount of domestic and external debt that can legally be incurred.
Payment of historic debt has been started or resumed in light of a favourable fiscal position, and in cases where payment may not be suitable, restructuring schemes may be pursued, as in the case of the Debt for Investment Programme currently under discussion with Brazil.
The Chinese-funded infrastructure project mentioned above is an example of the type of debt Suriname is willing to incur.
Debt was also incurred with India in the form of a credit line for technical services, agricultural pumps, military equipment and traffic control equipment.
So far, debt management has yielded positive results, with the policy of joint ventures for profit bringing new investment into Suriname and arrears on old debts falling.
Discussions are in progress to create a stabilization and heritage fund for Suriname, to be financed by windfall tax revenue from increased mineral production.
This fund would serve to supplement current expenditure in the event that the government could not meet fiscal goals, and would be a source of capital as well as a heritage fund for future generations.
In some sectors bureaucracy still appears to be a crippling problem, though some procedures have recently been relaxed.
Simpler taxation and regulatory systems need to be put in place, which would minimize the cost of doing business and reduce opportunities for corruption.
Net domestic credit expanded by 7.1% to 26.6% of GDP, fuelled mainly by a 35.7% expansion in domestic credit to the private sector, which reached 32.4% of GDP in 2007.
This expansion of private-sector credit seems to reflect the population’s growing demand for durable goods, especially for housing, which has been earmarked as a high growth sector.
The Central Bank offers a special housing facility where funds from the reserve requirement are used to finance housing loans at an interest rate of 7%, well below the market lending rate.
The Central Bank’s monetary policies remained largely unchanged over 2007, with the main focus being inflation control.
Market interest rates, however, did not necessarily reflect this policy, as the mid-year lending rate was down to 13.9% from a 2006 average of 15.4% and deposit rates had similarly fallen from 6.6% to 6.4%.
However, the Central bank does not consider interest rates to be as important a policy measure as the reserve requirement.
The reserve requirement settled at 25% for all banks except two small specialized banks in agriculture and small private credit, respectively, as they are still in the process of trying to meet the central bank standards.
The official exchange rate against the United States dollar remained virtually unchanged at approximately SRD 2.75.
In May 2008, the open-market exchange rate came under some pressure owing to speculation and the SRD was traded at SRD 2.84 per United States dollar.
The supervision and control exercised by the Central Bank produced the intended result and the exchange rate has been almost back to the old level of SRD 2.80.
The central bank has no plans to officially devalue the currency, however.
The financial system is considered strong enough to be able to weather the storm of externally driven inflation.
The recent bout of inflationary pressure, with rates reaching 11.5% at the end of January 2008, has been attributed to rising food and fuel costs; it is considered that these are uncontrollable and that policy must be altered to deal with the situation as well as possible.
Total GDP increased by 5.3% over 2007, driven mainly by growth in the mining and quarrying sector, the construction sector and the transport and communications sector.
Although slightly lower than the 2006 figure of 5.8%, this increase shows that the country’s sound economic performance of recent years is continuing.
The mining and quarrying sector posted the biggest increase, at 10.5%, and accounted for 8.5% of total GDP.
The construction sector was up 10.2% over 2007, accounting for 5.7% of GDP, and this was the sector’s fifth consecutive year of growth of 10% or more.
The sector was boosted by large numbers of government construction programmes, as well as a new emphasis on private housing construction.
The government also intends to look at a number of infrastructure development programmes in the coming years, which suggests that the sector will continue to grow.
Nonetheless, major infrastructure projects backed by foreign donors can have the effect of crowding out local contractors, since a key feature is that foreign contractors are tied to the financing scheme.
Increasing economic activity, especially in the construction sector, boosted demand for this sector’s services, as did the lead-up in 2007 to the liberalization of the country’s mobile-phone market, in which newly introduced player Digicel alone invested US$ 60 million.
Notably, after many years of stagnation, production of agricultural goods has picked up as a result of the new focus it has received from the government and achieved good results over 2007.
The sector grew by 4.1% in relation to the previous year, the largest increase since 2002, and accounted for 7.3% of GDP in 2007.
The banana and rice industries have performed well under the Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) negotiated between the Caribbean countries and the European Union.
With increasing amounts of technical and infrastructure development occurring in the sector, output is expected to significantly increase over the medium to long term.
The CPI almost doubled in 2007, increasing by 8.3% over the December 2006 figure, representing a December-on-December rise of 4.7%.
The annualized CPI for April 2008 is posted at 16.1%, with food and transportation being the main drivers, reflecting the high prices prevailing on international markets for fuel and agricultural products.
Some private businesses feel, however, that increasing international prices are not necessarily a bad development and that the country should find ways of increasing production of goods like rice, oil or gold, to benefit from high prices while prevailing conditions allow.
In light of the high price increases, Parliament has approved a 10% salary increase for civil servants.
The unemployment rate is unchanged in relation to the previous year’s figure of 12%.
With the new focus on large infrastructure projects, opportunities for employment are set to increase.
Additional efforts have been undertaken to diversify and expand the country’s production base, in the agriculture and manufacturing sectors especially, and this could increase employment.
Exports of goods increased by 15.7% to 76.1% of GDP, while goods imports were up by a slightly higher rate (16.9%) and represented 66.3% of GDP.
The services deficit worsened by 236%, swelling from US$ 30.7 million to US$ 72.0 million, or 4% of GDP.
The main drivers of the favourable current account situation for 2007 were mineral and metal exports.
Suriname also generates foreign exchange from exports of bananas and rice, although rice exports have been regulated.
The Ministry of Trade is endeavouring to increase the country’s export base.
The income balance recorded a surplus for the first time since 1999, at 0.4% of GDP, compared with a deficit of 3.1% of GDP in 2006.
This may seem like a large amount but historical rates of increase and decrease for the variable are comparable.
Despite the continuous upward trend driving energy prices to a record high, Trinidad and Tobago’s economy recorded a marked slowdown in 2007, with growth of 5.5% that was well below the impressive 12.0% posted in 2006.
This was mainly due to the sharp decline in the dynamism of the energy sector, which accounts for more than 40% of GDP.
On the economic policy side, rapid growth in capital spending associated with public infrastructure projects resulted in a rather expansionary fiscal policy that narrowed the fiscal surplus to 2.6% of GDP for the fiscal year 2006-2007 (6.9% in fiscal year 2005-2006).
In order to offset the impact of fiscal policy on prices, monetary policy followed a conservative course, with a year-end inflation rate of 7.6%, which was 1.5 percentage points less than in 2006.
The nominal exchange rate remained stable, but the tendency towards real appreciation continued.
Meanwhile, the current account surplus declined by almost seven percentage points of GDP to 18.6%.
General elections held in November resulted in the re-election of the People’s National Movement (PNM), and therefore no major policy changes are expected.
Looking ahead, the main economic policy challenge in the coming years is how to use the current energy windfall to support long-term economic growth, while at the same time expanding proven gas reserves.
The government is expected to continue to follow the basic elements of the “Vision 2020” development plan, which includes continued expansion of public investment financed by energy revenue to fund infrastructure projects and social spending.
As regards economic growth, the information available indicates a GDP growth rate of between 5.5% and 6.0% in 2008, as the energy sector is expected to recover momentum and the non-energy sector continues to be supported by government and private spending.
High and rising energy prices are expected to continue feeding fiscal and current account surpluses.
On the downside, inflationary pressures associated with food prices and the expansionary fiscal policy will continue to challenge the capacity of the central bank to keep inflation under control.
Includes hidden unemployment; nationwide total. k Weighted average. l The monetary figures are end-of-year stocks. m Refers to tax revenues from the non-petroleum sector. n Includes net lending.
Not including transfers to the Heritage and Stabilization Fund (HSF)1 (an oil stabilization and savings fund), the overall fiscal balance in fiscal year 2006-2007 posted a surplus of 2.6% of GDP, which was well below the 6.9% recorded in fiscal year 2005-2006.2 Revenue grew by around 1.8% in nominal terms, spearheaded by tax collection.
Nevertheless, growth in outlays outpaced revenue expansion, with the former increasing by 10.5% on the back of capital spending associated with ongoing infrastructure projects.
Including interest receipts, the HSF currently holds resources equivalent to between 8.5% and 9% of GDP.
However, in countries rich in natural resources such as Trinidad and Tobago, the non-energy fiscal balance provides a better picture of the fiscal stance.
Despite these figures, however, the expansionary nature of fiscal policy can be better demonstrated by the fact that, in fiscal year 2002-2003, the non-energy fiscal deficit was less than half its recent levels (7.6% of GDP).
Moreover, even though non-energy tax revenue rose between 2003 and 2007 (by 85% in nominal terms), public capital spending has increased by a factor of eight.
Unlike most Caribbean countries, public debt is not a major concern in Trinidad and Tobago.
At the end of 2007, the public debt-to-GDP ratio stood at 17.1%, of which approximately two thirds were domestic debt.
The combination of high imported food prices and expansionary fiscal policy put upward pressure on domestic prices.
To keep inflation under control, the central bank took a conservative position that helped to reduce the inflation rate to 7.6% in 2007 (9.1% in 2006).
Indeed, when annual inflation hit 10% in October 2006, the central bank changed tack and began using liquidity absorption rather than higher interest rates to curb inflation.
The rationale was that changes in the benchmark interest rate have little effect on market rates in the presence of excess liquidity.
This took place in the context of a monetary policy aimed at maintaining the benchmark (“repo”) interest rate constant at 8% —which meant a real interest rate close to zero— while at the same time issuing a significant amount of long-term securities.
Thus, from November 2006 to the end of 2007, special government sterilization bonds were issued for US$ 3.103 billion, with maturities of between 5.5 years and 10 years, and coupon rates ranging from 6% to 8%.
Nevertheless, domestic credit to the private sector increased by 22% in 2007, which was around three percentage points more than in 2006.
Growth in consumer credit continued to outpace business credit (21.5% and 13.9%, respectively).
It is worth noting that credit for the purchase of motor vehicles increased by nearly 50% in 2007.
Given the inflation rate differential, this meant a real appreciation of around 5% vis-à-vis the United States dollar in 2007.
In trade-weighted terms, the real appreciation recorded between 2004 and 2007 The resurgence of core inflation in early 2008 —with an annualized rate of 5.7% in January— reinforced the need to absorb excess liquidity.
This time, however, there was little room for further issuance of government securities due to the need for congressional approval of an increase in government debt ceilings.
At the end of February 2008, the central bank opted to increase the reserve requirement for commercial banks from 11% to 13% and to raise the repo rate from 8% to 8.25%.
In March, commercial banks responded by increasing their lending rates by 50 basis points to 12.25%. (c) Other policies In the face of escalating food-price increases, at the end of 2007 value added taxes were removed on more than 50 commodities, while the CARICOM common external tariff was eliminated on almost 30 commodities.
Currently, the government provides direct cash transfers to the poor through the Conditional Cash Transfer Programme or the TT Card, which involves the use of a debit card to buy selected food products.
Some 18,000 people participating in the Social Help and Rehabilitative Effort (SHARE) program are eligible to receive cards.
The main reason for the cooling of economic activity in 2007 was the substantive decline in the growth of the energy sector, whose output amounts to 43.0% of GDP.
This outcome is attributable to the absence of any new largescale energy projects that fuelled the sector in 2006, coupled with technical difficulties at one of the major energy plants.
As a result, crude oil production, exports and refining dropped year-on-year by 15.9%, 42.4% and 23.3%, respectively.
In addition, exploration remained stagnant after having increased by 16.4% in 2006, while natural gas production grew by 4.1%, less than one fifth of the expansion recorded in 2006.
A matter of concern regarding the energy sector was revealed by a report published by the consultancy firm Ryder Scott in August 2007.
The document highlights a reduction in proven gas reserves, estimating that these would be exhausted within 11 years, with probable gas reserves exhausted in a further nine years.
This is because no major gas reserves have been discovered in the country since 2004.
The government reacted by providing fiscal incentives for new oil and gas exploration, and amendments to oil and natural-gas production-sharing contracts (PSCs) were approved in September.
These now allow for the consolidation of profits and losses from different areas of operation, thereby reducing the overall tax burden in the energy sector.
Non-energy sector growth, for its part, remained robust at 6.7%, which was marginally higher than in 2006.
The construction sector expanded by 5.2% (14.5% in 2006), but large increases in input prices and labour costs suggest that the sector may be overheating.
For instance, the prices of concrete and structural steel have increased threefold since 2003, while the price of aggregate has risen by 280%.
On average, the price of construction materials climbed by 10% in 2007.
On the down side, agricultural output declined by 5.9% in 2007 because of a combination of low investment in infrastructure, workers being attracted to other sectors and the temporary disruption in the activities of CARONI Limited (a wholly State-owned enterprise).
On the demand side, growth was led by gross fixed investment, in the form of several public and private construction projects.
Government consumption slowed but remained strong and outpaced that of the private sector.
The drop in oil exports resulted in a lower growth rate of exports, while imports posted a similar performance to the one recorded in 2006.
As regards private-sector activities, in October it was announced that Canada’s largest bank, the Royal Bank of Canada (RBC), would buy RBTT Financial Holding Ltd.3 for TT$ 13.8 billion (US$ 2.2 billion).
This operation was approved by RBTT shareholders in in the same period.
However, food prices have always been the main driver of inflation in Trinidad and Tobago.
This means that the reduction in food inflation explains almost two thirds of the drop in total inflation during the period analysed.4 However, this downward trend was reversed in early 2008, and inflation has recorded annualized rates of between 9.3% and 10% during the first four months of 2008.
Again, this rise in inflation has been driven by food inflation, which rose from an annualized rate of 16.8% in December 2007 to 20.8% one month later.
It is interesting to consider the impact of imported inflation on domestic inflation.
According to the central bank, rough estimates indicate that imports represent around one quarter of the basket used to measure the Index of Retail Prices.5 During 2007, import prices increased by 14%, nearly doubling overall inflation.
The dynamism in import prices is explained by the depreciation of the United States dollar, higher oil and transportation charges, and worldwide developments in terms of food products.
As regards wages, 2007 saw the return of a wageindexation regime that had been virtually abandoned several years ago in an effort to curb inflationary inertia.
Thus, last year most negotiated contracts began to include catch-up clauses and cost-of-living clauses based on past inflation.
This was coupled with an increase in the level of wage settlements, with the basic-wage increase for three-year contracts signed in 2007 doubling to 6%.
On the other hand, the labour market experienced a marginal decline in the participation rate from 63.9% in 2006 to 63.2% in 2007, while the employment rate (the employed as a percentage of people aged above 15) remained above 59%.
The unemployment rate —including hidden unemployment— averaged 5.9% in After hitting two digits in annualized terms in October 2006, inflation gradually eased to stand at 7.6% in December 2007, mainly thanks to successful liquidityabsorption measures implemented by the central bank.
Nonetheless, the value of goods imports kept growing at a rapid pace (almost 7%), partly encouraged by increasing food prices, to reach almost US$ 7.3 billion.
This caused the trade surplus to shrink RBTT is the second largest bank in Trinidad and Tobago.
The weight of food products in the basket of consumption is 18% (180 products out of 1,000 items).
This is the name of the Consumer Price Index in Trinidad and Tobago. by some US$ 700 million to around US$ 4.5 billion or 21.8% of GDP (29% in 2006).
Another negative development was the deterioration of the income balance resulting in a deficit of US$ 965 million (-4.6% of GDP), due to increased repatriation of profits by multinational corporations in the energy sector.
The services and the transfer surpluses remained fairly stable and represented a minimal share of the balance of payments.
The capital and financial account recorded a deficit of just under US$ 1.6 billion (-7.6% of GDP), mainly due to outflows of short-term private foreign capital in excess of US$ 1.8 billion.
The balance of payments posted a surplus of US$ 1.92 billion, which was some US$ 275 million more than in 2006.
International reserves further increased to an equivalent of 9.4 months of import coverage.
In 2007, growth slowed to 5.2% from 6.3% in 2006 as many public and private construction projects relating to the Cricket World Cup were completed.
In addition, there was a significant deceleration in the tourism sector, which declined by 0.6% in 2007 compared with 6% growth in 2006.
Fuelled by hikes in oil and food prices, especially in the last quarter of 2007, inflation stood at 6.1%, up from 1.3% in 2006, and is expected to continue to trend upwards in 2008.
While remaining positive, economic growth is projected to slow in 2008 to 3.8%, mainly as a result of the slowdown in the United States economy and soaring international oil, food and other commodity prices.
In 2007, growth was strongest in Anguilla (21%), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (6.9%) and Antigua and Barbuda (6.9%), while Hurricane Dean, which struck in August 2007, negatively impacted on the growth rates of Saint Lucia (1.7%) and Dominica (1.8%).
Despite the challenge of continuous volcanic activity, the economy of Montserrat grew by 2.8%.
Intermediate growth of 3% was recorded in Saint Kitts and Nevis, while growth in Grenada was 4.4%.
The main impetus continued to come from the construction sector with spillover effects into mining and quarrying, transport and communications, electricity, water and banks and insurance.
Driven by the private sector and the Public Sector Investment Programme, construction activity will remain robust in 2008.
Consumer prices increased in all member countries by between 3 percentage points in Dominica and Montserrat and as many as 8.3 percentage points in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
The aggregate central government overall fiscal deficit improved from 4.9% of GDP in 2006 to 3.9% of GDP in 2007 but is still above the target of 3% of GDP set by the Monetary Council.
This out-turn followed strong growth in current revenue and a decrease in current and capital expenditure as many infrastructure projects related to the Cricket World Cup were completed.
The region reaped the benefits of the implementation of the value added tax (VAT) in Dominica and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and of the sales tax in Antigua and Barbuda.
However, the high level of public-sector debt remains a main challenge for the authorities: the debt-to-GDP ratio of the currency union was as high as 92%.
Liquidity in the banking sector contracted somewhat as the increase in domestic credit, which was driven by the private sector was double the increase in deposits.
Net foreign assets declined by 6.2% reflecting a drawdown on international reserves by commercial banks to meet the higher demand for credit.
The overall balance-of-payments surplus deteriorated from 2.3% of GDP to 1.0% of GDP, as the current account balance worsened, owing mainly to rising import prices.
The current account deficit is expected to increase even further in 2008 because all these economies are highly dependent on oil imports.
In 2007, ECCU policy continued to focus on the unsustainable level of public debt and the current account deficit.
These are critical issues that must be resolved in order to maintain the stability of the Eastern Caribbean dollar (EC$) and improve international competitiveness.
High on the agenda is also rising inflation, fuelled by the soaring international prices of oil, food and other commodities.
Many member countries have implemented a number of policy responses to the rising cost of oil and food, even though this is placing greater pressure on fiscal accounts.
The fiscal policy of the currency union was less expansionary than in 2006 and hence resulted in a reduction in the overall deficit from US$ 200 million or 4.9% of GDP to US$ 173 million or 3.9% of GDP.
The current surplus more than doubled in absolute terms to US$ 108 million (1.3% in 2006 to 2.5% in 2007), mainly reflecting the fact that current revenue expanded twice as much as current expenditure.
Current revenue increased by 11%, representing 28% of GDP, which indicates successful results from the implementation of VAT in Dominica and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and of the sales tax in Antigua and Barbuda.
The revenue collected from VAT has the potential to offset the losses in revenue from international trade in the countries where international trade taxes have already been removed in fulfilment of one of the major WTO requirements.
Current expenditure grew by 6% to 25% of GDP, which represents a marginal decline of 1.2 of a percentage point of GDP.
Higher personal emoluments and transfers and subsidies accounted for the increase in salaries and incomes observed in some member countries.
The rise in expenditure on goods and services was the result of the escalating cost of oil-related imports.
Interest payments meanwhile climbed slightly, by US$ 8.9 million or 6%, more than half the increase recorded in 2006, reflecting some caution in incurring more debt.
Capital expenditure declined by 0.5% to reach an equivalent of 8.7% of GDP, which mirrors the completion of construction projects related to the Cricket World Cup.
Dominica reported a lower surplus, and the situation in Anguilla deteriorated from a surplus to a deficit.
In nominal terms, the debt stock of the public sector increased from US$ 4.0 billion in 2006 to US$ 4.1 billion in 2007.
This high level of debt constrains fiscal policy and the absorption of economic shocks and raises doubts about the feasibility of the target set by the Monetary Council in 2006 of achieving a 60% debt-to-GDP ratio by 2020.
Moreover, some of the measures implemented by six member countries to combat the high food and oil prices —suspension of the common external tariff on selected items, safety net programmes, agricultural support and changes in fuel pricing— will burden fiscal accounts in 2008.
The monetary assets of ECCU increased by 9.8% to US$ 4.1 billion spurred by a 20.2% increase in domestic credit (mainly in the private sector), stronger growth than the increase of 16.5% recorded last year.
Commercial bank credit expanded in all member countries except Dominica and Montserrat.
The distribution of these credits by economic activity shows significant increases in lending to key drivers of economic growth.
Commercial bank liquidity declined but remained high (excess reserves increased by 25% to US$ 92 million) as the increase in domestic credit was double the increase in domestic deposits.
Net foreign assets of the banking system declined by 6.2% to US$ 1.1 billion as commercial banks drew down on international reserves to support the expansion in credit.
Owing to the drastic increase in its domestic credit, the banking system of Saint Lucia recorded a net foreign liabilities position for the first time.
Broad money (M3) grew by 7.2% reflecting a 9.5% increase in foreign currency deposits, a 7.1% increase in savings deposits and a 15.7% increase in time deposits.
The weighted average lending rate declined by 0.4 of a percentage point to 9.5% on account of intense competition for loans within the banking system, while the weightedaverage deposit rate remained unchanged at 3%.
In 2007, the number of auctions on the Regional Government Securities Market (RGSM) increased to 33 (28 Treasury bills and 5 bonds) compared to 30 auctions in 2006.
This reflected the additional securities issued by the governments of Saint Lucia and Grenada.
Saint Lucia issued its first instruments in United States dollars in the form of a 10-year bond and a 180-day Treasury bill.
However, the value of the securities traded declined (b) Monetary and exchange rate policy (c) Other policies In 2007, there was no change in monetary policy by the ECCU monetary authorities.
Both the discount rate and the Interbank rate remained at 6.5% and 4.5%, respectively.
The currency union maintains a fixed peg to the United States dollar at EC$ 2.70 to US$ 1 with a view to stabilizing the Eastern Caribbean dollar.
However, the depreciation of the United States dollar over recent months has led to a decline in the real effective exchange The Eastern Caribbean Central Bank is in the process of establishing the Eastern Caribbean Enterprise Fund, which will provide venture capital and debt facilities, as well as technical assistance for existing and start-up enterprises.
Furthermore, the Bank has also acknowledged that there is a need for new and different sets of skills, work practices, infrastructure and incentives, as tourism and services have become the leading foreign-exchange earners.
The expansion in the construction sector compensated for the decline in the tourism sector and had spillover effects in the wholesale and retail, transport, electricity and water, and banking and insurance sectors.
All member countries recorded positive growth rates ranging from 1.7% in Saint Lucia to 21% in Anguilla.
This was the result of the completion of many projects associated with the Cricket World Cup.
Tourism activity declined by 0.6% in 2007, a dramatic slowdown compared with the 6% increase recorded in 2006.
This contraction was due to a 3% decline in stay-over visitors from the United States, deterred by the requirement that they must present a passport when travelling to the Caribbean, and to increased competition from other holiday destinations.
Moreover, there was a 14,9% decrease in visitors from the Caribbean stemming from higher intraregional air fares and fewer scheduled flights in the region.
The Cricket World Cup did not yield the desired results on the tourism sector as the expected surge in visitor arrivals did not materialize.
Despite the 2% aggregate decline in stay-over visitors, total visitor expenditure expanded by 4%, largely reflecting the 25% increase in cruise ship passengers.
The number of stay-over visitors increased in Grenada (10.9%), Anguilla (4.5%) and Antigua and Barbuda (3.2%), and the number of cruise-ship passengers was up in all countries except Dominica.
For 2008, additional flights to certain member countries and a return of cruise lines to ECCU countries are expected, thus allowing for projected growth of 7,5%.
Hurricane Dean, which struck in August 2007, led to a contraction in banana production of 40% in Dominica and of 10% in Saint Lucia.
Consequently, total revenue from the banana industry declined by 14.6% to US$ 27 million.
Uncertainty over the banana industry remains because the WTO recently upheld a complaint brought by Ecuador regarding the European Union banana tariff system.
The potential erosion of trade preferences would have serious implications for the future of the industry.
Production of cocoa and mace increased by 195% and 57%, respectively, thanks to the steady recovery made since Hurricane Ivan, which hit Grenada in 2004.
Marginal declines were reported in the production of soap, dental cream and rice, while increases were recorded in the output of toilet paper, paint, soft drinks and beers, paper boards and plastic.
Generated mainly by global increases in the prices of fuel and food, inflation in the currency union rose sharply, from 1.3% in 2006 to 6.1% in 2007.
The food, fuel, and electricity, and transportation and communication sub-indices showed significant increases in all member countries.
The pass-through mechanism implemented by a few member States will continue to push the consumer price index upwards as the international price of oil rises.
Public-sector wages and salaries increased, in nominal terms, in Anguilla (20%), Saint Kitts and Nevis (5%) and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (5%).
In Antigua and Barbuda, the minimum wage increased from US$ 2.20 per hour to US$ 2.80 per hour.
Data on private-sector wages are not available; however, given the strong demand and the lack of local skilled labour in construction, it is assumed that wages in that sector increased.
As a result, international reserves declined to US$ 46 million in December 2007, the equivalent of 3.7 months of import cover.
The maintenance of the balance-of-payments surplus was due to the substantial increase in the capital and financial accounts, which outweighed the deterioration in the merchandise trade deficit.
Capital inflows increased by 53% on account of debt relief in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
Foreign direct investment increased by 17% or US$ 193 million, reflecting investment in tourismrelated construction projects.
The increase in demand for domestic credit resulted in commercial banks increasing liabilities by US$ 144 million compared with outflows of US$ 111 million in 2006.
The merchandise trade deficit widened by 15% to reach US$ 2.1 billion, reflecting the increase in import prices and sustained economic activity.
Exports increased by 10% in 2007 (after falling by 3% in 2006) owing to increases in re-exports in Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
The surplus on the services account declined by 8.2% because net outflows for transportation and insurance, government and other business services outweighed the 3.2% increase in net travel receipts stemming from the rise in cruise ship arrivals.
Meanwhile, the income account deficit improved from 5.3% of GDP to 4.8% of GDP as investment income increased, while the surplus in current transfers decreased from 4% of GDP to 3.6% of GDP.
Robinson (2004), “Institutions as the fundamental cause of long-run growth”, NBER Working Paper, No. 10481. (2001), “Colonial origins of comparative development”, American Economic Review, vol. 91.
Bacha, E. (1990), “Un modelo de tres brechas de las transferencias externas y la tasa de crecimiento del PIB en países en desarrollo”, El trimestre económico, vol. 57, special issue.
Raddatz (2008), “The politics of financial development: evidence from trade liberalization”, Journal of Finance, vol. 63, No. 3, June.
Reinhart (2000), “When capital inflows come to a sudden stop: consequences and policy options”, Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System, P.
González Rosada (2006), “Ciclo económico y coordinación de la política macroeconómica en el Mercosur”, Fundamentos para la cooperación macroeconómica en el Mercosur, F.
Frankel, Jeffrey (2008), “Commodity prices, again: are speculators to blame?, RGE Monitor, 5 August. (1999), “No single currency regime is right for all countries or at all times”, NBER Working Paper, Gavin, M. and R.
Heymann, Daniel (ed.) (2007), “Desarrollos y alternativas: algunas perspectivas del análisis macroeconómico”, Progresos en macroeconomía, D.
Végh (2004), “When it rains, it pours: procyclical capital flows and macroeconomic policies”, NBER Working Paper, No. 10780.
Loayza, Norman and others (2007), “Macroeconomic volatility and welfare in developing countries: an introduction”, The World Bank Economic Review, vol. 21, No. 3.
Licha (2008), “Sustentabilidade e espaço fiscal para o crescimento no Brasil”, Rede Mercosul.
Machinea, José Luis and Osvaldo Kacef (2007), “La coyuntura económica de América Latina: ¿hay lugar para el optimismo?”, Hacia un nuevo pacto social: políticas económicas para un desarrollo integral de América Latina, J.L.
Machinea, José Luis and Daniel Titelman (2006), “External shocks: how can regional financial institutions help to reduce the volatility of Latin American economies?”, document presented at the twenty-third technical meeting of the Group of 24, Singapore, September.
Robe (2003), “On the welfare cost of economic fluctuations in developing countries”, International Economic Review, vol. 44. (2001), “Foreign aid and the business cycle”, Review of International Economics, vol. 9, No. 4.
Piñeiro, Martín (2008), “Más allá de la coyuntura: la Argentina frente a un nuevo mercado internacional de los alimentos”, LATN Brief series, No. 39, May. (1949), “Teoría dinámica de la economía”, Obras 1919-1949, vol. 4, Buenos Aires, Raúl Prebisch Foundation, 1993.
Ramey (1995), “Cross country evidence on the link between volatility and growth”, American Economic Review, vol. 85, No. 5.
Rodríguez Vargas, Adrián (2008), “Análisis exploratorio de la evolución de los mercados mundiales de commodities agrícolas y del precio de los alimentos”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), unpublished.
Ruiz del Castillo, R. (2008), “Política fiscal, ciclo macroeconómico y la construcción de indicadores de resultado fiscal cíclicamente ajustados”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), unpublished.
Végh (2005), “Tax base variability and procyclical fiscal policy in developing countries”, Journal of Development Economics, vol. 78.
Total net capital income is the balance of the capital and financial account plus errors and omissions, plus loans and the use of International Monetary Fund credit, plus exceptional financing.
From 2003, corresponds to total external debt. g For 2007, data correspond to the third quarter.
A currency depreciates in real effective terms when this index rises and appreciates when it falls. b Preliminary figures, weighted by trade in 2006. c January-June average. d Simple average of the extraregional real effective exchange rate for 20 countries (does not include Cuba or Dominica). e Provisional figures.
Yearly calculation by ECLAC, based on consumer price data and nominal exchange rates provided by the National Statistical Office of Cuba. f Owing to lack of data, the period 2002-2008 has been weighted using trade figures for 2001.
The main factors behind this trend have been the region’s large primary surpluses, debt restructurings and the appreciation of many of the countries’ currencies against the dollar.
Sizeable reductions were also made in the total public debts of countries included in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative.
Thanks to the improved fiscal situation (which has reduced the countries’ borrowing requirements) and the build-up of reserves, there was less of an incentive for countries to enter into stand-by arrangements with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
One of the major events to occur in this connection was the early repayment of IMF loans by two of the Fund’s largest borrowers, Argentina and Brazil, in late 2005.
As a result of these early repayments, which reduced the Fund’s loan portfolio by nearly half, Latin America ceased to be one of the Fund’s main borrowers for the first time in many years.
Judging from the budgets drawn up by the countries in late 2005, the fiscal information available during the early months of 2006, and what appears to be an upswing in expenditures during the first quarter, a smaller primary surplus is expected for 2006.
Exchange-rate policy in 2005 was quite heterogeneous and was a very influential factor in the build-up of reserves.
One of the main reasons why it varied so much from case to case is that the countries of the region use different types of exchange-rate regimes.
Between December 2004 and December 2005, the Latin American and Caribbean region’s real effective exchange rate vis-à-vis the rest of the world appreciated by 8.3%.
The extraregional effective rate of exchange appreciated throughout 2005, however, so a comparison of the average rates for 2004 and 2005 yields a smaller figure (4.5%).
In 2005, the appreciation of the real effective exchange rate relative to the rest of the world was almost twice as high for South America (10.1% between December 2004 and December 2005) as, on average, for Central America, the Caribbean and Mexico (6%).
In contrast, the aggregate real effective exchange rate for the region vis-à-vis the rest of the world showed a slight depreciation (0.8%) in the first four months of 2006.
Monetary policy in the region has been adapting quite swiftly when turning points were reached in external conditions, and particularly to developments in financial markets and shifts in the outlook for international economic activity.
With some differences in degree depending on the status of the economy, priority has continued to be placed on keeping inflation under control.
The central banks of the region are concerned about the need to prevent the surge in oil prices from driving up price indices.
The appreciation of almost all the countries’ currencies has helped to rein in the pace of price rises, however.
Increases in the monetary policy rate were very slight in the great majority of the countries in 2005, despite the fact that real interest rates are fairly low in historical terms.
The few exceptions are significant, however, since they include Brazil and Mexico, the region’s largest countries.
From a medium-term perspective, in most of the countries real rates at the start of 2006 are only slightly lower or higher than they were three years ago.
A majority of the countries have seen a rise in real lending rates in recent months.
This trend reflects the change in direction of the United States Federal Reserve’s interest rate adjustments in June 2004.
Since that time, many of the region’s central banks have followed its lead.
Nominal growth rates for total credit and private credit both topped 15% in the 12 months prior to the first quarter of 2006.
This increase, which is a reflection of the improvement in global economic conditions, is higher than in preceding years and has brought these variables back up to their pre-2001 levels.
The Latin American and Caribbean region’s economic growth rate of 4.5% in 2005 (5.9% in 2004) is attributable to the momentum provided by both domestic and external demand.
After having fallen steadily between 1999 and 2003, investment began to rebound in 2004 and continued to do so in 2005, thanks to the persistence of favourable external conditions, a high capacity utilization rate in many industries, the appreciation of the countries’ exchange rates relative to their 2002-2003 levels, and a larger credit supply.
Meanwhile, low interest rates, the greater availability of credit and an increase in total wages fuelled an upswing in private consumption.
In fact, total consumption was the only component of demand to rise more sharply in 2005 than in 2004.
The growth of the region’s export volumes in 2005 (8.4%) continued to outpace GDP, while the expansion of imports (11.4%) attested to the strength of domestic demand (5.1%).
The various sectors of economic activity reflected the behaviour of the corresponding components of expenditure.
More robust external demand continued to drive production in the mining and hydrocarbons sector (3.6%), and the expansion of domestic demand buoyed the manufacturing sector’s performance (3.2%) both in branches of industry catering to the domestic market and in those that primarily export their products to other countries within the region.
The construction sector’s strong growth (6.4% for the region as a whole) in many of the countries was reflected in an increase in gross fixed capital formation.
The upturn in consumption spurred commerce, which posted an 5.6% increase regionwide, while the expansion of transport and communications (7.7% in regional terms) was in large part a result of the strength of activity in goods-producing sectors and the growth seen in communications, particularly mobile telephony.
Tourism-related activities such as hotels and restaurants, as well as the transport sector, exhibited a great deal of dynamism.
One of the most striking aspects of the region’s performance in the last two years has been the sharp rise in gross national disposable income, which (measured at constant prices) outstripped GDP growth, surging by 7.1% in 2004 and 5.9% in 2005.
This increase can be attributed to the trading gains deriving from change in the terms of trade, which, measured at 2000 prices, were equivalent national savings rates continued to climb, reaching a regional average, in current dollars, equivalent to 22.4% of GDP —the highest since 1990.
Inflation in the Latin American and Caribbean countries continued to trend downward in 2005, falling to a weighted average of 6.1% (as compared to 7.4% in 2004).
Measured as a simple average of national rates, it amounted to 7.3% (versus 8.6% in 2004).
Even though domestic demand (particularly private consumption) was significantly stronger in 2005, in various cases the rise did not translate into steeper increases in consumer prices; as a result, core inflation was lower than the general inflation rate in almost all of the countries.
The region’s relatively high rate of economic growth in recent years has had a noticeable impact on its labour markets.
In fact, 2005 was the third year in a row of marked increases in the employment rate.
It is important to bear in mind, however, that these recent improvements are simply bringing the region’s employment rate back up to where it stood in 1997.
The reactivation of employment since 2003 has been of a markedly different composition than before, as it is increasingly driven by the creation of wage-based jobs.
This reflects businesses’ growing confidence in the outlook for growth and has led to an expansion of formal-sector employment in many economies of the region.
Against the backdrop of these favourable economic trends, unemployment fell by over one percentage point to 9.1%, its lowest level since the mid-1990s.
This was due both to an increase in employment and a slowdown in the growth of the labour supply, as the labour participation rate dipped by 0.3 of a percentage point to 59.2% of the working-age population.
Recent improvements notwithstanding, unemployment remains high, with an estimated 18 million people out of work.
Furthermore, a sizeable percentage of new jobs are in low-paying positions, and the number of short-term employment arrangements in the formal sector is on the rise.
The labour market’s reactivation in 2005 has not yet led to any significant rise in real wages, which were up by just 0.5%.
In the early months of 2006, the region’s unemployment rate continued to decline at a fairly moderate pace as the net result of an increase in employment and a modest upturn in the participation rate, while real wages began to climb more quickly.
For the third year in a row, the region’s balanceof-payments current account yielded a surplus, with the 2005 average amounting to US$ 35.325 billion, or the equivalent of 1.5% of its GDP.
It also posted a surplus of US$ 21.65 billion on the capital and financial accounts (including errors and omissions), or 0.9% of regional GDP.
As a result, the global balance totalled US$ 56.977 billion, or 2.4% of regional GDP.
The corresponding counterpart items were a US$ 35.265 billion (1.5% of the region’s GDP) increase in reserve assets, US$ 26.816 billion in payments on IMF loans (1.1% of GDP), and US$ 5.105 billion in exceptional financing.
The region therefore became a net recipient of capital flows while at the same time running a surplus on its current account.
This was the first time that had happened (with the exception of 2003, when both surpluses were much smaller) since the beginning of the data series in 1980.
The current account included a US$ 80.627 billion merchandise trade surplus and a US$ 48.7 billion surplus in current transfers, which represented 3.4% and 2.1% of the region’s GDP, respectively.
The expansion of external sales was the combined effect of an 8.1% increase in the volume of shipments and an 11.0% rise in prices.
In the case of imports, the volume was 12.1% higher and prices were 5.5% above the preceding year’s levels.
In contrast, the services and income balances ran deficits of US$ 18.519 billion (0.8% of GDP) and US$ 75.476 billion (3.2% of GDP), respectively.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) totalled US$ 47.8 billion (2% of GDP), which was 9.7% more than the year before.
At US$ 26.2 billion (1.1% of GDP), the deficit in short-term capital flows was smaller than in 2004.
This figure was the net result of two opposing flows: on the one hand, debt paydowns and external asset formation and, on the other, sizeable capital inflows in the form of portfolio investments.
The reduction in the region’s external debt was coupled with a widespread restructuring of debt profiles aimed at diminishing exposure to shifting external conditions, particularly interest-rate and exchange-rate movements.
Liability management operations focused on extending external-debt maturities, retiring the more expensive debts, diversifying exchange-rate risk by issuing debt instruments in currencies other than the United States dollar, and reducing that same form of risk by shifting more debt balances into local currencies.
As a result, the Latin American and Caribbean region’s external debtto-GDP ratio shrank from 37% of GDP in 2004 to 27% In 2006, rising interest rates in the United States have begun to make the market more risk-averse.
When the United States posted a higher-than-expected rate of inflation in May, financial markets slumped, particularly in emerging (including Latin American) markets.
This was triggered by investors’ expectations of a steep increase in interest rates, which could in turn lead to a cooling of the global economy’s growth.
The continuation of these trends is uncertain, as are the implications of a possible adjustment of global disequilibria.
Be that as it may, macroeconomic conditions in the region, particularly its primary surpluses, build-up of reserves, and improved debt profiles, give reason to believe that the region is in a better financial position to cope with any future deterioration in the external environment.
Chapter I Introduction The Latin American and Caribbean region grew by 4.5% in 2005 and is expected to expand by around 5% in 2006, thereby completing a fourth consecutive year of growth.
If these projections are borne out, the average annual increase in the region’s GDP for this period will amount to approximately 17.6% (an annual average of 4.3%), which translates into an average rise in per capita GDP of nearly 12% (2.8% per year).
This is only the second time that this has occurred in the region in the last 25 years (the first was in 1991-1994).
In view of the moderate slowdown projected for the world economy, ECLAC estimates put the region’s growth rate for 2007 at Although high in historical terms, the region’s present growth rates are lower than those being observed in some other parts of the developing world.
It is noteworthy, however, that this economic expansion is, in the aggregate, taking place in combination with surpluses on the countries’ balance-of-payments current accounts and sound public finances.
In this sense, the region’s current growth phase is remarkable even when viewed from a comparative international perspective, both because of its reduced reliance on external saving and because of the speed at which it is paying down its debt.
Under prevailing international conditions, which include increasing market volatility and the prospects of a gradual slowing of world economic growth, the style of growth seen in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past few years is providing the region with a safety margin that will help it cope with any changes in external conditions.
Highlights of recent trends The region’s growth has been underpinned by the highly favourable external environment created by the world economy’s steady expansion and abundant liquidity on international capital markets.
These conditions have enabled it to significantly increase its export volumes and have improved the terms of trade for the South American countries and Mexico, and both of these factors have helped the region to generate increasingly large trade surpluses.
As shown in table I.2, most of this improvement was attributable to commodity prices, but in the case of the 2003-2005 average, a portion of it also stems from lower import prices.
Towards the end of this period, however, the impact of fuel price increases also began to be felt.
In the case of South America, the increase amounted to 12% (see figure I.1).
Within this subregion, six out of eight countries posted average increases in export volumes of over 10% per year.
Although they may expand somewhat less in 2006, the fact that they have risen by an average of 7.3% per year over the past decade attests to the increasing openness of the countries’ economies.
Another feature of this growth cycle has been the expanding flow of remittances being sent back, especially to Central America and Mexico, by emigrant workers.
This combination of trade surpluses and hefty unrequited transfers accounts for the surplus on the balance-of-payments current account, which, for the first time ever, is occurring in conjunction with positive economic growth rates.
As a result of the combined effect of favourable terms of trade and the high level of transfers, the region’s aggregate national income rose faster than its GDP (7.1% box I.1).
It has not, however, kept pace with the growth rates for national income, which means that national saving has been on the rise, especially in South America.
Gross fixed capital formation has been the fastestgrowing component of demand (especially in countries where the terms of trade improved), with growth rates of 13% in 2004 and 10.7% in 2005 for the region as a whole.
Construction and additional machinery and equipment contributed more or less equally to the expansion of investment in 2004, but in 2005 nearly two thirds of the total increase was accounted for by the growth of investment in equipment.
Measured in United States dollars at 2000 prices, it is calculated as the sum of the region’s GDP, the trading gain or loss resulting from 4.5% (5.9% in 2004).
The higher DISPOSABLE INCOME, 2004-2005c increase in income was shared by most of (Millions of dollars at 2000 prices, percentages of GDP) the countries in the region.
In 2004-2005, the average annual rate of increase in gross national disposable income exceeded GDP growth in all the countries, except the Dominican Republic, Panama and Uruguay. at constant prices, of current transfers (mostly Colombia����� Venezuela (Bolivarian Rep. of) 3.9 remittances from nationals living abroad).
In some countries, the main factor was the positive terms-of-trade effect; this was particularly true in those that saw a greater increase in the purchasing power of their exports (exporters of metals, minerals and hydrocarbons).
According to the definition used by ECLAC, the trading gain or loss resulting from changes in the terms of trade is determined by multiplying the value of goods and services exports at constant prices by the variation of the terms of trade index. (See ECLAC, Producto interno bruto de los países de América Latina, E/CN.12/L.51/Add.2), Santiago, Chile, 1970, part II.
Indeed, present investment coefficients are too low to sustain a fast enough growth rate to fuel job creation in the formal sector at the level needed to help alleviate the delicate social situation existing in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Thus, even though a great deal of headway has been made thanks to the rebounding level of economic activity, as discussed in the chapter on the labour market, the region still has a long way to go.
The answer depends, among other factors, on the type of investment, the sectors involved, how it is financed and a variety of factors that determine the effectiveness of any given investment.
A shortcut which is often used, although it is not free of criticism,a is to assume that the ratio of the investment rate to the GDP growth rate [(I/Y)/(∆Y/Y)], or the incremental capital/output ratio (ICOR), is fixed, and then to use this as a basis for calculating how much investment is needed to sustain a given economic growth rate.
The following figure shows the trend in this coefficient for Latin America since 1950.
As the figure show, it remained fairly stable up to the 1970s, with values of around 4, and then climbed higher with the crisis of the 1980s.
It then declined slowly until it rose again with the crises of the late 1990s.
If, in the absence of further shocks, the value of this coefficient (which is currently over 5) were to settle back to around 4-4.5, then the region would need to invest between 24 and 27 points of GDP in order to achieve an annual growth rate of 6%.
International market trends and their probable impact on Latin America and the Caribbean The international situation The pace of world economic growth remained brisk in the early months of 2006, but most projections point to a slowdown in the second half of the year that will probably carry over into 2007.
Lower growth rates are being predicted for the future in response to the rising levels of risks that have been present in the world economy for some time now and the fact that financial markets and commodities have begun to exhibit heightened volatility midway through the year.
The main risks at the global level are associated with the growing deficit on the United States’ balanceof-payments current account.
This imbalance could conceivably trigger a sudden, disorderly adjustment which could dampen demand in that country and, given its position as an engine of growth for the international economy, have a magnified ripple effect in the rest of the world.
The most immediate concern, however, is what sort of impact rising oil prices may have on inflation and consumer expectations in the United States.
Fears of a possible upswing in inflation have prompted interest rate hikes, with the increases being steeper for shortterm rates than they have in the case of medium- and long-term rates.
From a global perspective, one of the questions now being asked is to what extent a more energetic pace of activity in Europe and Japan might offset slackening growth in the United States economy.
The likelihood of this occurring will be influenced by the position adopted by Europe’s and Japan’s central banks, since too steep an interest-rate hike could curb a faster rate of expansion in these economies.
Clearly, the chances of having this positive outcome come to pass will depend a great deal on the extent of the supply shock represented by the continued rise in oil prices and on the implications in terms of a tightening of monetary policy to stifle inflationary pressures.
Both of these factors (supply shocks and rising interest rates) are usually present during global recessions.
Either way, the low real interest rates seen for most of the last decade (see figure I.3) are probably coming to an end.
As noted earlier, thus far increases in short-term interest rates have not fully carried over into longer-term rates.
This fact may be a sign of confidence in the central banks’ and, in particular, the United States Federal Reserve’s ability to hold inflation in check.
In the future, however, these higher rates are likely to dampen demand and spur a flight to quality that would hurt emerging markets.
In fact, as the mid-point of 2006 approached, country-risk was rising and some emerging-economy currencies were beginning to depreciate.
Just how much of an impact this situation will have on the region’s markets will depend primarily on the scale of the slowdown in world economic activity, which will surely have a negative influence on commodity prices and exports.
If a smooth, orderly adjustment is achieved, then the United States economy’s slower rate of growth can be expected to affect Mexico and Central America more than the rest of the region, since their export structure is more concentrated in that market.
South America, by contrast, has a more diversified structure in which China and other Asian economies are playing an increasingly important role.
In addition, a large percentage of Mexico’s and Central America’s exports are manufactures that are engineered to meet destinationmarket specifications and that would therefore be more difficult to divert to other markets in the short run.
Another consideration is how much of an impact the supply shock generated by rising hydrocarbons prices may have on individual countries depending on whether they are net oil exporters or importers.
The Central American and Caribbean countries (with the exception of Trinidad and Tobago) would appear to be the most vulnerable in this respect.
The implications of mounting uncertainty and volatility and their effects on financial markets are another element to be considered.
In fact, as a result of the growing unease that began to be seen in international financial markets in May, the demand for emerging-economy bonds has slackened.
This, in turn, has driven up country-risk and exerted varying degrees of pressure on these countries’ currencies.
Nevertheless, as noted earlier, the Latin American and Caribbean region is better prepared to deal with these types of processes than it has been on other occasions.
In 2004, only 8 out of 19 Latin American countries had a surplus on this account, but in 2005 the region’s surplus was attributable to the results posted by just 7 countries.
In a number of countries that did run deficits, however, those shortfalls were quite small and were more than offset by foreign-exchange inflows in the form of foreign direct investment.
An analysis of trends in the basic balance (rather than in the current account balance) shows that the region as a whole had a surplus equivalent to 3.2% of GDP in 2004 and 3.5% in 2005.
In addition, out of the 19 countries covered by this study, there were 12 countries with surpluses in 2004 The Caribbean as a whole registered a small deficit on its current account in 2005 and a surplus on its basic balance equivalent to 5.2% of GDP.
This result is due entirely to the results posted by Trinidad and Tobago (an oil exporter), however; the rest of the countries in the subregion ran deficits on both of these accounts.
In summary, then, with the exception of some Central American and most Caribbean countries, the region can be described as exhibiting a lower degree of external vulnerability than in the past. 1 (b) External accounts and terms of trade It is also clear that the surpluses recorded by some countries were heavily influenced by changes in their terms of trade.
A return to the region’s terms of trade in the 1990s would, however, make almost no change at all in the One factor that has helped to lessen vulnerability to external shocks in some cases is the reduction of the degree of dollarization in some of the region’s economies, especially in South America.
This continues to be a risk factor in a number of the economies, however. number of countries having a basic surplus in 2005, since some oil importers (especially Central American countries) would, all other things being equal, then have a surplus instead of a deficit.
Something quite similar would surely happen if such calculations were done for the Caribbean countries (with the exception of Trinidad and Tobago), but some of the information needed to prepare such an estimate is not available.
Some countries that are highly specialized in raw material exports, such as Chile and, to a lesser extent, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Mexico, would then run sizeable deficits, however, although the Chilean economy is, on the other hand, the least vulnerable to external shocks thanks to its countercyclical policy, lower degree of dollarization and low public debt levels.
The MERCOSUR economies (which are large exporters of agricultural commodities) either do not exhibit any major impact from the terms-of-trade effect (Argentina, Brazil) or this type of price correction would result in a larger surplus (Paraguay and Uruguay).
In this case, the comparison based on 1990 price levels does not show up such a marked different in the terms of trade because price rises have not been as sharp in recent years.
Another reason for this result is that agricultural prices were relatively higher in the 1990s than metal and oil prices were.
In this case it should also be noted that, with few exceptions, the macroeconomic equilibria associated with the external sector are not as sensitive to the level of the countries’ terms of trade.
Although some countries’ external debt ratios are still high (6 out of 19 Latin American countries and 6 out of 13 Caribbean countries have ratios of over 100%), the situation is significantly better now than it has been since the 1980s.
This is not only because the external debt-toexports ratio is lower, but also because of the change in the ratio between short-term debt and international reserves.
As figure I.6 shows, improvements in the debt structure and increases in international reserves have altered the trend of this coefficient, which is now only one third as high as it was 10 years ago.
On the one hand, the macroeconomic situation has boosted fiscal revenues thanks both to the upswing in economic activity and to the improvement in the countries’ terms of trade.
On the other, unlike what has occurred during other growth phases, public expenditure has been kept under control.
The combination of these two factors has resulted in hefty primary surpluses which the countries have used to pay down their debts (see figure I.7).
Not only has the debt been cut in size, but its composition has changed in ways that help make the region less vulnerable.
One of these improvements has been the increase in the share of the debt that carries a fixed interest rate.
Another important improvement has to do with the shift in the currency mix of the debt towards a larger proportion of debt denominated in local currencies.
For example, just 10% of Argentina’s debt was denominated in pesos in the late 1990s, but that share has risen to 52% now, while Brazil has increased the share of its net obligations that are denominated in reais from The widespread improvement in public accounts is the net result of differing situations, however.
For example, only a fifth of the Latin American countries (Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile and Paraguay) have overall fiscal surpluses and half of them have debts amounting to over 50% of GDP.
In addition, the need to maintain balanced fiscal accounts poses formidable challenges for economic policymakers.
For countries specializing in non-renewable resources, the sharp rise in revenues has prompted a debate about how these windfall profits can be used to best advantage.
Given the existence of a justified need to raise the level of social spending and to invest more in infrastructure, the region as a whole must now strive to determine the most appropriate direction for fiscal policy.
The outlook for the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean Although it is certainly possible that the world economy may be able to cope with the risks represented by inflation and the correction of global disequilibria without experiencing a hard landing, these phenomena constitute a source of uncertainty.
The escalation of the conflict in the Middle East and other international disputes are also a cause of concern.
Even if everything works out well, a period of greater global volatility appears to be in the offing, and the possibility cannot be ruled out that this could cause growth rates to decline and capital flows to reverse direction and begin moving towards developed countries, where the level of risk is perceived as being lower.
Against this backdrop, the prices of the region’s commodity exports are not expected to display a great deal of forward momentum, and this could have an impact on the size or sign of the countries’ current account balances.
Smaller trade surpluses and a tighter supply of external funds could have an impact on exchange markets that would either halt or partially reverse the currency appreciations witnessed over the past two years.
So long as these changes are moderate and occur gradually, and given the region’s less vulnerable external and fiscal positions, it is unlikely to depart in any major way from the growth path that it has recently embarked upon.
In an international environment such as this, the economies having a more diversified export structure in terms of the countries of destination and a comparatively small share of sales to the United States market (and especially of products that cannot easily be diverted to other markets) will be the ones that enjoy the greatest amount of manoeuvring room.
Furthermore, although somewhat lower commodity prices and slightly higher real exchange rates may pose a greater challenge for public finances, they may also spur the search for a more diversified and knowledge-intensive pattern of specialization.
In this sense, the process of defining the region’s style of growth in the coming years should provide some scope for the application of productive policies.
As ECLAC has noted on repeated occasions, it is also essential for the region to boost its rate of investment, since, although investment has made a considerably recovery, it is still too low to ensure sustained growth at the pace needed to alleviate the social situation in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Latin America and the Caribbean: growth and inflation in 2006 and 2007 The Latin American and Caribbean countries’ GDP will grow by 5% in 2006 and by slightly less (nearly 4.5%) in 2007.2 In general, as shown in table I.3, the various subregions will grow at fairly similar rates in 2006, with most falling into the range of 3.5%-6.5%.
The exceptions will be Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Dominican Republic, whose economies will expand by over 7.5%, and Haiti, with a projected growth rate of 2.5%.
As in past years, the Southern Cone and the Andean countries will be the two fastest-growing subregions, with rates of 7% and 6.2%, respectively.
The outlook for Latin America and the Caribbean in 2007 continues to be quite promising, with growth projected at 4.3%.
The Southern Cone’s growth rate for 2006 is projected at nearly 7%, mainly because the Argentine economy is expected to expand by 7.6% thanks to the strength of domestic demand, particularly for investment.
In 2007, Argentina’s growth rate is expected to slip to around 5.5%.
The Andean countries are likely to post a rate of 6.2%, primarily owing to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela’s continued rapid pace of growth.
A slower rate, within the range of 5%-5.5%, is expected for the Andean countries and the Southern Cone in 2007.
In Brazil, the statistics published for the first quarter of 2006 provide confirmation of a positive economic outlook for the year, during which domestic demand will continue to respond to the expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, marking up a growth rate of 4%.
As in the past few years, Mexico and Central America are expected to grow more slowly than South America in 2006 (see figure I.9), but the gap between them will narrow as the former subregion expands by about 4.1%.
Primarily as a consequence of the United States’ robust growth pattern, the Mexican economy will expand by 4% in 2006.
Its projected rate for 2007 will be around The projection that Central America will post a rate for 2006 of around 4.5% is based on the strengthening of demand being seen in most of that subregion’s countries.
Private consumption will continue to be spurred by increased consumer credit and remittances.
In addition, implementation of the Dominican Republic - Central America - United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) is expected to boost investment in the second half of the year.
Some countries’ non-traditional exports will continue to rise quite sharply, and the Central Mexico and Central America American countries are expected to continue growing at a rate slightly above 4.0% in 2007.
The Caribbean subregion’s economy is likely to grow at over 6.0% in 2006, with Trinidad and Tobago leading the field with a rate of around 10%.
The 2006 hurricane season represents the biggest risk in terms of the Caribbean’s economic performance; there is also some concern about some countries’ public finances.
Consumer prices in the region are expected to rise by 5.4% in 2006, as compared to the 6.1% rate of inflation recorded in 2005.
This reduction is associated with the fairly favourable price indices registered early in the year (see figure I.10) and will enable the region to continue to hold inflation to historical lows (see table I.4).
Trends in inflation at the regional and subregional levels are depicted in figure I.10.
A slight reduction is shown for the Southern Cone and Brazil, while the projection for 2006 of 5.5% is mainly a reflection of trends in Argentina, since the other countries’ inflation rates are expected to be quite moderate.
The Andean countries are also showing a reduction relative to 2005, and their 2006 inflation rate is expected to come in at an estimated 5.5% as well.
This is partly attributable to the positive results achieved by a number of countries in this subregion through the use of inflation targets.
There continues to be some uncertainty as to future trends in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, however, where inflation remains at double-digit levels.
Projections put the rate for Central America and Mexico at nearly 5% for 2006, which is slightly lower than the 2005 figure, even though domestic prices in Central America continue to reflect the trend in oil prices.
The Caribbean subregion’s inflation rate is expected to fall to 7.6%, mainly thanks to price trends in Jamaica.
This was partly due to the fact that many economies have finished making a recovery from the recession that took place at the beginning of the decade; the slower expansion of the United States economy at year’s end was another factor.1 As shown in table II.1, growth slowed throughout the world in 2005.
Moreover, when the distribution of growth in developed countries is compared to the average for the first five years of the last few decades, it becomes clear that not only were growth rates higher in 2000-2005, but variations across countries also declined (see figure II.1).
Consequently, the price of petroleum continues to rise, driven by an upsurge in global demand.
In 2005, the price per barrel of West Texas Intermediate (WTI) showed a year-on-year increase of 32% measured in constant May 2006 dollars.
Uncertainty regarding the possible impact of high petroleum prices on inflation is one of the main concerns facing developed and emerging economies that import crude oil.
The world growth rate in 2006 may therefore be close to that of 2005, with a 0.2% range of variation, depending on the reaction of developed economies to stricter monetary policies aimed at curbing inflation.
While the growth rate of the United States is expected to slow slightly, the greater buoyancy displayed this year by the euro area and the Japanese economy, coupled with continuing high growth rates in China, may offset this slowdown and preserve the favourable international environment.
In mid-2004, the Federal Reserve began implementing a restrictive monetary policy, as high real estate prices buoyed the economy.
The monetary authorities set this rate as the upper limit of the permissible range (1%-2%).
It is therefore reasonable to assume that, in the short term, the Federal Reserve is likely to continue raising interest rates.
The monetary authorities of the United States are facing a year of mixed economic indicators.
GDP appears to have expanded by over 2% during the first half of 2006, thanks to a strong rally during the first quarter of the year following a weak performance during the last quarter of 2005.2 Certain indicators are unsettling, however.
These signs include a slowdown in private consumption expenditure in May 2006 due to rising gasoline prices and the apparent end of the real estate boom, which may erode consumer confidence in the short term.
The impact of interest rate hikes on consumer credit should also be considered, given the high household indebtedness ratio and heavy reliance on private consumption characteristic of the United States economy.
In short, the growth rate of the United States may decline during the second half of 2006, with GDP for the year as a whole rising by approximately 3.4%.
The persistence and expansion of the United States economy’s external imbalances remain the most pressing concern from a global perspective.
The country posted a current account deficit of over US$ 800 billion in 2005, which was approximately US$ 137 billion more than in 2004 (see figure II.3).
This persistent imbalance is a reflection of the growing deficit on the balance of trade in goods and services.
Debate on this issue focuses on the medium- and long-term sustainability of the imbalance.
While some experts have called for an adjustment in the form of a strong depreciation of the dollar and fiscal discipline, others acknowledge that the imbalance is a problem shared with the economies that are financing this continuing deficit.
In fact, many Asian nations (particularly China and Japan) and petroleumexporting countries possess large current account surpluses thanks to the competitiveness of their products and high commodity prices.
The abundant global liquidity which this generates is channelled mainly into dollar-denominated assets, thereby financing the current account imbalances of the United States economy.
In real effective terms, while the United States dollar depreciated slightly more than 6% during the first five months of 2006, its cumulative depreciation since 2002 is equivalent to over 21%.
The euro continues to gain strength, posting a real effective exchange rate increase of 2.4% during the first five months of 2006.
Since its revaluation in mid2005, the Chinese yuan has undergone a real appreciation of slightly more than 5%, which has not been enough to reduce its trade surplus.
The dollar may be expected to continue depreciating slowly in the future, as pressure for a further revaluation of the yuan continues.
In 2005, the euro area, which includes 12 of the 25 countries that make up the European Union, was unable to sustain the rate of economic growth it had achieved the preceding year.
After an aggregate GDP increase of 2.1% in 2004, conditions deteriorated during the last quarter of 2005; at year’s end, growth stood at 1.3%.
This slowdown was a result of lower growth in Germany (1.0%), France (1.2%) and Italy (0%), which together account for over 70% of the subregion’s GDP.
In Germany, private and public consumption both contracted during the last quarter of 2005, in seasonally adjusted terms, compared to the previous quarter.
The growth rate of overall consumption in France declined during the same period, while the level of the country’s net exports fell.
This was also the case in Italy, where the growth of consumption also declined and investment contracted between the third and fourth quarters of last year.
Since 2000, inflation in the euro area has grown at an annual rate exceeding 2%.
The response of the European Central Bank (ECB) has been to raise its benchmark rate by 25 basis points, beginning in late 2005, in order to reduce inflation without unduly interfering with the region’s growth.
In fact, during the first quarter of 2006, private consumption in Germany and France surpassed levels reached during the last quarter of 2005 (0.6% and 0.9%, respectively).
Renewed optimism early in the year has been reinforced by recent improvements in the European Union’s employment indicators, which may bolster overall consumer confidence.
Households in Germany may even begin buying certain types of consumer goods in advance, thereby increasing their overall spending levels, in response to the country’s announced 2007 VAT hike.
Private consumption expenditure in Europe’s major economies is likely to become robust once again in 2006, with the monetary union’s aggregate GDP growth hovering around 2% at year’s end.
These rates exceeded those posted between 2001 and 2003, consolidating the revitalization of an economy that accounts for approximately 14% of global GDP.
Thus far in 2006, private consumption and investment have continued to rise, accompanied by low unemployment and higher wages, and improved corporate profits have offset rising fuel prices.
Prices have begun responding to this increased growth, with cumulative inflation reaching 0.8% during the first quarter of 2006 as a result.
This departure from eight years of deflation may soon reverse the Bank of Japan’s expansionary monetary policy.
More robust domestic demand also generated a 15.7% increase in imports of goods and services in 2005, surpassing the upsurge in the country’s exports (7.3%) and reducing its trade and current account surpluses, which amounted to 3.6% of GDP.
Economic expansion is expected to continue in 2006, with GDP growth approaching 2.8%.
In the future, the Japanese economy’s hefty fiscal deficit (5.5% of GDP in 2005) may lead the government to make adjustments in an effort to increase revenues or cut spending.
Depending on their intensity, these adjustments may dampen private consumption and corporate profits.
GDP in China expanded by 9.6% last year, after marking up a 10% rate for 2004.4 The country has experienced two In addition to a VAT hike in Germany, the restrictive policies planned for 2007 include a 1% cut in government spending in France.
The National Bureau of Statistics of China has revised its GDP figures, increasing its estimates for recent years to reflect the good performance of the service sector. decades of high, sustained growth, at an average annual rate of 10% between 1987 and 1996 and 8.4% between 1995 and 2005.
This forceful economic performance is founded upon three main pillars: a considerable increase in net exports, investment (mainly in infrastructure) and the energizing effect of domestic consumption.
In 2005, exports increased by 28.4% over the preceding year, totalling US$ 762 billion —more than the combined total of all exports from Latin America and the Caribbean (US$ 576 billion).
This resulted in a US$ 90 billion increase in the country’s current account surplus in 2005 —from 3.6% of GDP in 2004 to over 7% only one year later.
This decline is a result of stronger administrative restrictions on the real estate sector that are intended to regulate its growth.
In 2006, the Chinese economy is expected to grow at much the same rate as in 2005, although questions remain regarding its sustainability and possible inflationary pressures.
Investment in production declines amid increasing uncertainty The last few years have been characterized by high levels of international liquidity owing to improved corporate profits and the foreign trade surpluses generated by high commodity prices —particularly for petroleum.
Institutional investors, such as the central banks of surplus countries (mainly Asian nations and some petroleumproducing countries), have placed a significant portion of their reserves in dollar-denominated assets.
Higher earnings in the production sector have not been used to increase installed capacity, but rather to purchase financial assets, most of them in dollars.
This has kept investment demand below the levels that would generally be expected, given the abundance of liquidity in the economy.
One explanation for this phenomenon may be that transnational corporations have already undergone a restructuring process in early 2000 and have therefore ruled out the idea of expanding their installed capacity in the short term at a time when productivity is on the rise.
Stronger demand for dollar-denominated term assets has put an end to the trend in long-term interest rates, which had been rising more slowly than short-term rates (which were being hiked by the major economies’ central banks), thereby flattening the asset yield curve (see figures II.4 and II.5).
The behaviour of investors in May 2006 offers one example of this phenomenon: faced with a risk of higher inflation in the United States, they withdrew their investments in emerging economies, taking refuge in developed-country assets instead.
This suggests a more uncertain global environment and a latent risk of flight to quality.
There are two quite different scenarios as to how events may unfold in this regard.
Some experts espouse the de-coupling view, which holds that the slowdown of the United States economy will not have significant repercussions in the rest of the world because of the strength of Asian economies (particularly China, India, the Republic of Korea and Japan) and a higher rate of growth in Europe.
During the first six years of the 1970s, energy and agricultural prices posted smaller increases, rising by 386.9% and 89.7%, respectively.
Metal and mineral prices climbed by only 46.5% during the same period —a smaller increase than has been recorded during the present decade.6 In 2005, the average prices for commodities exported by Latin America continued to rise, in keeping with a trend that first appeared in 2002, reaching rates above 13% for the third year in a row.
The 2005 price index was 59.9% higher than the average for the 1990s: 175.4% for energy products, 58.4% for metals result of reduced trade, higher global interest rates and a greater aversion to risk that could lead to a marked decline in worldwide growth over the next few years.
Despite these competing views, the world economy has retained the upward momentum observed in 2005, although uncertainty has increased.
Incipient signs of a slowdown in the United States economy, as well as the possible adoption of stricter monetary policies by the United States Federal Reserve and the European Central Bank, may affect the expansion of the world’s major economies in early 2007 (with the usual lag).
It is too early, however, to draw conclusions regarding the depth, speed and consequences of the cooling of the United States economy, or the possibility that higher growth in the euro area and Japan may continue to offset that slowdown.
What is clear is that emerging economies must be prepared to face an environment of greater global uncertainty characterized by increased geopolitical instability in the Middle East, which would in turn affect future oil prices and give rise to more doubts concerning the performance of the global economy. and minerals, and only 1.2% for agricultural products.
As shown in figure II.6, both the overall price index for commodity exports and the index for energy, metals and agricultural prices are in the expansionary phase of the business cycle, and their values are above the trend values for the corresponding series.
The magnitude and duration of the current cycle’s upswing sets it apart from the two preceding ones.
A positive correlation, reinforced since the 1990s, can also be observed among the three product cycles.
The simultaneous across-the-board recovery of commodity prices is associated with the favourable impact of the increase in external demand for raw materials.
In 2005, the overall price index for commodities exported by Latin America rose by 21.1%, which falls short of the 29.4% increase recorded in 2004.
Moreover, in 2005, unlike the preceding year, the upturn in price indices for energy products (21.1%) far exceeded that of other commodities (15.3%).
None of these indices increased during the 1990s; during the 1980s, only the metals and minerals index rose.
For a detailed analysis, see Alejandra Ovalle, “América Latina: evolución del índice de precios de los principales productos de exportación 1980-2005”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2005, unpublished.
The upswing in the price index for energy products reflected the higher petroleum prices brought on by the embargo enforced by Arab countries in 1973.
The increase in oil prices is a reflection of the unstable balance between supply and demand associated with the expansion of demand for crude oil, which is being driven mainly by China and India.
It should be noted that, as a result of this upsurge in demand, the amount by which maximum short-term production capacity currently exceeds actual output is only enough to cover 2% of world demand.
The strategies devised to address this issue are reflected in the changes made in the United States’ strategic reserves, as well as the replacement of crude oil with other sources of energy.
The increases recorded in the price of coffee —both Type I (39.1%) and Type II (48.7%)— have been quite notable.8 Metal and mineral prices climbed by 22.5%, with this general upward trend being led by iron, zinc and copper, which rose by 71.5%, 31.9% and 28.4%, respectively.
In contrast, prices for soybeans, soymeal and soy oil, which are important products for the region, fell by 10.4%, 9.5% and 11.5%.9 This trend is attributable to the increase in supply resulting from good harvests in Brazil and Argentina.
As of April 2006, the overall price index for commodity exports was up by 23.1%.10 The price index for energy products rose by 36.6%, and that of non-energy products increased by 17.1%.
While energy products displayed the strongest momentum, the largest increases were posted for sugar, zinc, iron, copper and other metals.
The rise in sugar prices can be explained by demand-related factors, namely an upsurge in purchases for use in the production of ethanol, a substitute for petroleum-based fuels.
In Latin America, Brazil and Colombia, among other countries, are partially modifying their energy structure, especially with regard to motor vehicle fuels.11 Moreover, a seasonal supply factor —the drought in India and the resulting contraction of worldwide sugar production— has influenced its international price.
In the case of metals, the expansion of demand in China and India has driven up prices.
Buoyant demand, low stocks and the fact that any additional increase in production capacity can only be made at a higher marginal cost suggest that metal prices will remain high in the immediate future.
The market has, for example, closely tracked the royal succession in Jordan, election results in the Islamic Republic of Iran, and the acts of sabotage carried out against the petroleum industry in Nigeria.
The weight of soybeans and soybean products in the overall price index is 7%.
This figure refers to the percentage variation in the average index over the last 12 months.
In cities such as Cali and Bogota, gasoline is legally required to be 10% ethanol.
Fiscal policy Introduction As indicated in the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2005,1 improvements in the countries’ public accounts have lessened their external vulnerability.
This trend, which has been reflected in fiscal and public-debt indicators, is attributable to a range of factors, including the characteristics of the current macroeconomic situation and decisions taken by national authorities.
Since 2002, fiscal policy has been implemented against a generally favourable macroeconomic backdrop, although the specific situation has varied somewhat from one subregion to another.
In light of the international situation and the development of the region’s economies, the expansionary phase that began three years ago is expected to continue in 2006.
Since 2003, the region’s overall fiscal deficit has narrowed, many countries have been posting primary surpluses, and the region’s degree of external vulnerability has declined as its public debt has shrunk.
The question arises, however, as to how sustainable this situation may prove to be.
These developments have raised new concerns among the fiscal authorities of some of the countries that are benefiting the most from external factors and rising commodity prices, and there has been some debate as to how fiscal surpluses should be used and as to their impact in terms of stability and equity (see box III.1).
Given the institutional diversity of the way in which the countries’ public sectors are structured, it is difficult to find an indicator capable of reflecting their various fiscal positions.
It contributes almost 14% of world oil production and possesses about 10% of the world’s reserves.
Chile is the world’s biggest producer and exporter of copper, making up an average 30% of total output.
Soaring prices for oil and copper in recent years have therefore had a strong impact on the economies which specialize in producing these goods.
In response to the first question, the countries of the region have designed a number of mechanisms to take advantage of the additional resources.
The most direct way to transform the income from these commodity exports into fiscal resources has been for governments to participate in their production.
In recent years, some countries have implemented reforms in this area which have coincided with the strong upswing in commodity prices.
In 2005, Chile introduced a specific tax on operating revenues in the mining industry, and Bolivia adopted a direct tax on oil and petroleum products.
These instruments have enabled Bolivia and Chile to considerably boost the level of fiscal resources they derive from such commodities, thanks, in particular, to the strong upswing in the prices they bring, as can be seen in the following figure.
The second issue has to do with the role of fiscal policy in stabilizing the economy.
The basic recommendation usually made in this regard is that, when an economy is booming, fiscal authorities should be able to temper the pace of economic activity by restricting public spending while, during recessions, they should use fiscal policy to help spur the economy.
United Nations publication, Sales windfalls can trigger what the specialized literature refers to as “Dutch disease.” In such cases, the economic upturn results in an immediate improvement in the terms of trade, but can have harmful consequences for the economy.
These may include the highly paradoxical effect of encouraging a cut in production and external trade in tradable-goods sectors which have not benefited from the boom.
This effect can result from variations in relative prices and the impact of exchangerate appreciations.
It is therefore usually recommended that fiscal policy should provide for the creation of a stabilizing mechanism.
Mechanisms of this kind can be classified according to the variable to be stabilized.
On the one hand, there are mechanisms that target the source of the fluctuations, including the price of the commodity in question.
This category includes financial instruments (such as futures contracts and bonds tied to non-renewable resource futures), diversification of exports and international price stabilization agreements.
On the other hand, there are mechanisms which, based on the assumption that international prices are unstable, are designed to minimize their main impacts on the domestic economy by stabilizing one of the variables directly affected by the volatility.
This category includes rules aimed at reducing the effects of fluctuating revenue upon spending and stabilization funds financed with export earnings.
In 2001 Chile adopted a fiscal rule requiring the government to maintain a cyclically-adjusted structural surplus equivalent to 1% of GDP.
Although the region has some longestablished stabilization funds (Colombia’s National Coffee Fund dates back to 1940), in recent years there has been a revival of such funds, whose objective is to reduce the impact of income volatility on public accounts.
Sales other aggregates, such as indicators for the countries’ nonfinancial public sectors (NFPS), will be also be brought into the discussion.
This contrasts sharply with the outcome in 2002, when only seven countries achieved a primary surplus.
An examination of figure III.1 indicates that, assuming that the aforementioned average is the result of varying performances, then measuring the standard deviation can facilitate the analysis of that diversity.
In general terms, it can be said that unevenness in performance as measured by primary balances tended to increase during the crisis (beginning in 1998) and to lessen when the situation improved, beginning in 2001-2002.
The figures for Mexico in the central government column relate only to the federal government and. in the NFPS column. to the public sector.
For the Dominican Republic. the public debt includes only external debt. c Preliminary estimate. d Simple average. e National administration. f Federal government and central bank.
Results do not include net loans. adjustments for accruals. floating debt or the cost of financial restructuring. h Central administration. i Federal government and social security.
As mentioned above, however, central government figures are not entirely representative of the situations of a number of the countries in the region whose public sectors are more decentralized.
In 2002-2005, average annual GDP increased by about 4%, fiscal revenues expanded by 1.6% of GDP and primary spending rose by an average of 0.1% of GDP.
As shown in figure III.3, trends in public spending during that period contrast with those seen in two other periods with equivalent annual growth rates (average increases of 4%).
From the standpoint of resources, this cycle also stands apart in that revenues climbed by 1.6% of GDP, whereas for the two earlier periods it rose only slightly The variation of spending can be broken down into its various components in either economic or functional terms.
On the basis of an economic classification, capital spending for 2002-2005 fell by 0.2% of GDP, whereas it increased in the previous two periods.
This classification of spending is based on data from the Social Development Division and includes the following public-sector functions: education, health care, social security and welfare, housing and other.
The increase in revenues was due to the continuing upward trend in commodity prices.
The countries in which revenues climbed the most were the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (4% of GDP), Bolivia (3.5%) and Chile (2.3%), all of which specialize in extractive industries producing commodities whose prices have been rising sharply (oil, natural gas and copper).
Another factor in the case of Bolivia is the direct tax on hydrocarbons (IDH) that it introduced in 2005, which yielded receipts equivalent to 3.1% of GDP.
As for the composition of those revenues, the share of tax receipts has grown (over 60%), while the contribution of capital income and of grants donations has fallen.
In most cases, there are a series of considerations that are useful in analysing tax issues and defining ways of strengthening the tax structure.
First, Latin American and Caribbean tax systems are based mainly on indirect (% of total income) Capital income (incl. external grants and donations) Other current income Transfers Social security contributions Taxes Total income (% of GDP) taxes, with lower direct tax receipts than in other regions.
In recent years there has been a downturn in the share of revenue provided by taxes on external trade, greater VAT receipts, a lack of significant progress on income taxes, a tendency for revenue systems to become concentrated in a smaller number of different taxes, and the development of extraordinary or emergency tax schemes.
Over the past two decades there have been major structural changes in the tax situation in Latin America.
These changes have not led to a suitable balance in the distribution of the tax burden among the various socio-economic strata.
As a result, no social consensus has been reached concerning that distribution, nor has there been any success in ensuring that these changes result in lasting distributional patterns for the different levels of government in the tax burden in those countries where there are competing taxing powers.
Despite repeated reforms, the countries of the region have not yet achieved a satisfactory degree of stability regarding the appropriate level of the tax burden or the socially accepted tax structure; there is often debate as to the direction to be followed.
The relevant data indicate that the tax burden in countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Uruguay differs considerably from its size in countries whose tax intake is lower, such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico and Paraguay.
In any case, regardless of the size of the tax burden, most of the countries still have not achieved a sufficient degree of fiscal solvency, and there are a number of unmet social needs that cannot be satisfied without increased public resources.
It is also clear that, despite all the economic changes which have affected the region’s development in recent decades, the tax burden has grown.
Comparing the receipts for 2005 with those for 1980, the rise in the tax burden is between 2.5% and 3% of GDP, depending on whether or not social security contributions are taken into account.
This shows that, in one way or another, the countries’ numerous tax reforms and improvements have borne fruit.
According to this analysis, wealth Social contributions a General government coverage. b Data for 2004. c Simple average. and asset taxes have accounted for an extremely small fraction of total receipts, but since this study has focused on central governments, further investigation of this last point at the subnational level is called for.
Lastly, tax structures have been oriented towards deriving receipts from a reduced range of taxes, thanks to the elimination of a substantial number of minor taxes.
These trends have been seen in all the countries to a greater or lesser degree, regardless of the level of their tax burdens in absolute terms.
International experience has shown that the movement away from a reliance on taxes on foreign trade has been counterbalanced by an increased use of taxes on consumption, although in many cases this has also been coupled with increases in income taxation.
There is also a growing problem with informality in labour and goods markets and increasing unregistered economic activities.
These factors’ effects on the countries’ tax structures is substantial in relation both to the level of available tax resources and to the equity and neutrality of the system, since the fact that some taxpayers do not actually pay any taxes introduces vertical and horizontal inequities.
As for disbursements, as mentioned above, the trend in public spending has been a distinctive characteristic of this period, inasmuch as central government spending rose in 2005, regaining its 2001-2002 levels after having diminished in 2004.
On average, the whole of this expansion was concentrated in current spending, while capital outlays remained very close to their low 2004 levels.
The document presented during the thirtyfirst session of ECLAC 4 and the Social Panorama of Latin America, 2005 both noted that social spending rose considerably from 1990 to 2002.
Nonetheless, as mentioned above, this category of expenditure saw an average decline of about 0.4% of GDP between 2002 and 2004.
Nonetheless, among the 19 countries analysed, there are still nine countries where the level exceeds 50% of GDP.
Their eligibility is conditional upon the adoption of certain economic policies (macroeconomic adjustments, structural reforms and social policies oriented towards the education and health sectors) which led to considerable spending increases in those areas.
In addition, the HIPC Initiative has brought about a steep reduction in the total public debt stocks of Bolivia, Guyana, Honduras and Nicaragua.
The countries of the region are also taking advantage of favourable macroeconomic conditions to implement active debt management policies which have helped to reduce their financial vulnerability.
Although the great majority of the countries expanded their primary surpluses, primary balances were down in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Guatemala and Paraguay relative to the figures for 2004.
In the cases of Argentina, Brazil and Colombia, this downturn in the primary balance was attributable to increased primary spending (despite an increase in fiscal revenue of about 0.5% to 1% of GDP).
In the case of Guatemala, it was caused by a sharp slump in fiscal revenue.
The four countries where capital spending fell the most were Haiti, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama (1.4%, 0.9%, 0.6% and 0.7% of GDP).
The ratio between the primary surplus and debt interest payments offers an additional measurement of vulnerability.
If the primary surplus covers less than 100% of such payments (meaning that the country has an overall deficit), then it means that the fiscal authorities must borrow further in order to cover their interest obligations.
In this case, the indicator is the ratio of public debt to GDP.
If the regional averages of these indicators are included, then the countries of the region can each be placed in one of the four quadrants of this graph according to whether their present (the ratio of the primary balance to GDP) and past (public debt as a percentage of GDP) fiscal positions have improved or worsened.
The reader should bear in mind that public debt reflects the cumulative impact of past deficits.
If these country groupings are compared with the results of the primary surplus/interest ratio, a more dynamic version of this classification emerges: countries with a primary balance/interest ratio above 100% (or those having an overall fiscal surplus) are reducing their indebtedness, whereas for those with an overall fiscal deficit, total public debt is rising.
Subregional overview The fiscal positions of the countries in different subregions reflect their varying performances.
The MERCOSUR countries continued the trend towards the generation of primary surpluses observed over the past three years (although Argentina and Paraguay fell short of the record levels seen in 2004).
This had the effect of helping to lower their debt-to-GDP ratio, which had peaked in 2002 but has fallen by 25% of GDP over the past year.
This sharp reduction can be attributed to the level of these primary surpluses, combined with Argentina’s and Uruguay’s debt restructurings and Argentina’s and Brazil’s prepayments of IMF debt.
In the Andean subregion, a distinction must be drawn between the oil-producing and non-oil-producing countries.
The petroleum-producing countries are continuing to generate hefty primary surpluses, thanks to their steeply rising fiscal receipts from the hydrocarbons sector.
Colombia’s central government deficit increased in 2005, but decentralized bodies returned a surplus that led to an improvement in the consolidated accounts.
The Central American countries’ primary accounts were balanced in 2004-2005, but there is still a large overall deficit of more than 2% of GDP.
The improved debt-to-GDP picture is basically due to Nicaragua’s entry to the HIPC Initiative, which led to the forgiveness of a large part of its debt.
Bahamas, Dominica, Jamaica, and Saint Kitts and Nevis narrowed their fiscal gaps, but Brazil would change quadrants, moving into the category of countries with above-average debt, if data for the non-financial public sector were used instead of central government data.
Both Colombia and El Salvador would change quadrants, moving into the category of countries with an above-average primary surplus, if data for the non-financial public sector were used instead of data on central government primary balances.
In the first group, these fiscal changes were attributable to short-term economic factors (as in Bahamas), once-off reforms (closing down the sugar industry in Saint Kitts and Nevis), or more permanent changes (Dominica and Jamaica).
The second group of countries opted for fiscal expansion, mostly in order to stimulate aggregate demand (Antigua and Barbuda, Guyana, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago).
Conclusions As noted in the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2005, the region’s governments refrained from adopting expansionary fiscal policies during the 2003-2005 growth cycle, opting instead for debt repayments and accumulation of reserves.
This policy reduced external vulnerability and, to some degree, gave fiscal policymakers more room to manoeuvre.
The region’s authorities should seize this opportunity to move forward with a wide range of tasks in the area of fiscal policy.
As for fiscal revenue, since half the region’s countries have tax burdens below 15% of GDP at the central government level, priority should be given to strengthening the tax structure.
Countries specializing in the extraction of non- renewable resources have seen a sharp increase in their fiscal revenues thanks to upswings in the prices of their exports.
The present combination of circumstances thus provides them with a chance to make strides in designing stabilization mechanisms and diversifying their revenue structures and tax systems away from a reliance on the non-renewables sector.
Countries in the region that have weak tax structures and low levels of investment in physical and human capital should look for ways to improve their social spending patterns, while also investing in public infrastructure, an area where expenditure remains at the lowest levels seen in recent decades.
Aside from the improvements observed in recent years, it should be noted that only a fifth of the countries of the region show overall fiscal surpluses, and half of the countries have debts exceeding 50% of GDP.
Exchange-rate policy Exchange-rate movements in 2005 Between December 2004 and December 2005, the Latin American and Caribbean region’s real effective exchange rate vis-à-vis the rest of the world diminished by 8.3% (signifying a currency appreciation), although the annual average rate of appreciation for 2005 (5.1%) was lower than it was for 2004.
The rate of appreciation was almost twice as high in South America (10.1% from December 2004 to December 2005) as in Central America, the Caribbean and Mexico (6%).
Interestingly, these figures are not the net result of widely differing situations; in fact, 17 of the countries in the region (all those considered except for Peru) showed declines (currency appreciation) in their extraregional effective exchange rate over this period.
As indicated in the section on the external sector, this upward pressure can be accounted for by significant improvements in the current account balances of a number of South American countries.
Elsewhere, in Central America, the real rate of appreciation was linked to the high level of current transfers, mainly consisting of emigrant remittances.
Fourteen countries, however, posted real effective appreciations in relation to all of their trading partners between December 2004 and December 2005.
Eight countries recorded significant appreciations (over 5%), with four South American countries posting the highest figures: Brazil (8.3%).
They were followed by two Central American countries (Guatemala, with 6.7%, and Nicaragua, with 5.5%), Jamaica (6.3%) and Mexico (6.2%).
Brazil ran a current account surplus in 2005 (1.8% of GDP) and early 2006, as well as having a high level of foreign direct investment (FDI), equivalent to 1.6% of GDP, and high interest rates, which nevertheless showed a downward trend as of December 2005.
Probably as a result of their effect in adding to the level of the country’s debt obligations had an impact on the balance-of-payments capital and financial account balance (excluding FDI) in 2004 and 2005.
This balance moved from a net outflow of foreign currency equivalent to about 2.2% of GDP in 2004 to a net inflow of 0.1% of GDP in 2005.
In 2005, the country received capital inflows amounting to US$ 6.451 billion, which were used to purchase equities, and there were no large private debt payments on the scale seen in 2004.10 These factors contributed to the 15.9% nominal appreciation of the real against the dollar between December 2004 and December 2005.
In Chile there were two main factors behind the peso’s nominal appreciation of 10.8% against the dollar in 2005, which in turn largely accounted for its real effective appreciation.
Chile also benefited from a substantial improvement in its terms of trade, thanks mostly to steeply rising copper prices during the year, but its strong trade performance was partially countered by an increase in net payments of investment income, which amounted to 9.2% of GDP.
Second, there was a large reduction in capital outflows compared to 2004.
In Guatemala, when analysing the real effective appreciation in 2005, a distinction should be made between domestic inflation (a cumulative rate of 8.4%) and the nominal appreciation of 2% against the dollar.
The latter was primarily attributable to capital inflows (excluding FDI), which were equivalent to 4.2% of GDP despite a substantial reduction in purchases of Guatemalan portfolio assets, and current transfers (mainly emigrant remittances) amounting to 10.9% of GDP.
The increase in current transfers in 2005 almost offset the striking upturn in imports and freight expenses.
Even so, the build-up of reserves in 2005 was less than half of what it had been in 2004.
The real effective appreciation of the Jamaican dollar in 2005 reflected a nominal depreciation (4.5% between December 2004 and December 2005) that was rather less than the inflation rate for the period (12.9%).
The nominal exchange rate remained stable until July, when it began to rise (depreciation).
In the second half of the year there was an increase in the demand for foreign currency and dollar-denominated assets.
Factors affecting the availability of foreign currency in 2005 included the continuing high levels of remittances and of FDI and capital inflows, although the trade deficit widened.
In any case, the government’s aversion to a depreciation in the exchange rate, by reason of its fiscal impact (in view of the high levels of public debt, half of which is linked to the price of the dollar), has led the central bank to draw upon its reserves in order to sell United States dollars on the open market.
In the course of 2005, however, the government paid off its debt with the International Monetary Fund.
This was largely attributable to the uncertainty about upcoming elections that began to make itself felt in the third quarter of 2005, despite very positive trends in metals prices and the subsequent improvement in the trade balance, which in 2005 posted an 84.9% improvement relative to 2004.
Nevertheless, the current account result was negatively affected by increased payments of investment income, especially profits and dividends, which rose by 2.1% of GDP.
The net result was a current account surplus of 1.3% of GDP.
Meanwhile, the balance-of-payments capital and financial account (without including FDI) recorded a net capital outflow of 2.5% of GDP.
Foreign-exchange outflows from the public sector amounting to US$ 1.44 billion also helped to ease the upward pressure on the exchange rate.
Exchange-rate movements in early 2006 The Latin American and Caribbean aggregate extraregional real effective exchange rate increased (depreciated) by 2.8% between December 2005 and June 2006.
Three countries in South America (Paraguay, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Peru) recorded appreciations, while the other seven saw depreciations, the most notable being Colombia (13.5%) and Chile (9.5%).
Consequently, the extraregional real effective exchange rate for South America rose, on average, by 2.6% over the period.
In Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean, it was up by 3%, with all the countries of the subregion showing depreciations, led by Mexico (10.5%).
Although the prices of the region’s export commodities remain high, uncertainty in relation to the future course of United States interest rates and slacker demand for emergingmarket assets in general may help to dampen demand for assets denominated in Latin American and Caribbean currencies.
Only five countries posted an effective appreciation of their currencies over the first six months of 2006 relative to their December 2005 levels.
Paraguay had the largest appreciation, with a rate of 8%, while the figures for Peru, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Guatemala and El Salvador did not exceed 3%.
In the case of Mexico, monetary policy became more flexible in the second half of 2005, and in May 2006 policymakers struck a neutral stance.
The reduction in interest rate spreads relative to industrial countries and, more recently, the proximity of the elections and sagging investor demand for emergingmarket assets were probably the cause of the real effective depreciation recorded by Mexico in 2006.
Guatemala’s and Honduras’ real effective exchange rates were 24.1% and 17.5% lower (appreciation), respectively, than the values recorded in the 1990s.
To a large extent, this was the result of the high levels of remittances received by both countries in the past few years (see figure III.16) and, more recently and in the case of Guatemala, of capital inflows.
Argentina’s real effective exchange rate has held at a much higher level than in the 1990s, which tends to corroborate the theory that there was a significant misalignment in the effective exchange rate for at least part of that decade.
This is because the long-term component of emigrant remittances and its probable future trajectory would have to be determined in order to compute that divergence, and, unfortunately, there are no reliable or comparable cross-country data on such trends in the region.
This is a significant fact, since, if these flows continue to produce income levels As percentages of GDP Venezuela (Bol.
Rep. of) Dominican Rep. similar to or higher than the figures for 2005 (see figure III.16)11 over an extended period of time, then the exchange rate’s low values (appreciation) would come to represent an “equilibrium” situation.
In contrast, if the trend in remittances is reversed, and this type of inflow declines in the not-too-distant future, then these low exchange rates will not constitute an equilibrium level and economic theory would provide stronger support for the authorities’ attempts to avoid a very substantial appreciation.
Continuous, large-scale emigration flows, which are unlikely to be Intervention in the exchange market in 2005, and in the case of Peru, these operations have involved both purchases and sales.
In Argentina, where there is no formal system of inflation targets, the trend in terms of intervention in the foreign-exchange market would seem to indicate a clear interest in preventing the nominal parity of the dollar from falling below three pesos.
The country accumulated reserves amounting to 4.5% of GDP in 2005, and the central bank purchased US$ 6.13 billion in the first six months of 2006.
Rep. of) In 2005 exchange-market intervention policies varied a great deal and significantly influenced the accumulation of reserves, as reflected in figure III. 17.
One reason for this diversity was the variety of exchange-rate regimes existing in the region.
Countries with a defined exchangerate target have to intervene in order to maintain nominal parity within the desired range.
Countries with crawling pegs, such as Costa Rica and Honduras, or those with fixed rates, such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (which also has strict exchange controls), are in a similar position.
Situations vary in the case of countries that have flexible exchange rates.13 The reasons for intervening in the market may range from the reduction of exchange-rate volatility, when the market is not highly developed and is subject to a high degree of asymmetry and heterogeneity, to the avoidance of significant exchange-rate misalignments.
Nevertheless, the most frequently cited reason is the need to replenish reserves so that the country will be better able to withstand sudden changes in capital movements (especially in countries with highly dollarized financial sectors), which is clearly a very valid objective.
The central banks of Peru and Colombia intervened extensively in the exchange market sustainable in the long term, are essential if remittances are to remain at a high level as a percentage of GDP.
Even so, empirical evidence indicates that remittances may remain high for quite some time.
Meanwhile, and despite the fact that the migration policies of the main Latin American receiving countries have become stricter in recent years, it is still too early to conclude that the region’s emigration flows have slowed down.
In dollars This by no means entails maintaining an artificially depreciated exchange rate, however.
In Latin America, the expression “floating exchange rate”, which is often used in the literature, actually has a number of different meanings, as countries that allow their nominal currencies to float tend to engage in various forms of intervention in the foreign-exchange market.
Monetary policy Monetary policy in the region has been rapidly adapting to changes in the external environment, especially slumps in financial markets and in international economic activity.
In most countries, policies in this area in 2005 included slight increases in monetary policy rates, although real interest rates remained relatively low in historical terms.
There are some important exceptions, however, including the largest countries in the region: Brazil and Mexico.
Monetary policy in the region Monetary policy in the region continues to give priority to controlling inflation, although the emphasis placed on this objective varies somewhat depending on the state of the economy.
The hike in oil prices has been a cause of concern to Latin American central banks as they seek to avoid further impacts on price indices, but the widespread trend of appreciating local currencies has helped rein in the pace of price increases.
This appreciation has unwanted effects, however, and a number of central banks have therefore decided to intervene in the foreign-exchange market in order to slow the rate of appreciation.
A variety of monetary policy schemes have been adopted by the countries of the region, which currently fall into three broad categories.
First, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru have adopted a regime of inflation targets in tandem with a flexible exchange rate.
In these regimes, the central bank’s control of interest rates is the main instrument of monetary policy.
Second, countries whose financial systems are dollarized, albeit unofficially, are not easily placed to conduct an independent monetary policy.
Bolivia and Uruguay have a high proportion of their deposits in dollars, as does Peru, although the latter has adopted a system of inflation targets.
The majority of these countries use a monetary aggregate as a policy tool, as well as intervening in foreign-exchange markets.
Third, Panama (since 1904), Ecuador and El Salvador have currency systems that are linked to the United States dollar and thus use the dollar as their currency.
These countries have decided to forego the use of monetary policy instruments, and their interest rates follow movements very similar to those of international interest rates, and their country risk remains constant.
In Panama, which has a highly developed and efficient banking system, interest rates are practically the same as international rates.
The increase in monetary policy rates initiated by the United States Federal Reserve has been followed with caution and moderation by various central banks in the region.
Their rates are therefore still at relatively low levels from a historical perspective.
For most countries, real interest rates have basically held steady or have even moved downward over the last three years (see figure III.18).
Nevertheless there are some important exceptions, including Brazil and Mexico, the largest countries in the region.
After successfully bringing down consumer inflation from an annual 8.1% in April 2005 to 5.1% at the end of that year, the Brazilian central bank reduced the nominal Special System of Clearance and Custody (SELIC) rate on three successive occasions, lowering it from its August 2005 level of 19.75% to an annual 18% by the end of that year.
The SELIC rate was revised downward eight times and reached an annual 15.25% in May 2006.
It is expected to reach 14% by the end of the year.
The central bank also injected more liquidity into the market after a bout of financial turbulence in May.
Despite these expansionary monetary policy measures, Brazil’s real rates are still the highest of any of the larger economies (over 11% in annual terms), taking into account the expected 12-month inflation rate of 4.3%.
This is almost double the real rates of China and Mexico, which have the second and third highest real rates, respectively, among the larger economies.
If the SELIC rate reaches 14% at the end of 2006, the real rate will amount to over 9%.
In Mexico, the authorities reacted to the rise in prices between the second half of 2004 and the second half of 2005 with the largest rate hike in the region.
Only the sudden drop in the 12-month inflation rate to 3.5% in August 2005 made a less restrictive monetary policy possible, with a cut in the funds rate (interbank interest rate) from 9.75% to 7% at the end of April 2006.
This spread narrowed from seven percentage points in May 2005 to less than three in May 2006.
For the first time, the rate reduction was not accompanied by an increase in the corto (the funds Mexico’s central bank makes available to the market at twice the market rate), which until a few months earlier had been the main instrument of monetary policy.
The use of the interest rate alone seems to indicate that the monetary authority was taking the first step towards making the benchmark interest rate, rather than the corto, its main monetary tool.
The Mexican central bank’s decision to hold its interest rate steady in May interrupted the successive rate cuts that had taken place over the preceding nine months and led to a rethinking of the outlook for additional reductions in the future.
In view of the upcoming presidential elections and the weaker peso, which had depreciated by 8.3% between the end of January and mid-June 2005, financial markets had been expecting this.
These countries were hit by serious bouts of high inflation, and, in their wake, interest rates have remained above their 2003 levels.
In short, real rates in most countries remained moderate from a historical point of view and have risen only slightly in 2006.
In contrast, real interest rates in Brazil and Mexico are still higher than they were two or three years ago and have only recently gone down very slightly.
Argentina and Chile offer more interesting examples as they represent opposite extremes in terms of exchangerate regimes.
Argentina faces the challenge of gradually lowering its inflation rate, which amounted to over 12% in 2005 and thus overshot its 8% target figure.
Its main objective is to prevent the exchange rate from appreciating at a pace that would undermine the competitiveness of the country’s exports.
Since the government managed to stabilize the exchange rate at around three pesos per dollar in August 2003, M1 had expanded by 90.1% by April 2006 and M2 by 59% over the same period.
This expansion of the money supply has been accompanied by a shift in money demand towards more liquid assets, which seems to be a response to unresolved problems in the financial system.
Nevertheless, money demand is unlikely to increase as rapidly in the future as it has over the past three years.
One positive aspect is that the monetary programme’s M2 target was easily met in the first quarter of 2006, after a failure to meet the target in the last quarter of 2005.
Meanwhile, real interest rates are less negative, as the interbank rate rose from 6.7% at the end of 2005 to 8.2% at the end of March 2006; the inflation rate is expected to be higher than 10% by the end of 2006.
The government has emphasized not only monetary policy but also the success of recent price agreements, although they have not eliminated monetary pressures on prices.
Chile’s central bank continued to raise its monetary policy interest rate in 2005, quickening the pace of the adjustment as consumer prices neared and then edged slightly above the target band ceiling of 4%.
Under Chile’s currency flotation system, the peso appreciated substantially until May 2006 in line with the financial dictates of the market, reaching a rate of almost 500 pesos to the dollar.
This sparked a debate in Congress regarding the suitability of the existing exchange-rate system under current circumstances.
This became an issue, in particular, because of the scale of the appreciation, as the exchange rate fell from 741 pesos to the dollar in February 2003 to 514 pesos in December 2005 and in the following months.
The widespread decline in stock markets and a higher level of country risk in the region translated into an exchange rate of 550 pesos to the dollar in June.
Before this change in the situation, the rate had been expected to reach around 5.75% by the end of 2006, but now, given this turn in events, there is no longer any clear-cut projection as to its year-end level.
The interbank and deposit rates have been highly synchronized in these countries and, in fact, have been at practically identical levels for the past few years.
Argentina and Paraguay have regained a similar degree of synchronization and similarity since mid-2004.
Other countries, such as Mexico and Costa Rica, have maintained a stable margin between the two rates, with the two moving in tandem with one another.
In 2005 most of the countries in the region witnessed a change of the trend of these rates relative to 2004, as they exhibited a slow but steady increase (see figure III.19).
In a majority of the countries the money supply grew more slowly in 2005 than in 2004, while Barbados and Belize applied clearly restrictive monetary policies.
In November 2004 circulation of the United States dollar was prohibited in Cuba, and the convertible peso came into general use, with a 10% charged being levied on the exchange of dollars for convertible pesos.
As a result, bank balances in dollars have shrunk by Countries whose currency is tied to the dollar Countries with a dollarized monetary regime or whose currency is tied to the dollar cannot deploy monetary policy as such, since their monetary aggregates are endogenous and their interest rates tend to align themselves with international interest rates.
Interest rates rose slightly in 2005 in Ecuador, Panama and El Salvador and continued to do so in 2006 in line with the rises in international interest rates.
Real interest rates Nominal rates are a suitable indicator when they are used as an instrument of monetary policy.
Generally speaking, however, interest rates adjusted for inflation —real rates— are the relevant variables for the authorities and often are used as intermediate policy objectives. 57%, and accounts in convertible pesos have tripled.
The monetary union of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) uses the Eastern Caribbean dollar (EC$), which has a fixed exchange rate against the United States dollar.
The union uses the operating rules of a currency board, making adjustments when money demand increases by issuing EC$ dollars with 60% of their value backed by United States dollars.
There was no change in the discount rate or interest rates of commercial banks in 2005.
This trend reflects the change in direction of the Federal Reserve’s interest-rate policy in June 2004, since many of the region’s central banks have followed its lead.
Nominal growth rates for total credit and private credit have both topped 15% (and have reached over 35% in Argentina and Costa Rica) in the 12 months prior to the first quarter of 2006.
This constitutes an upward trend in comparison to the preceding years and has brought these variables back up to their pre-2001 levels, which is a reflection of the improvement in global economic conditions.
Only Bolivia and Paraguay show increases in total credit of less than 6% over this 12month period.
Monetary aggregates The money supply grew faster in 2005 than in previous years in most of the countries of the region.
Thus, the reduction in interest rates has been accompanied by a fairly widespread expansion of the money and credit supplies.
This analysis uses game theory to suggest that the problems inherent in such coordination can be resolved with the help of a mechanism for macroeconomic dialogue.
On the basis of this theory, it explains how macroeconomic dialogue can be used as a very effective tool for achieving coordination in this area in Latin America.
It starts out by looking at the reasons why policy coordination is needed in the region.
In general, macroeconomic policy decisions in one country have spillover effects in others, and policymakers often fail to take these spillovers into account.
This has been the basis for the analysis of policy coordination in the literature.
If national policymakers could coordinate the types of measures that have spillover effects, they could achieve a Pareto-superior outcome.
The volatility that the lack of policy coordination can generate in trading partners (independently of the scale of the impact) is also a reason for coordinating macroeconomic policies.
A third reason has to do with the pressure brought to bear by certain domestic groups in response to sudden changes in relative prices, which can lead to demands for sectoral protection measures.
In Latin America, where intraregional trade increased during the 1990s, efforts to promote integration, which strengthens the transmission channels of macroeconomic policy from one country to another, lend practical support to the theoretical arguments in favour of macroeconomic policy coordination.
Before considering ways of going about encouraging policy coordination between countries, however, it is important to have a logical framework for the analysis of their interactions.
The document therefore reviews the literature on non-cooperative game theory, which indicates the forms that this interaction can take and how to analyse it.
The document limits itself to analysing those situations in which countries are not capable of making “credible commitments” to pursue a particular predetermined policy, which seems to be the most relevant situation when analysing the potential for coordination between sovereign countries in the absence of supranational institutions, as in the case of Latin America.
The document begins with a description of the simplest games (static games, without uncertainty), and then adds complexity by incorporating multiple periods and imperfect information.
There is a review of basic concepts, such as the Nash equilibrium in cooperative games, and other more complex ones involving uncertainty in a dynamic context.
In particular, this examination shows that countries often participate in dynamic games with imperfect information and that the multiplicity of possible results can often be ranked in terms of their contribution to countries’ welfare.
In this case, mechanisms are needed to facilitate coordination of macroeconomic measures in order to achieve a Pareto-superior outcome.
After a review of the underlying concepts of some of the most important “equilibrium selection” mechanisms, macroeconomic dialogue is presented as a fundamental coordination tool which can avert situations where a lack of coordination results in low levels of well-being.
A demonstration of this macroeconomic dialogue in action is provided by the Macroeconomic Dialogue Network (REDIMA) project, which is currently being implemented by ECLAC with technical and financial support from the European Union.
This is particularly important for Latin America, in view of the high turnover rate among the economic authorities in a number of countries, as well as the difficulty of determining these authorities’ actual coordination capacity owing to various restrictions.
Moreover, the strengthening of policy coordination through macroeconomic dialogue may foster the establishment of institutions that can help to find cooperative solutions among all of the countries in the region.
Economic activity and investment Driven by strong domestic and external demand, the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean grew by 4.5% in 2005, following the previous year’s 5.9% expansion.
The slowdown in relation to 2004 occurred largely because the region’s two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, underperformed the regional average.
Nonetheless, the regional growth rate is still above the average for the 1990s and the first few years of the 2000s.
Economic growth was widespread, with all countries posting positive rates except for Guyana.
The strongest expansions were recorded in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (9.3%) and in Argentina and the Dominican Republic (9.2% each).
Guatemala, Mexico and Paraguay grew by around 3%, Ecuador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Bolivia by about 4% and the remaining countries by between 5% and 7%.
Despite the occurrence of intense hurricanes in 2005, GDP growth in the English- and Dutch-speaking Caribbean was similar to the rates registered by the Latin American countries (4.5%).
The highest rates were posted in Antigua and Barbuda (5.6%), Saint Kitts and Nevis (7%), Saint Lucia (7.3%) and Trinidad and Tobago (7%).1 The 2005 figures mean that the region has recorded three consecutive years of GDP growth, expanding by a cumulative 12.9% during 2003-2005 in relation to 2002 (per capita GDP rose by 8% in the same period).
The annual average growth rate for that three-year period was the region’s highest in the last 15 years (1990-2005) (see figure IV.1).
The unweighted average growth rate among the countries of the region was 5%, while the median was 4%.
The expansion was more pronounced in South America (among Andean and Southern Cone countries alike), but partly represented a recovery of activity levels following the downturns of growth rates in Mexico, Brazil and the Central American countries fell short of the regional average in 2004-2005, they are nonetheless higher than the rates recorded in the early 1990s (see table IV.1).
In 2006, the region as a whole is expected to continue growing at around 5%, but trends are likely to vary across countries.
Whereas growth in certain Central American economies, along with Brazil and Mexico, looks set to gather pace, most other countries will see a slightly slower expansion.
The trend of the international economy, and in particular the conduct of monetary policy in the United States, Europe and Japan, together with the behaviour of international financial markets and these factors’ economic policy implications for the region’s countries, give rise to uncertainties that could affect the region’s outlook, especially from 2007 onward.
Economic activity levels picked up gradually throughout 2005, although quarterly growth rates were below those recorded in 2004 (see figure IV.2).
Year-onyear quarterly growth rates show that, while economic activity in some countries tended to slow, particularly in the second half of the year (Brazil and Chile), elsewhere it picked up speed (e.g.
Dominican Republic); but in most cases the quarterly growth rate was similar to the annual average rate.2 The year-on-year growth rate in the first quarter of 2006 rose in relation to the second half of 2005 as a result of an expansion of economic activity in Brazil and Mexico.
Year-on-year quarterly growth rates correspond to the rate of growth in one quarter compared to the same quarter a year earlier.
In the first quarter of 2006, the region as a whole grew by 1.4% relative to the fourth quarter of 2005, but this figure also mainly reflects the upswing in economic activity in Brazil and Mexico.
The positive trend displayed by the international economy since 2003 provided the backdrop for economic expansion in Latin American and Caribbean countries in 2005, boosting activities with links to the external sector, in particular.
The region’s exports of goods and services have been growing in volume since the fourth quarter of 2003, driven by burgeoning world demand.
This external stimulus, which was sustained throughout 2004, made it possible for the strong performance of the export sector to be transmitted to other activities.
This in turn spurred domestic demand, triggering a recovery of investment and consumption and fuelling a considerable increase in import volumes.
The persistence of this favourable external climate, in conjunction with higher rates of capacity utilization in many sectors, low levels of investment following the sustained decline seen in 1999-2003, exchange-rate appreciation in relation to the levels posted in 2002-2003 and easier credit, all combined to drive the expansion of investment which had begun in 2004.
At the same time, private consumption was encouraged by lower interest rates and the greater availability of credit, in conjunction with higher wages.
In 2005, regional export growth (8.4%) continued to outpace GDP, while the rise in imports (11.4%) reflected the buoyancy of domestic demand (5.1%).
The various sectors of economic activity reflected trends in the different components of expenditure.
The strengthening of domestic demand also had favourable effects on manufacturing activity (3.2%), both in sectors serving the domestic market and in those where production is largely destined for exports within the region.
Stronger domestic demand in the individual countries thus promoted an upturn in intraregional trade, particularly in manufactured products.
Although bilateral exchange rates against the dollar fell in most countries throughout 2005, the real effective exchange rate remained favourable in many cases, thanks to the substantial devaluation of local currencies that occurred in 1999-2003.
Moreover, in countries whose currencies are tied to the United States dollar (Ecuador, El Salvador and Panama), the depreciation of the dollar against other currencies in 2005 enhanced the competitiveness of their exports to some extent.
Activity in the agricultural sector grew by 2.2% regionally, although performances varied from country to country.
While Mexico experienced a contraction, most countries recorded increases, although they were smaller than overall GDP growth rates, except in the cases of Argentina, Bolivia, Ecuador and El Salvador.
The construction industry experienced robust growth (6.4% in regional terms) in most of the countries in 2005, and in Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela it posted rates of over 20%; this, in turn, fuelled an increase in gross fixed capital formation.
In general, services were more buoyant than sectors linked to goods production.
Consumption growth stimulated commerce (which rebounded by 5.6% regionally), while expansion in the transport and communications sector (7.8% regionally) reflected activity in the goods-producing and communications sectors, particularly mobile telephony.
Meanwhile, the performance of tourism-related activities, such as hotels and restaurants and transport, benefited from increasing tourist arrivals both from the region and elsewhere.
The upswing in disposable income in several Latin American countries, in conjunction with local-currency appreciations and brisker economic activity generally, set the stage for an increase in recreational and business travel among the countries of the region.
As figure IV.5 shows, this stronger income growth was common to most countries of the region and, apart from the Dominican Republic, Panama and Uruguay, the average annual increase in gross national disposable income surpassed GDP growth in all the countries in 20042005.
This brisker pace of growth is basically explained by substantial gains from trade arising from the variation in the terms of trade, which amounted to 1.7% of GDP Explanations for this larger increase in gross national disposable income vary from country to country (see figure IV.6).
In some cases, it represents gains from trade arising from terms-of-trade movements, particularly in countries where the purchasing power of exports increased the most, World Tourism Organization (UNWTO), World Tourism Barometer, vol. 4, No. 1, January 2006.
In Argentina, the greater increase in disposable income stemmed from a reduction in factor payments, while in El Salvador, Haiti, Honduras and Nicaragua, it is attributable to an increase in current transfers received from abroad —mostly in the form of remittances from nationals of those countries living elsewhere.
As a result of this increase in gross national disposable income, the region recorded its highest level of national saving since 1990 (22.4% of GDP in current dollars).
National saving rates have been rising steadily since 2002 (see figure IV.7), with considerable upswings being noted in several countries.
The opening match is scheduled to take place in Jamaica on 11 March, and the final will be held in Barbados.
Antigua and Barbuda and Jamaica will host six of the eight most important games in this tournament.
This event is expected to have a considerable effect on the economies involved.
The construction sector has grown vigorously on the back of renovation and rebuilding works at cricket grounds, together with an expansion and upgrading of tourism infrastructure, which has promoted physical investment in these countries.
Fiscal accounts are also likely to be significantly affected in the countries involved, since much of the construction work will be undertaken by government agencies and will thus entail increased public investment.
Governments have also awarded concessions with a view to attracting investment; in some cases this has spurred private investment as concession holders brought their investment projects forward.
In addition to the preparatory work, the event itself will have major repercussions on the external accounts of the countries involved.
Movements on the current account of the balance of payments are expected to run in both directions.
On the one hand, a significant increase in tourist flows to the region is expected, with a consequent upswing in income from travel operations.
On the other hand, there is likely to be a substantial rise in merchandise imports owing to purchases of construction materials from other countries.
Longterm capital inflows into the country, both official and private, are also likely to climb substantially.
Given the size of their economies, the greatest economic impact will probably be felt by members of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).
According to preliminary calculations, preparations for the tournament in this group of countries will involve expenditure amounting to 10% of their GDP (US$ 1 billion).
Calculations suggest that grants received by Antigua and Barbuda for the reconstruction and renovation of cricket grounds will raise capital transfers to the country from 2.4% of GDP in 2004 to 24.4% in 2005.
In the case of Jamaica, official forecasts put the additional Government expenditure at 1.2% of GDP.
One of the aims of the authorities in these countries is to obtain permanent benefits from these investments, and world cup marketing strategies are being designed and fine-tuned for this purpose.
Another aim is to capitalize upon the resulting international exposure to promote these countries widely as tourist destinations.
First, there needs to be a guarantee that the planned expansion of hotel capacity will actually be ready by the time of the tournament; second, national authorities and a number of Caribbean hotel associations are debating the question of hotel price levels.
The rise in airfares could also dampen the expected surge in tourism flows.
The first was staged in England; the most recent was held jointly in South Africa, Zimbabwe and Kenya in 2003. and 0.5% in 2003), thanks to trade surpluses and the large volume of current transfers.
As a result, and repeating the pattern of the last two years, regional investment was entirely financed out of national saving, while the surplus (external saving) was used to repay debt, build up assets abroad and accumulate reserves.
At the subregional level, this pattern was particularly clear in South American countries, whereas external saving continued to play a major role in financing gross domestic investment in Central American countries and Mexico.
Although economic activity was brisk throughout most of the region, it was particularly so in the South American countries (see table IV.2).
In the Southern Cone countries, all components of expenditure had declined during that period except for the volume of goods and services exports.
This was not the case in the Andean countries, however, where exports declined along with investment and imports, while consumption rose slightly.
In the Southern Cone, import volumes decreased more sharply (5.5% per year on average), and both subregions experienced similar reductions in investment (annual averages of 6.5% and 6.4%, respectively).
In Brazil, these aggregates behaved in much the same way as they did in the Southern Cone, albeit on a smaller scale: average annual total consumption grew very slowly, investment declined, and the stalling of domestic demand was reflected in a reduction in the volume of goods and services imports.
With a backdrop provided by liberalization of the region’s economies in the 1990s and early 2000s, growth and investment staged a modest recovery from their 1980s slump.
Rates of growth have not yet regained the levels of the 1960s and 1970s, however, and are lagging behind those of other emerging economies.
The role of investment in the economic growth process is a key issue both in growth theory and in policy formulation.
This lends added importance to the criteria used in deciding whether to employ large-scale investment programmes as a mechanism for boosting the growth rate, along with considerations regarding the role played by productivity, the definition of areas to be given preference, and the policies to be implemented.
Economists continue to disagree about the role of investment in the growth process.
Some see it as the key explanatory factor for economic growth, while others acknowledge the important part played by fixed investment but argue that productivity is what marks the difference between fast and slow growth.
First, growthaccounting methodologies were used to measure the contributions made by the sources of GDP growth (capital, labour and total factor productivity) in the six countries during the period under study.
Then the effects of investments in machinery and equipment and in construction were estimated.
The third step was to prepare estimates for the effects of private and public investment on per capita GDP growth in those countries.
The findings indicate that investment has played an important role in the six largest Latin American countries, but that total factor productivity has made the difference between faster and slower growth experiences.
Evidence was also found that physical investment had a significant effect on the growth of per capita GDP.
Differences in the economic policies applied in the various countries were also important factors in explaining different economic growth rates, including policies relating to inflation control, external debt, open trade practices and education.
In the case of physical investment, investment in machinery and equipment made the largest contribution to per capita GDP growth.
The study also found that, although secondary education was an important contributor to per capita GDP growth in the 1960s and 1970s, its role has tended to decline since then, partly because the coverage of secondary education has increased.
The evidence suggests that education policies need to incorporate new ways to expand the human capital stock, mainly through efforts to improve the quality of training and dynamic adoption of new technologies.
Moreover, analysis of the effect of the public and private components of investment on per capita GDP growth shows that the private component has been the more important.
Lastly, the evidence also indicates that there is a relationship of mutual causality between growth and private investment and that stable macroeconomic conditions, particularly in terms of prices, are a prerequisite for applying countercyclical public investment policies.
In Southern Cone countries, the depreciations of 2002 boosted export earnings in local-currency terms, restored the profitability of goods-producing sectors and fostered greater export competitiveness.
This, together with the presence of idle capacity in a number of production sectors, stronger external demand and rising prices for the raw materials exported by these countries, made it possible to re-energize economic activity.
The revival was due firstly to the expansion of goods and services exports, in some cases accompanied by import substitution, and secondly to a growth spurt in other sectors of the economy.
This fuelled a substantial recovery of domestic demand that was linked to consumption growth and the upturn in investment.
The reduction in average annual exports from these countries reflected the drop in volumes exported by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The exports of goods and services by the other countries in this subregion, measured at constant prices, climbed by 3.8% in the period.
The Andean countries also witnessed the largest increase in national income relative to GDP, which fuelled a sharp upswing in domestic demand and especially in investment.
The comparison between these two groups of countries shows that while economic growth in the Southern Cone in 2004-2005 initially responded to an expansion of export volumes, growth in the Andean countries reflects a stronger upturn in domestic demand, particularly for investment, which has been financed by the substantial rise in disposable income in these countries.
Although this phenomenon was also seen in the Southern Cone, it was more pronounced among the Andean countries.
Nonetheless, in some countries, particularly those that experienced sharp decreases in economic activity in earlier years, former levels of investment and imports have yet to be fully regained.
In the Central American countries and Mexico, although consumption, investment, exports and imports all grew more vigorously in 2004-2005, growth figures were similar to those achieved in other periods of expansion.
Export performance has been closely linked to the business cycle in the United States, but has also been affected by the growing competitiveness of Asian countries, especially China, as exporters of manufactured products to the United States market.
At the same time, the subregion’s currencies have undergone real appreciations, which has eroded the competitiveness of their exports of manufactures to the United States and limited their growth.
The trend of domestic demand has been associated with a sustained increase in remittances from nationals living abroad.
As shown in table IV.2, gross domestic investment, measured in constant 2000 dollars, was one of the most dynamic components of demand in 2004-2005.
In fact, gross fixed capital formation is the component with the highest annual average growth rate during this period, at 11.7%, compared to a figure of 9.9% for goods and services exports.
Nonetheless, while the region’s gross fixed capital formation in 2005 surpassed the 1998 figure (the highest level since 1990) in absolute terms, it is still below that year’s value in relation to GDP (see figure IV.8).
This overall result was reflected in the national figures for most countries in the region.
As noted above, several factors have been fuelling robust investment growth in 2004-2005.
In the first place, investment had been lagging behind other sectors of demand as a result of its persistent decline in 1999-2003, so the sharp increase represented a recovery of previous levels.
Second, following the depreciations of 1999-2003, which had significantly raised the local-currency prices of imported capital goods, local currencies have now been appreciating sharply against the dollar.
In 1999-2003, and particularly in 20012003, external demand was weak owing to the sluggish growth of European countries, recession in the United States in 2001, and low levels of demand among Latin American countries, which also hurt trade within the region.
The slump in external demand was also reflected in low international commodity prices, which dampened export earnings.
In the second half of 2003 these trends began to reverse direction: commodity prices rose sharply, external demand for raw materials strengthened substantially and there was synchronized growth among the developed economies internationally.
In addition, interest rates remained low in 2004-2005, both in the region and internationally, despite hikes in several countries, particularly in the second half of 2005.
This, combined with easier credit both in individual countries and internationally, buttressed an increase in gross fixed investment (see table IV.3).
Another factor had to do with the increase in national savings rates during this biennium, which reversed the trend of 1999-2003, albeit to varying extents across countries.
This reduction was not offset by greater external saving, which dropped from 4.5% of GDP in 1998 to 0.8% in 2002 and turned negative thereafter, leading to a reduction in regional investment.
In 2004-2005, the growth of national income in the region and the lagged recovery of consumption led to a significant increase in national saving.
This was also true for the South American countries and, to a lesser extent, for the Central American countries and Mexico.
Construction-related investment was particularly dynamic, especially in view of its low previous levels, while fixed investment in durable equipment also increased considerably.
In 1999-2003, both categories had declined, although machinery and equipment by relatively less.
Measured by this index, the international prices of capital goods have been steadily falling over the last few years.
Another important issue concerns the destination sectors of imported machinery and equipment.
From 1998 to 2000 (2002 in many countries), capital goods imports declined, before staging a recovery in the region from 2003 onward thanks to the increase in gross fixed capital formation recorded in that year.
Foreign purchases of power-generating machinery and equipment rose more slowly, with very few exceptions, and in some countries actually declined.10 The aggregate data available for 2005 also reveal a sizeable increase in capital goods imports and the persistence of trends noted in 2003 and 2004 in terms of the destination sectors of imported machinery and equipment.
Few of the region’s countries publish up-to-date national accounts series giving a breakdown of the public and private components of investment.
Nonetheless, the available data suggest that public investment has generally been maintained at around 20% of gross fixed investment,11 except in Bolivia and Chile.
In Bolivia, public investment slumped from 60% in the early 1990s to 23% in 1998 before rising again to 47% in 2004; in Chile public investment accounts for roughly 10% of total gross fixed investment.
Domestic prices Latin America and the Caribbean recorded a weighted average inflation rate of 6.1% in 2005, compared to 7.4% a year earlier, and the downward regional trend of this indicator thus continued.
The simple average of the individual countries’ inflation rates was 7.3%, compared The results for 2005 reflect the trend in inflation rates in Brazil and Mexico, which declined from 7.6% and 5.2% in 2004, respectively, to 5.7% and 3.3% in 2005.
Steeper reductions were achieved in Haiti (from 20.2% in 2004 to Republic (from 28.7% to 7.4%), Uruguay (from 7.6% to 4.9%) and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (from 19.2% to 14.4%), whereas Argentina, Chile, Ecuador, Paraguay, and Trinidad and Tobago recorded the largest increases.
Inflation rates in the other countries of the region were similar to those reported in 2004.
Although several countries posted double-digit increases in the consumer price index (CPI), for the first time there was no rate above 16% —the year’s highest being the 14.8% registered in Haiti.
Inflation in English- and Dutch-speaking Caribbean countries rose in 2005, with the simple average climbing The trends that had been emerging in the second half of 2004 persisted throughout 2005.
Cost-push factors displayed mixed trends, as illustrated by the prices of imported products.
The following groups were excluded from this section: 781, “motor cars and other motor vehicles principally designed for the transport of persons (other than motor vehicles of the type used for public transport), including station wagons and racing cars”; and 784, “parts and accessories of motor vehicles,” since these correspond more to consumer durables or intermediate goods.
For 2005, the analysis was based on the trade statistics published by individual countries.
The percentages refer to the official national accounts series published by the individual countries, at constant prices. prices were considerably higher in 2005 than in 2004.
The prices of manufactured goods on international markets did not vary markedly during the year.
Lastly, trends in real wages and salaries were also mixed: Argentina, Chile and Uruguay saw the largest increases, while real wages and salaries in other countries either were broadly unchanged or else slipped back slightly.
Consumer demand benefited from the increase in real wages and salaries in certain countries, as well as from stronger labour-market indicators and greater access to inexpensive credit.
This enabled several countries to make upward adjustments in the prices of some services (e.g., health and education) and in products whose prices respond readily to increases in demand, such as clothing and footwear and household equipment.
The latter stemmed from price hikes in response to stronger domestic demand, adjustments in the prices of regulated goods and services, and prices increases for food products, transport and basic services.
The appreciation of various countries’ currencies mitigated the higher prices of imported products to some extent (see table IV.5).
Against this backdrop, the authorities of most of the region’s countries continued to base their monetary policies on inflation targeting and the avoidance of sharp increases in consumer price indices.
The price indices for product groups consisting mainly of goods and those composed primarily of services also displayed varied trends.12 Goods prices fuelled inflation in 2005 in one group of countries, while the prices of services climbed more sharply in another.
In Brazil, the reduction in the general inflation rate in 2005 was largely due to a sharp slowdown in the goods category owing to lower food prices in the third quarter of the year.
In Mexico, the annual rate reflects a reduction in food prices in the second half of the year and a downturn in the price of housing services.
The decrease in electricity prices in the third quarter of the year resulted in a smaller rise in administered prices, but this trend began to reverse itself in the last few months of 2005.
In the Dominican Republic, a sharp exchangerate appreciation tempered price increases for imports and food products.
In Chile, despite the larger relative increase in services prices, goods prices also rose, unlike what happened in 2003 and 2004, thereby contributing to the higher inflation rate in 2005.
Apart from manufactures, the prices of imported goods have generally increased: food products on international markets have displayed uneven trends, while the prices of agricultural raw materials are rising and the prices of metals and minerals and of oil and fuel products have continued to climb sharply.
On foreign currency markets, the appreciation of bilateral exchange rates against the dollar seen in 2005 has intensified in some countries, while in others the local currency has depreciated.
Real salaries and wages in the first quarter of 2006 were higher than a year earlier.
Thus, over the 12 months to May 2006, inflation rates eased in some countries relative to cumulative figures as of May 2005, but other countries recorded increases.
The latter represented price corrections resulting from the expansion of private consumption, adjustments in regulated prices and higher food prices.
Core inflation rose more sharply in the initial months of the year in regional terms, reflecting price increases for education and health services, basic services, and clothing and household equipment in response to the upturn in private consumption (see figures IV.10 and IV.11).
These indices were calculated using the same procedure for all the countries, which involved grouping food and beverages, clothing and footwear, and household equipment within the goods index and placing those relating to transport services, housing and education, culture and recreation, and health services within the services index.
A common methodology was used to calculate the core inflation rate which excludes fuels, fuel products and perishable food products from the consumer price index.
The wholesale price index (WPI) in countries for which information is available rose by less than the consumer price index in 2005 except in El Salvador, Paraguay and Peru (see table IV.6).
Then, in the first few months of 2006, it gathered pace in several countries, and the 12-month variation to May 2006 came in higher than the corresponding figure of a year earlier.
The trend of this indicator in Brazil and Chile is interesting: in Brazil, although the WPI for May 2006 was at the same level as it was in December 2005, it displays a negative 12-month variation.
In Chile, the WPI rose by a cumulative 8.9% in the first five months of 2006 as a result of the higher price of oil imports.
As mentioned above, the rise in international oil and fuel prices has been a highly influential factor in domestic price trends.
Although this situation has mostly affected the net hydrocarbon importers, it has also had consequences for countries that are net exporters of crude oil but importers of fuels and other refined products.
The end effect of the higher prices of fuels, transport and basic services on domestic prices in specific countries has depended on national policies regarding the regulation and setting of domestic prices.
Gasoline prices in South American countries have been analysed as a means of providing an indicator of fuel price increases in general.14 Comparing 2005 with 2004, the steepest rises in gasoline prices occurred in Peru (8.9%), Colombia (7.4%), Bolivia and Chile (both 5.7%).
Since 2002, when fuel prices began to rise sharply on international markets, the price of gasoline has risen considerably more than the cumulative variation in the consumer price index in Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay; in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the prices of these products have remained constant throughout the period (see figure IV.12).
Employment and wages The relatively high levels of economic growth attained over the last few years has had a substantial effect on the region’s labour markets; in 2005 there was a significant increase in the employment rate for the third straight year, which on this occasion rose by 0.5 percentage points to 53.6% of the working-age population.
Nonetheless, this improvement simply represents a return to the regional employment rate achieved in 1997.15 The recovery of employment levels since 2003 has undergone a major qualitative change as it increasingly shifts towards the creation of wage-based jobs.
This trend reflects businesses’ greater confidence in the prospects for future growth and has set the stage for a significant expansion of formal-sector employment in many countries.
With favourable economic trends as a backdrop, the unemployment rate shed more than one percentage point, falling to 9.1% (its lowest level since the mid-1990s).
This improvement is the net effect not only of higher employment, but also a decline in the labour supply.
In fact, the participation rate slipped by 0.3 percentage points to 59.2% of the working-age population, with the urban labour force expanding by a below-trend rate of just 1.8%.
This is measured as a weighted average of employment rates in 16 countries representing 88.9% of the total population of Latin America and the Caribbean.
The employment rate indicates the percentage of the working-age population that is employed. fact that relatively robust economic growth has positive effects on labour markets.
Nonetheless, the unemployment rate remains high, and an estimated 18 million people are still out of work.
Although in 2004 and 2005 there was a clear upturn in formal employment, a longerterm view indicates that over the last 25 years the vast majority of new jobs have been created in the informal sector.
Moreover, a large proportion of new jobs are low paying, and short-term job contracts are becoming more prevalent in the formal sector.
A final point to be made in this connection is that the reactivation of the labour market in 2005 did not elicit significant increases in real wages, which edged up by just 0.5%.
A considerable drop in unemployment The regional urban unemployment rate (as a weighted average) dropped sharply from 10.2% to 9.1%, which was its lowest level since 1994.
In absolute terms, the reduction corresponds to roughly 2 million people distributed across all but four of the 21 countries for which information is available; in eight cases the unemployment rate fell by one percentage point or more (see table A-22 of the statistical appendix).
The simple average of unemployment rates therefore dropped sharply as well (from 10.0% to 9.1%), with significant reductions being recorded in all the subregions (see table IV.7).
The unusually sharp decrease in the regional unemployment rate is accounted for by the combined effect of strong job creation and a reduction in the region’s labour-force participation rate.
Reduction in the labour-force participation rate At the regional level, the weighted average of total labour-force participation rates fell from 59.5% to 59.2%, thereby signalling a slow-down in the expansion of the economically active population.
This reduction was somewhat surprising, since in recent years relatively rapid economic growth has generally prompted an upturn in the labour supply in response to better opportunities.
The decline in the participation rate was not all that widespread, however, as in 11 of the 19 countries for which information is available the rate either increased or was unchanged; as a result, the simple average of the countries’ participation rates did not decrease.
Nonetheless, economies in which participation rates declined include several of the largest in the region (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia and Peru), which is why the weighted regional average did, in fact, fall.
In the long run, labour participation depends on individual factors such as age, sex and education level, in conjunction with predominant sociocultural values.
As noted in an earlier edition of the Economic Survey,17 it is hard to project the short-term behaviour of this rate because of the diversity of strategies deployed by households in different economic circumstances; but while a variety of reactions are seen in all countries, there are patterns that distinguish some cases from others, as figure IV.13 illustrates.
Mexico provides the clearest example of a positive correlation between labour participation and economic growth in recent years; in Argentina and Brazil the trend is less clear, although the participation rate in these countries has also moved broadly in line with growth over the last 10 years.
In contrast, Colombia and especially the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela are countries where the participation rate tends to climb during periods of slow economic growth and vice versa.
Apparently, in these countries, the perceived benefit of having an additional income-earner tends to prevail in downswings, while the income effect predominates in upswings.
In Peru, participation patterns have been more varied, although the behaviour of the labour supply is broadly similar to that described for the previous two countries.
An analysis of events in 2005 in medium-sized or large countries shows that the reduction in the participation rate at the regional level can be explained by a number of factors.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia and Peru, the drop in participation reflects a continuation of the pattern of behaviour in the labour force seen during times of relatively rapid economic growth.
In Brazil, the decrease in participation may represent a continuation of the shrinkage of the labour supply that has occurred in this country whenever economic growth has been weak.
Nonetheless, given that the Brazilian economy continued to create jobs (the employment rate rose by 0.4 percentage points), it is unlikely that this has been caused by a discouraged-worker phenomenon; instead, people’s withdrawal from the labour market seems to have been motivated primarily by an income effect.
Argentina, for its part, saw a clear-cut departure from the procyclical behaviour of the labour supply that previously characterized that country.
In Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Brazil, the steepest drop in labour participation occurred among young people.
In Argentina, the employment rate for this age group rose at the same time, whereas in Brazil it declined only slightly, by 0.1 percentage points.
Thus, at least in these cases, a discouragement effect has apparently not been a factor in the reduction of the labour-force participation rate among the young population.
Instead, the increase in household incomes —largely thanks to the expansion of employment— is likely to have made it possible for a segment of young people to withdraw from the labour market and, at least for a significant proportion of them, to continue with their studies.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, labour participation among young people between 15 and 24 years of age dropped by 5.8 percentage points between 2003 and 2005, while the employment rate for this age group rose by 0.4 percentage points.
Exceptions are medium-sized or large countries in which overall labour participation dropped sharply and the female labour participation rate weakened, in some cases considerably (in Argentina and Brazil by 0.7 percentage points and in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela by 3.0 points).
Employment growth was substantial for the third consecutive year and was quite widespread in 2005 across the different countries (see table IV.8).
As figure IV.14 shows, the quite close correlation existing between economic growth and the variation in the employment rate in 2004-2005 explains this upturn.
The characteristics of job creation have changed significantly over the last few years.
In 2003, own-account work and wage employment were up by 4.8% and 2.8%, respectively, compared to figures of 2.9% and 3.7% for This calculation did not include Mexico because data were no longer comparable following a methodological change.
Accordingly, to evaluate the effects of the expansion of economic activity on labour demand, this country also needs to be excluded from the calculations relating to economic growth.
Studies conducted at the aggregate level in several parts of the world have not found any single cause for these processes, but in most cases technological change has been identified as the main one, with demand for skilled labour being stimulated at the expense of lower-skilled labour.
Other factors that have been mentioned in this connection are market restructuring, labour reforms, reduction of the real minimum wage, weakening of labour unions, and relative prices that are unfavourable to labour because of prevailing macroeconomic policies.
Nonetheless, there are major discrepancies regarding the weightings assigned to each of these factors.
As some studies have claimed that the influence of the various factors varies between sectors, one methodological proposal has been to deepen the analysis and study changes in the characteristics of labour demand at the sector level.
A review of the literature on changes in Latin America’s production sectors, particularly with regard to the effects of technological and organizational change on the demand for labour and its characteristics, reveals the existence of mixed trends.
On the one hand, there has been a significant degree of upskilling in the occupational structure, both in relation to new jobs that call for higher qualifications and as regards increasingly demanding requirements for personnel in existing posts.
This is not happening across the board, however, since some job categories have not exhibited these kinds of trends of this type and, what is more, simultaneous deskilling processes are to be observed in some cases, even within the same firm or business.
In the latter case, the wage gap can be expected to widen as more highly skilled personnel are rewarded while pay raises for workers in less demanding positions are restricted.
This process has probably been intensified by organizational changes that make labourmarket conditions more heterogeneous, such as outsourcing.
A case study of the Chilean port sector provides evidence of the varied effects that organizational and technological changes have had on employment and working conditions.
Organizational changes in this sector included the introduction of a differentiated system of port concessions and alterations in the work system, while technological changes included the use of new types of cranes as well as information and communication technologies.
These changes raised the sector’s productivity, but many of the expectations in terms of employment were only partially fulfilled.
For example, although the skill requirements of port workers generally increased, the work did not become concentrated in a small number of highly skilled workers, as had been predicted.
In mixed systems, where part of the port is operated by a single enterprise (single operator) and another by several active firms (multi-operators), the high level of unemployment in the main port zones added to the labour supply.
This, compounded by strong pressure to reduce costs, the discontinuous nature of the work and rising productivity’s effect in driving down labour demand, led to an increase in the proportion of work undertaken by temporary staff working a small number of shifts per month.
The result was increasing polarization in the port labour force, with a relatively small group of highly skilled and increasingly multi-functional staff at the top of the occupational structure and a growing contingent of relatively low-skilled temporary workers at its base.
Middle- ranking port workers have lost ground in this new occupational structure.
Differences in organizational structure are also reflected in the distribution of the available work and, hence, income.
Whereas in mixed systems (single operators and multi-operators) there is growing underemployment, with a declining number of shifts per worker and the resulting drop in their average incomes, the data on ports organized by a single operator point to more favourable trends.
The effect of new technologies depends on how production processes are reorganized, and in such situations there is no immediate adaptation of the organizational structure, nor a single or obvious way of bringing this about.
Factors unrelated to technological change also affect the characteristics of employment in the sector.
This study also highlights the fact that any public intervention aimed at leveraging the positive effect of technological and organizational change on employment and at reducing its negative consequences needs to take account of the specific characteristics of the sector in question.
Above all in activities that involve discontinuous labour demand, such as port work, organizational change affecting human resources needs to be undertaken from a sector-level perspective.
In fact, the Chilean port system is still searching for the best way to integrate its strategic objectives (productivity gains with lower costs and fewer interruptions of port activity) and the consequent technological and organizational change, with a humanresource policy that is sustainable in the long term.
Achieving these goals requires better coordination on various levels: between firms in the sector, between them and workers, and among firms, workers and the public sector.
United Nations publication, Sales In addition, the growth of own-account employment virtually came to a standstill.
There are two dynamics that drive the increase in this category of employment: the exploitation of opportunities created by expanding economies for the production and sale of goods and services; and self-employment creation to compensate for a lack of business-generated labour demand.
Following several years of economic revival, and in a setting of dynamic labour demand, the second type of strategy seemed to lose its appeal in 2005, and some people took advantage of new wage employment opportunities to abandon own-account work.
Lastly, in 2005, unpaid family work continued on its long-term downward path, which has recently been interrupted only in years of very low growth, such as 2001 and 2002, when, given the lack of job options, some young people seem to have preferred to contribute to the economic activities of their families.
An analysis of regional employment growth by branch of activity shows that the manufacturing sector continued to take advantage of domestic demand growth and favourable competitiveness conditions to expand production and hire workers.
Financial services, real estate and business services, in which the number of jobs shrank early in this decade, expanded by 5% or more for the third straight year.
It is also interesting to note that in commerce and in community, social and personal services —the two largest non-agricultural branches of activity in terms of employment, which have accounted for the majority of new jobs in recent years— employment grew more slowly than the overall increase, even though 47% of new jobs were created in these two branches.
Nonetheless, in 2005, as in 2004, job creation was more diversified than in most of the 1990s and the start of this decade.
Up to 19% of new jobs were created in manufacturing, 9% in construction and 19% in the financial services, real estate and business services sector.
In several countries, the upturn in economic growth has resulted in formal job creation at rates that frequently outpace aggregate employment growth.
The table shows how indices of formal employment reflected the weakness of labour demand in years of sluggish economic growth in the late 1990s and at the start of the current decade and also how those indices have recovered since then.
This upturn is the combined result of dynamic wage-based job creation and the formalization of casual employment relationships.
In addition to higher employment, some countries also saw an improvement in the index of visible underemployment (employed persons who are working for less than what is normally considered a full working day and want to work more).
Other indicators of employment quality show that, despite the buoyancy of formal employment, a large proportion of new jobs are of low quality.
Thus, in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Honduras and Uruguay, the proportion of employed workers receiving incomes below a certain level (invisible underemployment) rose; and in Chile and Mexico, formal employment contracts involve predominantly temporary jobs.
In fact, in 9 of the 16 countries for which there is information, own-account employment retreated in absolute terms in 2005.
Little variation in wages As was the case in 2004, the upturn in economic activity in 2005 had a greater effect on employment than on wages: real average wages in the formal sector in most countries recorded modest variations of between plus or minus 2%.
The regional median and regional weighted average of real average wages rose by just 0.2% and 0.5%, respectively (see table IV.7).
Exceptions to this pattern included a number of countries that are recovering from deep economic crises in which high inflation rates had eroded real wage levels.
These countries (Argentina, Dominican Republic, Uruguay) recorded increases in excess of 4% (see table IV.8).
To support the recovery of the purchasing power of labour incomes, the authorities in these three nations implemented active wage policies involving substantial hikes in the real minimum wage (32%, 19% and 70%, respectively).
The fact that in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil and Honduras real minimum wages also rose by more than 5% suggests that this instrument is being used differently than in the 1990s.
During most of the last decade, the minimum wage was managed cautiously in order to avoid fuelling labour costs and stoking inflationary pressures; as a result, between 1990 and 1997 its median real value for 20 countries slipped by 0.9% per year.
In contrast, since 1998, wage increases have been more widespread, and between 1997 and 2005 the median annual growth rate was 1.3% while the weighted average rose by 2.7%.
The sharp rise in the real minimum wage in 2005 led to increases of 2.0% in the regional median and 5.5% in the regional weighted average.
This type of more active wage policy was not implemented across the board, however, since in seven countries the real minimum wage declined or remained unchanged in 2005, and in another four it climbed by no more than 2%.
Prospects for 2006 In the first few months of 2006, the unemployment rate has continued to fall, although at a more measured pace, and the rate is forecast to drop from 9.6% in the first half of 2005 to 8.8% for the first six months of 2006.
Since regional employment is continuing to grow vigorously, the slower rate of decline in unemployment is accounted for by the fact that the regional participation rate has not only ceased to fall but has actually begun to rebound slightly.
The slackening of economic growth in Brazil in 2005 was reflected with a lag in a number of labour-market indicators, and employment growth stalled (see table IV.10).
The acceleration of economic growth in Mexico —another of the region’s largest economies— led to an upturn in the employment rate and, despite an increase in the labour supply, a fall in unemployment.
The other countries for which information is available also registered improvements in their respective unemployment and employment rates, with the rate of formal job creation remaining strong.
The first quarter of the year saw significant increases in the rate of growth of formal employment in Mexico and Peru (5.5% and 6.2%, respectively), while this rate eased somewhat in Argentina and Brazil, although formal job creation remains vigorous (8.6% and 5.1%).
The decrease in the unemployment rate is expected to slow in the second half of 2006, and an annual figure of 8.6% is projected, compared to 9.1% in 2005.
In the first few months of 2006, no country for which data are available reported a reduction in real wages, and in several cases wage growth actually picked up speed.
A simple average of nine countries shows real wages in the formal sector rising by 3.2%, with substantial increases in Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay.
Balance-of-payments current account The current account Worldwide economic growth has resulted in more buoyant international trade and has boosted demand for raw materials and helped push up prices.
This trend has not been seen in all commodities, but the upswing has included most energy products, some industrial metals and certain agricultural products such as sugar, bananas and coffee.
In the last three years, this external demand shock has fuelled a significant increase in economic activity in Latin America which has been coupled with surpluses on its balance-of-payments current account.
This growth trend and improved external balance have been seen in countries whose export structures are based on commodities whose prices have risen.
In other words, these results are due to an exogenous factor: higher prices for commodities that some countries possess in abundance.
For the third year in a row, the region posted a surplus on the balance-of-payments current account, with the 2005 surplus amounting to US$ 35.325 billion, or the equivalent of 1.5% of Latin America’s GDP.
The capital and financial accounts of the balance of payments (including errors and omissions) recorded a surplus of US$ 21.650 billion, or 0.9% of regional GDP.
The overall balance therefore took the form of a surplus of US$ 56.977 billion (2.4% of regional GDP).
Reserve assets rose by US$ 35.265 billion (equivalent to 1.5% of regional GDP), the region made US$ 26.816 billion in payments on loans from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (1.1% of GDP), and exceptional financing amounted to US$ 5.105 billion (0.2% of regional GDP).
The positive balance on the current account reflected surpluses on the merchandise trade account (US$ 80.627 billion, or 3.4% of regional GDP) and in current transfers (US$ 48.694 billion or 2.1% of regional GDP).
In contrast, the services account posted a deficit of US$ 18.519 billion (0.8% of regional GDP), while the deficit on the income account came to US$ 75.476 billion, or 3.2% of regional GDP.
In 2005 only nine Latin American countries improved their current account balances relative to 2004 (when 14 countries had shown advances over 2003), while seven countries registered a current account surplus, which was one less than in 2004 (see figure V.1).1 All of the seven except Haiti were South American countries.
As in 2003 and 2004, current transactions were within the interval of +/–three points of regional GDP in 10 of the region’s countries.
The median of the distribution went from a deficit of 0.5 percentage points of GDP in 2004 to one of 0.8 percentage points.
Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela are the only countries to have had an uninterrupted string of current account surpluses since 2002.
In 2005, Nicaragua posted the region’s largest current account deficit (16.2% of its GDP), while the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela turned in the biggest surplus (20% of its GDP).
If the latter country were factored out of the calculations, then the region’s current account balance in 2005 would have been US$ 9.966 billion instead of In 2005, the Caribbean countries posted a current account deficit of US$ 136 million (0.3% of their GDP).
This was an improvement over the situation in 2004, when the current account deficit amounted to 0.9% of the subregion’s GDP.
As shown in figure V.2, all the countries of this subregion registered a current account deficit in 2005 except Trinidad and Tobago, which had a surplus of US$ 2.741 billion (21.2% of its GDP).
The improvement in South America’s current account reflected a larger merchandise trade surplus, especially in the Andean countries, thanks to the increase in petroleum exports from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In Central America, the slight improvement seen in the current account was related to the upturn in In terms of the basic balance (i.e., the sum of the current account balance and net foreign direct investment), four countries posted a deficit in 2005: Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua.
This is the equivalent of 0.45 % of regional GDP (excluding the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela).
The current account balance of Caribbean countries (as a simple average) was -14.1%. the income account.
Here too, worker remittances made a major contribution to the positive balance in current transfers of almost 9.3 percentage points of GDP.
South America turned in a surplus of US$ 44.899 billion in 2005 (the equivalent of 3% of the subregion’s GDP).
This was half a percentage point higher than in 2004, with improvements observed in the merchandise trade balance (a surplus of 7.2% of GDP, which was 0.3 percentage points higher than the year before) and the income account (whose deficit narrowed by 0.5 points).
The services balance deteriorated by 0.1 percentage points of GDP, while net current transfers were down by 0.2 points.
The countries of the Andean Community recorded a surplus of almost US$ 24.790 billion, or 6.8% of their GDP (2.6 percentage points higher than in 2004).4 In 2005, the trade balance of The Andean Community’s trade surplus expanded by 2.3 points of GDP, while the surplus on its income account rose by 0.4 points.
Contributing factors to this result included the balances posted by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Bolivia thanks to higher hydrocarbon prices on international markets, while the current transfers account recorded a slight decline.
The MERCOSUR countries’ current account surplus amounted to US$ 19.407 billion (1.9% of the group’s GDP) in 2005, while they witnessed a deterioration in their trade balance (by 0.3 percentage points of GDP), services balance (0.2 points) and current transfers (0.09 points).
The current account deficit in Central America totalled US$ 5.020 billion, or 5.2 percentage points of the subregion’s GDP (an improvement of 0.4 points over the preceding year).
The country is therefore included in all analyses of the Andean Community for 2005. posted negative balances for current transactions.
The subregion’s trade deficit was equivalent to 13.8% of its GDP, which was 0.2 percentage points less than in 2004.
The higher prices brought by hydrocarbons have been a determining factor in this result, since all of these countries are net importers.
Net current transfers closed at a level similar to the figure recorded for 2004.
A comparison with emerging economies in other world regions shows, for instance, that some oil producers in the Middle East (such as Saudi Arabia and Kuwait) posted major increases in their current account balances in 2004 and 2005.
In 2004, Saudi Arabia’s current account surplus climbed by 7.7 percentage points of GDP, while Kuwait’s rose by 13.5 points.
In 2005, Saudi Arabia’s current account surplus increased by 7.4 percentage points.
In contrast, most emerging countries in Eastern Trade in goods and services In 2005, Latin America’s balance of goods and services stood at US$ 62.108 billion, or 2.6% of GDP.
Growth rates for exports and imports were 20.0% and 18.2%, respectively, with both of these figures being lower than the rates recorded in 2004.
Increases in export volumes contributed 8.1% to the expansion of external sales, while higher price contributed 11%.
For imports, these two factors’ contributions were equivalent to 12.1% and 5.5%, respectively.
These growth rates for the value of exports and imports were quite high, especially when compared to those from the early part of this decade.
Changing price levels were one of the main determinants of the region’s merchandise trade result.
If the 2004 import and export baskets are held constant, then price increases widened the merchandise surplus by almost US$ 28.993 billion.
The value of Latin America’s merchandise exports climbed by 20.3%, of which 11.7% is attributable to price increases and 7.7% to higher volumes.
As illustrated by Colombia, Chile and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela —three of the countries with the largest percentage increases in external sales— the Europe and Central Asia saw their current account balances deteriorate in 2005.
This was the case for Bosnia and Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Estonia, Hungary, Moldavia, Montenegro, Serbia, Ukraine and Turkey.5 Some Asian economies, such as the Republic of Korea and Indonesia, recorded reductions of 2.3 and 0.1 points in their respective current account balances; the merchandise trade balances of both countries also deteriorated.
As in Latin America and the Caribbean, results vary widely and are largely dependent on the export and import structures of the countries concerned.
Unlike the case of exports, however, the increase in import volumes (10.8%) exceeded the rise in prices (6.4%).
This may be linked to the fact that the region’s economic growth in 2005 drove up demand for imported goods and to the appreciation of many of its countries’ currencies, which made imports cheaper in relative terms.
In El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, for instance, prices made a more significant contribution than volumes to the increase in imports owing to the higher prices paid for fuel imports.
In 2005, the value of the Andean Community’s external sales rose by US$ 28.4 billion, which was an increase of 36% and 4.2 percentage points of these countries’ GDP.
This group’s imports expanded by US$ 15.5 billion, which was an upturn of 29.5% (1.8 Some of these countries are running deficits on their current accounts and are therefore highly dependent on capital inflows, which could easily undergo changes in an international context of rising interest rates.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, prices increased by 5.3% and volumes by 36.0%; in Colombia, prices rose by 9.7% and volumes by 15.0%; and in Chile, prices climbed by 3.2% and volumes by 22%.
The MERCOSUR countries’ exports swelled by US$ 27 billion (a growth rate of 19.7%) and its imports by US$ 16.8 billion (an 18.6% increase).
Trade within these integration schemes has been relatively limited compared with other economic integration groups, and intra-group trade has been gradually declining in the Andean Community and MERCOSUR.7 In 2005, exports within the Andean Community represented 9.6% of its total exports, compared with 10.5% in 2004.
These trade flows’ peak level over the last 16 years reached its peak (14.2%) in 1998 and since then has been fluctuating between 8.8% y 10.6%.
In contrast, trade within the Central American Common Market (CACM) is trending upward, reaching a record high of 28.7% of the subregion’s total exports in 2005.
Trade within the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) has also been expanding in recent years, thanks in large part to Trinidad and Tobago’s crude oil sales.
As for the Andean countries, the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA), which has been in force since 1991, is due to expire in December 2006.
This would mainly benefit Bolivia and Ecuador, as Peru signed a free trade agreement with the United States in April 2006 (ratification by Congress is still pending in both countries, although this is expected to occur by the end of the year), while Colombia is expected to sign a similar agreement soon.
Various Latin American countries are in the process of negotiating free trade agreements with the United States, have recently signed such accords or are about to do so.
This agreement is expected to enter into force in Guatemala and the Dominican Republic and to be approved by the Costa Rican Congress in the second half of 2006, while Panama is engaged in the final round of negotiations on this treaty with the United States.
The Dominican Republic is not taking part in the negotiations with the European Union being pursued by the Latin American bloc of countries.
Terms of trade Although recent years have seen a significant improvement in Latin America’s average terms of trade, this trend has not manifested itself equally in all subregions (see figure V.5).
In 2005, Latin America’s terms of trade went from strength to strength: improving by 5.7% compared with the 5.2% increase recorded in 2004.
Chile, which is an oil importer, recorded an increase in its terms of trade as higher copper prices more than offset the rise in crude oil prices on international markets.
At the other extreme, the terms of trade of Costa Rica, Paraguay and Uruguay decreased by 8.2%, 7.8% and 5.7%, respectively.
An even clearer picture of the improvement in the region’s terms of trade in recent years is provided by a comparison between the average for the 1990s and for 2005, which shows a 23.2% increase.
This sharp upswing reflects the strength of demand for raw materials, which is being driven by world economic growth, and especially that of China and India, and of the political uncertainty that has generated additional oil price volatility.
In 2005, South America’s terms of trade climbed by 6.5% while Mexico’s increased 2.9% and Central America’s fell by 3.3%.
A comparison with the average for the 1990s shows that these subregions’ terms of trade varied by 50%, 21% and -11.8%, respectively.
Within the subregion of South America, there are considerable differences at the country level.
Higher oil and copper prices in 2005 have been a major factor in the improved terms of trade for South America as a whole.
The terms of trade of countries such as Brazil and Mexico are less closely correlated with commodity export price indices than those of Bolivia, Chile and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela because of the large proportion of manufactures in these first two countries’ exports.
If world oil prices continued rising at the present rate, these countries’ balance of payments could worsen and their economic growth could even be held back.
Rising prices for oil and petroleum products had various consequences in Central America.
In terms of the subregion’s external accounts, the rising oil bill led to a considerable worsening of the trade balance, while fuel price adjustments pushed up inflation at the domestic level.
The oil bill for Central America soared by 39% in 2005, an increase of US$ 1.559 billion, or 34.8% of the overall increase in the cost of imports.
If the Dominican Republic and Haiti are included, the increase amounts to US$ 2.386 billion (the equivalent of 37.2% of the overall increase in imports).
The countries for which the growing oil bill represented the greatest proportion of increased spending on imports were Guatemala (49.2%).
All the countries of the subregion apart from Panama registered a deterioration in their merchandise trade balances.
As a percentage of the overall current account deficit for Central America, the oil bill rose from 83% in Over the past three years, Central America’s oil bill has risen by 0.4%, 0.7% and 1.1% of GDP, respectively.
If the Dominican Republic and Haiti are included, the figures are 0.7%, 0.6% and 1%, respectively.
The country whose oil bill showed the greatest increase as a percentage of GDP in 2005 was Nicaragua (2.3%), whereas it had been the Dominican Republic in 2003 (2.9%) and Honduras (1.7%) in 2004.
The picture drawn by all of these figures shows just how serious an impact the rising prices of petroleum and petroleum products have been having on these economies.
The rising oil bill, which climbed from 49.1% of the current account deficit in the reasons why these deficits have been widening over the past three years.
In 2005, this subregion’s external purchases of petroleum and petroleum products increased by 18.8% (the equivalent of US$ 172 million), thus accounting for 34.8% of the overall growth of imports.
The countries where the rate of increase in expenditure on crude oil and fuels was the highest relative to the rate of increase in total imports were As a percentage of GDP, the oil bill for the Caribbean countries expanded by biggest increase in 2005 was recorded by Guyana, at 6.4% of GDP.
At the subregional level, however, it should be noted that the terms of trade have worsened for Central America.
Because it is a net oil exporter, Trinidad and Tobago is not included in the English-speaking Caribbean for the purposes of this analysis. d This analysis covers the countries in this subregion for which data are available.
The oil bill for 2005 is known for the following countries: Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Guyana, and the member countries of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).
Information on the oil bill for Jamaica and Suriname is available up to 2004. b c B.
Capital flows and external debt Capital and financial account balance Venezuela) and, on the other, sizeable capital inflows in the form of portfolio investments.
International investors took advantage of the favourable economic conditions in Latin American and, in the case of Brazil and Mexico, of high interest rates, to channel resources into the financial assets of the region’s countries.
Buybacks of external bonds and external debt restructurings spurred the development of the countries’ domestic bond markets, thereby attracting an increasing number of foreign investors.
This was made possible thanks to surging demand for raw materials exported by the region and an extremely favourable financial environment at the international level.
As mentioned previously, US$ 16 billion of this result was attributable to the current account surplus (1.5% of GDP) while US$ 28.6 billion corresponded to the transformation of the US$ 7 billion capital and financial account deficit (including errors and omissions) into a surplus of US$ 21.6 billion (0.9% of GDP) in 2005.
The overall balance was used to build up reserves by the equivalent of 1.5% of GDP and to pay the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (1.1% of GDP); in addition, exceptional financing amounting to 0.2% of GDP was recorded.
The region therefore became a net recipient of capital flows while at the same time running a current account surplus.
This was the first time that this had happened (with the exception of 2003, when both surpluses were much smaller) since the beginning of the data series in 1980 (see figure V.7).
Capital flows were received under two subheadings in the capital and financial account.
First, foreign direct investment (FDI) amounted to US$ 47.8 billion (2% of GDP), which was 9.7% higher than the previous year but nonetheless below the record net inflows for this data series of US$ 79.3 billion (4.4% of GDP) registered in 1999.
The main recipients of FDI in 2005 were Brazil and Mexico (with net inflows of almost US$ 12 billion), followed by Colombia (US$ 5.5 billion), Chile (US$ 4.7 billion), Argentina (US$ 3.5 billion) and Peru (US$ 2.5 billion).
Bolivia, on the other hand, closed out the year with US$ 280 million of disinvestment.
Second, at US$ 26.2 billion (1.1% of GDP), the deficit in short-term capital flows was smaller than in 2004.
This figure was the net result of two opposing flows: on the one hand, debt paydowns and external asset formation (particularly in the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Portfolio and other types of investment IMF and exceptional financing Reserve variation a A minus sign (-) indicates an increase in reserve assets.
The basic balance is the sum of the current account balance and FDI flows. countries, inflows of FDI failed to entirely offset their current account deficits.
The negative short-term capital flows of the other countries that posted positive basic balances were attributable to external asset formation (as was the case in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile and Colombia) and to a decrease in net external liabilities.
All of the countries except El Salvador recorded a build-up of reserves (see figure V.8).
Management of external liabilities High international liquidity, an almost flat yield curve in the United States, low interest rates and rent-seeking on the part of investors were all determining factors in the entry of capital flows into the region and the take-up of local-currency bond issues with lower cost.
The reduction in the region’s external debt was coupled with a widespread restructuring of debt profiles in the interests of diminishing exposure to shifting external conditions (particularly interest-rate and exchange-rate movements).
Liability management operations focused on extending external-debt maturities, retiring the more expensive debts, diversifying exchange risk by issuing debt instruments in currencies other than the United States dollar, and reducing that same form of risk by increasing the proportion of debt issued in local currencies.
Countries such as Argentina, Brazil, Panama, Peru and Mexico undertook external bonds buybacks, while certain countries also swapped external for domestic debt (Argentina, Colombia and Peru).13 Mexico issued warrants that give investors the option of swapping dollardenominated bonds for peso debt.
In March 2006, Mexico issued warrants to swap US$ 720 million worth of eurodenominated bonds for peso-denominated paper.
These external bonds buybacks came in response to a strategy aimed at eliminating obligations with high interest rates and more restrictive conditions.
In early 2006, there was a spate of debt buy-back operations, including the withdrawal from the market of Brady bonds, which had been introduced at the end of the 1980s as part of non-performing debt swap operations.
Many countries decided to take advantage of the buy-back option provided by Brady bonds to remove them from the market, which suggests that the market for such instruments may be coming to an end.
In August 2005, Brazil exchanged US$ 4.2 billion in C-bonds (capitalization bonds) for US$ 4.5 billion in A-bonds (amortization bonds), thereby extending this debt maturity from 2014 to 2018.
In October, the remaining US$ 1.2 billion in C-bonds was also retired.
For a long time, C-bonds (a type of Brady bond introduced as part of the 1994 debt restructuring) were Brazil’s main external debt instrument.
In late February 2006, Brazil and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela announced their intention to buy back US$ 6.6 billion and US$ 3.9 billion in Brady bonds, respectively.
For Brazil, this operation eliminates its Brady bond debt, while the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will clear out its par and discount Brady bonds.
Mexico had retired all of its Brady bond debt back in mid-2003.
Total debt held in Brady bonds in the region peaked at almost US$ 150 billion in August 1996, but had shrunk to US$ 10.1 billion by the end of April 2006.
By that time, only nine countries were holding such bonds, and only four of those were Latin American (the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the Dominican Republic, Panama and Peru).14 At the beginning of June, Panama announced that it would buy back all its Brady bonds (almost US$ 360 million) at the end of that month.
In addition to the retirement of Brady bonds, early 2006 saw a number of countries join the wave of buyback operations.
These included Mexico, which in March retired bonds worth US$ 2.9 billion by issuing US$ 3 billion in dollars —denominated benchmarked bonds.
Brazil announced that in 2006 it would buy back other short-term external debt bonds, while in March, Colombia retired US$ 600 million in external bonds as part of its strategy to reduce the proportion of its debt in foreign currency.
In May, Ecuador retired US$ 740 billion in 2012 global bonds (some of its most costly debts) with a coupon rate of 12%, and announced that it would retire the remaining US$ 510 million of such bonds by January 2007.
At the end of 2005, Brazil and Argentina announced that they would be paying off all their debts with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (US$ 15.5 billion and US$ 9.5 billion respectively).
However, the ensuing market reactions in the two countries differed: in Brazil, the operation was considered an example of successful management of external debt and international reserves, while in Argentina it was deemed a rash decision that might have to be financed with more costly subsequent operations.
Although this pushed up Argentina’s risk rating, the concerns proved unfounded and the risk rating began to trend downward once again in January 2006.
At the end of March 2006, Uruguay announced the early payment of US$ 630 million to IMF, while in May Mexico announced the early payment of US$ 7.0 billion to the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).
Peru paid some of its debt to the Paris Club using funds that were raised partly on the domestic market.
International bond issues Despite the various bond buy-back operations, international markets recorded a high level of bond issues in 2005 and during the first six months of 2006.
A large number of pre-financing operations were carried out in 2005 both to take advantage of low interest rates and in an effort to bypass election periods in 2006 that might heighten market volatility and drive up interest rates.
Sovereign bonds accounted for 53% of that total, while corporate bonds and bank paper represented 47%.
The overall total was 26% higher than in 2004 and represents 29% of all emerging-economy issues.
The region was outpaced only by the emerging economies of Europe, which accounted for 34% of the total.
Although the returns on some of the new issues were used to build up reserves (specifically earmarked for future external debt payments), the aggregate increase in reserves was partially curbed by asset formation abroad.
As a result, the international reserves of Latin America and the Caribbean in 2005 amounted to a record level of almost US$ 255 billion, which is the equivalent of 10% of regional GDP and 15.7% higher than in 2004 (see figure V.9).
All the countries except El Salvador recorded yearon-year growth in their stock of international reserves.
The Dominican Republic posted the highest growth rate for reserves (130%), while Brazil and Mexico accounted for 50% of the region’s reserves in absolute terms.
One trend observed in 2005 was the use of international issues in local currencies.
Brazil floated its first reaisdenominated issue on the international market for US$ 1.5 billion, which was the largest local-currency issue to be made by any emerging-market issuer.
These bonds have a 10-year maturity and a coupon rate of 12.5%.
The Government of Colombia and several Brazilian, Mexican and Peruvian companies issued bonds on the international market in local currency.15 These local-currency bond issues (including that of the Brazilian Government) totalled around US$ 3.9 billion.
Another widespread pattern in the region was the lengthening of maturities (see figure V.10).
Brazil reopened its issue of 2034 global bonds, issuing US$ 500 million in May and the same amount in November 2005.
In 2006, Brazil extended maturities by issuing US$ 1 billion of 2037 global bonds in January (with a yield of 7.56%) and Maturity Amount of issuance Coupon rates the basis of figures from J.P.
According to IMF data, debts existing prior to 1 January 2005 that are eligible for forgiveness amount to US$ 231 million in the case of Bolivia, US$ 65 million for Guyana, US$ 154 million for Honduras and US$ 201 million for Nicaragua (including remaining assistance under the HIPC Initiative).
Peru also issued a further US$ 500 million in 2025 global bonds for the same purpose.
In addition to sales of federal government bonds (BODENs) to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on a number of occasions during 2005, Argentina placed a bond issue on the international market in March 2006 for the first time since the moratorium of December 2001.
This US$ 500 million issue of 5-year Bonar V bonds had a yield of 8.36% and carried a coupon rate of 7%.
In May, a similar amount was issued at a somewhat lower yield (8.09%).
Years and percentages Nicaragua) and that the proposal would be discussed at the meeting of the Bank’s Board of Governors in early April.
However, no concrete measures have yet been implemented as a result of the meeting.
In 2005, 80% of the region’s sovereign issues were denominated in dollars, 10% in euros, 1% in yen and 9% in Brazilian reais, Colombian pesos, Mexican pesos, Peruvian soles and Swiss francs.
The countries of the region have also increased their debts’ maturity profiles and lowered the cost of external debt by retiring short-term and more expensive bonds from the market.
Comparison with the external public debt of these countries as of December 2005.
Outlook for 2006 In 2005, international market conditions were a determining factor in achieving the above-mentioned results.
In particular, continuing low interest rates, narrow interest rate spreads and excess liquidity were associated with robust external demand for raw materials exported by the region.
This pushed up prices of those exports and gave a major boost to income.
The historical series of the region’s interest rates spreads measured by the Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBI+) reached its lowest level of 2005 in September of that year, when it registered 280 basis points.
At the beginning of 2006, spreads trended downward, posting a record low of 199 basis points in April (see figure V.11).
During 2006, however, the market began to reflect greater risk aversion in the face of rising interest rates in the United States.
In May, when inflation increased by more than expected in the United States, financial markets cooled considerably (especially emerging markets).
This reflected the reaction of investors to expectations of an interest rate hike and a resulting slowdown in world growth.
In May, Latin American stock markets and currencies contracted while interest rate spreads as measured by EMBI+ expanded (see figures V.12, V.13 and V.14).
The spread was 239 basis points in May and 235 basis points in June.
There is uncertainty about how long this situation might continue and the potential consequences of adjusting to international disequilibria.
However, the macroeconomic conditions in the region (particularly the primary surpluses, build-up of international reserves and improved debt profiles) suggest that the region is now in a better financial position to face a potential retreat of capital or global recession.
Despite the increase in risk premiums, the region’s fundamentals do not seem to be under threat, as the corrections that were made mainly took place in those markets and currencies with the highest levels of appreciation.
However, this does not mean the region is devoid of risk factors such as a lack of development in domestic financial markets.
The work of Budnevich and Le Fort on this subject contains an empirical analysis of the relationship between the cyclical components of GDP and of external financing, particularly from private sources.a Push factors and pull factors are therefore controlled for in the estimates, and the causes of fluctuation in external financing are also considered.
The authors conclude that the GDP of the United States and external financing —as measured by the capital account to GDP ratio— were procyclical in relation to domestic GDP, while the domestic interest-rate gap was countercyclical.
As for external financing, the real exchange rate, the United States interest rate corrected by country risk (measured by the EMBI) and the domestic interest rate were all countercyclical.
The conclusions of the study are reached by estimating specifications from two equations.
One seeks to explain the cyclical fluctuation of GDP and the other accounts for the volatility of the capital account.
Since the explanatory variables for both equations include the lagged dependent variable, estimates were prepared using the Arellano-Bond method.
United Nations publication, Sales No.S.05.II.G.198. a The authors used the Hodrick-Prescott filter to obtain the cyclical components or gaps.
Chapter VI The role of the real exchange rate and investment in export diversification in Introduction The region’s unsatisfactory export performance has long been a central theme of ECLAC documents.
Such a structure would enable the region to sell more dynamic products on the international market, which would in turn reduce the volatility of export earnings and have a greater impact on GDP growth and employment.
In the early days of ECLAC, criticism of the limitations of export specialization based on natural resources emphasized the aspect of world demand, which tended to worsen the terms of trade.
Although that argument was not completely abandoned, subsequent criticism of export performance focused on the lack of production linkages within the specialization in natural resources.
Later still, ECLAC stressed that specializing in natural resources would not stimulate knowledge creation in the same way as the industrial sector would.
In recent years, the potential of a specialization in natural resources has been assessed more favourably.
There is a general consensus that most of the region’s countries have done little to diversify their export structure.
The question arises as to why Latin America and the Caribbean have had so much difficulty in diversifying this structure during the past 30 years.
In order to diversify an economy’s exports, it must be capable of producing new tradable goods and services.
This requires the appropriate technical conditions and economic incentives to be present at the same time.
Although ECLAC has tended to emphasize one aspect of the problem: the lack of policies and mechanisms for technical capacity-building or compensation of market failures that hamper the development of new skills.
But these skills will not translate into regular goods production unless the right economic conditions prevail.
This raises the question as to what has been happening with regard to capacity-building and the profitability of producing tradables in the region over the last three decades.
Individual countries’ performances have clearly varied, but the insufficient expansion of export production appears to be associated with a feature common to most of the countries: macroeconomic instability that manifests itself as a combination of high inflation and sizeable variations in GDP growth.
First, macroeconomic instability has reduced the profitability of tradable goods as a result of highly volatile real exchange rates, with prolonged periods of real appreciation being interspersed with short-lived bouts of very steep real depreciation (usually caused by external shocks).
Second, the region’s macroeconomic instability also conspired against increased investment in physical and human capital and therefore against the expansion and diversification of the capacity to produce new goods.
The following section reviews concepts and empirical literature relating to the link between the production of tradable goods and these three variables (level of the real exchange rate, its volatility and investment).
The third section discusses some stylized facts of export diversification, while the fourth presents an econometric analysis of panel data for the entire set of selected countries.
Determinants of export diversification Diversifying exports is about modifying an economy’s pattern of specialization to produce new exportable goods.
An economy’s technical capacity to produce new exportables depends on its endowments of human and natural resources and the stock of physical capital and knowledge it has accumulated.
These determinants have varying effects on the development of an economy’s technical production capacity.3 In the short and medium terms, developing the capacity to produce tradable goods basically depends on the development of knowledge and the growth of physical capital stocks, which in turn determine factor productivity.
Although the quantity and quality of natural resources in an economy cannot be taken as givens, they change very gradually as a function of the stock of knowledge and capital that is accumulated.
Increased knowledge, whether generated at home or abroad, may make it possible to expand an economy’s resource endowment and use it more efficiently (World Bank, From Natural Resources to the Knowledge Economy: Trade and Job Quality, Washington, D.C., 2002). level of the real exchange rate and its volatility.
In addition, the supply of such goods may take some time to respond to real devaluations or may be inhibited from doing so.
This is why real exchange-rate volatility is particularly detrimental for economies seeking to diversify their supply of tradable goods.
Investment and the real exchange rate’s level and degree of volatility are thus three fundamental variables influencing the characteristics of an economy’s export supply.
Three main issues to be considered in this regard are: the relationship between the real exchange rate and changes in an economy’s supply of exportables; the role of exchange-rate volatility in inhibiting the diversification of export production; and the way in which this volatility and macroeconomic instability influence the level of investment in tradables.
Real devaluation as an instrument for the diversification of production There are at least two ways in which real devaluations can have a positive effect on an economy’s supply of export goods.
First, they may increase profitability levels and, as a result, stimulate production of existing export goods and create incentives for the emergence of new tradable activities.
Second, as real devaluations encourage and expand the production of existing and new tradables, they open up opportunities for achieving economies of scale and new knowledge in the sectors involved.
The region used to be reluctant to consider real devaluation as a means of expanding tradable production for two reasons.
First, the high inflation that prevailed According to Agosin and Tussie, most countries that achieved steady export growth maintained exchange rates that were attractive to their exporters (“An overview”, Trade and Growth.
These exchange rates also tended to remain stable, thereby enabling tradable-goods producers to make long-term investments.
Rodrik discusses the roles of the real exchange rate and investment in the expansion and diversification of exports in South-East Asia (D.
Krugman (1987) analyses the dynamic process of production specialization that can be triggered by a real devaluation within an economy.
Krugman, “The narrow moving band, the Dutch disease, and the competitive consequences of Mrs.
Thatcher: notes on trade in the presence of dynamic scale economies”, Journal of Development Economics, vol. 27, 1987.
The duration of a real devaluation depends on how long it takes the real exchange rate to return to its purchasing power parity (PPP convergence).
Recent evidence (from periods of flexible exchange rates and low inflation in developed countries) shows that this convergence process may be very slow, and domestic mechanisms to adjust prices in accordance with nominal valuation may vary greatly. in most of the region’s countries provided limited and fleeting opportunities for a real devaluation.
Second, during the import-substitution industrialization (ISI) phase, real devaluations had ambivalent effects on the profitability of firms that sold a large proportion of their goods on the domestic market and whose cost structures were strongly influenced by the cost of imported inputs and of servicing foreign-currency debts.
The problems that impeded devaluations were not limited to the difficulty of altering relative prices in a context of high or chronic inflation.
The region also faced stumbling blocks in its attempts to expand its supply of exportables.
The factors that hindered or restricted the expansion of export supply following a devaluation,7 particularly in the short run, included the low short-term elasticity of the export supply of certain natural-resourceintensive goods and the lower profitability and tighter liquidity constraints faced by export companies following devaluations.
These increased liquidity constraints were the result of the devaluation-induced decrease in domestic demand, higher prices for imported inputs, reduced external financing and tighter monetary conditions within each of the affected national economies.
In short, the pessimistic view of how the supply of exportables would react to real devaluations was associated with two phenomena that were common in the region up until the 1990s: high inflation and a lower profit ratio for many manufacturing companies owing to their cost structures and the liquidity constraints associated with devaluations.
This can increase the economy’s productivity in the short term or procyclically for a variety of reasons, including the emergence of economies of scale, increased utilization of factors of production and the effects of “learning by doing”.
According to Krugman (1987), real devaluations can have lasting effects on an economy’s relative productivity and its pattern of specialization.
Exchange-rate policy can pave the way for the emergence of new production sectors, and experience and knowledge in these activities can thus be accumulated.
In his model, a given sector’s factor productivity depends on its cumulative production experience, both nationally and abroad.
Relative productivity vis-à-vis the rest of the world therefore rises in those sectors that gain experience through producing.
Dynamic scale economies resulting from the production process bring down costs and allow for new areas of specialization.
According to this model, a new sector that has emerged thanks to this kind of exchange-rate policy’s application will produce goods at increasingly lower costs thanks to the productivity gains it will realize as it accumulates more production experience, thus consolidating a new specialization pattern.8 Krugman describes some limitations on the possibilities for diversification based on exchange-rate policies.
First, the increase in the number of sectors will lead to more employment and thus to higher wages.
This will limit diversification, since very large productivity gains will be required to make a new sector profitable.
For a more theoretical discussion of the impact of devaluation, see W.M.
Diaz Alejandro, “A note on the impact of devaluation and distributive effect”, Journal of Political Economy, vol. 71, 1963; P.
The relative productivity of the new production process vis-à-vis the rest of the world will increase in line with the accumulation of experience.
Countries with high wages may find it difficult to find sectors in which a rise in productivity would suffice to achieve a relative cost advantage.
Relatively large countries or those with more resources (in terms of labour) tend to have greater production experience and relative productivity vis-à-vis countries with fewer resources, since a larger workforce may be able to produce a higher number of goods. difference in terms of diversification.
In small countries that do not have large enough domestic markets to permit production to expand, exchange-rate policy may not succeed in speeding up productivity growth sufficiently to achieve comparative advantages for that sector.
Clearly, increases in the potential profitability of exportable goods brought about by real devaluations do not automatically create capacity for producing new varieties of goods.
It is plausible to think, however, that increased profitability would encourage new or existing entrepreneurs to create that capacity by investing in research, imitating other countries, purchasing technology and training the labour force.
Yet the learning experience is basically limited because imitating and applying existing technologies may not be a linear or automatic process.
Cimoli (1992)11 stresses that, following a real devaluation, the possibility of diversifying the supply of tradable goods and changing an economy’s pattern of specialization in relation to its trading partners will depend on the technological gap between them.
This technological gap has two elements: imitation (based on technological asymmetries between the country and the rest of the world) and innovation.
According to Cimoli, an economy with no innovation capacity can diversify its export structure only by using its imitation capacity to produce goods based on consolidated technologies.
This capacity may be relatively low, however, due to considerable technological asymmetries in relation to the rest of the world that entail differences in production coefficients and in product characteristics and performance.
Real devaluations generate opportunities for diversification, but low technology-absorption and imitation capacities may limit the possibilities of taking advantage of them.
This may have been the case for many Latin American economies in the past.
The failure of exportables production to respond to a real devaluation may also have been linked to the region’s very low levels of productive and technological development.
Volatility of the real exchange rate and the reaction of exportable supply To analyse the role of that volatility in real exchange rates plays in trade flows, it must be remembered that winning over or penetrating an external market has high costs stemming from the production, investment and marketing decisions inherent in such a strategy.
Once the company has invested in the product and in developing a foreign clientele (which involves a high proportion of intangible assets relating to the acquisition of knowledge about external markets), it will be difficult for it to sell or liquidate the venture (or it can do so only at a price far below the investment value).
Cimoli, “Exchange rate and productive structure in a technological gap model”, Economic Notes, vol. 21, Monte dei Paschi di Siena, 1992.
Investment aimed at adapting products and developing distribution and marketing networks has similar characteristics to investment in technology.
This kind of investment is knowledge-intensive, and the outcome is extremely uncertain, given the cultural distance between the domestic producer and the external market.
As in the case for technology, those who invest to enter an external market cannot appropriate all the benefits, as their knowledge generates positive spillover effects for other exporters.
Consequently, private investment levels are lower than what would be socially desirable.
As a result of the high costs of entering external markets, exportable supply displays atypical reactions to movements in the real exchange rate.
For instance, small movements in the real exchange rate may not be sufficient to encourage a potential exporter to enter the external market if the resulting change in profitability will not offset the entry costs.
According to Krugman, potential exporters’ tendency to refrain from reacting to real devaluations is accentuated when the devaluation is expected to be temporary.
When the post-devaluation level of the real exchange rate is expected to be temporary, potential exporters who benefit from the higher real exchange rate will wait before investing in order to avoid losing profitability if the rate returns to its pre-devaluation level.
Thus, in a context of high entry costs, if real devaluations are temporary or if real exchange rates are extremely volatile, potential exporters of non-traditional products may refrain from entering external markets altogether and traditional exporters may decide not to expand into any new markets.
Devaluation of the real exchange rate, macroeconomic instability and investment in exportable goods Rodrik (1995)14 suggests that investment was a key factor in building export capacity in Asian countries.
Compared with Asia, there is a much lower rate of investment in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The region’s macroeconomic instability and volatile real exchange rates may have been partly responsible for dampening the level of investment in the production of tradable goods and consequently for reducing the region’s possibilities of diversifying its exports.
According to the theory of investment under uncertainty and irreversibilities, the volatility of future investment returns may delay the decision to invest.15 When macroeconomic volatility is chronic, as in Latin America, this can end up reducing the economies’ level of investment.
The fact that most Latin American countries had experienced a rapid reversal of real devaluations must have contributed to the perception that such devaluations were likely to be short-lived.
This perception and the existence of market entry and exit costs, discouraged potential exporters from entering external markets.
These factors no doubt contributed to the forces that reduced the diversification of the region’s supply of exportable goods.
Exporters’ tendency to wait before entering or leaving an external market may grow stronger as real exchange rates become more volatile.
For Krugman, the higher the volatility of the real exchange rate, the greater a difference there will have to be between entry costs and expected earnings in order for exporters to enter the market.
Companies avoid long-term commitments that would saddle them with a set of relative prices that could become detrimental to their profitability.
Tommasi (1994) studies how the instability of relative prices and reduced incentives to seek price information are related to the establishment of inefficient equilibria in the economic system.17 In particular, his analysis emphasizes that high relative price variability can increase the risks D.
Henley, “What do we know about investment under uncertainty?”, Journal of Economic Surveys, vol. 14, 2000.
Temple, recent empirical evidence indicates that the variability of relative prices increases with inflation and that variability seems to be associated with unanticipated components of inflation.
Relative price variations caused by inflation appear to influence resource allocation (“Inflation and growth: stories short and tall”, Journal of Economic Surveys, vol. 14, 2000).
Tommasi, “The consequences of price instability on search markets: toward understanding the effects of inflation”, American Economic that firms face when introducing a new technology, as it heightens the probability of generating inefficient relations with the suppliers of the technology or of that technology becoming unprofitable in the event of changes in relative prices.
For all of these reasons, macroeconomic instability may have exerted a negative effect on aggregate investment and the introduction of new technologies in the countries of the region.
As discussed below, volatility and the difficulties involved in sustaining real devaluations may have had a particular impact on investment in exportable goods. (b) Real devaluations and investment In the short term, real devaluations boost profitability and the external demand for the production of exportables.
These two factors may then encourage decisions to expand production capacity in those sectors.
However, the positive effects on profitability and external demand may be offset by a series of factors that can accompany devaluations, such as higher prices for imported equipment, external financing constraints, tightening of domestic credit terms and conditions, lower domestic demand for exportable goods and changes in the asset portfolios of export producers.
These factors have a stronger impact in the short run and may taper off over the medium term, but, as noted earlier, the region has found it difficult to maintain real devaluations and the corresponding profit incentives for the production of exportables.
Burstein, Neves and Rebelo (2004) show that nominal devaluations have a greater impact on the prices of imported capital goods than on other products, such as consumer goods.18 In developing countries, a high proportion of machinery and equipment is imported.
A real devaluation may therefore increase investment costs and have an adverse effect on investment dynamics and technological modernization projects.
The expansion of investment in tradables may suffer from the financial constraints associated with devaluation.
Devaluations in the region usually occur in response to an external financing crisis, but they do not immediately solve those crises.
The shortage of external financing in the immediate aftermath of a devaluation hinders the importation of the machinery and equipment that are so important for investment in tradable goods.
In addition, devaluations may worsen local companies’ financial position by pushing up its leverage ratio.
Deteriorating solvency indicators and the lower value of foreign-currency assets make it more difficult for them to gain access to credit and external financing in the wake of a devaluation.
Financial surpluses and self-financing resources shrink as a result of the increased debt-servicing burden relative to cash flow, thereby heightening the financial constraints on investment.
First, devaluation quickens the pace of inflation, which obliges the monetary authorities to tighten monetary policy.
Second, the domestic financial system’s credit supply suffers because of the reduced quantity and higher cost of external resources and from the rise in the system’s default rate, which in turn leads to wider spreads and higher interest rates on loans.
Weaker domestic demand for exportable goods is the result of changes in relative prices and falling real domestic expenditure (due to higher inflation and its various effects on spending capacity) and lower real wages.
This weakening of domestic demand may make it possible to meet external demand without expanding production capacity in the short term.19 Such negative effects on investment may, as noted earlier, fade over the medium term.
External demand and the recovery of domestic demand, combined with the increased financial resources provided by the boom in exports, may make it possible to take advantage of idle capacity and overcome financing constraints.
For exportables production and investment to remain attractive, however, the real devaluation must be maintained over time.
The erratic performance of the real “Investment prices and exchange rates: some basic facts”, NBER Working Papers, No. 10238, 2004.
This would not be a valid statement if tradable-goods companies’ sales were made up entirely of exports prior to the devaluation.
The following measures must be taken in order to avert a devaluation’s inflationary impact in relatively stable economies: control of aggregate expenditure, openness and productivity-based nominal wage hikes.
Another effect of a policy of controlling expenditure and real wages is to guide production towards exports as a way of compensating for the reduction in domestic demand, thereby changing the economy’s aggregate demand structure by increasing the proportion of external demand in the medium term.
Recent experiences in the region’s largest economies indicate that macroeconomic stability has made it possible to maintain real devaluations. exchange rate generated highly variable patterns in the production of exportables and inhibited the investment reflex of tradables producers.
The volatility of real exchange rates contributed to the limited diversification of exportable production in the region by reducing the demand and profitability expectations for investments in tradable goods.
The impact of such volatility depends on several factors, including investors’ attitude toward risk and the costs of adjusting investments in the event of changes in demand and profitability.
Depending on the hypotheses formulated in regard to these factors, the relationship between volatility and investment can be negative or positive.
Carruth, Dickerson and Henley (2000) assert that the literature focusing on the irreversible nature of investment indicates that greater volatility in real exchange rates can cause investment decisions to be delayed and can lead to a drop in the current level of investment even among risk-neutral investors.
This is the result of the notion that a decision to invest is tantamount to a “perpetual call option”.
Increased uncertainty —i.e., an increase in the variance of the distribution of future returns— raises the value of the option represented by the postponement of the decision to invest.
In addition, the irreversibility of investment projects may give rise to asymmetrical adjustment costs if volatility generates changes in demand and profitability conditions, and these costs may be greater in the case of a contraction than an expansion.
This leads to the postponement of investment decisions at certain price intervals, but it does not necessarily create a negative relationship between volatility and investment.
Observations on export diversification in the region According to the line of thought traditionally espoused by ECLAC, diversification is about more than merely reducing the export concentration index.
For the most part, these indicators are composed of export ratios or the proportions of total exports represented by certain types of industrial goods.22 The ratio that best represents diversification as defined by ECLAC is exports of durables and diffusers of technical progress over total exports (XDDTP/XT).
ECLAC regards these goods as having the dynamism and the high technological content necessary for the rapid growth of export value and of production linkages with the rest of the world economy.
For each country in the sample, the XDDTP/ XT ratios were therefore established for exports to: (i) all Latin American and Caribbean countries, (ii) United States and (iii) the rest of the world.
For South American countries, the United States was considered as part of the “rest of the world”.
South American exports of durables and diffusers of technical progress to Latin American markets may be favoured by trade preferences, so Latin America has also been excluded from the “rest of the world” category.
The most objective diversification variable is therefore the XDDTP/XT ratio of sales to the rest of the world.
The category of traditional industrial goods is made up of two groups: foodstuffs, beverages and tobacco, and other traditional products.
Non-traditional goods correspond to natural-resource-intensive products with high economies of scale, durables and diffusers of technical progress.
Excluding Mexico, the weighted average remained almost unchanged in the 1970s and 1980s —when Mexico accounted for a smaller share of the region’s exports— but fell to 10.6% in 2000-2003 (almost four percentage points less than the regional average including Mexico).
Regional averages are heavily influenced by the performance of Brazil and Argentina, which, together with Mexico, are the region’s largest economies and often turn display atypical patterns.
Excluding these countries, the average XDDTP/XT ratio of the remaining countries 12 percentage points less than the average for the sample as a whole).
What follows is an attempt to associate the XDDTP/ XT ratio for exports to the rest of the world with possible determinants.
The fitted line appears to underestimate the performance of low-volatility countries such as Bolivia, Costa Rica, Honduras and Paraguay.
Imports of capital goods are a crucial part of investment in the production of tradable goods.
Costa Rica, Paraguay, Honduras and Bolivia registered a high variation in XDDTP/XT compared with the rates of expansion of their capital goods imports.
By contrast, imports of capital goods rose substantially in some countries that did succeed in increase the XDDTP/XT ratio very much (Argentina, Chile, Jamaica, Nicaragua, and Trinidad and Tobago).
The diversification variable considered was the ratio of exports of durables and diffusers of technical progress to total exports (XDDTP/XT) for sales to the rest of the world.
On the basis that sales to certain markets benefit from economic complementarity and integration agreements, the variable excludes Latin American and Caribbean markets for all countries in the sample and also excludes sales to North America for Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean countries.
Sales to the “rest of the world” are a better reflection of the determining influence of the selected economic variables on sales of durables and diffusers of technical progress.
The choice of the ratio of exports of durables and diffusers of technical progress to total exports (XDDTP/ XT) as an indicator of diversification should be explained.
This choice does not imply that this is the only, best or most representative indicator of the export diversification process.
Nor does it imply a rejection of other export diversification options such as those implemented by some Latin American countries.
The ratio in question simply happens to be the proxy that best represents the ECLAC tenet that diversification is tantamount to increasing the proportion of products with the highest value added, the greatest technological content and, therefore, the least natural-resource content.
Usually, empirical analyses of diversification include structural variables or variables representing factor endowments.
In this case, investment (and, more specifically, imports of machinery and equipment) may be considered a proxy for changes in an economy’s production capacity that can be used to gain a greater understanding of the XDDTP/XT relationship.
The accumulation of knowledge is also reflected in changes in production capacity and is even more important in terms of producing complex or hightechnology goods.
There is thus a need for an indicator of an economy’s level of knowledge or knowledge-related production capacity.
Labour productivity or the level of schooling of the labour force are two proxies used in the literature to capture the impact of knowledge on production capacity.
This study did not use representative data on education, as not all countries had such data available for the 1970s.
The problem with using enrolment rates includes the fact that, for durables and diffusers of technical progress, university enrolment would have to be considered in addition to primary enrolment.
The decision was therefore taken to use a labour productivity index, based on the average output per worker in the countries concerned.
Labour productivity, thus defined, rose during the 1970s but then subsequently slowed or remained constant.
As a result, the productivity levels of most of the sample countries declined relative to those of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
The dynamic panel data partly resolves the problem of the role of factor endowment, as XDDTP/XT in period t is the result of that ratio in t-1, of the level and volatility of the real exchange rate and of investment in machinery and equipment in t.
The lagged dependent variable captures production capacity and profitability determinants up until t-1.
Between t-1 and t, the structure of the economy undergoes few changes, and XDDTP/XT shifts according to variations in economy’s profitability and stock of machinery and equipment.
The other two options considered for measuring the volatility of the real exchange rate were the 12 months of the year in question and a total of 36 months (the previous, current and following years).
As explained in section B, investment in tradable goods has a large component of machinery and equipment.
In most of the region’s countries, imported equipment plays an important role in domestic investment, given the existing shortcomings in the countries’ domestic production of capital goods.
Imports of capital goods were therefore considered to be a proxy for investment in machinery and equipment.25 The following two options for representing the The Dominican Republic, whose exports boomed during the 1990s, was excluded due to a lack of sufficient data in terms of the classification used in this study.
Information on capital goods imports was compiled by the Statistics and Economic Projections Division of ECLAC. variable of capital goods imports were considered: the index of real imports of capital goods and the level of capital goods imports in terms of GDP.
Values for real imports were obtained by adjusting each country’s nominal imports according to the United States price index for capital goods imports.26 The capital goods imports/GDP ratio was calculated using constant-dollar series for imports and GDP.
The two productivity criteria used were each country’s labour productivity and each country’s relative productivity.
The latter is the quotient of each country’s productivity and the average productivity of the seven main OECD countries.
The value shown in brackets below the coefficients is the standard error for that coefficient.
With the exception of world demand and the constant variable, all the variables are statistically different from zero with at least a 10% confidence margin (p-values below 0.10).
Column (2) is the same specification as equation (1) without the constant.
This index was chosen because it represents a diversified basket of capital goods and therefore represents the approximate import prices that the countries in the sample pay for capital goods.
The estimate was arrived at using variables in natural logarithms, and the coefficients therefore represent elasticities.
First, the aim was to determine how export diversification in the region as a whole reacts to the selected economic variables. values of the dependent variables as instruments.
The validity of the instruments can be tested for a period of time T > 3, as in this case, since the model is overidentified: arguments must be found to justify the model chosen and the way in which the variables are mutually affected.
Strict exogeneity is assumed in the real effective exchange rate (REER), the Second, the country series contained few observations, which made it difficult to approach the analysis as a set of seemingly unrelated equations or, alternatively, to produce a traditional time series analysis of each individual country.
The usual hypothesis employed for panel data is one of strict exogeneity of the explanatory variables, that is, the explanatory variables in each time period are not correlated with the error for the same period.
In the structure defined in (1), this hypothesis is unsuccessful owing to the dynamic introduced by the lagged dependent variable.
The relevant hypothesis thus becomes one of sequential exogeneity, that is, EXPis is not correlated with the error when s < t.
The solution proposed by Arellano and Bond (1991) consists in the first-difference estimate of the above equation (the “generalized method of moments (GMM) approach”) using lagged for a given time t, there are numerous instruments available, which are lagged values of the variables.
The validity of instruments for the estimate is tested using the null hypothesis of the Sargan test.
The higher the p-value of the test, the more confidence we can have in not rejecting the null hypothesis of the test, which indicates that the instruments used for the estimate are valid.
The strict exogeneity hypothesis can also fail for the other explanatory variables Xit.
If uit is not correlated with Xis where s < t, Xit can be said to be predetermined.
If Xis is contemporaneously correlated with uit, Xit is considered to be endogenous.
Bond (2002) maintains that the classification of X it variables as predetermined, whether endogenous or exogenous, is arbitrary to some degree, although there are tests to validate the assumptions.
In general, economic volatility of the real exchange rate (RER), world demand (WD) and of (INVEST), in other words, DDTP/XT does not affect these variables either in the same period or in future periods.
These variables are determined by other factors of the economy and exports of durable goods to the rest of the world do not exert pressure on them.
The estimated model was: EXPit = rEXPi(t-1) + b1TCREit + b2VOLit+ b3INVESTit + b4DMi(t-1) + ci + uit Where r is close to one, it can be demonstrated that the lagged values are weak instruments for the estimation.
Arellano and Bover (1995) and Blundell and Bond (1998) solve this problem by adding levels equations to differenced equations in the estimate.
Since the r in the estimates are statistically different from 1, the GMM difference is used.
In both equations, there is evidence of first-order auto-correlation in residuals, as expected, but not of second-order auto-correlation.30 Lastly, in both specifications, the Sargan test gives a low p-value, indicating that the instruments used for the estimate are not valid.
Since various instruments exist for a given period of time, one solution proposed by Bond (2002)31 is to limit the number of instruments or the degree of lag judged as acceptable when choosing which variables to use as instruments.
Various adjustments were made along these lines, such as limiting the number of lags used as instruments, but the p-value of the Sargan test did not improve.
The fact that countries react differently to these variables or the presence of heteroskedasticity may account for the unsuitability of these instruments.
As Mexico posted the best performance in terms of exports of durables and diffusers of technical progress, interactive dummy variables were estimated for the real exchange rate (RER), RER volatility and investment in order to The lower the p-value of the test, the more confident our rejection of the null hypothesis of the absence of an auto-correlation.
In the case of the first-order auto-correlation test, the p-value is fairly low and the null hypothesis is rejected; for the second-order test, the p-value is high and the null hypothesis is not rejected.
Bond, “Dynamic panel data models: a guide to microdata methods and practices”, Working Papers, No. 09/02, London, Centre for Microdata Method and Practices (CEMMAP), 2002. capture the specific features of each country.
These dummy variables did not differ from zero, and the p-value of the Sargan test did not improve.
In order to correct for the effects of heteroskedasticity in the matrix of variances and co-variances of the estimators, a robust estimate of this matrix was applied in equation (2).
As can be seen from column (2)-(robust estimate), the coefficients of the volatility of the real effective exchange rate and of investment in machinery and equipment were not different from zero.
Finally, equation (2) was estimated in two steps in order to heighten the efficiency of the estimate while keeping the standard errors low.
Blundell and Bond (1998) stress that in spite of being asymptotically more efficient, the two-step estimates of the standard errors tend to be severely downward biased.32 (b) Estimates for the sample excluding Mexico and As shown in table VI.3, Mexico and Costa Rica performed differently from the rest of the countries of the sample.
Another dimension of the atypical behaviour of these two countries is indicated by the fact that the next-largest difference is that of Brazil, with an absolute 15 percentage-point increase in the ratio.
The increase for the rest of the countries of the region was far below these values.
Furthermore, the geographical proximity of the United States as a major consumer and producer market has influenced Mexico’s specialization and production structure, and this factor is imperfectly captured by the lagged dependent variable in these estimates.
In the case of Costa Rica, specific investments in the 1990s had a strong impact on the economy in terms of its level of activity and completely transformed this economy’s export profile, as can be seen if its performance is compared with that of the region before and after that decade.
A new estimate was therefore prepared excluding Mexico and Costa Rica from the sample of countries.
The coefficients differ statistically from zero within a 10% confidence interval, with the exception of the variable of real world imports.
The p-value does not allow us to reject the null hypothesis that the instruments are valid The constant was eliminated and equation (2) was estimated.
This equation yields coefficients with correct signs, and all the variables, both individually and taken together, are statistically different from zero.
A rise of 1% in the real effective exchange rate increases the XDDTP/XT by almost 0.9%.
The weight of the structure and history of the ratio is significant.
All else remaining constant, a 1% rise in the t-1 ratio increases the t ratio by 0.5%.
Blundell and Bond recommend using the results of one step to make inferences about the coefficients (R.
Bond, “Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models”, Journal of Econometrics, vol. 87, 1998). capital goods have very little effect on XDDTP/XT, but the combination of a real appreciation and sustained volatility ends up having a strong impact on the XDDTP/ XT ratio.
The relevant literature and empirical evidence appear to indicate that the region’s difficulty in increasing the production of tradable goods has been associated with the high degree of macroeconomic instability experienced over the last three decades, which has affected some of the determinants of the relative growth of tradables in the production structure.
The econometric analysis demonstrates that, in order to increase the proportion of durable goods and diffusers of technical progress in total exports, a high, stable real exchange rate is required along with investment in machinery and equipment.
Macroeconomic instability and other factors militated against the possibility of having real sustained devaluations, a low degree of volatility in the real exchange rate and high investment rates.
Macroeconomic instability has therefore played a crucial role in limiting the diversification of exports in the sense traditionally referred to by ECLAC, namely an increase in the proportion of exports having a high technological content.
The findings of this study thus provide empirical evidence to backup two public policy recommendations for stimulating export diversification in the medium term: the achievement and maintenance of macroeconomic stability, and a gradual and sustained devaluation of the real exchange rate.
This represented a complete turnaround from the declines registered during the lengthy, deep recession of the late 1990s and early years of the present decade.
Although all components of aggregate demand showed a considerable increase in 2005, the star performers were investment (with an investment-toGDP ratio of 22.2% at current prices in the last quarter —the highest since the series began in 1993) and exports of goods and services.
True to the pattern observable since 2003, aggregate consumption climbed significantly, although by less than GDP growth.
The employment rate was high in historical terms, while the unemployment rate fell once more, slipping to just below 10% in the final quarter.
Wages in the public sector and informal private sector did no more than keep up with the rise in retail prices, but real wages in the formal private sector rose by 12% for the year as a whole, thereby comfortably regaining the levels reached at the end of 2001.
The combination of employment and wage trends helped to lower the country’s still high rates of poverty and indigence.
Against a backdrop of booming domestic demand and higher prices for some exportables that are heavily consumed in the domestic market, inflation rose to 12.3% over 2005 as a whole.
Inflation trends became the subject of public debate, thereby prompting the government to negotiate price agreements with various production sectors.
Measures directly aimed at influencing price formation were reinforced following a change of Minister at the end of 2005.
The authorities also placed priority on supplying mass consumer goods to the local market as opposed to exports.
As part of this effort, the government raised export duties on dairy products and, in 2006, suspended beef exports.
Although merchandise imports posted notable growth, the reduced elasticity of domestic absorption and a steady expansion of export volumes helped maintain a positive trade balance of around US$ 13.0 billion in 2005.
The current account surplus swelled to US$ 5.4 billion (around 3% of GDP), mainly thanks to the effect of public debt restructuring on the amount of interest owed on that debt.
For the first time since 2000, the capital movements of the non-financial private sector (NFPS) yielded a positive balance of almost 2% of GDP.
The oversupply of foreign exchange was absorbed by the central bank with a view to building up reserves and maintaining the exchange rate (in order to prevent the currency from appreciating).
The central bank also engaged in domestic operations to sterilize the monetary effects of its interventions in the foreignexchange market.
The primary surplus of the central government (adjusted using a cash-basis methodology) amounted to 3.7% of GDP, which was a high level in historical terms but nonetheless lower than the previous year.
The public accounts of the provinces followed a similar trend, with a primary balance of 0.8% of GDP.
In January 2006, the government paid off the whole of its outstanding debt with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The main traits of macroeconomic policy management included the maintenance of a considerable primary surplus, the country’s return to voluntary debt markets after a four-year absence, a build-up of international reserves and the adoption of measures designed to directly influence price formation in response to the significant rise in inflation.
Previously, differences of opinion had emerged between the authorities and the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and the Fund had not been involved in the country’s debt restructuring operation.
The authorities held subsequent negotiations with the Fund on the possibility of implementing an IMF programme, but no agreement was reached and the government decided to use international reserves to repay its IMF debt ahead of time.
In 2005, the national public sector’s current resources slightly outpaced nominal GDP growth.
National tax receipts swelled by 21.3%, thereby increasing the tax burden by 0.4 percentage points to 22.4% of GDP.
Although considerable increases were recorded in revenues from the taxes on financial transactions (23%) and external trade (20%), about three quarters of the rise in receipts was attributable to broad-based taxes (VAT and tax on profits) and social security contributions.
Receipts from taxes on profits and assets as a whole expanded (23%) owing to an increase in income and the maintenance of the minimum income levels subject to taxes in nominal terms.
In 2006, the government decided to raise these minimum thresholds, while VAT receipts rose by 19% as a result of higher prices and brisker economic activity.
The steady increase in the wage bill in the formal sector and the elimination of ceilings for employer contributions had an impact on social security revenues (29%).
During 2005, NFPS expenditure rose by just over 25%, thereby outpacing the growth in revenues.
Primary spending expanded by 21.7%, while debt interest payments surged by 80% owing to the regularization of debt service payments following the bond swap and amounted to 20.1% of GDP (19.6% in 2004).
This result reflected transfers made to the provinces under existing revenue-sharing arrangements and to the private sector (in the form of energy and transport subsidies and family allowances), as well as rising capital outlays (73%).
Payroll expenditure climbed in step with nominal GDP (19.2%), but social security spending rose by only 9%.
In 2006, the government raised minimum pensions by 20% and higher pensions by 11%.
The primary surplus of the National Treasury stood at almost 20 billion pesos in 2005, which was more than enough to cover interest payments and to finance part of the debt payoffs.
The provinces posted a significant primary surplus, although its level has been trending downward.
To cover its capital payments, the government issued securities, with much of the demand for this government paper coming from pension funds, trust funds and the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The debt with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (US$ 9.5 billion) was paid off using reserves of the central bank, which received 10-year dollar-denominated bonds in compensation.
This included the outstanding debt with IMF, but did not include the approximately US$ 23 billion in holdouts, i.e., those that had chosen not to participate in the debt swap.
This increase reflected a rapid expansion of cash in circulation (29%), which was partly offset by a sharp fall (34%) in commercial bank deposits with the central bank.
The comfortable liquidity situation of financial institutions paved the way for an increase in the proportion of holdings in the form of short-term securities issued by the central bank, to the detriment of bank reserves and to passive swap (“pases”) operations with the monetary authority.
These operations represented over US$ 28 billion at the end of 2005.
The central bank continued to purchase foreign exchange in the first part of 2006, and this went some way towards reversing the decline in reserves that followed the payment of the country’s debt with IMF.
Intervention in the foreign-exchange market was the main factor in the monetary base’s expansion, while sterilization mechanisms included the central bank’s net bond placements, the recovery of rediscounts granted during the financial crisis and public-sector operations.
Throughout the reporting period, the central bank continued to raise benchmark interest rates.
By the end of 2005, the band for short-term interest rates was between 5% and 6% (i.e. around 2.5 percentage points higher than the year before).
This monetary policy stance carried over into the first few months of 2006.
M3 monetary aggregates (money supply plus interestbearing deposits of the private sector) climbed by just over 25% in 2005, which represents an increase of almost 10 percentage points in real terms.
With interest rates remaining low, the expansion of the money supply (M1) jumped by nearly 35%).
The proportion of inflation-adjusted deposits increased, but remained below 10%, while official deposits expanded by around 19% in line with total deposits.
Credit to the public sector shrank by a quarter, while privatesector credit trended upward by 33% (although the latter has only just surpassed 10% of GDP following the sharp decline recorded at the beginning of the decade).
The increase in financing for the private sector encompasses various types of operations, with a particularly strong upswing being seen in consumer loans.
Towards the end of 2005, as various types of interest rates edged upward in step with benchmark rates, nominal yields on 30-day deposits rose to almost 4.7% (almost two percentage points higher than in 2004), while average rates on advances and discounts fluctuated between 11% and 18%.
The implicit interest rate premium on bonds maturing in 2012 was around 430 basis points at the end of 2005, which represents a 200-point reduction in 12 months.
In mid2006, the increase in long-term rates in the United States was having an impact on bond and equity markets.
GDP grew by more than 9% in 2005, and the aggregate activity indicator posted a year-on-year increase of around 8.5% in the first quarter of 2006.
Although domestic absorption components were buoyant in 2005, export volumes also made a significant contribution to growth by posting a double-digit expansion (13.8%) for the first time in eight years.
The ratio of consumption to GDP at constant prices (78%) remained below the levels of the 1990s; in fact, the domestic savings ratio was almost three percentage points higher than the cyclical peak reached in 1998.
As a result of relative price variations, at current values the ratio (26.8%) was more than eight percentage points higher than in 1998.
Thanks to the positive result in savings, the increase in capital formation (22.7%) was financed out of domestic resources.
Investment was fuelled by construction (20.5%) and durable equipment (26.5%), particularly the increase in imported machinery (35.6%).
In the fourth quarter of 2005, the investment-to-GDP ratio surpassed the 1997 level, which was the record high for the 1990s, both in terms of current values (almost four percentage points higher, at 24%) and constant prices (22.2%, half a percentage Merchandise imports, c.i.f.
Although investment in durable equipment at constant prices did not match the previous record of 9.2% (for the final quarter of 1997), it nonetheless did reach nearly 8.4% of GDP.
In a context of across-the-board expansion, goodsproducing sectors once again expanded more (10.1%) than services (8.2%), although the difference between these two sectors’ growth rates narrowed.
In goods production, noteworthy performances were turned in by agriculture (11.9%) and construction (20.4%).
As for services, transport and communications fared well (14.8%), as did financial intermediation (17.4%), which increased for the first time since the end of the convertibility regime.
Manufacturing growth (7.7%) was a little less than aggregate GDP, while mining and minerals declined slightly (-0.7%).
Despite the small size of the increase in the area under crops (2%), grain production in the 2004/2005 growing season soared by 25% to a record level of over 85 million tons.
The reduction in the area under cereal crops (especially wheat and maize) is expected to bring down output for the 2005/2006 growing season.
In contrast, there was an increase in the areas sown with oilseed crops (particularly sunflowers and soybeans).
Steady growth in external demand for beef pushed up domestic prices against the backdrop of a reduction in the number of animals slaughtered, a slight increase in meat production and an upswing in domestic consumption.
In 2005, the year-on-year increase in farmgate cattle prices amounted to nearly 20%, while consumer beef prices soared by almost 30%.
The government attempted to negotiate price agreements with organizations in the sector and, in the face of continuing price increases, in March 2006 decided to suspend sales abroad for 180 days (with the exception of those covered by country-tocountry agreements and exports to the European Union —under the Hilton Quota).
Towards the end of May, the moratorium was converted into a quantitative restriction, under which exports were limited to 40% of the volume of the previous year.
In the light of increased demand for energy and dwindling hydrocarbon reserves, the policy governing the supply of natural gas (which represents a considerable proportion of the energy matrix), including the gas that Argentina purchases from Bolivia, and the expansion and diversification of primary energy sources were all issues on an agenda that remains open to debate.
In 2005, industrial output reached a new record as it rose for the third consecutive year, this time by almost 8%.
Although the increase was more widespread across the various sectors this time around, certain activities nonetheless stood out, such as the automotive industry (26.7%) and non-metallic mineral products (14.4%) used in construction.
This industrial buoyancy was accompanied by no more than a slight rise in the use of installed capacity, which attests to the fact that several sectors have increased their productive potential.
Construction continued to boom, thanks to both public works and private building projects.
There was also considerable demand for housing, which was reflected in fresh increases in real estate prices.
The strategy for controlling inflation became a key issue on the economic policy agenda and in public debate.
The government promoted the conclusion of agreements with major producers and distribution agents, raised duties, and reduced or eliminated drawback facilities for exports of certain domestically consumed goods.
The price of the dollar did not change significantly, as the government implemented a policy aimed at stabilizing the price of foreign exchange in order to maintain the economy’s external competitiveness.
The real appreciation of the dollar was consequently a mere 3.2% in terms of the multilateral exchange rate.
Against a backdrop of strengthening labour demand, real wages rose (especially in the formal private sector).
In the first few months of 2006, wage negotiations resulted in the issuance of informal guidelines by the authorities indicating that wake hikes should be held to around 19% for the year as a whole; subsequent wage increases were generally in line with those recommendations.
Wage increases in the public sector and informal private sector were generally in line with the rise in retail prices.
Towards the end of 2005, the urban employment rate (41.3%) was almost one percentage point higher than it had been a year earlier.
The increase in employment took place across all sectors and geographical areas, thereby bringing down the unemployment rate by two percentage points in the fourth quarter compared to the final quarter of 2004.
Although the unemployment rate rises from 10.1% to 11.4% if calculations include people working for State employment programmes and those actively seeking employment, the latter figure is still three percentage points lower than one year before.
In 2005, the current account surplus stood at slightly over 2.9 points of GDP.
A surplus of US$ 2.3 billion (1.5% of GDP) was posted on the capital and financial account.
The increase of almost US$ 1 billion in this balance is mainly attributable to the The rate of price increases picked up speed in 2005, pushing up the consumer price index (CPI) to 12.3%.
In the first four months of 2006, the CPI increased by around 1% per month.
Throughout the year, price increases were recorded for certain domestically consumed exportables such as fresh beef (almost 30%), dairy products (17.1%) and fish and seafood (18.1%).
The price index (which does not include seasonal items or goods whose prices are regulated) climbed by an above-average 14.1%.
Particularly strong increases were seen in private services (16.5%), probably as a result of the surge in domestic demand.
Until the debt-swap operation of 2005, balance-of-payments figures included the total interest owed on government debts in default since 2001 in the income account.
From the second quarter of 2005, the figures take into account interest on the regularized debt, without including interest corresponding to securities not included in the swap. performance of the non-financial private sector which, following four years of narrowing deficits, recorded almost US$ 3.5 billion (1.9% of GDP) in net income.
This surplus was partly offset by a smaller positive balance for the public sector’s aggregate account due to higher net payments to IMF and a sharp decline in involuntary financing (arrears).
Foreign direct investment was up by nearly 9% on the previous year.
Merchandise exports topped US$ 40 billion in 2005 (up by 16%), thanks to a 15% rise in volumes sold and a 1% price increase.
Although patterns varied in terms of volume and price, all major categories expanded considerably.
In primary products (+16%) and agriculturally-based manufactures (+10%), volumes showed a strong increase while prices fell.
Industrial manufactures (+25%) saw a rise in both volumes and prices, while higher fuel sales (+11%) were attributable to a price hike that more than offset shrinking volumes.
From a geographical standpoint, MERCOSUR lost some export share (from 19.6% to 19.2%) in favour of China, East Asia, India and the rest of Latin America.
In 2005, merchandise imports (US$ 28.7 billion) expanded significantly (+28%), although this growth rate was, nonetheless, much lower than the +61% registered in 2004.
Increases were most striking in fuels (+54%), where they were attributable to higher international prices, and in capital goods (+33%), where they were attributable to increased volumes.
The rise in purchases of intermediate goods (+20%) is largely the result of higher prices. in geographical terms, the share accounted for by MERCOSUR expanded once again, this time to just over 38%, while the shares of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the European Union decreased to just under 17% in each case.
The economy’s expansion was driven by non-oil activities (10.3%), whereas the petroleum sector showed no more than a slight increase (1.7%).
All sectors registered rises, with the highest rates being observed in the financial sector (30.8%), construction (20.1%), commerce (19.5%) and communications (19.8%).
On the demand side, the components that showed the strongest growth were investment (20.5%) and private consumption (16.3%).
Although GDP, measured at 1997 prices, was higher than it was in 2001, some sectors still remain below their 2001 levels; the petroleum and construction sectors, for example, were 4% and 12% lower, respectively.
Despite a surge in merchandise imports, the strong export earnings made possible by buoyant oil prices on international markets resulted in a substantial current account surplus in 2005 (equivalent to 20.1% of GDP, in current dollars).2 Economic growth was reflected in a reduction in total unemployment and a recovery in real wages.
High oil prices, combined with more efficient tax collection, generated a significant increase in fiscal revenues, enabling authorities to maintain and, indeed, step up their social action programmes.
These programmes, which are known as “missions”, target mainly poor or extremely poor sectors and focus primarily on the areas of health, education and employment.
In December 2005, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was admitted to MERCOSUR as a non-voting member, and in April 2006 the country announced its intention to withdraw from the Andean Community of Nations (CAN).
Nevertheless, in accordance with its commitments under CAN, it is bound to maintain existing tariffs with the other member countries of this group for the next five years.
In May 2006, the country announced its withdrawal from the Group of Three (G-3), to which it had belonged together with Mexico and Colombia.
In the first quarter of 2006, economic activity recorded a 9.4% rise over the first quarter of 2005, and growth for the year as a whole is projected at between 7% and 8%; average annual inflation is expected to stand at 12%, and the exchange rate is likely to remain at 2,150 bolívares = US$ 1.
Presidential elections are scheduled for December A nation-wide general strike that lasted from December 2002 to February 2003 brought the economy to a standstill, driving down the country’s GDP in those two years.
In 2005, the average annual price of the Venezuelan basket of crude increased by 37% over the 2004 average.
During 2005, the authorities maintained a clearly expansionary fiscal policy, which they implemented primarily through current and capital transfers to public agencies.
In nominal terms, the central government’s total public expenditure expanded by 43% over its 2004 level; nevertheless, the financial balance showed a surplus equivalent to 1.7% of GDP owing to a strong increase in revenues (63.9%).
Even though the VAT rate was lowered from 15% to 14% in October 2005, tax revenues were up by 72.1% thanks to a steep rise in proceeds from the tax on petroleum earnings (193.4%), an upswing in receipts from the tax on bank debits (43%) and the higher foreign-exchange gains paid over to the government by the central bank (113%).
In addition, measures aimed at reducing tax evasion helped to increase the collection of VAT and other taxes.
Yet another factor was the overall rise in the prices of goods and services subject to excise taxes.
Despite skyrocketing petroleum prices, oil revenues still account for about 50% of the government’s total income because receipts from other sources have also climbed.
In 2005, the total expenditure of the budgetary central government was similar to the 2004 level (26.9% of GDP), while its total revenue rose to 28.6% (up from The Hydrocarbons Act, which entered into force in early 2005, altered the tax rates and royalties charged under existing operating agreements in the petroleum sector.
Royalties were raised from 1% to 16.66% of the value of extracted crude oil, while the profits tax rate was increased from 35% to 50%.
In April 2005, the government announced that all companies working under the terms of operating agreements would have to become joint ventures with PDVSA, with the latter holding more than 50% of the stock.
In May 2006, the government announced the introduction of a new levy on crude oil extraction (33.3% of the well-head value of crude).
As a result of this measure’s implementation, all oil companies operating in the country will be paying the same royalty rate.
In February 2006, the government suspended collection of the tax on bank debits.
In 2005 and 2006, the government has been using dollars to invest in foreign bonds3 (most of which it then sells to national financial institutions), as well as setting up foreign-currency funds abroad and pursuing an ambitious programme to reschedule foreign debts with a view to obtaining longer terms and lower rates.
In addition, it has restructured domestic debt so as to improve the yield curve of government bonds.
During the first half of 2006, the government invested close to US$ 4.4 billion in the repurchase of all its outstanding Brady bonds.
During 2005, the government continued to issue bonds denominated in dollars but payable in bolívares.
These bond issues, together with the sale of Argentine bonds, has enabled it to offer domestic agents financial instruments that will help move capital out of the country and absorb bolívares in the local market.
One of the major challenges facing the economic authorities in 2005 and 2006 has been how to handle the steadily rising level of domestic liquidity, which is being driven up by the country’s voluminous foreign-exchange earnings from oil exports, as well as by the sharp increase in fiscal spending.
Although monetary policy has allowed for the expansion of monetary aggregates, the central bank has continued to intervene in the market in an attempt to mop up excess liquidity.
Up to April 2006, the bank had issued certificates of deposit equivalent to approximately 1.4 times the monetary base.
The increase in monetary aggregates has moderated in 2006, however, and as of April, M3 had accumulated a 10% rise relative to December 2005.
During 2005, deposits in the banking system increased by 35% (sight and savings deposits expanded by 60% and 65%, respectively), while bank credit to the private sector rose by 40.8%.
The authorities have set minimum limits for the shares of bank credit to be allotted to specific sectors.
The mandated allotments are: 16% to the agricultural sector, 10% for mortgage loans, 3% for microfinance and 2.5% to the tourism sector.
The maximum and minimum limits on lending and deposit rates set by the governing council of the central bank entered into force on 1 May 2005.
Restrictions were also placed on banking commissions.4 In 2005, the average lending and deposit rates of the six main commercial banks stood at 16.43% and 6.5%, respectively; at the end of May 2006, these rates were on the order of 15% and 6.83%, respectively.
The central banks’ assets/liabilities position and its performance have been influenced by the quantitative and qualitative expansion of the types of operations it carries out and by changes in rules and policies applied for handling such items as foreign exchange.
Thus, for example, in addition to stepping up its implementation of absorption policies, the central bank has transferred substantial amounts of funds drawn from its international reserves and foreign-exchange gains to the public sector.
This has resulted in a negative operating balance for the first four months of 2006 and makes it difficult to interpret or assess the balance-sheet items.
In addition, under a temporary article included in the Act, the central bank made a one-time US$ 6 billion transfer to the Executive branch from From May 2005 to April 2006, the Venezuelan Government invested US$ 2.29 billion in Argentine government bonds (US$ 1.99 billion in 12-year bonds and US$ 300 million in 15-year bonds).
It then sold US$ 1.469 billion worth of these securities to local financial institutions, bringing the government’s effective portfolio as of the end of April 2006 to approximately US$ 821 million.
The government has also invested US$ 25 million in Ecuadorian government bonds.
In May 2006, it was announced that the Argentine Government would be selling US$ 239 million in 12-year bonds to Venezuela at market value.
A maximum of 28% in the case of loans and a minimum of 6.56% and 10% for savings and time deposits, respectively.
In addition, the authorities made changes in the Macroeconomic Stabilization Fund (FEM) and created the Treasury Bank, a public financial institution which is now in the initial stage of its operations.
Following a reinterpretation of the law, the National Assembly approved an additional US$ 4.2 billion transfer from the central bank’s international reserves to the FONDEN.
In March 2005 the authorities devalued the bolívar by 12% in nominal terms (bringing the rate to 2,150 bolívares = 1 US$) while maintaining the existing foreign-exchange regime.
Despite this measure, the establishment of limits on the amount of foreign-currency credit that credit-card holders may use and the fact that foreign exchange is now more readily available through the Foreign Exchange Administration Commission have kept the rate of exchange on the parallel market at between 15% and 20% above the official rate.
October 2005 saw the entry into force of a law that establishes penalties for the purchase and sale of any amount of foreign currency, with the exception of securities operations. (d) Other policies The government has signed agreements with several countries under which it will supply petroleum at belowmarket prices.
Pursuant to the Bolivarian Alternative Agreement for the Americas (ALBA), oil has been supplied to Cuba in exchange for services provided by the Cuban Government in the area of health and education.
In addition, the Government of Venezuela has signed the PETROCARIBE agreement, in which it pledges to supply oil to participating Caribbean countries and provide credit facilities.
Under this agreement, buyers pay down an initial amount and pay off the remainder through long-term, low-interest loans.
In the first quarter of 2006, GDP showed a year-on-year increase of 9.4%, thanks to the strength of construction, commerce, communications and the financial sector.
On the expenditure side, private consumption displayed the strongest growth with a year-on-year rise for the first quarter of close to 20%.
This improvement is attributable to a number of factors, such as the maintenance of price controls and the greater availability of goods, thanks to strong foreign currency earnings which have fuelled a rise in imports.
Other factors include the expansion of the distribution and marketing network for mass consumer goods sold at subsidized prices within the framework of the MERCAL mission and the real appreciation of the exchange rate, which has made imports less expensive.
The producer price index rose by 14.2% between December 2005 and December 2004 owing to the rise in prices for domestically produced goods.
In April 2006, the producer price index showed a cumulative rise of 3.8% over its December 2005 level (local products: 3.9%, and Average annual wages were up by 19.1% in 2005 compared with 2004, with private-sector and public-sector wages climbing by 16.2% and 26.6%, respectively, for an increase in real terms in both cases.
In the first quarter of 2006, this index showed a 20.6% rise in relation to the same quarter of 2005 (17% for private-sector wages and 29.8% for wages in the public sector).
In 2006, the minimum wage was adjusted upward again, first by 15% with effect from 1 February and then by a further 10% as of 1 September.
The more robust pace of economic activity was reflected in a decline in unemployment, from which dropped from 13.9% in the second half of 2004 to 11.4% in the second half of 2005, although, in the first quarter of 2006, it inched back up to 11.2%.
According to estimates published by the National Institute of Statistics, extreme poverty decreased substantially in 2005 relative to its 2003 levels, when they had reached a five-year peak.
In 2005, merchandise exports soared by 43.2% in value terms (petroleum exports were up by 50.6% and non-petroleum exports by 8.7%), while imports of goods climbed by 38.3%.
Public enterprises’ oil exports expanded by 46%, while those of private companies (which account for 18% of the country’s total exports of crude oil) jumped by 77%.
In the first quarter of 2006, exports of goods continued to increase sharply (36.2%) owing mainly to the upswing in oil prices; imports also continued to trend upward, although at a more moderate pace (17.5%).
As a result, both the trade and current account surpluses have continued to climb.
In December 2005, they slipped to US$ 29.636 billion as dollars were transferred from the country’s international monetary reserves to FONDEN.
In October, the authorities announced that they had transferred approximately US$ 14.4 billion of reserves held in United States Treasury bonds and deposits in United States banks to deposits in the Bank for International Settlements.
Since the beginning of 2006, international reserves have continued to increase and by the end of April stood at US$ 31.365 billion.
Approximately 50% of the debt is in the form of bonds and notes, and the increase in the use of these types of instruments, along with commercial credits, is attributable to higher public-sector borrowing.
Despite the measures taken by the authorities, the external debt swelled to US$ 48.316 billion in the first quarter of 2006 as a consequence of these factors.
In 2005, the Bolivian economy turned in a good performance on several fronts.
GDP grew by 4.1%, which was 0.2 percentage points more than the previous year.
Similarly, per capita GDP rose by 1.8%, which was 0.1 percentage points higher than in 2004.
The deficit of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) narrowed by 3.2 GDP percentage points, the balance of payments posted a surplus of US$ 492.9 million and net international reserves swelled by US$ 503.6 million.
These results occurred in the context of two opposing factors: favourable external conditions for hydrocarbon-producing countries (with natural gas prices rising by 28.9% and petroleum prices by 44.1% in 2005), yet in a domestic political environment characterized by social protests, presidential and parliamentary elections and major institutional reform.
In the first half of the year, major social protests called for the nationalization of hydrocarbons, as Congress discussed the hydrocarbons act.
These demonstrations culminated with the resignation of the President, who was replaced by a transition leader.
Unlike in previous administrations, the parliamentary majority ensures a significant support base for the new government.
The first half of 2006 has again been dominated by elections, this time by the vote for representatives to the Constituent Assembly in early July.
There are also signs of institutional change, with a supreme decree issued on 1 May nationalizing the country’s hydrocarbons sector and a change of direction in Bolivia’s integration strategy, in the form of various types of cooperation agreements concluded with Cuba and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
As far as improving the fiscal accounts and strengthening net international reserves is concerned, it appears that Bolivia will not renew the stand-by agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) which was extended in 2005.
Given the structural nature of these changes and the lack of more specific information, it is too soon to attempt to assess their impact.
For instance, the decree on the nationalization of hydrocarbons provides a 180-day period for negotiations with companies affected by the measure.
In any event, gas export prices are expected to be higher than in 2005.
In addition, it is not yet known how much will be invested as part of the cooperation agreements Bolivia has signed.
Nevertheless, given the favourable fiscal and external conditions prevailing this year, the Bolivian economy is expected to grow by 4.2%.
The main economic policy measures implemented in 2005 were the adoption of the hydrocarbons tax and steps to facilitate the remonetization of the economy.
At the end of 2005, the NFPS deficit stood at 2.3% of GDP, which means it was almost 3.2 GDP percentage points narrower than in 2004 and the smallest NFPS deficit this decade.
This improvement in the fiscal balance was due to an increase nearly 4.9 GDP points in fiscal revenues, combined with a smaller 1.4 point rise in expenditure.
The fiscal performance was attributable to the direct hydrocarbons tax, which brought in revenues amounting to 3.1 percentage points of GDP.
All gas fields must now pay a direct tax of 32% on production, in addition to a national royalty of 6% and a government royalty of 12%.
In fact, in 2006, the direct hydrocarbons tax will not necessarily provide real relief for the Bolivian Treasury, as the distribution mechanism allocates 42.3% to the Treasury and 57.7% to the departments.1 The authorities continued to collect the levy on financial transactions, which resulted in fiscal revenues of almost 0.8% of GDP.
There was also an increase in receipts from other taxes such as VAT and taxation of corporate profits.
The profits tax raised close to 2.8 GDP points, partly owing to the receipts from the tax on the windfall profits of firms extracting non-renewable natural resources.
The fiscal cost of pensions was 0.2 GDP percentage points lower than in 2004, bringing the figure to 4.1% of GDP in 2005.
Pension costs have been falling since 2002, when outlays represented 4.9 percentage points of GDP.
The public debt was restructured in 2005, with external debt decreasing by 5.4 GDP points and domestic debt rising by 0.7 points.
Public securities denominated in bolivianos have expanded significantly, increasingly by 17.4 percentage points as a proportion of all public instruments.
One of the central bank’s key objectives is to keep the inflation rate low and stable, for which it sets a cap on net domestic credit and maintains a minimum level of international reserves.
In 2005, monetary targets were comfortably achieved thanks to the favourable fiscal and external situation.
The fiscal deficit, whose target level was revised down in October from 5% of GDP to 3.5%, closed at 2.1%, thereby easing the country’s borrowing needs.
In a similar vein, the US$ 503.6 million increase in net international reserves was 3.73 times the amount anticipated.
The monetary base and M1, M2 and M3 all expanded more strongly than in 2004, growth of the monetary base was driven mainly by the rise in net international reserves.
The central bank’s open market operations were consistent with the seasonal pattern of monetary aggregates, since the net balance of public securities fell by US$ 17.1 million in the first half of the year and increased by US$ 39.8 million in the second.
With abundant liquidity in the economy in 2005, most interest rates on boliviano-denominated instruments came down.
The interest rate on 13-week treasury bills dropped from 5.82% to 4%.
The rate on repo operations dipped from 6.01% to 5.26%, while the weighted interest rates on credits secured against the liquid assets fund (RAL) retreated from 7.5% to 6.75%.
The growth surge in these aggregates was absorbed by the demand for money driven by economic growth and currency substitution in the direction of the boliviano.
This, in turn, was the result of a relative abundance of foreign exchange and the measures implemented by the central bank as described below.
In 2005 the central bank maintained the crawlingpeg exchange rate regime that it has operated since the second half of the 1980s, with small non-preannounced depreciations or appreciations of the boliviano against the dollar.
The aim is to maintain a competitive real exchange rate, although this is subordinate to the inflation target.
Exchange-rate stability has been attributed to favourable external conditions and the policy measures implemented by the central bank to help remonetize the economy.
As a result, net international reserves swelled by 52.6% seems to have continued into 2006, as reserves had increased by 29.2% (or US$ 509.2 million) by April.
In absolute terms, this increase corresponds to 101.1% of the total for the whole of 2005, which attests to the favourable external environment prevailing in 2006.
The allocation to departments is broken down as follows: 21.7% to the three departments that produce hydrocarbons; 54.2% to the other departments; and 24.1% for departmental levelling.
In turn, departmental funds are earmarked as follows: 56.64% for prefectures, 34.7% for municipalities and 8.7% for universities.
This was the highest GDP growth rate for six years and 0.5 percentage points higher than the 2004 figure, despite the political problems that led to supply shocks in the second and third quarters of 2005.
The fastest-growing branches of activity were mining and quarrying (13.7%) and agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing (5.1%).
The expansion of mining and quarrying was the largest increase in 15 years, while agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing grew 4.78 percentage points more than in 2004.
Within the latter category, the best performance was reported by non-industrial agricultural products, which were up 9.01%.
Mining and quarrying accounted for 33.5% of the growth rate of GDP.
This category includes crude oil and natural gas (up 15.1%) and metal and non-metallic minerals (up by 11.6%).
The growth rate of hydrocarbons was 8.7 percentage points, which was lower than in 2004, while mining turned in the highest growth rate in 16 years.
A number of sectors that are quite dynamic creators of employment, such as manufacturing, commerce and construction, recorded relatively modest performances in 2005.
On the expenditure side, in 2005 final consumption increased by 3.3% for households and 0.5% for public administration, while gross capital formation rose by 2.8%.
The ratio of this last indicator to GDP was 12.8%, or 78% of the average ratio recorded during the 1990s.
Private investment in hydrocarbons exploration, for example, was down by nearly 50.6% in 2005 to a mere 16.1% of the high recorded in 2000, representing this activity’s lowest level of investment in nine years.
In the first quarter of 2006, Bolivia’s GDP recorded growth of 4.3% in relation to the year-earlier period.
The construction sector, on the other hand, continued to grow below the average for the economy, at 1.23%. increased from 440 to 500 bolivianos, thereby restoring purchasing power to the level recorded following the previous increase in 2003.
Furthermore, the employment rate is thought to have fallen slightly amidst a moderate pace of economic growth. (c) The external sector Prices climbed by 4.9% in 2005, which exceeded both the central bank’s original target of 3.8% and the adjusted target of 4.2%.
This figure was also 0.3 percentage points higher than in 2004, mainly owing to supply constraints on a number of goods caused by the social protests calling for the nationalization of the hydrocarbons industry in May and June, as well as increases in urban and interurban transport costs recorded at the beginning of the year.
For this year, the central bank set an inflation target of 4% (within a range of one percentage point on either side).
In May 2006, the minimum monthly wage was In 2005, the balance of payments posted a surplus of US$ 492.9 million, which was equivalent to 4.9 GDP percentage points.
This balance has been positive for three years in a row, and was US$ 364 million up on the 2004 figure.
The current account balance was US$ 129.2 million higher than in 2004, while the capital and financial account was US$ 327.9 million higher.
The trade balance turned in a surplus of US$ 329.5 million (3.5 percentage points of GDP), which was 9.2% higher than in 2004.
In 2005, merchandise exports climbed by 24.5% on the strength of external sales of gas and other fuels, which were up by 58.8% and 52.4%, respectively.
Exports of minerals and non-ferrous metals expanded by 17.7%, while manufacturing exports rose by 7.4%.
External sales of agricultural goods, on the other hand, declined by 6.3% owing to the slump in soybeans, sugar and other goods.
In general, external sales benefited from higher prices for export commodities and Bolivia’s terms of trade improved by 5.2% in 2005.
Imports increased by 27%, mainly on the back of intermediate and final consumer goods, which expanded by 27.9% and 24.8%, respectively.
The deficit for net factor income narrowed by US$ 11.6 million, mainly thanks to the increase in incoming interest payments.
Lastly, a positive variation of US$ 237.8 million on the capital and financial account (including errors and omissions) yielded a surplus of US$ 26.3 million.
Inward net foreign investment dropped by US$ 342 million, as disinvestment increased by US$ 361 million.
The lower rate of growth was mainly the result of a sharp slowdown in gross fixed capital formation (from 10.9% in 2004 to 1.6% in 2005).
Meanwhile, the rate of expansion in household consumption (3.1%) outstripped average economic growth.
With inflation easing over the year (consumer price inflation came in at 5.7% in 2005, as against 7.6% in 2004), the authorities began to gradually lower interest rates in September 2005.
The country continued to run large surpluses on both the central government’s primary balance (4.9% of GDP) and on the balance-of-payments current account (1.8%).
In December 2005, Brazil announced that it was going to pay off its US$ 15.5 billion in outstanding liabilities with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The indicators available for 2006 point to higher economic growth this year, with the rate forecast to come in between 3.5% and 4%, based on first-quarter expansion (1.4% up on the last quarter of 2005).
This year’s growth projection is a reflection of good macroeconomic conditions, lower rates of interest, on-target inflation and still-favourable external conditions, which have helped to generate substantial foreign-exchange inflows.
Brazil is due to hold general and presidential elections in October 2006. (a) Fiscal policy The main objective of fiscal policy in 2005 was to soften the impact on net public debt of the interest rate rise of late 2004.
Throughout the year, the authorities worked to build up the primary fiscal surplus in order to control the expansion in public debt.
This surplus stood at 4.9% of GDP at year’s end (well above the target of 4.25%), which made it possible to hold the nominal deficit down to 3.28% of GDP.
The larger surplus was achieved thanks to the healthy balance posted once again by the federal government (2.9% of GDP) and, most of all, to an increase in the primary surplus yielded by State enterprises (from 0.6% of GDP in 2004 to 0.9% in 2005) thanks to higher operating profits and low financial costs.
As an annual average, these firms’ net interest payments over the last two years have been equivalent to zero.
The federal government’s receipts, including social security payments, exceeded 20% of GDP in 2005, up from 19% in 2004.
Unlike the situation in other years, however, the higher tax revenues were not generated by legislative or procedural changes; instead, the 22.1% nominal rise in income tax revenues was driven by an expansion in corporate profits in 2004, while the increased receipts from the manufactured products tax (15.6%) were attributable to record motor vehicle sales.
The higher revenues from these two taxes permitted an increase of 24.2% in transfers to states and municipalities.
As well as higher transfers, financing of social security continued to put pressure on central government spending.
In addition, current expenditures, especially on health, education and income transfer programmes, also climbed more steeply.
Successive real increases in the minimum wage and the rate of expansion of new benefits (4.7% in 2005) pushed up expenditures on pensions and retirement benefits to 7.5% of GDP.
This exceeded the expansion of income from employers’ contributions, which remains at close to 5.6% of GDP, despite increased formalization of employment.
The federal government’s capital spending was up by 14% in 2005, even though some difficulties arose with budget execution.
In 2005 bonds indexed to the exchange rate declined steeply as a proportion of the total federal public debt (to 2% in December 2005), while the share of fixed-rate bonds rose (28% of the total).
Foreign investors qualify for an income-tax exemption for interest earned on federal bonds and this, together with their longer maturity, has boosted demand for these securities.
Higher interest rates and lower inflation in 2005 translated into an increase in the real interest paid on the public debt (7.6% of GDP Developments in Brazil’s economy in 2005 reflected the government’s efforts to maintain the credibility of its macroeconomic policy by meeting pre-announced inflation targets.
In September 2004, the central bank began raising the benchmark interest rate (SELIC) in a process that took it from an annual rate of 16% at that time to 19.75% by June 2005.
Inflation as measured by the broad consumer price index (IPCA) amounted to 5.7% in 2005, which was close to the target of 5.1%.
Market expectations for 2006 place the inflation rate close to the year’s target of 4.5%.
During this period (December 2004 to April 2006), the expansionary impact of the central bank’s build-up in international reserves (to more than US$ 21 billion) was offset by an increase in the national treasury’s local-currency deposits with the central bank, which were equivalent to some US$ 20 billion.
This trend was particularly strong in credit to private individuals, where an increase of 38.7% was driven by an expansion in payroll loans extended at below-market rates (payments on these loans are deducted directly from payrolls, pensions or retirement benefits).
By December 2005, 6.8 million loan contracts of this type had been signed by pensioners and retirees with incomes equivalent to the minimum wage.
This number of loans represents 55% of the number of pensioners at that income level.
Throughout 2005, the larger supply of foreign exchange generated by Brazil’s hefty trade surplus speeded the appreciation of the exchange rate, which gained a nominal 12%.
Although, as noted earlier, the central bank bought foreign exchange to meet its external debt reduction objectives, this did not prevent the strong appreciation of the real, and the impact of this began to show up in the results for early 2006, which reflected a slackening of growth in merchandise exports.
In April 2006, the real effective exchange rate calculated by ECLAC was 33% lower than the average for 2003. (c) Other policies A number of reform initiatives were put in place during 2005, including the regulation of public-private partnerships and new corporate insolvency legislation.
Discussions on fresh proposals, such as tax and labour reforms, were constrained by the political crisis that broke out in Brazil in May 2005, however.
The government has provided incentives to certain sectors, particularly those related to investment (including construction), exports and technological innovation, by reducing or eliminating federal taxes on their inputs. (a) Economic activity Higher economic growth projections for 2006 notwithstanding, the different sectors are expected to perform very unevenly.
As in 2005, when agriculture expanded by 0.8%, calculations for this sector show it performing below the average rate of economic growth in 2006.
In the first quarter of 2006, agriculture recorded a year-on-year contraction of 0.6%, which was attributable to the weak performance of the livestock sector and of some main crops (cotton and rice).
Both in 2005 and thus far in 2006, this sector’s poor showing has stemmed from a number of factors, including a sharp fall in domestic agricultural prices in recent months, exchange-rate appreciation and some producers’ high levels of indebtedness.
The manufacturing sector expanded year-on-year by 3% in the first quarter of 2006, with considerable growth in the production of consumer durables and capital goods and more modest increases in output of intermediate and non-durable consumer goods.
Manufacturing is projected to expand at a rate of close to 4% in 2006, compared with Mining production has maintained a robust upward path, expanding by 11% in 2005 relative to the 2004 figure and marking up a year-on-year growth rate of 12.6% for the first quarter of 2006.
This upswing is being driven by growth in iron production, mainly for export, and in petroleum and gas, principally for the domestic market.
In this first quarter, the services sector’s 2.8% expansion was led by commerce (4.8%) and transport (3.6%), followed by financial services (2.9%) and public administration The first quarter of 2006 brought an upturn in gross fixed capital formation, which rose by just 1.6% in 2005 as a consequence of sluggish activity levels and high rates of interest.
For 2006 overall, investment is expected to climb to the equivalent of 21% of GDP.
In the first four months of the year, imports of capital goods were up by 29.4% in relation to the same period of 2005, and production of domestic capital goods rose by 6.7% year-on-year in the first quarter of 2006.
The brisker growth of investment was attributable mainly to a brighter outlook for economic growth, particularly because of expectations of a drop in longterm interest rates and in the cost of imported goods, the latter as a result of exchange-rate appreciation.
The conditions still warrant a degree of caution in business circles, however. although some sectors are using nearly all of their installed capacity, which represents a stimulus for investment, this will also depend on the behaviour of interest rates.
Nevertheless, investment is likely to be the fastest-growing component of demand in 2006.
The manufacturing wholesale price index rose by only 0.9% in 2005, compared with 19.5% in 2004, while the agricultural wholesale price index decreased by 6.3% over the year.
In 2006, as pressure for public utility rate hikes eases(since they are tied to the preceding year’s price index), and the decline in the prices of agricultural products is expected to continue, annual inflation is likely to come in very close to its 4.5% target level.
In the 12 months to May, the IPCA recorded a below-target variation of 4.2%.
The economic slowdown in 2005 did not drag down labour market indicators, since the average unemployment rate for the year was 9.8%, as against 11.5% in 2004.
Implementation of a plan for promoting formal employment that had been launched in 2002 continued in 2005, with 558,000 jobs being formalized in metropolitan areas, for an annual growth rate of 6.3%.
The government has taken steps to boost the incomes of the poorest population groups by introducing substantial real increases in the minimum wage (8.2% in 2005 and 13% in 2006) and expanding the coverage of income transfer programmes, such as the Bolsa Familia scheme, which was serving more than 8 million families by December 2005.
Total wages have evolved positively in the last few quarters, with a real expansion of 5% in the 12 months to April 2006 in Brazil’s main metropolitan regions.
This was aided by an increase in employment, albeit at a lower rate than in 2005 (72,000 new jobs were created in the first four months of 2006), and continued efforts to encourage the formalization of workers (the average formality index was 54.1% in April 2006, compared with 52.5% a year earlier 2005).
In 2005, the balance-of-payments current account posted a surplus of US$ 14.193 billion (1.8% of GDP), as Brazil’s merchandise trade activity returned an unprecedented surplus of US$ 44.748 billion.
Net capital inflows in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI) and portfolio investment amounted to US$ 17.434 billion.
This inflow of hard currency helped to bring about a substantial nominal appreciation (11.8%) of the real against the United States dollar, which bolstered inflation containment efforts.
The central bank bought some of the surplus foreign exchange in order to build up its reserves, pay off its debt with IMF (US$ 15.5 billion) and the Paris Club (US$ 3 billion) and to retire Brady bonds (US$ 6.6 billion).
In response to the favourable balance-of-payments position, together with abundant liquidity in international financial markets, Brazil’s country-risk premium dropped throughout 2005 to a record low of 217 basis points in April 2006.
In the first five months of 2006, Brazil’s external accounts continued to perform well, as they have since 2004.
In that period the value of exports amounted to US$ 49.466 billion, which was 13.8% up on the same period of 2005, thanks to an increase of 2.5% in volume and of 11.1% in prices.
Imports stood at US$ 34 billion, representing a 22.1% gain on the year-earlier period, driven by a rise of 13.2% in import volumes and of 7.8% in prices.
The expansion in imports reflected the upturn in domestic economic activity and the appreciation of the currency.
Brazil’s fastest-growing exports were commodities, which posted gains of 2.6% in volume and 14.7% in price, followed by manufactures, which were up by 3.6% and 9.7%, in volume and price, respectively.
A notable feature of the income balance is the expansion seen in profit remittances in the last few years.
Outflows corresponding to profit remittances continued to rise steeply in the first five months of 2006, giving rise to a deficit of US$ 7.22 billion (as against US$ 5.07 billion in the same period of 2005).
As a result of these developments, in the first five months of 2006 the current account showed a surplus of US$ 2.506 billion (0.7% of GDP).
Brazil’s continued surpluses on its balance-ofpayments current account have paved the way for an adjustment in its capital and financial accounts, which recorded outflows of US$ 9.593 billion in 2005 and net inflows of US$ 5.292 billion in the first five months of 2006.
The increased availability of foreign exchange has also enabled Brazil to continue paying down its external financial liabilities.
As a result, the country has been able to improve its external indicators, build its international reserves to US$ 63.381 billion in May 2006 (up from US$ 53.799 billion in late 2005) and lower its ratio of net debt to exports of goods to 0.6%, compared with 2.4% at the end of 2002.
For the second consecutive year, the Chilean economy expanded at a rate of over 6%, in a context of favourable terms of trade, large fiscal and balance-of-payments surpluses, inflation within the target range and unemployment levels gradually declining, albeit more slowly than desired.
In 2005 growth was led by domestic demand (i.e., consumption and investment), in contrast to the export-driven performance of 2004.
The central bank maintained its policy of curbing monetary expansion by raising interest rates as the gap between actual and potential output gradually narrowed.
The fiscal policy of a structural surplus of 1% of GDP was also maintained, which, together with exceptional copper and molybdenum prices, translated into an actual surplus of 4.7% of GDP.
The new government, which entered office in March 2006, intends to continue with this policy.
Thanks to the high copper and molybdenum prices and despite high oil prices, the current account posted a surplus, contrary to the original expectations.
These factors, together with the favourable terms of trade, led to a significant appreciation of the peso.
This situation would have been exacerbated had the larger flows external income been used to fund higher fiscal expenditure.
At the end of 2005 inflation was at 3.7%, within the annual target range of 2%-4%.
The unemployment rate declined to 8% thanks to growth in employment, despite higher rates of participation in the economically active population, especially for women.
Nevertheless, unemployment remains one of the main concerns as regards the economy.
First, average oil prices are expected to be higher in 2006 than they were in 2005.
As there seems to be little margin between oil production and consumption, any supply constraints could cause spikes and volatility in prices in the context of a tight market.
If this translated into inflationary pressure, especially in the more developed countries, external interest rates could rise even higher and slow the growth of external demand.
Thanks to the low level of fiscal debt and moderate private indebtedness, this should not have serious financial implications for the State or for business.
Nevertheless, in such a scenario the monetary authorities would be likely to raise interest rates again, which would dampen domestic demand, the economy’s most dynamic driver in the past few years.
A second external risk factor is associated with the continuity of the gas supply from Argentina.
Supply restrictions are expected to continue during 2006, but any worsening of the situation will push up costs, which could affect production in some branches of industry.
This risk factor should diminish in the medium term as energy projects come on stream.
A third risk factor, this time of a domestic nature, stems from the high copper and molybdenum prices, which have reached unprecedented levels and will, on average, be higher than those of the previous year.
Commodity prices always have a large speculative component, in view of the very tight balance between supply and demand.
While high, but slightly more moderate, prices (from US$ 2 to US$ 2.5 per pound of copper) may persist for another year, the long-term cost has historically been less than US$ 1 per pound, suggesting the possibility of an expansion in supply that would cause prices to drop.
With inflation stable, another important factor in monetary and fiscal policy decisions is the possibility of achieving a significant reduction in unemployment in the short term and bringing the rate down to levels similar to those of 1996-1998.
Analysts now agree that that situation, when unemployment was close to 6%, was not sustainable because of the context of surplus spending and overheating of the economy at the time.
This would apparently not be the case today, however, as there is no spending surplus and fiscal affairs are clearly solvent.
Moreover, it is estimated that a stable inflation rate is compatible with unemployment in the range of 6.4% to 9.3%.1 Nevertheless, after two years in which actual GDP grew by 6.2% on average and exceeded the 5% growth rate of potential GDP, any gaps in capacity may be assumed to have diminished.
In these circumstances, the potential for reducing unemployment without generating an impact on inflation is a function of the existing capacity margin, in particular the level of idle capacity and the availability of energy resources.
Dynamic investment in 2005 brought a number of developments that should have a positive impact on capacity in the medium term.
In the light of the public debate on this subject, policies to strengthen investment and increase productivity should return to the fore given the need to increase the growth of potential GDP in order to strike a balance in which rates of unemployment and inflation are lower.
Be that as it may, the projections for 2006 indicate a performance similar to that of 2005, notwithstanding a temporary slowdown in the first quarter of the year, when unemployment rates became sticky and the consumer price index (CPI) spiked above the target range, owing to sharp rises in external fuel prices.
See Central Bank of Chile, Monetary Policy Report, Santiago, Chile, May 2006. (a) Fiscal policy (b) Monetary and exchange-rate policy Fiscal policy maintained its countercyclical slant in 2005, with the target of a structural surplus of 1% of GDP, and this has continued in 2006.
Over these two periods, public expenditure expanded steadily at 6.1% and 6.6%, respectively, in real annual terms.
With growth at over 6% for two consecutive years and the positive impact this has had on tax revenues, coupled with extraordinarily high copper and molybdenum prices, the overall surplus for 2005 was equivalent to 4.7% of GDP, which was more than double the figure for the previous year and the highest since 1997.
This achievement made it possible to reduce domestic and external debt and build up assets.
The central government’s gross debt thus declined from net terms it moved from a debtor position equivalent to 4.2% of GDP to a creditor position equivalent to 0.1%.
This was reflected in the spreads on Chile’s external sovereign bond issues, which in 2005 averaged 51 basis points for fixed-rate bonds and 19 basis points for floating-rate bonds.
In the second quarter of 2006, the government sent to Congress a draft bill on fiscal responsibility, which provides for the establishment of a number of funds in which to hold windfall revenues.
These funds will then be used to cover financing needs during lower-income periods, to ensure compliance with State guarantees and to meet the higher expenditure that minimum pensions will entail.
According to current projections, public spending will increase by 6% in real terms in 2006.
Moreover, the trends in revenues seen in 2005 carried over into the first quarter of the year, so that the overall balance looked close to 6% of GDP and for the year as a whole will be higher than the 2.3% originally stipulated in the budget law.
This solid fiscal position has meant that, despite the fluctuations associated with uncertainties over oil prices and external interest rates, which affected emerging market bond prices in April and June 2006, there have been no great changes in Chilean bond spreads, either sovereign or corporate.
During 2005 and thus far in 2006, the central bank has continued with the policy of reining in the monetary expansion that began in September 2004.
Despite the hikes, in the view of the monetary authorities the benchmark rate is still below the neutral rate, implying that monetary policy has continued to be stimulative.
The rationale for toning down this stimulus is that actual growth has exceeded potential growth for the past two years, which narrows the manoeuvring room in which to increase growth without pushing up inflation.
Although inflation steepened in response to rises in oil prices and other external prices, it remained within the central bank’s target range.
The risk assessment conducted by the monetary authorities, however, concluded that inflation was more likely to rise than to fall, so the policy of hikes in the monetary policy rate may well continue, unless the economy slows sharply, as occurred temporarily in the first quarter.
The gradual rise in the monetary policy rate translated into higher deposit rates, despite which bank credit to the private sector was buoyant enough to bolster domestic expenditure.
In 2005, personal, consumer and housing loans expanded at an annual nominal rate of between 18% and 20% and business loans were up by an average of 15% and these growth rates have held steady in 2006.
This investment growth reflected financial conditions that were still propitious, the upswing in domestic demand and a falling exchange rate that stimulated capital goods imports.
Consistently with the current phase of the business cycle, the effect of higher interest rates and forecasts of further rises, the pace of investment is expected to have slowed somewhat in the first quarter of 2006.
In line with the higher level of domestic demand, the most buoyant sectors in 2005 were construction (9.8%), commerce (8.5%) and transport and telecommunications (8.3%).
These were followed by agriculture and livestock and forestry (5.7%) and the industrial sector (5.2%), especially those branches of activity that produce mainly for domestic demand.
Mining showed meagre growth of 0.2%, while the fishing sector contracted by 2%.
In the first quarter of 2006 activity levels slipped somewhat, which was attributable to temporary factors, in particular weather conditions affecting agricultural activity and exports and delays in the start-up of a number of construction projects.
Indeed, the indicators for June show an upturn in activity, with an expansion rate of close to 6%.
The core inflation indicators generally came in under 3% annually, but all rose gradually as domestic demand climbed and idle production capacity diminished.
In the first half of 2006, 12-month inflation again edged towards 4%, partly because of the rise in international fuel prices and the resulting increases in the price of public transport.
In 2005 and early 2006 the petroleum stabilization fund was used to moderate the pass-through of external price fluctuations to domestic prices, especially for gasoline, diesel and, consequently, public transport.
As oil prices continued to rise, the effects were gradually passed on to the domestic prices of a number of services with regulated prices.
As borne out by the core inflation indices, however, there is no evidence that this is causing secondary inflation, suggesting that the higher fuel prices have been successfully processed as variations in relative prices.
On average, in 2005 the wholesale price index (WPI) rose by 5.5%, reflecting price increases of 6.8% and 1.3% for domestic and imported products, respectively.
The appreciation of the peso has caused drops in the local-currency prices of most imported products, with the exception of mining products which posted an annual average increase of 29% as a result of the price boom.
Up to April 2006 the WPI rose by an annual average of 5.8%, again driven by the prices of domestic products, which were up by 7.8% in annualized terms, while import prices fell by 0.6%.
In 2005 real hourly wages increased at an average annual rate of 1.9%, which was similar to the figure observed in 2004 and reflects a trend that has continued into 2006.
Nominal hourly wages continue to reflect the price trends described here, but are also gradually showing the effects of a single upward adjustment in the form of a three-hour reduction in the working week in 2005.
Meanwhile, unit labour costs, which had posted real reductions in 2005, showed an increase of some 1.9% towards the end of the year and in the first quarter of 2006.
These costs may diminish as economic activity and productivity pick up momentum in the second half of the year.
The unemployment rate was 6.9% in the fourth quarter of 2005, with the average for the year at 8.0%, which was less than in the previous year.
This reflected a 2.3% expansion of the labour force, a 3.2% rise in the number of employed and a 7.1% reduction in the number of unemployed, in annual average terms.
The labour force has been very dynamic, particularly in the case of women.
The female labour force grew at an average annual rate of over 4%; women’s rate of participation in the economically active population has risen, while the figure for men has held steady.
This translates into higher unemployment rates among women (9.8% in 2005) despite the growth in employment.
In the first quarter of 2006 the unemployment rate was 7.9%, which was identical to the figure for the previous year, but rates higher than those of 2005 have been observed since.
Consistently with the trend in aggregate demand, in 2005 the largest growth in employment was seen in sectors associated with domestic demand (construction, commerce and services).
Thus far in 2006 the greatest increases have been observed in agriculture and mining, probably owing to the price boom in the mining sector. (c) The external sector The current account recorded a surplus of US$ 703 million (0.6% of GDP) in 2005.
The trade surplus (f.o.b.) was close to US$ 9.6 billion, compared to US$ 8.5 billion in 2004; merchandise exports expanded to US$ 32.2 billion in 2004, as against US$ 40.6 billion in 2005, while imports of goods rose from US$ 23 billion to US$ 30.4 billion in that period.
The export performance breaks down into an annual increase of 22% in prices, especially copper and molybdenum, and of 2.9% in volume.
Industrial exports rose steadily, with annual growth of over 10% for the second consecutive year.
The increase in imports can be disaggregated into an 8.8% rise in prices, especially oil, which was up by 33.2%, and a 20% increase in volume.
Notably, imports of capital goods expanded by 52.3%, as a result of rapid growth in investment in 2005.
Net foreign direct investment diminished from In this regard, it must be borne in mind that in 2004 a high proportion of FDI consisted of mergers and acquisitions.
Since the promulgation of the Foreign Investment Statute (Decree Law 600) in 1974 US$ 60.6 billion has been built up in FDI stock, with one third of this corresponding to mining.
All the sectors showed improvements and there was a significant rise in domestic demand, especially in investment and private consumption.
The central bank operated an expansionary monetary policy with high liquidity and low interest rates, in the context of decreasing inflation.
As for foreign trade, exports and imports grew rapidly, as did flows of foreign direct investment (8.2% of GDP in 2005 compared to 3.2% in 2004).
The outlook for 2006 promises a similar rate of economic growth, especially as regards consumption and investment.
On the external front, however, lower growth in some trading partner countries could slow the expansion of exports.
The devaluation observed thus far in 2006 will tend to reduce import growth.
The unemployment rate should continue to fall and the quality of employment to improve, thus reducing poverty levels.
ECLAC estimates a GDP growth rate of 4.8%, while government projections include a currentaccount deficit of 1.3% of GDP, a fiscal deficit of 2.0% and an inflation rate of 4.5%.
In 2006, Colombia introduced a new system of parliamentary elections to coincide with the presidential election.
In 2005, monetary policy was expansionary, which translated into a decline in interest rates and a significant expansion of credit, especially consumer loans.
In the course of the year, the central bank intervened actively in the foreign-exchange market in order to curb the peso’s appreciation.
The consolidated public sector achieved a fiscal equilibrium, despite initial projections of a deficit of 1.2% of GDP, thanks to the narrowing of the non-financial public sector deficit in turn, to an increase in the surplus of the decentralized sector.
This surplus was attributable to the improved results for social security, especially in pension funds and unemployment, as well as those of State enterprises such as Empresa Colombiana de Petróleos (ECOPETROL), which offset the central government deficit.
The central government deficit was 4.8% of GDP, which was less than in 2004 (5.5%), owing to higher revenues.
The rise in income was the result of higher tax collection on the back of the improved economic performance; the rise in the VAT rate from 7% to 10% for some products; the buoyancy of imports, which swelled tariff and VAT receipts; and the broadening of the income tax base and improvements in tax administration.
Total expenditure rose by 10.3%, investment expenditure by 0.5% and current spending by 11.2%, with this last item consisting largely of reflecting transfers.
Expenditure Annual growth rates corresponding to interest payments on debt fell by 4%, as a result of the appreciation of the peso and a rise in the value of debt securities.
Central government borrowing needs, including the costs of financial restructuring, amounted to 5.2% of GDP.
The bulk of financing came from domestic debt issues, in the framework of the policy of substituting domestic for external debt.
The purpose of the last two laws is to guarantee market transparency and create an investment-friendly environment in Colombia by ensuring stable rules of the game.
In the first quarter of 2006, the central government deficit amounted to 2% of GDP, which was less than the figure observed for the same period of 2005 (2.2% of GDP).
Total income expanded by 0.4% of GDP with respect to the year-earlier period, mainly as a result of higher receipts from VAT (on domestic goods and imports) and income tax.
Expenditure increased by 0.2% of GDP, the main reason being the rise in investment expenditure on road infrastructure, mass transport systems and security.
In 2005, expansionary monetary policy kept interest rates low and liquidity abundant.
In September the intervention rate was lowered for the first time since December 2004, from 6.5% to 6%.
Market interest rates showed nominal reductions and held steady in real terms.
The average deposit rate was 7.0% in 2005, less than the figure for 2004 (7.4%), while the real interest rate remained relatively stable (2%).
The lending rate was 14.6% in nominal terms and 9.2% in real terms.
A downward trend in interest rates on securities was a constant feature of the domestic public debt market in 2005.
Public securities rose in value owing to a combination of factors: macroeconomic stability, the drop in inflation, broad liquidity, peso appreciation and demand from foreign investors.
The money supply (M1) expanded at an annual average rate of 18%, three percentage points more than in 2004.
The rate of increase for broad monetary (M3) went from 13.5% to 17.9%.
In general, the financial system expanded more rapidly and the quality of the credit portfolio improved, especially for consumer loans, which were up by over 30%, while the mortgage portfolio continued to contract.
In the first half of 2006, the central bank (Banco de la República) shifted its monetary stance and raised the intervention rate twice, in April and June, by a total of 50 basis points, bringing it to 6.5%.
Although the central bank expects the inflation target for 2006 to be achieved, it anticipates possible inflationary pressures over the next few years, hence the interest rate adjustment.
Interest rates continued to fall in the first few months of 2006.
Stiffer competition in the property market helped to bring down rates on loans for house purchases quite significantly.
Interest rates on the public debt continued to trend downward until the middle of the first quarter of 2006, but were subsequently raised in view of expectations of further interest rate hikes in the United States.
Reflecting these developments, stock market prices started to drop in February 2006.
In 2005, the price of the dollar fell by an annual average of 11.6%, which was equivalent to a real appreciation of 8%.
Throughout 2005, the Colombian peso continued to gain in value, although less strongly than in 2004.
Contributing factors included larger capital flows (mainly in the form of foreign direct investment) and the termsof-trade upturn owing to higher international prices for raw materials.
In order to slow the appreciation of the peso, the central bank continued with the discretionary purchase of dollars, some of which it sold to the government to prepay external debt as part of the effort to substitute domestic for external debt.
The local currency continued to appreciate into the first quarter of 2006, but at the end of March, as occurred in most other emerging markets, this trend was reversed by an increase in the value of the dollar.
In May, the exchange rate stood at 2,418 pesos per dollar, which was similar to the figure recorded in December 2004 and represented a depreciation of 6% in relation to December 2005.
The exchange rate’s volatility may be attributed to expectations of hikes in external interest rates. (d) Trade policy In February 2006 free trade negotiations between Colombia and the United States were concluded.
The resulting agreement will be submitted to the respective congresses for consideration and approval in the second half of the year and should enter into force in mid-2007.
Six rounds of talks are planned, culminating in an agreement expected in December.
The expansion in domestic demand became consolidated in 2005, as regards both private investment and household consumption.
After growth of 4.8% in 2004, the economy accumulated an expansion of 5.1% in 2005.1 Investment was substantially higher (29%), driven by tax incentives, readily available credit and low interest rates.
Consumption also recorded rapid growth (4.9%) in both the private and public components (4.9% and 4.8%, respectively).
In addition to the low interest rates, household consumption was stimulated by low inflation, a decrease in unemployment, increased consumer confidence and, to some extent, the wealth effect of the appreciation of shares in the stock exchange.
The increase in public consumption was coupled with the positive trend in tax income and favourable oil prices.
The external sector made a negative net contribution to economic growth, since the expansion in exports was not enough to offset the jump in the volume of imports.
The fastest-growing sectors were commerce (9.2%) and construction (12.6%), consisting mainly of public works.
Industry and the agricultural sector posted a lower growth rate than in 2004 (4.0% and 2.1%, respectively).
The economy is expected to remain buoyant in 2006, although with a lower rate of growth than in 2005.
In the first quarter of 2006 economic growth came in at an annual 5.4%, exceeding the annual 4.5% recorded in the year-earlier period.
Investment continued to rise (27%); household consumption (5%) climbed strongly and public Excluding the effect of illicit crop eradication on aggregate production, the growth figure is an annual 5.2%.
The available second-quarter data point to a good performance in industry and trade.
A survey conducted by the Industrialists Association shows that 2006 is expected to be a good year for the sector.
The cumulative variation in the consumer price index in 2005 was 4.9%, within the central bank’s target range for annual inflation (between 4.5% and 5.5%) and 0.65 percentage points below the rate recorded in 2004 (5.5%).
One contributing factor was the fall in prices of tradable goods, which were closely associated with the appreciation of the peso.
The prices of regulated goods trended downward, despite the rise in fuel prices, which helped to bring down inflation.
The central bank established an inflation target of 4.5% for 2006, with a margin of half a percentage point either way.
Annual inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, continued to fall in the first half of 2006 and reached 4.0% in May, thanks to lower prices for foods, regulated goods and services and tradable goods.
Currency appreciation in 2005 brought down the prices of imported goods, which to a large extent explains the drop in this index.
The first semester of 2006 brought a change in the trend, however.
In May the index showed a 4% rise over 12 months, compared to the 3.0% recorded for the same period of 2005.
Economic growth has led to a steady decline in unemployment, reflecting both an increase in the number of employed and a contraction in the national labour supply.
Nationwide, the drop in unemployment was larger (down from 13.6% to 11.8%).
Meanwhile, the labour force participation rate was down from 60.8% to 59.9%.
The main concern with regard to labour issues continues to be the high rate of underemployment, which remained at 31.6%.
The monthly minimum wage (equivalent to US$ 164) was The results for the first four months of 2006 are highly positive, with unemployment down and employment rising.
Nationwide, the unemployment rate dropped from 13.1% to 12.5% and the number of employed rose by 2.6%.
Notwithstanding the appreciation of the peso, Colombia’s exports benefited from rising international prices for raw materials and good performances in the economies of its trading partners.
Exports were up by 26% in 2005, mainly owing to a positive showing by traditional exports (35%) and, to a lesser degree, of non-traditional products (19%).
The United States continued to be the main export destination (40% of total exports), followed by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (10%).
Traditional exports expanded thanks to the upturn in international prices and, to a lesser extent, to higher volumes of coffee, coal and ferronickel exports.
In the case of oil and petroleum products, the increase in international prices more than compensated for the fall in export volumes (4% down on 2004).
Non-traditional exports expanded strongly, mainly in sales of industrial products, although at a lower rate than in 2004.
Growth in industrial exports was led by sales of motor vehicles and spare parts, as well as foods, beverages and tobacco.
In 2005, a substantial rise in domestic investment and real exchange-rate appreciation resulted in a 27% increase in imports.
Almost half of this expansion corresponded to purchases of capital goods, mainly for industry, reflecting the rapid growth of investment.
Imports of raw materials and intermediate goods for industry were up significantly (16%).
Imports of consumer goods rose by 26%, with durable goods contributing strongly (31%).
In the first half of 2006, total exports grew by 17.8%, owing mainly to increased sales of non-traditional products (19.3%), led by the industrial sector.
Imports rose by 24%, driven by raw materials, capital goods for industry and transport equipment.
Net capital inflows amounted to US$ 3.659 billion and gross international reserves were up by US$ 1.729 billion.
In December the reserve stock amounted to US$ 14.957 billion, or the equivalent of 8.9 months of goods imports.
The bulk of the current account deficit reflected higher net outflows on the factor income account, associated mainly with payments of profits and dividends.
This effect was partially offset by a larger trade surplus (US$ 250 million) and an increase in net transfers, mainly in the form of workers’ remittances, which rose by 5%.
In the first quarter of 2006, the balance-of-payments current account deficit was US$ 568 million (1.7% of quarterly GDP), well in excess of the year-earlier figure of US$ 29 million.
At the same time, net capital inflows amounted to US$ 609 million, contrasting with the outflow recorded for the same period of 2005 (US$ 236 million).
Of this total, the external indebtedness of the private sector decreased from 14.1% to 11.6% of GDP and of the public sector, from 26.7% to 19.7% of GDP.
This included private debt equivalent to 10.7% of GDP and public debt equivalent to 17.8%.
Although economic growth was moderate (3.9%) in 2005 and GDP is expected to increase by 3.5% in 2006, the economy faces significant challenges as regards the oil industry and competitiveness in general.
In particular, given problems in the electricity sector, the threat of losing access to external markets under advantageous conditions and cost issues, the government will have to make explicit efforts to lower barriers to private-sector competitiveness.
In 2005 the fiscal situation deteriorated with respect to 2004, despite the large oil revenues being earned thanks to high international prices for crude oil.
The primary and overall surpluses of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) were smaller, although this did not prevent a further reduction of the debt-to-GDP ratio.
Throughout 2005 and into early 2006 private banks continued to hold large percentages of their assets in foreign securities.
In the external sector, oil exports performed very well in 2005 and 2006 because of the high prices being fetched by crude petroleum.
Nevertheless, the export volume was flat owing to problems experienced by the State-owned Petroleum Corporation of Ecuador (PETROECUADOR) and low levels of investment by private oil companies.
In 2005, the NFPS returned a primary surplus of 3% of GDP, while the overall surplus was 0.7%.
This represented a significant decline with respect to the primary surplus of 4.5% of GDP and the global surplus of 2.1% of GDP recorded in 2004, owing to the fact that total spending grew more rapidly than total income: while spending expanded from 22.7% of GDP in 2004 to 24.5% in 2005, income increased from 24.8% to 25.2% of GDP.
In nominal terms, total NFPS spending was up by 18.5%, while income grew by 11.9%.
The central government posted a primary surplus of 1.9% of GDP and an overall deficit of 0.5% of GDP in 2005, which was an improvement on the primary surplus of 1.5% of GDP and the global deficit of 1% of GDP recorded in 2004.
First, the increase in oil export income accounts for over half of the growth in total NFPS income.
Second, almost a third of the rise in total income was attributable to the higher level of income tax collection, owing to the expansion of oil companies’ earnings and of economic activity in general.
Third, there was a rapid decline in fiscal income from the sale of petroleum products owing to the fact that domestic prices for petroleum products have been frozen since 2003 and much of the demand for such products is met by imports ––paid for at international prices–– because PETROECUADOR lacks installed refining capacity.
NFPS revenues for domestic sales of petroleum products dropped from 2% of GDP to only In terms of expenditure, there were significant increases in social security expenditure, which included the return of reserve funds by the Ecuadorian Social Security Institute, as ordered by Congress.
Spending on wages expanded by 12.4% in 2005 and constituted almost a third of total NFPS expenditure (8% of GDP).
In general, fiscal spending continues to be very inflexible and the pre-allocation of income to a number of areas, such as subnational governments, is another fiscal management constraint worsening spending rigidities.
Another issue with important fiscal implications is the uncertain situation of the electricity sector.
First, there are substantial cross debts among clients, distributors, generators and PETROECUADOR.
This makes it difficult to establish the true position of the different companies, as the collectibility of the various debts is uncertain.
This is important because a large part of the sector is publiclyowned.
A second factor is that the distributors have significant operating problems and PETROECUADOR sells fuel to thermal generators at prices below opportunity cost (export price).
Ecuador’s external public debt (including that of the central bank) diminished over the year, reaching US$ 10.85 billion in December 2005 (29.9% of GDP), while the central government domestic debt rose in nominal terms to US$ 3.686 billion (10.2% of GDP).
External debt increased in the first quarter of 2006, reflecting the receipt of a US$ 400 million loan from the Latin American Reserve Fund (FLAR).
On 15 May 2006 the government exercised an option to buy back, at face value, US$ 740 million (of a total issue of US$ 1.25 billion) in Global 2012 bonds, which carry a high coupon rate (12%).
This transaction lowered the cost of borrowing for Ecuador, since the coupon rate on the 2015 bond was 9.375% (with a return of 10.75%) and the FLAR loan was made at the LIBOR rate plus 2%.
Contingent liabilities are an important factor in the analysis of fiscal sustainability.
In this connection, Occidental Petroleum sued the Ecuadorian State for the reimbursement of US$ 75 million in VAT and the international arbiter in the proceedings ruled against Ecuador in July 2004.
The British court to which the State then appealed upheld that ruling in March 2006. rapidly in 2006.
Even so, in May 2006 corporate loans constituted 27.1% of total bank assets and loans to other resident sectors accounted for 22.7%.
Interestingly enough, in 2005 and 2006 the banking system continued to accumulate non-share holdings, especially foreign securities.
In addition, 11.7% of holdings (US$ 1.372 billion) ––almost one quarter of the system’s assets–– are held in transferable deposits abroad, which constitute “insurance” for Ecuadorian banks against bank runs and other contingencies.
This preference for foreign assets seems to have become more pronounced in the first five months of 2006, when 45.5% of new assets were placed in foreign securities.
Despite the high opportunity cost of keeping such large quantities of assets abroad, the banks reported profits in 2005.
The total real exchange effective rate was 4.3% higher (i.e., depreciation) than the average for 2004, which was mainly a reflection of the United States dollar’s depreciation in relation to other currencies (such as the Colombian peso).
The depreciation of Ecuador’s real effective exchange rate in 2005 was led by real bilateral depreciation in relation to the Colombian currency (16.4%), followed by depreciation in relation to the Brazilian real (25.9%), although the latter trend had much smaller impact on the effective exchange rate owing to its lesser weight in Ecuador’s external trade.
The benchmark lending and deposit interest rates fluctuated slightly in 2005, but without significant changes.
The reference lending interest rate was 9% in December 2005, while the deposit rate was 4.3%.
Accumulation of assets in the Ecuadorian banking sector expanded by 20.3% between December 2004 and December 2005.
In 2005 loans increased by 27.2%, outstripping the previous year’s figure; corporate loans were up 18.6% and loans to other resident sectors by 39.7%, with this latter item continuing to grow more (c) Other policies Ecuadorian GDP grew by 3.9% in 2005, which was a significant slowdown compared to 2004 when real GDP was up by 7.6%.
The economic growth in 2005 was mainly attributable to the manufacturing industry, led by the meat, processed fish and machinery and equipment subsectors, as well as wholesale and retail trade and other services.
In particular, mining and quarrying ––basically the oil sector–– expanded by only 1% in 2005, which contrasted with the sector’s buoyancy in 2004.
A particularly strong driver of spending were exports, with expansion of 5.2%, followed by gross fixed capital formation (5.1%) and household consumption (4.9%).
A growth rate of 3.3% is forecast for 2006, driven by commerce, transport and services in general.
Total oil extraction rose by a mere 1% in 2005, since drilling by PETROECUADOR declined by 1.4% and private extraction climbed 2.4%.
The State firm’s crude extraction volume continued to decline, owing to lack of investment and internal problems in the company, leading to a drop in production from 119.7 million barrels (328,000 barrels per day) in 1994 to 71 million barrels (194,400 barrels per day) in 2005.
In 2005 and 2006 the company experienced operating difficulties, mostly because of the debts accumulated by electricity generators and the need to import large quantities of petroleum products at market prices for subsequent heavily subsidized domestic sale.
These fields yielded an average of 100,000 barrels per day of crude, which was equivalent to 18.8% of Ecuador’s total production.
Unless PETROECUADOR can match the investment capacity and production efficiency of the private sector, this change in administration could impact strongly not only on the fiscal position but also on GDP growth.
Third, in August 2005 serious disturbances occurred in the provinces of Sucumbíos and Orellana, two major oil areas.
These protests led to a temporary stoppage of PETROECUADOR crude oil exports.
The prices will be adjusted according to the United States consumer price index.
Price movements in 2006 are expected to reflect economic growth in the services sector, as well as increases in credit and the effects of the reimbursement of pension reserve funds that began in 2005.
In 2005, job creation was moderate in Ecuador, despite the growth of industry and the services sector, which usually create labour demand.
This was despite a slight rise in the participation rate, since the employment rate increased by 0.3 percentage points.
In the first six months of 2006, the average unemployment rate was 10.4%, which was below the 11.1% recorded for yearearlier period, while the employment rate was also 0.75 percentage points higher than in the first half of 2005.
One possible interpretation is that growth in services and other activities with low rates of labour productivity contributed to the increasingly insecure employment conditions observed in 2005.
During the first half of 2006 “adequate” employment was at 41.2%, similar to the level recorded for the same period of 2005, while underemployment was higher in the first half of 2006 (48.3%) than in the same period of No balance-of-payments data have become available since the second half of 2005; hence, the analysis will focus on trade.
Of this increase, 64% is attributable to the expansion in oil exports (38.4%).
The jump in oil exports is almost entirely due to a 36.1% rise in crude oil prices, however, since the volume exported rose only 1.7%.
Shrimp was the fastest-growing non-oil export in 2005, with a substantial rise of 38.7%, although this represented only about half the value exported in 1997.
Banana exports grew moderately in 2005 (5.9%) and the fastest-growing non-traditional exports were canned tuna (up 35.2%) and motor vehicles (up 113.4%).
Crude oil exports are expected to remain buoyant in 2006, mainly because of the high prices.
During the first five months crude exports rose by 57.3%, owing to an average price rise of 43.9%.
Export volumes are unlikely to change significantly because of the problems being experienced by PETROECUADOR and private companies’ lack of interest in substantially increasing their investments.
Other exports, such as shrimp, should also have a good year, in particular owing to the weakness of the United States dollar compared to the currencies of Ecuador’s trade partners.
In relation to banana exports, it is not yet clear how the European Union’s shift from quotas to tariffs on banana imports in 2006 will affect Ecuadorian exports in the long run.
Imports rose by 26.4% in 2005; over a third of this growth reflected increased imports of fuel and lubricants (72.3%) and almost another third was attributable to imports of capital goods (up 31.5%), mainly for industry.
Fuel and lubricant imports reflected not only the higher oil prices, but also the need to meet expanding domestic demand for petroleum products, in view of the limited refining capacity of PETROECUADOR.
Imports of consumer goods grew by 14.1%, while raw material imports increased by 14.4%.
In the first five months of 2006 the value of imports was up by 19.8%, mostly due to large imports of fuel and lubricants, which are continuing the upward trend recorded in 2005.
Lastly, the negotiations for a free trade agreement between Ecuador and the United States have stalled and it is not clear when they will resume.
This is a matter of concern for exporters who benefit from preferential tariffs under the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA), which helped them to place their products in the United States market.
Those preferences expire this year so, unless the free trade agreement (which is opposed by part of the population) is signed, sectors that used to benefit under ATPDEA will face higher tariffs.
The Paraguayan economy grew by 2.9% in 2005, boosted by the expansion of the livestock sector (18% real growth for the year), commerce (3.6%) and communications (12%), and despite a 5.8% downturn in crop-farming owing to the impact of drought on a number of crops.
The overall figure reflects a slowing of the economy in comparison with the recovery enjoyed in the two previous years, which had followed the downswings of 1999 and 2000.
Thanks to a favourable international context, the economy is expected to pick up in 2006, with growth projected at over 3%.
Inflation as measured by the consumer price index had stood at just 2.8% in 2004, but rose to 9.9% in 2005, mostly owing to imported inflation.
As of June 2006, the cumulative inflation rate was 3.7%, but for the year as a whole it is expected to be inside the central bank’s target band.
The central government ended 2005 with a slight overall fiscal surplus of 0.8% of GDP, higher than expected.
For 2006, thanks to the new stand-by agreement with IMF, the public accounts should remain balanced.
The current-account deficit in 2005 was 1.4% of GDP (in current dollars) and the capital and financial account showed a surplus of 2.9%.
The greatest challenge facing Paraguay is to resolve the executive power’s current difficulty in obtaining the approval of Congress for fundamental reforms, which is impairing governance.
The growth of tax receipts slowed and expenditure rose more quickly in 2005, however.
Nevertheless, the central government showed an overall surplus of 0.8% of GDP and a primary balance of 2% of GDP, compared with the 2004 figures of 1.6% and 2.7%, respectively.
The central government’s overall fiscal revenue was up by a nominal 10.6% (26.1% in 2004), which was similar to the rise in tax revenue (11%, compared with the 2004 figure of 34%).
Despite this slowdown, there was an increase in the number of new taxpayers, which broadened the tax base.1 Receipts from tax on net income and profits rose by nearly 10%, as against the previous year’s 41% increase, while VAT revenue continued to mount significantly (24% and 23.5% in 2005 and 2004, respectively).
Despite rising oil prices, fuel tax revenues were down 5.9% owing to a change in the tax on diesel fuel, which was fixed at 600 guaraníes per litre regardless of the sale price, and a cut in the tax rates on gasoline of up to 85 octanes from 34% to 24%.
In 2006, in order to contain spending, the authorities froze the hiring of new staff until August.
Current transfers rose by 23.8%, with a sharp increase in outlays on pensions (19.8%), mostly because of bonuses and levelling of pensions.
Capital spending was up 14%, but it still represents 23% of total spending, a little over half the amount of spending on personal services.
According to projections published in August 2005 by the Ministry of Finance, the overall fiscal balance for 2006 will show a deficit of 0.66% of GDP and a primary surplus of 0.42%.
To that end, the government may apply the Financial Plan, a legal instrument provided for in the Law on Government Financial Administration, which requires that funds for expenditure should be disbursed only when revenue permits. also adopted a proposal from the executive branch to issue sovereign bonds totalling 130 billion guaraníes, to finance capital spending and public debt.
Under the Administrative Restructuring and Fiscal Reform Act, personal income tax will be payable for the first time in 2006.
The annual tax rate will be 10% for individuals whose monthly incomes are more than ten times the monthly minimum wage (or whose annual incomes exceed 120 monthly minimum wages), and 8% for incomes below that threshold.
In the second year, the threshold will be lowered to nine times the minimum wage and it will decrease by one minimum wage every year thereafter until it reaches three monthly minimum wages in 2012.
These audits revealed large gaps and hidden losses in the corporations’ accounts.
The report published by the government in June 2006 creates a restructuring plan which includes resultsbased management, but there are no plans for a significant private-sector stake in the corporations.
The Central Bank of Paraguay set an inflation target of 5% for 2005, within a band of 2.5% on either side.
At the end of the year, however, the year-on-year inflation rate stood at 9.9%, with an annual average of 6.8%.
In 2005, in response to this inflation, the central bank raised the interest rates of its short-term monetary regulation instruments (central bank debt securities), although longterm rates varied less, which resulted in a flattening of the yield curve on those securities.
Accordingly, the weighted mean yield of monetary regulation instruments was 4.1%, despite the 6.7% recorded in December.
At the same time, there was a steep rise in the volume being issued, reaching a monthly average of 820 billion guaraníes in 2005.
As of May 2006, the average stood at 1.479 trillion guaraníes, representing 58% of M0 (notes and coins in circulation).
Monetary regulation instruments were the main factor holding down M0 in 2005.
Nevertheless, monetary aggregates expanded by more than 15% in 2005, except for base money (4.4% year-onyear) and M3 (8.3% year-on-year).
The early months of 2006, however, saw a slowdown in this year-on-year expansion and the growth rates observed in M2 and M3, respectively.
The weighted average for nominal lending rates stood at 26.6% in December 2005, compared with 22.5% a year earlier.
The weighted average for nominal deposit rates stood at 0.6% in late 2005, lower than the 1.7% recorded in December 2004, which translated into negative real deposit rates of -8.5% in 2005 because of inflation combined with the virtually-zero nominal rates on sight deposits.
Given the behaviour of interest rates, private-sector deposits and credit to the private sector increased more moderately in 2005.
Deposits were up 5.7%; those in local currency rose 14.5%, but foreign-currency deposits declined by 1%.3 This decrease was due in part to the appreciation of the guaraní against the United States dollar, since dollar-denominated deposits increased by 1.2%.
Total credit grew by 13.3%, with only a small increase in foreign-currency credit (1.4%), compared with loans in domestic currency, which continued to grow in 2006 at a year-on-year rate of more than 20% (26.5% in 2005).
As regards exchange-rate policy, in 2005 the guaraní depreciated against the Brazilian real despite strengthening against the United States dollar for part of the year, because the real’s appreciation against the dollar was greater.
As of the end of 2005, the guaraní had appreciated by 1.2% in nominal terms against the United States dollar (4.9% in real terms).
Nevertheless, taking the average value for 2005 against the average for 2004, the currency had depreciated by a nominal 3.4% (0.8% in real terms) against the dollar.
This downward trend was due to Paraguay’s current-account deficit and the difference between the two countries’ inflation rates.
Against the Brazilian real, the year-on-year nominal depreciation of the guaraní was 16% (6.6% in real terms).
Given Paraguay’s strong trading links with Brazil, the real effective depreciation of the guaraní was 13.7%.
As a result, the real effective exchange rate ended the year practically unchanged on a year-on-year basis.
The interventions took place mostly in the second half of the year. (c) Other policies In early June 2006 Paraguay concluded a new agreement with IMF that will remain in force until 2008.
The agreement is based on five pillars: (i) a solid macroeconomic programme; (ii) public-sector reform; (iii) reform of the financial sector; (iv) a reform programme to promote growth; and (v) a social security network.
The Development Finance Agency (AFD) was created in April 2006 to perform second-tier banking functions, channelling public-sector credit to intermediate financial institutions.
It is expected that the creation of AFD will lead to improved development of the mediumand long-term credit market in order to meet the needs of the productive sector.
The reform of first-tier banking, provided for in the agreement with IMF, is still awaiting approval by Congress.
The National Development Bank continues to operate in that capacity, and the new agreement provides for a clean-up of its balance sheet.
This reflected expansion in livestock output, commerce and communications, and a fall in crop production.
This last activity slumped by 5.8% because of production losses in a number of crops affected by the drought, particularly cotton (-40%), maize (-26%), sugar (-5.6%).
Drought is expected to affect the farming season for the third year in a row in 2005-2006.
The early soybean harvest suffered fairly badly, but the mid-season and late crops are expected to improve the final production figure.
The livestock sector enjoyed significant growth of 18% in 2005, in response to strong domestic and foreign demand, benefiting activities connected with meat packing.
The communications sector also trended strongly upward (12%) thanks to the expansion of mobile telephony, with higher investment in the sector and increasing sales.
Commerce was up by 3.6% but was hit by Brazil’s restrictions on merchandise from Ciudad del Este.
On the demand side, general government consumption remained the strongest driver of economic growth (7.6%), followed by private consumption (4.2%).
Gross fixed capital formation swelled by 4.8%, close to the 2004 figure of 5%.
The increase was mainly caused by factors such as rising oil prices, which are reflected in higher transport fares; increased prices for beef and beef substitutes, owing to rising domestic and external demand; and, to a lesser extent, higher prices for fruit and vegetables.
At the same time, greater liquidity in the market caused by growth in monetary aggregates, especially since mid-2005, may have contributed to rising prices.
The central bank’s measure of core inflation (X1) stood at 8.8%, although it does not exclude the prices of meat and other perishable foodstuffs.4 Inflation maintained its upward trend in the early months of 2006.
Cumulative inflation to June 2006 stood at 3.7%, with the monthly inflation rate gradually decreasing.
In April 2006, the authorities announced a 12% hike in the minimum wage, in response to cumulative inflation of 10% since the previous review in April 2005.
It is unlikely, however, that this measure will have much impact on inflation, given the small percentage of workers who will benefit.
Given the degree of informality in the Paraguayan economy, the minimum wage (about US$ 210 per month) serves more as a wage ceiling for the least skilled private-sector workers, since employers consider it excessively high and often ignore it.
In the public sector, however, the minimum wage is used as a point of reference.
There is therefore no evidence of job creation; this is explained in part by lower economic growth.
There was a small increase in underemployment, reflected the rise in underemployment in urban areas Paraguay’s balance-of-payments current account deficit in 2005 stood at US$ 105 million (1.4% of GDP), resulting from the US$ 609 million trade deficit (7.9% of GDP), which was partially offset by surpluses on the other components of the current account balance.
Goods exports rose by a nominal 18.5%, while imports swelled by a nominal 26.4%.
The terms of trade were poor for Paraguay in 2005; according to central bank data, they fell by 26.6% in annual average terms.
This was caused partly by lower average international prices for soybean (-14%) and cotton (-6.7%), together with an average 42% hike in oil prices.
On the other hand, rising prices for meat, exports of which rose by a nominal 57% and made up 15% of total resistered exports, helped to slow the downturn in the terms of trade.
Positive balances on the services account (US$ 237 million), income account (US$ 45 million) and currenttransfers account (US$ 223 million) compensated in part for the heavy trade deficit.
Net foreign direct investment (FDI) picked up by 151% in 2005, with a net inflow of US$ 113 million.
The incoming resources went mainly to agribusiness (particularly to multinational corporations involved in soybean production), telecommunications (especially mobile communications) and financial services.
The capital and financial account (including errors and omissions) showed a surplus of US$ 222 million (2.9% of GDP), despite the central government’s external debt payments.
Most of Paraguay’s external public debts are medium- and long-term liabilities and its creditors are multilateral bodies and official bilateral entities.
At the end of 2005, the overall balance of payments showed a surplus of US$ 117 million (1.5% of GDP).
Reserves increased by 1.7% of GDP and exceptional financing was 0.2% of GDP.
The Central Bank of Paraguay’s X1 measure of core inflation excludes fruit and vegetables, regulated services and fuels.
The Peruvian economy expanded by 6.4% in 2005, well exceeding initial expectations, to close the period 2000-2005 with an average growth rate of more than 4% per annum.
A highly favourable external climate contributed to a steep rise in exports, resulting in an unprecedented surplus, equivalent to 1.3% of GDP, on the balance-of-payments current-account.
The economic policy implemented in the last few years has brightened the expectations of economic agents and fuelled domestic demand.
Thus, all the components of aggregate demand outstripped the previous year’s rates of growth without generating inflationary pressure; at the end of the year, the consumer price index showed a moderate rise of 1.5%.
Buoyant economic activity contributed to a significant improvement in the fiscal balance.
Formal employment rose significantly but its impact on the labour market overall was limited and the unemployment rate rose slightly to 9.6%, while poverty levels remained high.
Growth expectations for 2006 are based on the continuation of good external conditions and a buoyant performance from domestic demand components, which should sustain an annual expansion rate of almost 6%.
On the other hand, the dissatisfaction with living standards expressed by broad groups of society during the presidential and legislative elections has heightened the challenges faced by the new administration taking office at the end of July.
The authorities took advantage of the propitious conditions to drive ahead their strategy to reduce the Peruvian economy’s vulnerability by narrowing the fiscal deficit, restructuring the public debt and reducing it in GDP terms, building up international monetary reserves and stimulating the de-dollarization of the financial system.
In addition, economy policy helped to maintain stability in key prices, such as consumer prices and the exchange rate, and to boost economic growth in the short term (through relatively low rates of interest, for example) and the long term (with the signature of a free trade agreement with the United States, which the Peruvian parliament approved in June).
The fiscal situation of 2005 and early 2006 was notable for a strong increase in income, mainly because of economic expansion, the favourable prices being fetched by export goods and headway on administrative improvements to the coverage and efficiency of tax collection.
The implementation of the new temporary tax on net assets raised a sum equivalent to 0.4% of GDP.
General government expenditure rose by 11.1% in nominal terms, with the largest jumps in capital expenditure (13.1%) and non-financial current expenditure (11.8%).
Nevertheless, gross fixed investment by the public sector remained historically low (2.9% of GDP, compared with an average of 4.6% in 1993-1999).
Among other causes for the low investment, there were problems in implementing projects which were to be funded using resources made available locally and regionally through the decentralization process begun in 2002.
This deficit was covered entirely by financing raised on the domestic market.
The government took a number of steps to lessen fiscal spending vulnerabilities.
The reform of the public employees’ pension system (decree-law 20.530 on the “cédula viva”) prohibited the entry of new beneficiaries to the scheme and imposed ceilings on pensions.
Peru also rescheduled its debt with the Paris Club and paid liabilities owed to the Japan Peru Oil Company (JAPECO), which reduced the external public debt burden and improved the profile of its servicing commitments.
In absolute terms, public debt dropped slightly from US$ 30.9 billion to US$ 29.8 billion.
The external public debt was partly replaced by bonds issued on the domestic market and decreased from the equivalent of 34.3% of GDP in December 2004 to 29.6% a year later, while domestic debt rose from 9.0% to 10.2% of GDP.
Thanks to good export prices and buoyant economic activity in early 2006, fiscal revenues have continued to expand apace (27% in real terms in the first five months), which has enabled a fresh improvement in the fiscal balance, despite a 12% real increase in spending.
In the light of this, the government adjusted its medium-term programming and 2006 is expected to yield an NFPS primary surplus of 1.9% and a deficit of 0.2% on the overall balance.
In order to strengthen the credibility of its commitment to curb inflation, in 2002 the Central Reserve Bank of Peru established a scheme of inflation targets.
In the years that followed, price increases came within the range established in this scheme (between 1.5% and 3.5%), notwithstanding temporary deviations in both directions.
Although inflation was kept in check throughout the reporting period and in some months even came in below the floor of the target range, in December 2005 the government began a policy of monthly half-percentagepoint increases in the benchmark rate of interest, which thus rose from 3.0% to 4.5% in May 2006.
The rationale for this policy lay in the price pressures that might result from the upswing in economic activity combined with the lagged impact of monetary policy.
The exchange rate became more volatile in mid-2005, having maintained a very stable trend towards slight appreciation hitherto.
First came a real depreciation, followed by a period of volatility with no clear trend.
This was partly attributable to investment strategies, especially on the part of institutional investors, and to the uncertainty surrounding the electoral process.
The authorities responded by selling hard currency and issuing dollar-indexed deposit certificates.
The interest rate hikes also averted any widening of the gap with respect to international rates of interest in a context of political uncertainty, which could have augmented downward pressure on the new sol.
As a yearly average, the two opposing trends evident throughout 2005 practically balanced each other out: the real bilateral exchange rate against the dollar dipped by 1.7%, while the real effective rate rose by 0.6%.
A comparison between the end of 2004 and the position 12 months later shows that, in real terms, the new sol depreciated by 6.8% against the dollar and by 4.7% against a basket of the currencies of its main trading partners.
Owing to stiff competition in the sector and large financial spreads, not all interest rates rose, despite the tighter monetary policy.
Indeed, the median fixed lending rate declined and 17.2% in the first semester of 2006.
With the economic outlook positive and funds available, the financial system’s credit to the private sector expanded at a year-on-year rate of 17.5% (December 2005).
Bank lending in the form of consumer and mortgage loans was the fastestgrowing type, although business loans also expanded at two-digit rates.
The credit arrears of multiple banks also continued to decline, from 3.7% in December 2004 to (c) Other policies In April 2006 Peru signed a free trade agreement with the United States.
Another such agreement was signed with Thailand and negotiations were conducted with a view to increasing trade relations with Chile, Mexico and Singapore.
Concessions were granted for a variety of infrastructure works (for example, the Tumbes water and sanitation system and the construction and maintenance of the inter-ocean highway) and for the operation of La Granja copper mine and the Bayóvar phosphate mine.
A proposal to reorganize the country’s administrative and territorial structure in order to make the existing decentralization scheme more efficient was rejected in a national referendum.
Lastly, the authorities launched the pilot phase of the programme “Juntos” which consists of conditional direct transfers linked to health care and education of children from poor households.
In 2005 economic growth (6.4%) exceeded the previous year’s figure thanks to a buoyant performance from all the components of aggregate demand.
Exports of goods and services expanded particularly strongly (13.9%), thanks to favourable conditions in the international markets, as did gross fixed capital formation (13.4%), which amounted to 18.8% of GDP at current prices, although this was still well below the levels seen between 1994 and 1999.
Be that as it may, both public and private investment saw significant upswings in 2005.
Private consumption also picked up (4.7%, compared with 3.5% in 2004) on the back of a rise in employment and the expansion of credit, while public consumption increased by 9.2%, thanks to rising fiscal income.
The terms of trade improved by the equivalent of 1.2% of GDP.
A buoyant performance was rendered across the board on the supply side.
With the exception of fishing, which posted a rise of only 1.2% after an expansion of over 30% in 2004, all branches of activity bettered their 2004 performance.
Particularly good performers were construction (8.4%), driven by infrastructure projects, construction of shopping centres and residential schemes; mining and hydrocarbons (8.1%), fuelled by high prices and the start-up of new metal mining projects, as well as the operation of the Camisea gasfield; and manufacturing (6.5%), which was buoyed by the good performance of non-traditional exports and domestic demand.
After a contraction in 2004, the agricultural sector was up by 4.6%, thanks to improved weather conditions and a strong expansion in livestock in response to higher demand.
In the first four months of 2006 the Peruvian economy expanded by 5.9%.
For the year as a whole ECLAC forecasts GDP growth of 5.8%, reflecting slower growth in export volumes, partly offset by higher domestic demand.
The change of government is not expected to have any repercussions for economic performance in the second semester.
At the end of 2005 inflation came in at 1.5%, at the floor of the authorities’ target range.
This represented a drop of two percentage points with respect to 2004, attributable to decreases in a number of agricultural prices that had been pushed sharply upwards that year by climatic factors.
The impact of rising fuel prices in the international markets was cushioned by a series of cuts in the excise tax on fuels and by the use of the fuel price stabilization fund, which came into operation in 2004.
In 2005 these measures, at a combined fiscal cost of some US$ 300 million, kept the rise in fuel prices to 6.9%.
Leaving aside these factors, prices varied little and 2005, like 2004, ended with core inflation at 1.2%.
Contributing to this was strong competition in a number of markets, as well as exchange-rate stability during most of the year.
Inflation rose slightly in early 2006, again because of weather conditions impacting on the supply of some agricultural products, but returned to low levels towards mid-year, with a year-on-year rate of 1.8% in June, while core inflation stood at 1.3%.
Wages did not exert inflationary pressure in 2005, since formal employment wages and salaries were down by 1.0% and 1.8%, respectively.
Formal job creation continued to expand, increasing by 4.5% on average in 2005 and 6.2% in the first five months of 2006.
The main poles of formal employment creation were in agribusiness and mining areas but, in contrast to previous years, formal employment also expanded strongly in Lima (3.8% on average in 2005, gathering momentum in the second semester of 2005 and early 2006).
This gain in formal employment fed into an improvement in the employment profile, rather than significant net generation of new jobs, since in 2005 Lima’s employment rate fell from 61.6% to 60.7% and unemployment rose from 9.4% to 9.6%.
At the start of 2006 the labour situation showed clear signs of an upturn, with an increase in the employment rate and a drop in the rate of unemployment (from 10.8% in the first five months of 2005 to 9.2% a year later).
The balance-of-payments current account closed 2005 with an unprecedented surplus of 1.3% of GDP.
Strong contributors to this performance were buoyant merchandise exports, which were up by US$ 4.6 billion to over US$ 17 billion, and, to a lesser extent, larger transfers of remittances.
With a slightly smaller increase in imports (US$ 2.25 billion), the balance of trade in goods closed with a surplus of 6.5% of GDP.
Transfers derived from factor income rose by US$ 1.6 billion to 6.3% of GDP, thanks to rising export revenues.
Mining exports did particularly well, increasing by 40% to reach almost US$ 10 billion, mainly thanks to improved prices for copper, gold, zinc and molybdenum, although the export volumes of several of these products also increased.
Non-traditional exports also climbed strongly (23%), with increases in all the main branches.
Reflecting the upturn in investment, capital goods were the fastest-growing imports (30%).
The rise in imports of inputs (23%) was due in part to climbing fuel costs, while higher household consumption contributed to increased imports of consumer goods (16%).
Conditions remained favourable for many export products in the first few months of 2006, although limits on the possibility of increasing export volumes in some cases (such as mining) meant that in the first four months year-on-year export growth declined to 26%.
Nevertheless, for the year as a whole exports are expected to exceed US$ 20 billion.
Imports continued to be driven by investment and consumption, and expanded by 21%.
In the first quarter of 2006 the balance-of-payments current account recorded a modest deficit of 0.8% of GDP, mainly as a result of increased transfers of factor income, facilitated, in turn, by strong export revenues.
The capital and financial account closed with a surplus of US$ 500 million.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) rose to over US$ 2.5 billion, which was the highest figure since 1996.
The strategy of reducing the external public debt (prepayment of US$ 1.555 billion in Paris Club debt and of US$ 758 million in debt owed to JAPECO) resulted in large outflows of capital.
Part of these prepayments was funded by the issuing of two sovereign bonds for a total of US$ 1.15 billion, for which the government took advantage of the narrowing of risk spreads from an average of 349 basis points in 2004 to 200 in 2005.
As a result, total external debt dropped from 44.6% of GDP at the end of 2004 to 36.0% a year later, mainly thanks to the reduction in public debt.
The surplus on the overall balance helped to increase the central bank’s net international reserves by US$ 1.47 billion in 2005 and by a further US$ 320 million in the first semester of 2006.
The manufacturing industry continued to expand at a rapid rate, together with the commerce and services sectors.
The rise in production was mainly due to increased external demand, with exports up by 16.8% compared to the previous year.
Investment was up by 10.1% and gross fixed capital formation by 23.8%.
The coefficient of investment in the economy was 13.2%, rather lower than the previous year’s figure of 15.9%.
As employment rose by a meagre 1.4%, the unemployment rate came down by just 0.9% to an annual average of 12.2%, or two percentage points above the pre-crisis level.
The proportion of people living in poverty diminished by 2.8% over the year, to 29.8% of the urban population, while indigence levels were down slightly, The authorities maintained the general thrust of macroeconomic policy in their efforts to restructure financial and public spending affairs.
A reform of the tax system, intended to enhance efficiency and equity, was submitted to parliament.
Nevertheless, given continued financial restraints, rigorous debt and expenditure management have been required in order to maintain fiscal sustainability.
The Uruguayan economy continued to perform well, apart from some friction with its main trading partners in MERCOSUR.
Since the beginning of 2006, these problems have affected some of the most dynamic sectors, especially transport and tourism.
A serious drought that has persisted in much of the country has caused mounting difficulties in the agricultural and livestock sectors and in energy generation.
Growth of over 5% is projected for 2006, while the terms of trade are expected to deteriorate, mainly because of rising oil prices.
Inflation is expected to be within the authorities’ target range of between 4.5% and 6.5%.
The primary fiscal surplus will probably reach 3.7% of GDP at the end of the year, while the global deficit will rise to 1.1% of GDP.
In 2005, Uruguay posted a primary fiscal surplus for the non-financial public sector of 3.9% of GDP and a global deficit of 0.6% of GDP.
At the end of 2005, the total income of the non-financial public sector amounted to 28.9% of GDP.
In 2006, the overall deficit has continued to narrow and the 12-month moving average for April was equivalent to 0.2% of GDP.
The fiscal situation has benefited from the decline in debt servicing payments, which amounted to 4.3% of GDP in the 12 months to April 2006, compared to 5.0% recorded in 2004.
In the 12 months ending in February 2006, income increased by a real 4.2% year-on-year, while expenditure rose by 6.4%.
Fiscal income was consistent with the expansionary phase of the business cycle and tax receipts increased thanks to the higher degree of formalization of the economy and the improvement of oversight mechanisms.
Collection by the Social Security Fund increased by 11.6% in real terms in the year ending in CENTRAL GOVERNMENT b b In 1999 the accounting methodology changed.
April 2006 and the receipts of the Tax Administration Department continued to grow steadily, posting a real year-on-year increase of 6.7% in the 12 months to February 2006.
In real terms, a breakdown of expenditure shows an increase of 4.9% in current primary spending and similar increases in government payroll and procurement.
Transfers to the private sector increased by 6.6% owing to the rise in social benefits.
Public investment rose by almost 20% in the period, led by public enterprises, whose investment in fixed assets jumped by 38%.
Interest payments on the public debt continued to decline in real terms and in relation to GDP, as a result of debt restructuring operations, the prepayment of debts to a number of international agencies and the narrowing of emerging-market spreads, among other factors.
In the 12 months ending in February, the amount paid in interest declined by 7.3% in real terms, or by 20.5% if the debt of the central bank is included.
Gross public debt amounted to almost US$ 12 billion in December 2005 (69.6% of GDP), which was an increase of over US$ 600 million in relation to the previous year.
The authorities took advantage of the liquidity in the international markets to launch several bond issues in 2005 and early 2006, for a total of close to US$ 1.5 billion.
This enabled Uruguay to restructure its portfolio of creditors in order to reduce its liabilities with some of the multilateral lending agencies, thus improving its debt maturity profile and reducing interest payments.
Throughout 2005, the central bank gradually shifted its monetary policy, as part of its policy of inflation targets.
The target range of annual inflation for 2006 has been set at 4.5%-6.5%, and the central bank estimates that a 12.6% year-on-year expansion in the monetary base in the last quarter of 2006 would be consistent with this target.
One of the instruments the central bank uses to expand the money supply is the net purchase of foreign currency, which amounted to US$ 588 million in the year ending in March 2006.
Interest rates on local-currency securities issued by the central bank remained low, standing at 3.8% in March 2006, while average maturities lengthened from 91 to 116 days.
The rates on local-currency deposits in the market continued to decline, reaching an annual 1.5% in the first quarter of 2006.
The foreign-currency deposit rate was somewhat lower, at 1.8% in February 2006.
Annual lending rates in local currency were down from 32.1% in February 2005 to 17.2% in the same month of 2006, while those denominated in foreign currency climbed to Local-currency deposits continued to expand.
Foreign-currency deposits posted a real increase of 1.7% in the same period and declined to 86.4% as a proportion of total deposits at the end of 2005.
In real terms, in the 12 months to February 2006, local-currency credit increased by 14.5%, while foreign currency credit held steady.
In 2005 loans in local currency posted growth of 80% over the low recorded in 2003, after the banking crisis of 2002, while those in foreign currency were flat.
Both levels continued to be lower than those for 1998, the year before the crisis.
Uruguay maintains a floating exchange rate in a market heavily influenced by the public sector’s foreigncurrency purchases.
In nominal terms, the Uruguayan peso appreciated against the dollar by 11% in 2005 and by a further 4.4% in January-April 2006.
In real terms, the local currency appreciated by 9.8% in 2005 but posted a year-on-year depreciation of 1.6% at the end of March 2006. (d) Other policies Trade policy has been a particular focus of attention in the framework of the government programme for 2005 and 2006.
Regional difficulties have led the government to redouble its efforts to expand exports to markets outside the region, while steps are also being taken to negotiate trade agreements with the United States, China, India, New Zealand and South Africa, among other countries.
After a recovery sustained since 2003, in 2005 the Uruguayan economy regained the levels of production experienced prior to the crisis that began in 1999.
The favourable performance in 2005 was driven by the industrial sector, which grew by 9.5% and accounted for 1.7 percentage points of the 6.6% increase in GDP.
This was followed in order of impact by the sector of commerce, restaurants and hotels, which expanded by 11.6% and accounted for 1.4 percentage points of GDP, and transport and communications, with annual growth of 10.9% and a 1.3 percentage point share in GDP.
Activity expanded in almost all the other branches of industry in 2005, more rapidly in the case of those oriented towards the external sector.
The most dynamic subsectors were foods and beverages, chemical products, rubber and plastic products and transport equipment.
Expansion in the commerce, restaurants and hotels segment reflected growth in commerce, which more than compensated for the meagre results in the other two industries.
Agricultural and livestock production showed a rise of 3.2%, driven by livestock activities.
Construction picked up momentum, thanks to private investment in housing (mainly in resort areas of the east of the country) and the beginning of works to build two cellulose pulp plants.
The consumer price index (CPI) was up by 4.9% in 2005, in the context of a slight acceleration of the inflation rate.
In the year ending in April 2006, the CPI registered a cumulative variation of 6%.
The sectors showing the largest variations were furnishings, household goods and domestic services (11.2%), transport and communications (6.7%), housing (6.3%) and medical care (5.9%).
The labour market remained quite flat, only partially responding to the successive upturns in economic activity.
In 2005 the unemployment rate went down by 0.9 percentage points in relation to 2004, owing to a slight increase in employment (1.4%).
Real wages accumulated an increase of 4.6% in 2005, reflected in a 6% expansion in total wages, which rose to about 27 points of GDP.
The real average wage index for the year ending in April 2006 showed a cumulative growth rate of 5.4%.
Wages and allowances increased more in the public than in the private sector (5.8% and 4.6%, respectively).
A noteworthy development in 2005 was the re-establishment of Wage Councils, which are a mechanism of tripartite collective wage bargaining in different occupational and industrial groups.
The current account balance posted a small deficit of US$ 88 million in 2005, reflecting the swing in the trade balance from a surplus of 1.2% of GDP in 2004 to a deficit of 0.4% of GDP in 2005.
Given that the physical volume of exports expanded more than that of imports, the trade deficit was attributable to worsening terms of trade.
Measured in dollars, exports of goods were up by 19.5% in 2005, owing to higher external demand, the availability of livestock goods and competitiveness gains by national goods.
Beef exports expanded by 22.4%; milling, wood and dairy products also posted a very good export performance.
Imports grew considerably in 2005 (by 25% measured in dollars), mainly owing to increased economic activity and higher oil prices.
Intermediate inputs (including oil) accounted for most of the change (14 percentage points).
The rise in imports was somewhat smaller in the year ending in April 2006, at 21.8%.
In the first four months of 2006, oil and electricity imports have risen significantly, in view of a persistent drought which is affecting the generation of hydroelectric power.
Mexico and Central America Real GDP grew by 5.9% (up from 4.1% in 2004) on the strength of export growth (12.6%), which was primarily due to the recovery of external sales of microprocessors produced by the Intel plant, as well as the buoyancy of tourism and international business services.
In per capita terms, GDP rose by 4.1%, while national disposable income expanded by only 1.9% owing to losses generated by worsening terms of trade.
External factors affecting the country’s economic performance included the high international prices of petroleum and some of the main raw materials imported by Costa Rica.
These trends added to the exacerbation of the terms of trade, the widening of the trade gap and rising domestic prices.
This situation was aggravated by the uncertainty stemming from the lack of parliamentary support for Executive-branch initiatives, particularly fiscal reform and the Dominican Republic —Central America— United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) and the worsening social and political climate at a juncture dominated by the elections of February 2006.
Despite rapid economic growth, the open unemployment rate rose slightly, from 6.5% to 6.6%.
At the same time, real average wages in the formal sector retreated again (-1.9%), while minimum wages increased by only 0.3% in the wake of the 1.6% dip posted in 2004.
The central government was able to keep finances under control thanks to higher revenues and restraint in spending.
The global deficit of the narrowly-defined public sector shrank from 3.6% of GDP to 2.3%.
Faced with strong inflationary pressures (14.1%) and growing imbalances in the external sector, monetary policy was tightened during the second half of the year.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit widened to 4.8% owing to a marked increase in the trade gap.
The consolidated public-sector deficit is expected to grow to 3.4% of GDP, while the balance-of-payments current account deficit will shrink to 4.6%.
In 2005, various external and domestic factors encumbered the management of economic policy and prevented compliance with some of the goals of the monetary programme.
Because fiscal policy had little manoeuvring room, a large part of the adjustment burden was borne by monetary policy.
The economy was, however, able to absorb much of these factors’ destabilizing effect.
After a hiatus of 20 years, former President Oscar Arias Sánchez was re-elected to the presidency of Costa Rica in February 2006 and took office in May.
The new government’s economic policy will give priority to strengthening integration with the world economy, solving fiscal problems and effectively combating poverty and inequality.
Monetary and exchange policies will gradually take on a greater role in making significant reductions in inflation and, to this end, the government plans to capitalize the central bank.
As the government does not have a majority in Congress, it will have to seek the necessary consensus in order to achieve their implementation.
One of the primary objectives of the new government is to put public finances on a sounder footing.
The fiscal deficit is one of the factors behind the fact that the country’s interest rates are high relative to international levels, which encourages inflows of speculative capital, on the one hand, and raises the cost of open-market operations, on the other, thereby making monetary policy less effective.
The high level of indebtedness also places a considerable burden on public finances.
The plans of the new government, which include a commitment to narrowing the fiscal deficit and raising expenditure on investment and poverty reduction, will require an increase in tax revenues estimated at 4 percentage points of GDP.
The government plans to achieve this increase by enacting progressive reforms in the tax system (particularly regarding its organization and legal framework) and combating tax evasion.
Measures will also be taken to contain the growing public debt, improve its profile, and reduce its cost with a view to allowing an increase in investment spending, especially on social services.
In public spending, priority will be given to expanding comprehensive public services, particularly health and education (with the goal of increasing sectoral spending on the latter to 8% of GDP), creating jobs by developing production linkages and supporting micro-, small and medium-sized enterprises, stimulating domestic and foreign private investment that contributes to knowledge-based economic growth and developing infrastructure.
In 2005, the global deficit of the narrowly-defined public sector shrank from 3.6% of GDP to 2.3%.
With the exception of the central bank, this performance was attributable to all the components of that sector, including both the central government and the rest of the nonfinancial public sector (NFPS).
Increased revenues and controlled spending narrowed the central government’s financial imbalance from 2.7% of GDP to 2.1%.
In contrast to previous years, when a significant portion of the fiscal deficit was financed by issuing bonds on international capital markets, borrowing requirements in 2005 were covered by placing debt on the local market.
Current income rose from 13.6% of GDP to 13.8%, with receipts from customs duties, income taxes and the general domestic sales tax showing the sharpest increases.
Total expenditure dropped from 16.4% of GDP to 15.9% owing primarily to the use of the single Treasury account.
The stagnation of wages and salaries in real terms (30% of total expenditure) contributed as well.
In contrast, higher interest payments (+4.5%) had an adverse effect on government efforts to reduce spending, although interest payments on foreign debt dipped slightly in real terms.
The net result for the rest of the NFPS also improved on the preceding year, as it posted a surplus equivalent to 1.2% of GDP.
This reflected a larger positive balance on the accounts of the Costa Rican Electricity Institute and the Costa Rican Social Security Fund as a result of lower capital expenditure and reduced purchases of goods and services.
The improvement in the Costa Rican Petroleum Refinery’s finances was largely attributable to the rise in revenues from fuel sales.
This result reflected the financial cost, in the absence of any further capitalization operations on the part of the government, of active monetary management in response to significant inflows of foreign capital.
The ratio of total public debt to GDP declined for the third consecutive year owing primarily to the shrinkage of the central government’s debt and its financing strategy.
Nevertheless, debt continues to be one of the most serious problems facing the Costa Rican economy, representing around 55% of domestic production.
At the beginning of 2005, the central bank continued raising interest rates for open-market operations and announced its intention to implement a restrictive monetary policy in order to curb the upswing in inflation.
It also maintained the level of the legal reserve requirement (12%) in place since October 2004 and reduced the devaluation rate to 15 centavos per day in accordance with the inflation target (10%).
However, high interest rates and the relative stability of the exchange market resulting from the policy of mini-devaluations boosted the returns on investments in colones relative to those offered by other options for financial investment in the domestic and international markets.
This spurred the inflow of capital and interfered with efforts to manage the money supply, since the central bank’s participation as a net buyer of foreign currency had an expansionary monetary effect that had to be sterilized to avoid domestic-spending pressures.
The central bank gradually lowered its deposit rates, raised the legal reserve requirement from 12% to 15% and stepped up its open-market operations.
However, the rise in the principal monetary aggregates was greater than the increase in nominal GDP, and the expansion of credit extended to the private sector was greater than in 2004 due to the relative stability of lending rates and strategies implemented by banks to stimulate credit demand.
Real borrowing rates held steady at an average of 1%, while lending rates dipped from 8.7% to 8.2%.
The primary objective of the central bank’s monetary policy in 2006 has been to bring inflation down to around 10% in the next biennium.
To this end, it will continue with a tight monetary policy based on open-market operations.
In order to improve the transmission mechanism for monetary policy and the efficiency of monetary policy tools, the central bank plans to introduce changes in the mechanisms it uses to obtain funds, such as the auctioning of bonds, and will use new monetary absorption instruments.
These improvements are aimed at heightening the efficiency of monetary absorption without obliging the central bank to hike interest rates to any significant degree.
It is hoped that these measures will influence the savings and investment decisions of economic agents by discouraging present consumption and thereby reducing inflationary pressures.
An “electronic deposit window” will also be opened for investment in monetary-stabilization bonds.
This will allow the bank to provide economic agents with an instrument to replace time certificates of deposit offered by financial intermediaries.
This mechanism is intended to improve the interest rate’s effectiveness as a transmission mechanism for monetary policy, promote greater competition in the financial market and raise real returns for savers.
On average, the real effective exchange rate dropped by 1.5% in 2005.
The central bank will continue in 2006 with its policy of daily adjustments or mini-devaluations.
Considering the financial system’s high level of dollarization, this could create problems unless this shift is coupled with measures to strengthen the financial system. (d) Trade policy In October 2005, the executive branch sent the text of the free trade agreement with the United States, Central America and the Dominican Republic (CAFTA-DR) to the legislative assembly.
A free trade agreement with the countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) took effect in 2005.
The new Administration has expressed its determination to strengthen the economy’s export orientation.
A similar agreement with the European Union (the principal market for some of Costa Rica’s most successful exports) is also being considered, as are negotiations to bring Costa Rica closer to the AsiaPacific region. (colones per dollar) Merchandise imports, c.i.f.
Economic activity cooled in the first five months due to worsening terms of trade, an austere fiscal policy and the effect that the prospects of a rise in interest rates had on domestic spending.
Certain short-term weather factors weighed in as well, mainly affecting banana and sugar-cane production.
During the rest of the year, however, economic activity rebounded on the back of buoyant exports, especially in the hightechnology sector.
The expansion of economic activity was fuelled by the dynamism of external demand.
Goods and services exports posted a growth rate of 12.6%, which was substantially higher than the 2004 rate of 8.2%.
Domestic demand, in contrast, slackened as a result of reduced growth in consumption, which tempered the impact of the surge in investment on domestic spending.
A strong recovery in gross fixed capital formation (7.3%) was driven by investment in capital goods, especially by companies operating under the free-zone regime.
Investment in new construction slackened, however, owing largely to the reduction in public works.
Private consumption (3.9%) suffered from the decline in the growth rate of disposable national income, but benefited from rising employment and an increase in bank financing for consumption and housing.
Public consumption grew only slightly as a result of efforts to curb public spending.
At the sectoral level, goods production was notably buoyant (8.2%) as a result of a higher level of value added in the manufacturing sector (11.8%), thanks mainly to the production activities of companies operating in the free zones and Costa Rican firms’ exports, most of which go to other Central American countries.
Services were up by 4.9%, largely due to transport, telecommunications (especially mobile telephones and Internet services), hotels, financial services and international business services (especially software production, call centres and business centres).
The rate of inflation, measured by the annual variation in the consumer price index, stood at 14.1%.
This rate not only overshot the target set by the central bank at the beginning of 2005 by four percentage points, but also marked the highest level recorded in the last 10 years.
This development was largely attributable to external shocks that boosted the prices of tradable goods.
This mainly reflected rising international hydrocarbon, coffee and beef prices, much of whose effect was passed on to domestic prices.
Even though such external shocks are transitory, in this case their magnitude and duration appear to have heightened inflationary expectations.
In addition, efforts to hold down price levels have been hindered by the strong inertial component of inflation in the Costa Rican economy.
Economic growth translated into a considerable upturn in employment, especially in the formal sector.
However, as a consequence of the expansion of the labour supply, the national open unemployment rate edged up from 6.5% to 6.6%.
At the same time, real average wages in the formal sector retreated by 1.9%, while nominal minimum wage adjustments barely compensated for price increases.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit widened to the equivalent of 4.8% of GDP (in 2004 it amounted to 4.3%).
The narrowing of the deficit on the income account (thanks to decreased repatriation of profits and dividends from foreign direct investment (FDI)) was more than offset by the surge in of the trade deficit, which jumped from 3.0% to 5.0% of GDP.
The inflow of foreign financial capital caused international assets to swell by US$ 391 million.
Among the most significant investments were those linked to the expansion of companies located in the country’s free trade zones, such as Intel, as well as the establishment of new industrial and services companies.
New acquisitions and reinvestments by large retailers were also a significant factor.
Products showing particularly high growth included coffee (due to rebounding international prices) and non-traditional agricultural goods such as pineapples, melons, flowers, foliage and household plants.
Industrial goods for export showing notable increases included microprocessors, sound amplification equipment, dental equipment, integrated circuits, electrical conductors, refrigerators and medicine.
The expansion of imports (18.6%) was concentrated in raw materials and intermediate goods, largely because of the country’s rising oil bill and external purchases by companies located in its free zones.
In 2005, GDP in El Salvador grew by 2.8%, resulting in the largest increase in per capita GDP (1%) for six years.
The increase in agricultural production and the improved performance of the construction sector offset the lower growth of previous years.
Nevertheless, this growth rate was lower than in the other Central American countries and below the average for Latin America.
Increased public investment (24.9%) had a significant multiplying effect on consumption, and family remittance income was equivalent to 16.7% of GDP.
Economic activity was held back by higher international oil prices and, to a lesser extent, by the hike in international interest rates which resulted in a slight increase in debt servicing.
Annual inflation stood at 4.3% and the current account deficit was 4.6% of GDP.
The floods caused by tropical storm Stan, and the eruption of the Ilamatepec volcano in October 2005, caused damage and losses estimated at US$ 355 In view of the absence of monetary and exchange-rate policy, economic policy was focused on fiscal policy, the main feature in 2005 being the successful implementation of the tax reform.
The goal of fiscal policy in 2005 was to improve results through fiscal reform.
Although this reform’s positive effects were offset by the costs of reconstruction work following the natural disasters, the central government million, but this did not affect the main macroeconomic balances.1 The economy is expected to grow by 3.5% in 2006, driven by reconstruction works, the buoyant growth of world markets, and improved results for agriculture and tourism.
The main planks of economic policy are to maintain fiscal discipline and encourage production, especially in manufacturing and agriculture, as well as tourism activities. deficit dropped from 1.1% of GDP in 2004 to 1.0% in 2005.
The tax reform generated additional income of US$ 170 million, owing to amendments to the tax code and the laws governing pensions, banking and income tax.
The tax burden was 12.6% of GDP, which was one percentage point higher than in the previous year and was also the target amount.
The taxes showing the highest real growth were the tax on consumption of goods and property and other taxes (2.3%).
Annual percentages a Annual growth rates Current expenditure rose by 3% in real terms, mainly because of the increase in debt servicing and the burden of the pension system (US$ 327.1 million).
It is estimated that pension costs will rise by 22% in 2006, judging by the recent trend in pension system transition costs.
As a result of these different trends, total expenditure was 6% higher.
In order to attenuate the impact of rising oil prices and protect low-income families, subsidies were introduced for public transport (US$ 8.9 million) and for consumption of electricity (US$ 33.4 million) and liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) (US$ 55.6 million).
These measures, together with reconstruction expenditure and pension costs, resulted in a non-financial public sector (NFPS) deficit equivalent to 3% of GDP, one half of a percentage point more than in 2004.
In view of the upward trend in fossil fuel prices, it is expected that the subsidies will continue in 2006 and the NFPS deficit will remain at the same levels.
The successful adoption of the budget led to a recovery in public-sector investment (24.9%), after a fall of 43.2% in 2004.
Growth is expected to be even higher in 2006, owing to infrastructure investments in the La Unión and Acajutla ports, which are 50% completed.
In 2006 a bond issue for US$ 663.7 million is expected, which would include US$ 563.7 million on the international market (US$ 400 million had been placed by April 2006) and US$ 100 million on the national market, to meet financing needs (capital expenditure, debt servicing and pension costs).
The pension debt will be covered by 60% of this bond issue.
In 2006 the government plans not to increase taxes but to make efforts to combat evasion and smuggling and to encourage compliance with tax obligations.
Domestic credit to the public sector grew by 44.5% and to the private sector by 7.7%.
In December 2005, banking indicators improved slightly compared with the same month in the previous year.
In 2005 the Central Reserve Bank held net international reserves of US$ 1.83 billion (3.1% less than in the previous year), equivalent to three months’ goods and services imports. (c) Other policies 2005 saw the adoption of the consumer protection law, providing greater security to the population in the purchase of goods and services.
Despite the fact that the government of President Antonio Saca has launched a number of crime reduction programmes, National Police statistics indicate that violence increased by almost 33% in 2005.
The authorities sought to boost tourism, with the adoption of a general tourism law and the identification of immediate measures to improve infrastructure in the ten major areas of tourism development in the country.
This led to the design and construction of the first stage of the tourism complex “La Libertad” and the granting of facilities for private investment in various tourism enterprises.
Developments expected in 2006 include an increased number of tourists (over one million), the implementation of the National Tourism Plan 2014, the application of the implementing regulations of the legislation on tourism and the creation of an inter-agency commission for tourism development.
In March 2006 the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTADR) came into force, and El Salvador was the first country in the region to approve the set of reforms needed for its implementation.
The treaty is expected to offer greater incentives and facilities for exports and foreign direct investment (FDI), especially in non-traditional and ethnic products.
Economic activity in 2005 showed the highest growth for six years (2.8%), driven by favourable export prices for some agricultural goods and the recovery of gross fixed investment (5.7%), which compensated for the previous year’s 5% fall.
A significant contribution was made by the increase in public spending (24.9%), compared to private investment which expanded by only 3.6%.
Investment in machinery and construction grew at similar rates, close to 6%.
Remittances have had an impact on domestic demand and have boosted private consumption (2.6%).
In 2005, exports of goods and services rose very slowly (0.4%), while on the supply side, goods and services imports increased by 0.8%.
The agricultural sector experienced growth of 5.8% in 2005, owing to the rise in basic grains production and the hike in international coffee and sugar prices.
Financial services grew by 2.9% and the manufacturing sector expanded by 1.4% despite the exit of some maquila companies.
In September 2005, the government announced an industrial policy proposal (implementation will begin in 2006) which is intended to strengthen the competitiveness of the manufacturing sector, promote economic diversification and eliminate coordination and information failures.
This policy has a reactivation fund of US$ 30 million which will be managed by the Multisectoral Investment Bank and will be used to support strategic projects and sectoral studies.
The sector is expected to post growth rates of 7% over the next five years and contribute up to 30% of national GDP, starting from a base level of 24%.
In 2006 a series of measures will be implemented in the agricultural sector to increase productive capacity and efficiency.
In addition, the government plans to encourage other key areas of national development.
To help to open up external markets, treaty administration will be strengthened and a National Management Commission for Trade Treaties (Conatco) will be established, while trade negotiations will be concluded with Canada and initiated with the European Union, Taiwan province of China and CARICOM.
As for competitiveness and productivity, efforts will be made to improve the business climate and attract new investments.
Lastly, the government will launch a national energy policy to encourage an expansion of electricity generating capacity using renewable resources.
The country’s economic activity as measured by the economic activity index (IVAE)2 (trend cycle) posted an annual increase of 5.6% in the first quarter of 2006.
This expansion of economic activity was due to the rapid growth in the sectors of electricity, gas and water, transport, storage and communications, financial services, agricultural activities and commerce.
Economic activity was also supported by a higher growth rate for exports.
The IVAE includes eleven of the twelve activities that make up GDP, with coverage of 84.5%.
The activities added in 2006 are: fishing, cotton production, mining and quarries, water supply services, communications, restaurants and hotels, business services, and community, social and personal services.
The number of establishments surveyed in the trade and industry sector has been expanded and the number of products has been increased.
Annual inflation of 4.3%, exceeding the target range of between 3% and 4%, was attributable to price rises caused by temporary food shortages resulting from the floods and high oil prices, which in turn increased transport costs and led to higher prices for pulses, vegetables and electric power.
The sectors which had inflation equal to or higher than the average were alcohol, tobacco and narcotics (16.6%), transport (8.1%), foodstuffs and nonalcoholic beverages (4.7%) and housing, water, electricity, gas and other fuels (4.3%).
For the rest of 2006 price rises are expected to fall back to the 3%-4% range, despite wage increases for public officials and rising oil prices.
In 2005, the fifth consecutive year, there was no increase in the minimum wage and families’ purchasing power diminished.
This was partially mitigated by the subsidy programme to help low-income groups.
Despite economic growth, job losses in the maquila sector caused the unemployment rate to rise by one percentage point, The wage increases for public employees in 2006 were the first since 1998, and the total cost was US$ 40 million.
In addition, staffing in the health and education sector will be expanded to 23,227 employees, costing nearly US$ 12.5 million.
In 2005, exports of goods increased only slightly (2.7%), as a result of the fall in maquila exports (5.4%), which accounted for 54% of total exports.
This was offset by the improvement in the prices of some agricultural products, including coffee and sugar.
CAFTA-DR will benefit sugar exports in 2006 in view of the doubling of the import quota for the United States market.
There was a 10.1% rise in exports of non-traditional goods and growth of 40.6% in exports of traditional goods, but the latter represented only 6.9% of total goods exports.
In the first quarter of 2006 it posted growth Meanwhile, goods imports increased by 6.9%.
Almost 50% were purchases of intermediate and capital goods, 30% were consumer goods and the remaining 20% were maquila inputs.
Imports of consumer goods (13.2%) and intermediate goods (11%) were the most buoyant.
In the case of intermediate goods this was due to the high prices of oil and petroleum products.
In March 2006 the growth rate for imports reached 13.8%, and the current account deficit is expected to increase in 2006.
In 2005 income from tourism was US$ 629 million, owing to promotional activities conducted abroad by the newly-created Ministry of Tourism.
The economy received a significant external boost from increased family remittances (11.1%), associated with efforts to counteract the impact of natural disasters and with the strong performance of the United States economy.
Remittances (US$ 2.83 billion) sustained private consumption and covered almost 94% of the trade gap, but the terms of trade worsened for the third consecutive year (-2.3%).
These trends led to a balance-of-payments current account deficit of 4.6% of GDP.
The financial account showed a positive balance of US$ 722.9 million, an increase of over US$ 600 million compared to 2004.
This was due to the 37.5% rise in the net inflow of foreign direct investment, which amounted to US$ 517 million.
One of the contributing factors was non-recurring receipts from the sale of bank assets, although there was a drop in assets under the heading of “other investment”.
Portfolio investments grew by US$ 93.6 million, reversing a six-year downward trend.
In May 2006 the three main international rating agencies did not alter their risk ratings for El Salvador’s long-term debt instruments.
Among the Central American countries, it is the only holder of the “investment grade” rating awarded by Moody’s Investors Service.
The Guatemalan economy grew by 3.2%, the best performance of the past five years.
GNP growth was driven by private consumption and inflation was at 8.6%, a moderate reduction from the 2004 level of 9.2%.
No unemployment survey was carried out in 2005, but the economic growth would be consistent with an unemployment rate similar to that of 2004, while the underemployment rate would be almost 30%.
The current account deficit of 4.1% of GDP was due to a negative balance on the goods and services account equivalent to 14% of GDP, mitigated by current transfer income equivalent to 10.9% of GDP, consisting mainly of family remittances from the United States.
The negative current-account balance was more than offset by capital flows, which increased international reserves by US$ 250 million.
The terms of trade continued to deteriorate and despite improved export prices, the price rises for oil and other raw material imports were even higher.
Economic performance in 2005 reflected efforts by the monetary authorities to moderate the impact on inflation of higher fuel prices and measures taken in connection with the foreign-exchange market, such as the introduction of an explicit intervention rule to prevent any sudden appreciation of the national currency, a policy strongly supported by the fiscal authorities.
In September, the government deficit was 0.6% of GDP, and by the end of the year it had risen to 1.5% of GDP, owing to the increase in spending in the fourth quarter, especially capital spending.
Risk factors include the sustained increase in oil and petroleum product prices and their impact on domestic and global inflation.
The monetary authorities tried to establish a balance between boosting the economy and ensuring stable domestic prices in view of the high oil prices.
Prudent fiscal policies contributed to achieving this goal and exchange-rate policy moderated the appreciating trend caused by growing remittance and capital flows.
Total revenue in real terms was down by 2.2% despite efforts by the Office of the Superintendent of Tax Administration to increase collection.
Tax revenue diminished by 2.3%, although direct tax receipts grew by 3.7%, mainly owing to increased income tax revenues.
The take from indirect taxes contracted by 4.3%, and from VAT by 5.5%.
As a result, the tax burden declined from 10.1% to 9.5% of GDP.
September saw the restoration of the fuel distribution tax, after its suspension by the Constitutional Court at the end of 2004.
A special tariff had been applied to fuels between January and August in order to compensate for this suspension.
Total expenditure grew by 2.7% and current expenditure was down by 0.4%.
There were savings in public debt servicing, thanks to improvements in interest rates and terms for domestic borrowing, and this contributed to the growth of 9.6% in capital expenditure.
It was also possible to assign resources according to the priorities established in the peace agreements.
Social spending rose by an estimated 11.8% in real terms compared to 2004, mostly benefiting the education and health sectors.
If collection does not improve in the second half of the year, some budgetary spending items may have to be cut.
The central bank authorities made progress toward the adoption of a comprehensive inflation target system, which includes measures such as the adoption of a flexible exchange-rate regime and monetary stabilization operations.
The inflation rate of 8.6% in 2005 was much higher than the annual target of 4%-6%.
The Government sought to moderate the monetary base by keeping central bank deposits above the planned level (in September they exceeded the original target by 1.265 billion quetzales); in addition, 2005 saw a 15% increase in the placement of monetary regulation instruments.
These movements only partially countered the monetization resulting from the monetary authority’s purchases of foreign currency.
M1 expanded by 8.5% in real terms (17.7% in nominal terms) while liquidity in national currency (M2) and broad liquidity (M3) grew at a slower rate (5.5%).
The abundant liquidity in the economy was reflected in a substantial increase in credit to the private sector (11.8%).
At the beginning of the year the central bank announced that the interest rate for seven-day deposit certificates would be the benchmark rate for short-term monetary stabilization operations.
In view of the persistence of inflationary pressures, the monetary authority gradually increased that rate from 2.6% at the beginning of 2005 to 4.0% by the end of the year.
The weighted average interest rate of all monetary stabilization operations rose from 6.3% at the beginning of 2005 to 6.5% in November.
There was substantial credit expansion, together with improvements in portfolio quality and a reduction in non-performing assets.
The banking system showed moderate levels of liquidity in national and foreign currency and channelled more resources towards the private sector.
The legal instruments adopted in 2005 included a law to prevent and counteract the financing of terrorism, which complemented the regulations against the laundering of money and other assets and the investment rules for banks in relation to securities issued by private entities.
In order to counteract the inflationary pressures of the “second round”,1 the monetary policy interest rate GDP grew by 3.2%, which was higher than the 2.7% recorded in 2004.2 Per capita GDP growth was up (0.7%) for the first time since the year 2000.
The monetary authorities continued to face the appreciation of the national currency that was caused by the easy availability of foreign currency in the Guatemalan economy, fuelled by massive inflows of financial capital and family remittances (13.9% of GDP).
Exchange-rate policy in 2005 sought to hold back any sudden appreciation and minimize exchange-rate volatility.
The central bank bought US$ 467 million in 2005, and the annual average real appreciation was 7.1%.
In the first half of 2006 the value of the quetzal remained stable at 7.6 quetzales to the dollar, and with lower domestic inflation, real appreciation was reduced. (d) Other policies In 2005 the Congress of the Republic approved the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Treaty (CAFTA-DR), which was due to enter into force on 1 January 2006.
Owing to delays in the approval of some of the regulations, it actually entered into force on 3 July 2006.
The treaty opens up opportunities for more rapid growth of non-traditional exports and an influx of new foreign investment over the next few years.
In the public sector, consumption was 5.3% higher owing to increased health and education spending, which offset the 10.1% drop in 2004.
Private spending grew by 4.6%, mainly owing to family remittances, while gross fixed investment expanded by 11%, driven by construction and rising purchases of capital goods.
In October 2005, Guatemala was ravaged by tropical The expression “second round” refers to the increase in prices of those goods and services which do not include petroleum products in their cost structure, but which are affected indirectly by the increase in transport, electricity and other prices.
The estimates of the system of national accounts (SNA) and the balance of payments are being updated.
In addition, the new balance of payments series will be compiled in accordance with the fifth manual of the International Monetary Fund.
The new statistics will be submitted to the Monetary Board of the Bank of Guatemala in June 2006.
The agricultural sector was one of the worst affected, as the tropical storm caused damage to approximately 61,000 hectares of crops, mainly white corn, sesame, bananas and various non-traditional export products, including mini-vegetables, snow peas and ornamental products.3 Despite the material damage, all productive sectors posted positive growth except for mining (-1.1%).
Agriculture grew by 2.3% (3.7% in 2004); in 2005 sugar cane and cardamom production was down, but countered by the increase in banana production and the improvement in basic grains (excluding corn), pulses and vegetables; there was no change in coffee production.
Manufacturing industry grew by 2.7%, the best result of the last seven years, owing to the recovery in exports of industrial products; the increase in investment brought higher demand for industrial products as well as cement and iron.
Trade slowed its growth from 3.2% in 2004 to 2.6%, reflecting the downturn in agriculture and slower growth in foreign purchases.
The construction subsector showed signs of recovery (3%) following its 20% fall in 2004, owing to the boom in private construction.
That boom compensated for the drop in public works, which consisted only of highway maintenance activities.
The twelve-month variation of consumer prices in rise in international prices for oil and petroleum products contributed to the rise, as did temporary shortages of some products caused by tropical storm Stan.
In 2005, according to the central bank, imported inflation accounted for 2.5 percentage points of annual inflation.
All other items were below the annual 7% rate, with the lowest increases in clothing and footwear prices (3.5%).
In 2004 the national open unemployment rate was estimated at 3.1% and the equivalent unemployment rate (which includes visible underemployment) was 29% of the economically active population (EAP).
The deficit in goods and services was around US$ 4.5 billion, reflecting the upward trend in foreign purchases that began in 1997.
The deficit of around US$ 200 million on the nonfactor services account was small thanks to the growing foreign-currency income from tourism, which amounted to US$ 864 million, despite the problems caused by tropical storm Stan.
The current transfer balance was US$ 3.5 billion, which included family remittances estimated at US$ 2.9 billion.
Income from family remittances and donations counteracted the deficit in non-factor goods and services, so that the balance-of-payments current account deficit was US$ 1.3 billion.
This was financed with room to spare by income on the capital and financial accounts, leaving an overall balance of US$ 250 million.
This improvement boosted international reserves to US$ 3.782 billion, which covers five months of imports of goods and services.
Traditional exports (20%) contributed strongly to this growth, boosted by the recovery of prices, especially for foreign sales of coffee, whose export value increased by 43.5%, and of petroleum (26%).
In contrast, the growth of non-traditional exports (12%) was reduced almost by half.
The external sales which generated the greatest amounts of foreign currency were rubber articles (19%), clothing (18%) and chemical products (17%).
Although fruit exports recovered by 50%, the amount exported was the same as the 2000 level, while there was a drop in exports of food products and, in particular, tobacco.
With few exceptions, it was the recovery in the prices of exported goods that contributed the most to total exports in 2005.
The fastest growth in export volume was for cardamom (21%) and bananas (8%), while exports were down for oil (7%) and sugar (4%).
The growth of exports to Central American countries slowed to 12% (15% in 2004).
External sales were affected by Asian competition in the textiles sector and the closure of some maquila enterprises.
Goods imports maintained the upward trend observed the significant hike in the oil bill (44%), which jumped from US$ 1.09 billion in 2004 to US$ 1.57 billion in 2005.
Purchases of intermediate goods for industry grew by 9% and for construction by 22%, but those for agriculture were down (-26%).
Purchases of capital goods declined once again (18%), although those for the industrial sector continued their rapid growth (15%).
The expansion in consumer goods imports slowed from 13% to 8%, and what growth there was in 2005 was entirely due to purchases of non-durable goods.
Guatemala’s external public debt burden (11.6% of GDP) continued to be one of the lowest in Latin America and the Caribbean, and remained below critical levels; the external debt stood at US$ 3.723 billion, a nominal reduction of 3%; between 2004 and 2005, it diminished from 83% to 73% as a proportion of exports of goods and services.
Stimulated by a generally favourable external environment, the Honduran economy recorded 4.1% growth (compared with 5.0% in 2004).
GDP growth was led by domestic demand, especially private consumption (7.9%), and by significant inflows of family remittances.
Notwithstanding the high cost of fuel, annual inflation stood at 7.7% (down from 9.2% in 2004).
The balance-of-payments current-account deficit hit a record low of 0.5% of GDP, owing to copious inflows of current transfers, which offset the chronic trade deficit.
This achievement brought relief in the service of external debt owed to various creditors.
In January 2006, Manuel Zelaya took office as president of the country.
The new government’s priority objectives were to promote public sector transparency, reduce poverty and combat corruption.
Projections for 2006 are for 4.8% GDP growth, an inflation target of between 5.5% and 6.5%, a fiscal deficit equivalent to 2.5% of GDP and a balance-of-payments current-account deficit of 0.2% of GDP.
Continued growth is expected in remittances and exports, especially the value added of the maquila industry, in a year marked by the entry into force in April of the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free-Trade Agreement (DRCAFTA).
Potential risk factors are high prices for oil and petroleum products and their implications for domestic and world inflation, more intense pressure for a nominal appreciation of the Honduran currency and demands for wage hikes in the public sector.
The Honduran authorities continued to develop their economic policy in accordance with the IMF Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement.
In the fiscal area, there was no significant progress in reducing expenditure on wages and allocating additional resources to public investments.
The monetary policy modernization programme adopted in 2004 as part of the reform plan is now being implemented.
The fall in the government deficit as a percentage of GDP from 3.1% in 2004 to 2.4% in 2005 was a positive development for an electoral year, although it was due to a reduction in capital expenditure.
Tax revenue rose by 5.8%; proceeds from direct taxation were up by 13.8%, owing to higher receipts from income tax and the tax on property and net assets, and revenue from indirect taxes grew by 3.1%.
Receipts from the general sales tax picked up by 6.9%, but proceeds from the taxes on petroleum products and beer production and consumption, and those from the tax on the production and consumption of cigarettes declined by 13%.
Non-tax revenues showed a 4.8% rise, while grants increased by more than 50%.
Current expenditure increased by 8.5%; interest payments on public external debt diminished by 5%, reflecting lower overall external debt payments, compared with a sharp increase in domestic debt servicing.
Payroll expenditures rose by 1.6%, while procurement of goods and services expanded substantially (35%).
Capital expenditure declined by 8.5% mainly owing to a contraction in physical investment (17%).
As much as 73% of the fiscal deficit was covered through external sources.
A fiscal deficit equivalent to 2.5% of GDP is projected for 2006 and will be financed essentially with external resources.
The financial constraints affecting some non-financial public sector (NFPS) corporations and some local governments deserve special attention.
The gradual phasing out of tariffs under DR-CAFTA is likely to result in a decline in tax revenues, which could be mitigated by higher revenues if the projected increase in economic activity materializes.
In May 2005, the monetary policy modernization programme began to be applied.
Its objective is to make economic agents more aware of monetary policy and to regulate the financial sector’s short-term liquidity.
Short-term open-market operations (weekly auctions) were separated from medium and long-term operations (fortnightly auctions).
A seven-day interest rate was established as the monetary policy reference rate and a methodology was put in place for forecasting the financial system’s liquidity requirements.
Credit in the financial system grew by 10%, reflecting a more proactive credit policy in a context of falling interest rates.
The real average lending rate stood In February 2005, the central bank approved regulations for last-resort loans to resolve temporary liquidity problems.
This system provides for financial institutions whose solvency is good to receive shortterm help when they have temporary cash-flow difficulties.
In May 2006, the central bank presented its first of its six-monthly monetary programmes, the purpose of which is to reduce uncertainty for economic agents in the medium term.
The bank set its inflation target at between 5.5% and 6.5% for 2006 and 2007 and gave priority to stabilization of interest rates for deposits and loans at positive real values.
The lempira recorded a nominal average annual depreciation of 3%, which occurred mainly in the first half-year, since from mid-2005 to mid-2006, the nominal rate of exchange remained stable at 19 lempiras to the dollar.
As a result, there was a slight real appreciation Thanks to the massive remittance and capital inflows, the results were positive.
It may be difficult to avoid a more significant real appreciation of the lempira in the coming months, owing to the continually growing amounts of remittances.
In the first four months, these totalled US$ 680 million, a 30% increase over the same period in 2005.
However, with this trend, per capita GDP increased substantially for the second consecutive year (1.6% in 2005, 2.5% in 2004).
GDP growth was driven by external and domestic demand; one of the significant components of the latter was private consumption (7.9%), boosted by the massive inflow of remittances.
This was due to the decline in gross fixed capital investment (8%) following a reduction in privatesector investment (12.7%).
Investment in construction, especially for commercial and industrial premises suffered the sharpest contraction.
This result reflects weak growth in traditional exports, especially bananas and coffee.
All productive sectors performed well, although growth in the agricultural sector was minimal (0.5%).
Among the crops geared mainly to the export market, coffee recorded a 16% decline in production; banana production contracted by 5% compared with a 19% expansion in 2004.
Conversely, sugar cane was up by 2.7%, continuing the positive trend of recent years.
With respect to production for the domestic market, the African palm performed remarkably well (18%), following a decade of sustained growth.
Basic grains rallied (after a contraction in the previous year): corn expanded by 18.2% and beans, by 9.7%.
Fishery output increased by 1.2%, with tilapia and shrimp performing particularly well, but lobster production was down by 16%.
The transport and communications subsectors were also buoyant (6.3%), with strong results in communications and manufacturing (5.1%), which benefited from 11.7% growth in the textile industry (including maquila operations); the other branches of industry were below average, although construction expanded by 3%, making up for the previous year’s decline.
Twelve-month inflation to December was 7.7% (9.2% in 2004), partly owing to rising prices for oil and petroleum products, although strong domestic demand also played a part.
However, the appreciation of the lempira mitigated the rise in the prices of imported goods.
In April 2006, year-on-year inflation was down to 5.8%, almost two percentage points less than at the end of 2005.
By mid-year, food prices had increased by 12%, but they later subsided.
Among the factors that had the strongest impact on inflation in 2005 were the steep rise in the cost of construction materials (18.4%) caused by the sector’s remarkable recovery, and price increases in the agricultural The nationwide open unemployment rate declined from 5.9% in May 2004 to 4.1% in September 2005, with improvements in both urban and rural areas.
However, this lower unemployment went hand in hand with a reduction in workers’ income, since the rate of visible underemployment1 increased from 29.5% in May 2004 to 33.9% in September 2005.
As from 2005, the average nominal daily minimum wage increased by 9.7%, and real wages grew by only 1%.
On 1 January 2006, minimum wages were raised by 9.2%, which could mean a higher real increase this year if the inflation target is met.
The non-factor goods and services deficit continued to widen; it stood at US$ 1.71 billion in 2005, while the factor goods and services income balance diminished slightly to US$ 315 million.
These deficits were offset by current transfers so that the non-factor and factor goods and services deficit, which was equivalent to 25% of GDP, was offset by the positive transfer balance of 24.5% of GDP.
As a result, the balance of payments currentaccount deficit amounted to only 0.5% of GDP, a figure unprecedented in the last twenty-five years.
Thus, by the end of 2005, international reserves were equivalent to five months’ goods and services imports.
The value of merchandise exports (including the net value added of the maquila industry) increased by 10.6%.
This was due to the expansion of traditional exports (25%), including the substantial increase in earnings from coffee and bananas (which together account for 82% of this category), thanks to strong prices on international markets, although the volumes exported actually declined.
Sugar sales recovered (82%) and timber exports were up (26%), reflecting volume and price increases, although they are still short of the 2001 figures.
Non-traditional exports grew by 0.8% in value terms, accounting for earnings of the order of US$ 1 billion, export volumes having increased although prices deteriorated.
The value added recorded by the maquila industry grew by 10%, despite competition from the Asian countries.
The value of imports continued to follow the sustained upward trend begun in 1990 (14.5%).
Imports of consumer goods (especially non-durable goods) also increased substantially (21%); meanwhile raw material imports grew by 24%.
Conversely, imports of capital goods slumped by 17%, mainly because of declining purchases for the industry sector.
It should be borne in mind, however, that this is being measured against 2004, when extraordinary purchases were made by electric power generating companies.
The deterioration in this account was partly due to higher transport costs abroad in the 2004-2005 biennium.
It was offset, however, by increasing inflows from tourism, which stood at US$ 500 million in 2005, double the amount recorded in 2000.
In 2005, current transfers, which include family remittances from the United States (US$ 1.763 billion) and non-refundable official development assistance (US$ 221 million) totalled US$ 1.984 billion, an unprecedented amount, 43% above the 2004 figure.
The factor income balance amounted to US$ 315 million (US$ 359 million in 2004); there were falls in net profit remittances and net interest payments, which was a result of higher revenues, since payments remained practically unchanged.
Foreign investment stood at US$ 272 million, while net outflows of other capital totalled US$ 14 million, reflecting clearly the reduction in public external debt arising from the HIPC initiative.
In April 2005, following several years of negotiations, Honduras reached its completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative,2 enabling the member countries of the Paris Club to forgive US$ 1.061 billion in external public debt.
By mid-2006, the World Bank is expected to ratify this offer of debt relief; steps have been taken towards achieving a similar objective with the Inter-American Development Bank.
Total relief (including the debts written off by the Paris Club, IMF and the World Bank) is estimated at US$ 2.875 billion, almost 60% of the external public debt, and will be implemented over a period of 15 years.
Honduras’s external debt diminished for the first time since 1997, falling from US$ 5.912 billion in 2004 to US$ 5.170 billion in 2005 thanks to the reduction in public liabilities, while private debt continued to grow.
As a percentage of goods and services exports, it diminished from 190% in 2004 The completion point is the point at which the country has satisfied all the conditions relating to policy measures required under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative.
Economic policy continued to be guided by the principle of fiscal and monetary prudence and this contributed to market stability: interest rates trended downwards in the second half of the year and the exchange rate appreciated slightly in real terms, which helped to lower inflation.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit narrowed for the fifth year in a row to 0.6% of GDP, mainly thanks to oil revenues and a 20% increase in family remittances (which exceeded US$ 20.0 billion).
Inflows of foreign direct investment amounted to over US$ 18.0 billion, while Mexican investment abroad has increased five-fold in the last three years and represented over US$ 6.0 billion in 2005.
Private consumption remained buoyant on the back of increases in credit and remittances.
Following a three-year period of decline, capital formation rose for the second consecutive year (7.6%) thanks to greater investment in machinery and equipment and a moderate upturn in construction driven by mortgage lending.
In the second half of 2006, the United States economy is expected to slow slightly, which would take some of the wind out of Mexico’s export performance.
GDP should grow by 4%, driven mainly by domestic demand, which will continue to draw strength from the expansion of private-sector credit and a low inflation rate (of around 3.5%).
Monetary, foreign-exchange and fiscal policy stances will remain unchanged and the fiscal surplus is expected to weigh in at 0.2% of GDP.
The presidential and legislative elections to be held in July 2006 are expected to be closely contested and the post-election climate may entail some financial volatility, but the transition is not expected to bring any great commotion on the economic front.
In a context of fiscal and monetary austerity and a floating exchange rate, windfall oil revenues afforded a degree of freedom that enabled the authorities to meet the fiscal deficit target comfortably and pay down public debt.
Monetary policy remained tight in the early part of 2005 until inflation showed signs of abating then, in the second half of the year, interest rates came down in a trend that continued into the first few months of 2006.
Fiscal policy remained austere, amidst abundant oil revenues that were up by 9.6% in real terms and represented 37% of the total income of public-sector institutions included in the federal budget.
These revenues facilitated the achievement of the target for the fiscal deficit, which at 0.1% of GDP was 0.13 percentage points smaller than predicted by the federal government at the beginning of 2005.
Non-oil revenues expanded by 3.6%, with tax income growing strongly (6.4%) thanks to improved collection.
Expenditure has remained almost constant in relation to GDP since 2003 (23.3% of GDP).
The public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR), encompassing all public-sector activities (whether implemented by public or private entities), continued to trend downwards in 2005 and stood at 1.63% of GDP, not including excluding exceptional income from Banco de México (central bank) profits or from privatizations.
As a result of amortization and prepayment of external obligations, external public debt dropped from 9.8% of GDP in 2004 to 7.7% in 2005, around which figure it is expected to remain in 2006.
The domestic debt ratio remained unchanged, and total public sector debt fell to In 2006, a lower take is expected from income tax (as a result of legislative reform) and from tax on nonrecurrent income.
Expenditure will therefore need to be adjusted in order to achieve the fiscal target.
Outstanding tasks in the areas of public finances include the need to increase the tax burden, which fell from 10.0% of GDP Monetary policy was directed towards keeping inflation within a range of one percentage point on either side of the target of 3%.
See Banco de México, Informe anual 2005, p. 87. equilibrium interbank rate) down from 10.0% in the second quarter of 2005 to 8.7% at the year’s end and The nominal lending rate2 followed the same trend, dropping from almost 10% in late 2005 to around 7.5% in the first half of 2006.
The decline in interest rates is expected to tail off during the rest of the year, in line with the thrust of monetary policy.
The money supply swelled by 7.9% in real terms in 2005, while narrow money expanded by 7.1% (11.1% of GDP), which is evidence of the gradualness of the remonetization process.
The decline in interest rates starting in the second half of 2005 helped to fuel expansion of M1 and other monetary aggregates, and this effect continued into the first few months of 2006.
Rates of growth in foreign-currency deposits (a component of M3) went from 59% to 47% in the same period.
In a context of expanding credit supply, households absorbed 80% of total commercial bank lending in 2005 (with a 15% increase in the lending balance of this banking sector in 2005).
Consumer credit, from both commercial banks and other sources of financing, was the most buoyant.
Consumer credit from bank and nonbank institutions grew by 41% in real terms in 2005 and has kept up that rate in 2006.
Mortgage lending is also continuing to expand in 2006 after having grown by 6.7% in 2005, driven by housing loans extended by non-bank intermediaries such as limited purpose financial institutions (SOFOLES).
Economic performance was notable for the slowdown seen in external demand and for rising domestic expenditure led by private consumption and investment.
This rising expenditure, however, was not enough to prevent a fall in the GDP growth rate, from 4.2% in 2004 to 3.0% in 2005.
Gross fixed capital formation swelled by 7.6%, Mexico’s foreign-exchange policy has been based on a floating exchange-rate regime since the end of 1994.
In 2005, the peso tended to appreciate slightly in the foreign-exchange market, especially in the second half of the year, when inflows of foreign exchange from FDI and exports firmed up.
The average nominal exchange rate in 2005 was 10.9 pesos to one United States dollar, with real appreciation of 4% for the year as a whole.3 The foreign-exchange market experienced short-lived periods of volatility in 2006, caused by the prospect of an international liquidity squeeze and as a result of the domestic political context.
On average, the exchange rate has fluctuated around 11 pesos to the dollar, and it is expected to stabilize and continue to record moderate real appreciation following the presidential elections.
One contributing factor in this has been the weakening of the dollar in relation to several other currencies in the first half of 2006.
In response to the expansion of international reserves triggered by rising petroleum prices and increases in both exports and direct and portfolio investment, the Banco de México continued to hold foreign exchange auctions —the mechanism it has been using since March 2003 to slow the build-up of reserves.
In May 2006, international reserves amounted to US$ 75.0 billion, with growth expected to slow during the second half of the year. driven by the private sector component, which represented 80% of the total.
This performance was largely thanks to purchases of machinery and equipment, especially from abroad, which were up by 15%.
Public investment continued to decline (-0.5%), owing to declining purchases of machinery and equipment (-4.3%).
This was reflected in a first-quarter GDP growth rate of 5.5%: the highest in six years.
Private consumption was up by 5.4% in 2005, fuelled by remittances and increased employment.
Another factor was the downward trend in interest rates in the second half of 2005 and the first few months of 2006; this also gave impetus to fixed investment, which rose by 7.6% (similar to the 7.5% recorded in 2004) and continued buoyant into 2006.
Services, which account for 65.7% of GDP, maintained a steady pace of growth during 2005 (6.4% for basic services and 3.5% for other services) and, like the other branches of the economy, have remained buoyant in 2006.
In the manufacturing sector, good performances were turned in by the metal products and machinery and equipment segments.
The latter includes the automobile industry, which has succeeded in repositioning in the United States market.
In the light of changes in world competitiveness and demand, the manufacturing industry is shifting its production platform towards luxury automobiles for export.
As a result, and thanks to increased demand from the United States (the main export market), the automobile industry’s production rose by 6.6% in 2005, with 74% of output destined for the external market.
This trend has strengthened in 2006, with production up by more than 35% in January-April.
Japanese companies with operations in Mexico have stepped up production, encouraged by the benefits of the Economic Complementarity Agreement in place between the two countries since April 2005.
With readily available financing, construction continued to expand, although less vigorously than in 2004.
Residential construction (48% of the total) fared particularly well, while infrastructure work slowed slightly.
In 2006, construction in the petroleum and petrochemical sectors picked up as oil-industry surpluses were put to use, which According to data from the Secretariat of Agriculture, Livestock, Rural Development, Fisheries and Food (SAGARPA), 1.6 million hectares were affected by drought and 254,000 hectares by hurricanes.
Services benefited from steady demand for traditional and mobile telephones, courier services and air transport.
This was reflected in a 7.1% increase in the transport, storage and communications sector in 2005, which is expected to continue in 2006.
Commerce, restaurants and hotels slowed to 3.1% in 2005 (down from 5.5% in 2004) as result of the damage wreaked by Hurricane Wilma in one of the tourist areas of Quintana Roo, although this activity is now picking up (5.3% in the first quarter of 2006) thanks to reconstruction efforts in the area.
Financial services climbed 5.8% in 2005 and community, social and personal services by 2.1%.
Contributing factors included the peso’s nominal stability and trend towards real appreciation, less buoyant economic activity and the Banco de México’s aforementioned efforts to neutralize domestic inflationary pressure.
Core inflation5 stood at 3.12%, owing to smaller rises in prices for processed food and housing thanks, in turn, to the easing of international price volatility in raw materials, particularly steel, which boosted residential construction.
Core inflation covers merchandise (processed food, beverages and tobacco) and services (housing and others).
If this trend continues, overall inflation is expected to end the year at around the 3.5% mark.
This reflected the absorption of labour by the informal sector and, to a lesser extent, increased employment in labourintensive activities such as construction.
In 2005, 11.8 million people, representing over 28% of the employed population, were in informal employment.
The average rate of underemployment7 was 7.5% of the employed population in 2005, retreating to 6.2% in the first quarter of 2006 in keeping with the economic buoyancy seen in that period.
As regards formal employment, the number of workers affiliated to the Mexican Social Security Institute swelled to 12.9 million in 2005, exceeding for the first time the previous record of 12.6 million recorded in 2000.
This uptrend has continued into 2006 on the back of strong economic growth and the number of affiliates came to 13.5 million in March.
The services sector consolidated its position as the main generator of formal employment (45% of the total) and the largest absorber of labour in recent years.
Manufacturing, which is the second largest employment generator (22.5% of the total), has recorded negative performances since 2001, although 2005 saw growth of 1.3% over 2004.
The number of people employed by the maquila industry grew by 4.7% in 2005, which was similar to the 5% rate recorded in 2004.
However, the number of jobs is still 10% below the peak registered in 2000.
Employment in construction expanded by 6.5%, although this largely reflected the hiring of temporary workers.
Labour productivity in the manufacturing industry edged up by 2% in 2005 (compared with 7.1% in 2004), while real average wages declined (-0.1%), as did unit labour costs (-2.1%).
Commerce recorded a 2.8% rise in productivity and a fall in both wages (-0.4%) and unit labour costs (-3.1%) over the same period.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit has been narrowing since 2001, due both to rising migrant remittances and to the fact that export growth has exceeded import growth.
The current account deficit stood at 0.62% Unlike what occurred in 2001-2003, however, growth was strong in both exports (14%) and imports (13%) —and that trend has continued into 2006 as a result of rising external demand for automobiles and high petroleum prices.
The year’s most robust growth in trade occurred in the final quarter of 2005 and continued into the first quarter of 2006 (in which sales of land vehicles and fuels and minerals stood out with rates of 51% and 54%, respectively), far outstripping import growth.
High petroleum prices during 2005 (an average of US$ 43 per barrel of Mexican mix) pushed up the value of oil sales by more than 33%.
Rising world demand, tighter international supply and the geopolitical risk in the Islamic Republic of Iran and in Iraq seem to be driving this upward trend: by April 2006, the average price of Mexican mix had risen above US$ 50 per barrel.
Agricultural exports also expanded in 2005 (5.7%), since the fall in production did not affect export supply.
Manufacturing exports were up by 11%, with decreases observed only in textiles and office equipment.
Worthy of note in relation to imports is the gradual growth in consumer goods purchases, which have exceeded those of capital goods since 2002.
This pattern is associated with more readily available consumer credit and with inflows of remittances.
Growth in purchases of intermediate goods, which are closely linked to maquila plant imports, has risen to two-digit figures thanks to the upswing in the maquila industry.
The underemployed are those who are willing and need to work more hours than their current employment permits.
The income account deficit widened slightly to stand at US$ 12.919 billion, mainly as a result of interest payments on debt and profit remittances.
The deficit on the trade and income accounts (US$ 25.273 billion) was largely offset by the surplus on transfers.
Transfers consist almost entirely of remittances from Mexicans living abroad, which accounted for of GDP; and 111% of foreign direct investment).
If this trend continues, remittances will total US$ 25.0 billion by the end of the year.
The financial account posted a surplus of US$ 12.758 billion, which was the net outcome of the reduction in government debt (US$ 10.165 billion), higher inflows of foreign direct investment (US$ 18.055 billion gross, US$ 13.0 billion net) and portfolio investment (US$ 10.188 billion).
Portfolio investment benefited from the interest rates prevailing in the first half of 2005 and from the country’s financial stability.
In 2006, capital inflows continue to rise, partly due to the increased non-financial public sector borrowing being recorded since the last quarter of 2005.
Despite high economic growth in the United States, that country’s demand for Mexican manufactures slackened in the face of competition from Asian countries, especially China, which has replaced Mexico as the second largest exporter to the United States after Canada.
In the first few months of 2006, however, Mexican products seemed to be regaining market share from competitors such as China, Japan and Germany.
Mexico’s imports from China are also on the rise (23% more than in 2004) and represent 8% of the market, while imports from the United States edged up only slightly (7%) and their market share dropped to 53.4% (2.9 percentage points down on 2004).
Real GDP grew by 4% in 2005, reflecting a loss of momentum of almost one percentage point with respect to 2004 and corresponding to per capita GDP of 1.9%.
The open unemployment rate at the national level declined for the third consecutive year, from 6.5% to 5.6% national, while urban open unemployment stood at 7.0%.
The real average wage increased significantly in the central government but remained unchanged for formal private-sector wage-earners.
Official minimum wages were adjusted in May, when a nominal 16.5% increase was awarded for construction and financial sectors and 15% for other economic activities.
Lack of parliamentary support for the projects of the Executive and mounting political tensions in the run-up to the November 2006 elections have generated a climate of uncertainty that is putting a damper on the economy.
At the same time, the increase in the public budget in 2005 (beyond the figure originally agreed) and the meagre advances in the area of structural reform resulted in the suspension of the three-year programme signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in December 2002; this led to a reduction in disbursements for budget and balance-of-payments support.
Following negotiations during the year, however, the Fund, convinced of the government’s commitment to achieving quantitative goals and conscious of its efforts to achieve a national consensus in order to fulfil the agenda of structural reforms before the year is out, decided to extend the programme to December 2006.
The fiscal discipline of the previous years was maintained, resulting in a reduction in the non-financial public sector deficit (before grants) from 5.8% to 4.3% of GDP, but without resorting to the cut in public spending, especially spending on the poverty reduction strategy.
Thus, public financing management also facilitated the fulfilment of the main monetary policy goals.
Notwithstanding the suspension of the IMF programme, the debt relief provided for under the heavily indebted poor countries initiative (HIPC) was not affected.
At the end of December 2005, Nicaragua became eligible for external debt relief programmes that will cancel US$ 3.761 billion of a total scheduled debt of US$ 6,328 billion.
As a result of the negotiations carried out during the year, the external debt balance was one of the lowest in the last 20 years.
In addition, the Group of eight added Nicaragua to its list of countries for consideration under the debt-forgiveness plan for countries included in the HIPC initiative with IMF, the World Bank and the African Development Fund.
This will imply a further externaldebt reduction of approximately US$ 800 million.
The trend towards a slowdown in the economy, noted in the last quarter of 2005, is expected to continue in 2006.
Exports will continue to expand, but uncertainty surrounding the electoral process is expected to curb domestic demand and especially private investment.
Nevertheless, a continued rise in international prices for oil and some industrial raw materials could cause economic activity to slow more than predicted, restricting GDP growth to between 3.2% and 3.4%.
In terms of price trends, an increase of 7.3% is expected, but imported inflation could push up domestic inflation to between 8% and 10%.
The central bank estimated that a 10% increase in the price of oil would translate into a 0.7 percentage-point increase in the inflation rate.
As regards monetary policy, one of the main objectives of the central bank is to build up international reserves.
These are expected to stand at 15.2% of GDP, which will bolster domestic stability and the exchange-rate, and improve vulnerability indicators, such as coverage of the monetary base (1.98 times) and of imports (3.2 months).
Fiscal policy will be adjusted with a view to attaining this goal.
The primary balance deficit of the public sector is expected to diminish, while the fiscal balance after grants should remain constant.
In the external sector, the balance-of- payments current-account deficit will amount to 17% of GDP.
No significant changes are foreseen with respect to economic policy management in 2006.
Monetary policy will continue to be oriented towards curbing inflation, countering the external vulnerability of the economy, and further strengthening net external assets and reducing central bank debt, provided that this does not have an adverse effect on economic activity.
Despite the estimated expenditure (1% of GDP) that the electoral process will entail, fiscal discipline is expected to be maintained.
This will give the monetary authority more leeway in achieving its policy objectives.
Unlike the situation in previous elections, there is consensus among the contenders in the present electoral process on the need to preserve the existing macroeconomic stability so that at the start of its mandate, the next administration does not have to correct huge imbalances.
The extension of the IMF agreement will also have a positive effect by contributing to inflows of financial resources to shore up the budget and the balance of payments position and by facilitating access to international financial markets on concessional terms.
In 2005, the results of the fiscal policy were a key factor for macroeconomic performance.
The central government fiscal deficit before grants contracted, making it easier to achieve the monetary targets in terms of price and exchange-rate stability.
Current central government revenues expanded by 20.2% and the tax burden rose from 15.7% to 16.6% of GDP.
However, with grants down from 4.7% of GDP to 3.3%, the share of total revenues in output (21.2%) diminished by half a percentage point.
For its part, total expenditure (including both current and capital expenditure), recorded similar levels to those of the previous year and stood at 23.1% of GDP.
As a result, current savings represented 4.3% of GDP in 2005, up from 3.5% of GDP in 2004; the fiscal deficit (including grants) increased from 1.5% to 1.8% of GDP.
It should be noted that the Government transferred the equivalent of 1.7% of GDP in recourses to the central bank, thereby improving its financial position.
The external public debt balance, which stood at US$ 5.348 billion (equivalent to 109% of GDP), decreased slightly with respect to 2004.
The appreciation of the dollar had a favourable effect: a more than US$ 150 million reduction in the debt balance.
The ratio of debt service to exports of goods remained constant at 10%.
One of the intermediate goals of the monetary programme in recent years was to build up reserves.
This went hand in hand with a policy designed to reduce gradually the central bank’s domestic borrowing, thus lessening its financial vulnerability and freeing up resources for the financial system; this has enabled it to increase the volume of intermediation and avoid sharp variations in interest rates.
Reconciling currency stabilization with domestic debt reduction was contingent on coordination of monetary and fiscal policy.
The measures adopted to reduce the deficit and increase external borrowing helped to boost reserves.
Open market operations resulted in a reduction in the central bank’s domestic debt, achieved through the net redemption of private-sector securities.
The resources captured by the banking system were used to inject credit resources in the economy, which led to a 32% cumulative expansion in the loans portfolio.
The credit expansion was concentrated in the private sector, since credit to the non-financial public sector declined.
The structure of the loan portfolio revealed the buoyancy of household loans, loans to private businesses and finance companies.
The expansion in the household loans portfolio (44%) was closely related to the increase in consumption.
The fact that the financial system tends to direct its credit towards profitable and rapid recovery sectors is one of the factors that accounts for the strong expansion in consumer loans.
This is reflected in the relationship between growth in aggregate consumption and the leverage of the financial system.
In 2005, the government maintained its exchange rate policy of daily mini-devaluations consistent with a preannounced annual crawling-peg devaluation rate.
Initially, the central bank policy was to reduce the crawling-peg rate, since inflation is closely related to the annual devaluation rate, which would help to moderate inflationary pressures.
In general terms, this is expected to have a positive impact on the domestic economy.
It will be recalled that in terms of tariffs, the agreement provides for preferential treatment for Nicaragua, guaranteeing most of its exports immediate access to the other markets and offering more vulnerable national products gradual, long-term liberalization.
Other negotiations in 2005 led to access to the European Union’s new Generalized System of Preferences, which entered into force on 1 January 2006.
Most of the exports under this system (excepting meat and dairy products) will enjoy favourable tariffs.
Up to 1999 the figures refer to the nationwide total. l Weighted average rate on 30-day deposits. m Weighted average rate on short-term loans. n Includes grants. o The monetary figures are end-of-period balances. p Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions.
As regards structural reforms, mention should be made of a set of political commitments adopted in 2005 for accelerated approval in October and November of a series of bills which will lead to the conclusion of a new agreement with IMF.
These include the approval of the Tax Code, the adoption of the government budget for 2006 and reforms for strengthening the regulatory framework of bank supervision and risk management.
The increase in GDP was triggered both by the expansion in exports (5.3%) and by growth of domestic demand (4.5%).
If restocking is not included, however, the rise in domestic demand is much smaller (3.8%) owing to the contraction in real terms of public investment (-5.6%) and the weak growth in public consumption.
Conversely, private investment picked up (10.8%), boosted by expenditure on construction and investment in machinery and equipment.
Private spending on consumption grew at a similar rate to that recorded in 2004.
A strong performance by the tourism sector also contributed to these positive results.
In the merchandise production sectors as a whole (which account for more than 40% of total GDP), the manufacturing industry and construction grew at a higher rate than the average for the economy, and agricultural production showed lower growth (3.1%).
This growth is due essentially to the increase in the production of basic grains, the significant increase in exports of beef on the hoof to Mexico and other Central America countries and the recovery in shrimp and fish production.
The expansion of the manufacturing industry is attributable to the production of textiles and clothing, foodstuffs, beverages and rum, tobacco, wood products, non-metallic products and chemicals.
Construction was buoyed up by private investments in commercial, industrial and residential sectors.
Performance in the construction, commerce and financial services sectors was determined to a large extent by higher wages in the public sector, the credit boom recorded in the economy and the substantial growth in family remittances.
Inflation stood at 9.6%, above the rate planned at the beginning of the year.
The international price for oil was one of the strongest factors of inflation, with a direct impact on fuel prices (27.1%), electricity (13.0%) and transport (13.4%), (in other words the essential inputs of the production system), and repercussions on the prices of other goods and services.
Thus, the main determinants of the slight rise in inflation in 2005 were primary inputs and a limited set of related products in the production chain.
The surge in inflation is therefore attributable to the strong external shock which occurred in a context of domestic vulnerabilities, including wage pressures in the public sector, disruptions in the agricultural sector and excess liquidity in the economic system.
According to the results of the household survey for measuring employment, job creation outpaced economic activity.
The main employment-generating sectors were the manufacturing industry, community and social services and commerce.
In addition, the process of labour market formalization intensified and was reflected in the higher membership in the Nicaraguan Social Security Institute.
Open unemployment fell for the third consecutive year in November 2005 to stand at 5.6%.
In 2005, the real average wage increased by 5.3%, mainly as a result of adjustments in wages paid to central-government employees (9.3%), since the real average wage of formal private-sector wage-earners showed no increase.
Official minimum wages were adjusted in May, when a nominal 16.5% increase was approved for construction workers and financial employees and a 15% increase for those engaged in other economic activities.
The expansion of economic activity was accompanied by a sharper imbalance in the external sector.
This was due to the significant increase in the deficit on the merchandise trade balance (27.4% of GDP) since the income account deficit contracted sharply, reflecting the reduction in interest paid and the substantial increase in current transfers (11.5%), especially family remittances, the equivalent of 12.5% of GDP and 75% of the current account deficit.
The reduction in the official capital flows was compensated by private capital inflows.
The higher net capital inflows were sufficient to finance the external imbalance, which led to a slight increase in the very limited net international reserves.
The services sector received the strongest inflows (83.7%), the principal beneficiaries being commerce, communications, the energy sector and the sugar industry.
Exports (including those from the free zones) expanded by 13.9%, while imports were up by 18.4%.
The recovery in sales of traditional products and the expansion in nontraditional sales both contributed to growth in exports.
Other factors include the buoyancy of exports from the free zones, especially those from the textile maquila, and the income generated by the tourist industry.
In particular, raw materials and intermediate goods were up, owing mainly to the higher import bill for oil and oil products (33.8%) and to purchases of capital goods required by the expansion of investment.
Panama’s economy continued to register a high level of growth (6.4%) thanks to favourable external conditions and buoyant domestic demand.
The unemployment rate came down to 9.6% and the fiscal deficit narrowed to 2.5% of GDP.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit also shrank to the equivalent of 5.3% of GDP, while inflation exceeded usual levels with an increase of 3.4%.
International service sectors such as the Colón Free Zone, the international banking centre, the Panama Canal, ports and tourism —as well as exports of national products— all benefited from the expansionary phase of the world economy and from the buoyancy of raw materials exports from South American countries.
In these circumstances, rising international interest rates and high oil prices had a limited impact.
The government’s agenda for 2005 included four main projects: fiscal reform, social security reform, the conclusion of free-trade negotiations with the United States and a referendum on the widening of the Panama Canal.
Only the first two were achieved, and not without difficulty, since more than a month of strikes and protests followed the social security reform proposal.
The government plans to push ahead with the other two projects during 2006.
Given its potential impact on the future of Panama’s economy, the most important event in 2006 will be the referendum on the widening of the Panama Canal, due to be held at the end of the year.
In 2006, the rate of growth is expected to remain high, at around 6%, thanks to the continuation of trends observed in 2005.
A number of new developments, including the construction of luxury apartment buildings in Panama City and the upgrading of sanitation in the Bay of Panama, could offset a slight slowdown in the growth of the international service sectors.
In 2005, the deficit of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) narrowed to 2.5%.
This reflected a 12.5% increase in revenues in real terms which, in turn, was partly attributable to buoyant production activity and the fiscal reforms.
The surplus on the accounts of public enterprises swelled by about 60%.
At the same time, expenditure held steady thanks to an explicit policy of spending restraint, while capital expenditure decreased by 10% in real terms.
Revenues were up by 11.7%, whereas expenditure expanded by only 2% in real terms.
Another piece of legislation approved was the Social Security Fund Act, which combines the increased contribution parameters with the introduction of a system of individual accounts.
This measure is intended to reverse the widening of the actuarial deficit, given that the operating deficit of the Social Security Fund weighed in at US$ 369.7 million in 2005 (US$ 1.4 million more than in 2004).
Another important initiative was the launch of the “Panamacompra” programme to facilitate government procurement and reduce corruption through increased transparency.
The US$ 369 million in accounts payable from the end of 2004 was whittled down to US$ 164 million a year later.
For 2006, US$ 800 million is budgeted for investment, which is twice as much as in previous years.
The government continued to take an active approach to public debt management, taking advantage of low international interest rates.
Between November 2005 and January 2006, the external debt was restructured to replace high-interest medium-term bonds with lower-interest long-term instruments.
The debt swap involved US$ 2.34 billion and extended extends the average maturity from 12 to 16 years, reducing the need for refinancing in the next few years.
The measures pave the way for a future improvement in the risk rating of Panama’s debt, with a view to achieving investment grade in the medium term.
This would also help with the widening of the Panama Canal, as almost half of the financing will need to come from external sources.
The cost of restructuring, combined with increased liabilities to bilateral and multilateral lenders, was reflected in the US$ 360 million increase in external public debt.
As a proportion of GDP, however, this debt decreased from 50.8% to 48.8%, thanks to strong economic growth.
Domestic debt fell from 19.4% of GDP to 17.2%, as the smaller fiscal deficit implied a lower borrowing requirement. (b) The international banking centre and credit policy In 2005, the international banking centre turned in a good performance on the back of economic growth in Panama and region-wide, especially in South America.
Banks took advantage of the high growth rates being posted by countries exporting raw materials (particularly petroleum) to step up their operations.
At the national level, banks reaped the benefits of trends in private consumption and property investment.
The assets of the international banking centre rose 11.7% to US$ 38.652 billion.
Profits stood at US$ 792 million, liquidity remained high and the ratio of capital to risk-weighted assets was 17.2%.
Portfolio quality indicators also remain very favourable: reserves cover 131% of the non-performing portfolio, which represents only 1.6% of the total.
The loan portfolio increased significantly (14.8%), driven by the surge in international credit (21.6%).
The expansion of net domestic credit was smaller (13.2%) but nonetheless significant.
The buoyant economic conditions were reflected in an expansion in mortgage, consumer and business loans (19.5%, 14.3% and 9.0%, respectively).
Contrasting with the upward trend in international interest rates, Panama’s nominal interest rates remained stable, partly because they had not fallen as steeply as rates in the rest of the world had done and partly because of abundant liquidity in the international markets.
Consolidation of the bank regulation and supervision framework continued and received the endorsement of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The sector now complies with 90% of the principles of the Basel Capital Accord (Basel I) and has taken measures to combat money laundering and the financing of terrorism.
In 2006, efforts will focus on the New Basel Capital Accord (Basel II) and on strengthening regional cooperation.
Also in 2005, the granting of seven new banking permits attests to international interest in the activities of the international banking centre.
The positive trends carried over into the first quarter of 2006: profits were up by 32%, assets by 14% and domestic private-sector credit by 13.7%.
However, interest rates are beginning to climb in the wake of international rates. (c) Trade policy The policy of liberalizing trade through free-trade agreements continued in 2005 and received even greater impetus in 2006.
Negotiations with the United States continued in 2005 but were not concluded on account of a number of divergences, mainly on agricultural issues.
The free-trade agreement with Singapore, on the other hand, was concluded and ratified and came into effect.
As a result, previously scarce Singaporean investment in Panama soared in excess of US$ 100 million.
After stalling at the end of 1990s, negotiations with Chile were reopened and rapidly concluded, and the agreement could enter into force in 2006.
In 2006, Panama defined its position in relation to negotiations with the European Union.
Since in this instance the European Union negotiates only with regional blocs, not individual countries, Panama had to chose either the Andean Community or the Central American Common Market (CACM) as a regional integration partner, and opted ultimately for the latter.
In May it was decided to initiate negotiations between the European Union, the Central American countries and Panama, with a view to forging a cooperation accord that would include a free trade agreement.
Such an agreement presupposes stronger integration on the Central American isthmus; accordingly, Panama reopened free trade negotiations, which had stalled four years earlier, with the countries with which it does not yet have a free trade agreement (Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua).
The aim is to conclude the negotiations in the course of 2006.
In addition, plans have been announced to build two oil refineries in the next few years, which would involve several billion dollars in investment.
Lastly, over US$ 3.0 billion is to be invested in various tourism and real estate projects and the construction of a mega-port on the Pacific coast.
In 2005, growth was driven by external demand (up 14%), while domestic demand was less buoyant (6%).
Gross domestic investment expanded by around 6%, mainly on the back of private investment, while the public component stood still.
A similar pattern occurred in consumption, with the private component up by 6.3% and the public component by only 1%.
This pattern is now in its second year and is the result of efforts to rehabilitate public finances.
Agriculture recorded an expansion of 2.9%, mainly thanks to buoyant non-traditional exports (melon, watermelon, pineapple and cattle on the hoof).
Traditional export products, on the other hand, returned negative figures or stood still.
Results were good in the production of beef and pork livestock, vegetables and cereals for the domestic market, while growth in the fishing sector remained low (2.6%).
Mining and construction both posted a meagre expansion (0.4% and 1%, respectively).
The lacklustre performance of construction was the result of a strike over the social security reform, which paralysed the sector for an entire month.
This was well below the figure of 10.9% returned in the transport, storage and communications sector which was driven, in turn, by a 12.2% increase in port activity (mainly thanks to movements of container freight).
As for land transport, railway freight activity surged by an extraordinary 128%.
This trend continued in the first quarter of 2006, with a growth rate of 102%.
Air transport increased by 18%, with the continued expansion of Copa airlines and the renovation of Tocumen airport strengthening Panama’s position as a regional air transport hub.
Panama Canal activities climbed by 4%, which was the result of a slight reduction in the number of transits but an increase in the size of vessels.
Total income exceeded US$ 1.0 billion for the first time ever in the 2005 fiscal year and this trend continued into the first six months of 2006, with a 4.5% rise in transits of Panamax ships (the largest vessels the Panama Canal can accommodate) and a 17% increase in container ship tonnage.
Retail performance was average (4.5%), although this was compensated by a 13.1% expansion in the activity of the Colón Free Zone.
Tourism continued to boom as tourist spending climbed by 19.8% and arrivals by 17.9%.
Financial institutions, insurance, property and services expanded by 7.9%, with growth of 16.4% in the banking sector alone.
The balance for personal, community and social services (1.4%) was affected by a 0.7% decrease in governmental services. (b) Prices, wages and employment Price trends were markedly unfavourable.
The consumer price index (CPI) was up by 2.9% as an annual average in 2005, compared with 0.5% the previous year.
Although this figure is low for developing countries in general, it is nonetheless relatively high compared to the usual patterns in Panama’s economy.
Food and beverages (4.8%) played the most significant part in the overall increase, closely followed by housing, water, electricity and gas (4.7%) and transport (3.8%).
The increase in transport prices reflected higher international prices for petroleum and petroleum products.
The wholesale price index climbed by 5.7%, compared with 4.4% the previous year.
The increase was due to higher import prices (10.4%), as industrial prices rose by only 1.6% and agricultural prices fell by 0.2%.
The fact that wholesale prices affect retail prices, combined with continuingly high oil prices, suggests that inflation will remain high in 2006.
This is confirmed by data from the first four months of the year, with 12-month consumer price inflation of 2.9% and a rise of 6.9% in the wholesale price index.
Although minimum wages are usually adjusted every two years, no adjustment was made in 2004 or 2005.
A wage hike came in 2006, with an 8% increase from April.
Labour-market indicators improved considerably as the unemployment rate dropped from 11.8% to 9.6% and the number of employed increased by 5%. (c) The external sector The buoyancy of the world economy fuelled strong growth not only in Panama’s traditional economic specialty of services, but also in merchandise exports.
This narrowed the current account deficit from the equivalent of 7.9% of GDP to 5.3%.
The financial account recorded large inflows of US$ 1.49 billion from banking operations and foreign direct investment (FDI).
Robust growth of merchandise exports (17%), combined with a more moderate increase in imports (11%), helped to shrink the merchandise trade deficit.
Re-exports from the Colón Free Zone, which represent the bulk of goods exports, grew by around 20% for the second consecutive year.
National exports expanded by 8.3%, which is slightly less than the 10.5% growth recorded the previous year.
Good performances were recorded for sugar (128%) and fruit such as watermelon and pineapple (68%).
Lobster, shrimp and other sea products also fared well, while banana exports declined for the sixth year running (-10.8%).
For 2006, agricultural exports are expected to increase by more than 20%.
The pattern of merchandise imports contrasted with the export trend: free zone imports increased by 7%, while those to the rest of the country were up by 14.8%.
Imports of consumer goods rose by 20%, reflecting the good overall state of the economy.
Capital goods imports also expanded considerably (16.6%) thanks to strong private investment, while intermediate goods were up 8.6%.
Net inflows of FDI recorded in the financial account represented US$ 1.027 billion, which was US$ 15 million up on 2004.
These large inflows reflect the abundant liquidity in international markets combined with the particular features of Panama’s economy that make it attractive to investors: the use of the dollar as legal tender, its deep, sophisticated financial market and the legal certainty it offers.
Hefty inflows were also recorded by banks, partly due to the establishment of new banking institutions in Panama.
The Caribbean Economic growth increased from 1.8% in 2004 to 2.7% in 2005, driven by tourism, construction and financial services.
Increased economic activity led to higher tax receipts and a subsequent narrowing of the fiscal deficit.
Economic growth also resulted in increased demand for credit, a need that was satisfied by commercial banks.
While the improved economic performance did not bring down the unemployment rate, the labour market was able to absorb the increase in the labour force as the participation rate rose.
The balance of payments worsened: the overall balance was negative as the capital and financial account surplus failed to cover the growing current account deficit.
The current account deficit is attributable to higher international oil prices and the rise in imports in the face of increased economic activity.
For 2006, growth of 4.7% is expected to affect the balance of payments in the short term.
Despite the hefty external debt that is worrying the authorities, no significant changes are expected in terms of fiscal policy.
This continuation of the status quo is partly due to the fact that elections are scheduled for 2007.
The performance of total public revenues (including grants) is due to higher levels of economic activity, particularly the expansion of imports and higher levels of hotel occupancy.
These factors then resulted in significant increases in income from tax on international transactions and trade (26%) and especially gaming taxes (88%).
Levels of current expenditure (18% of GDP in 2004 and 19% in 2005) are attributable to government purchases, and more specifically to transfers and subsidies.
Capital expenditure (1.5% of GDP in 2004 and 1.9% in 2005) was associated with infrastructure projects, including building construction, road maintenance and the repair of State schools.
This pushed up total public debt by 6.5% to stand at US$ 2.7 billion, equivalent to 46% of GDP.
Foreign-currency debt (which includes domestic and external debt) contracted by 5.4% to stand at US$ 531 million in 2005 (9% of GDP, down from 10% in 2004), of which over 50% is external public debt.
Includes hidden unemployment. i Weighted average of interest rate on deposits. j Weighted average of interest rate on loans and overdrafts. k For the period 1997-2003, information refers to the fiscal year. l Includes grants.
In 2006, current revenue is projected to rise by 11% as a result of increased economic activity.
Current expenditure will climb by 14% owing to debt servicing (33%), while capital expenditure will expand by 19%.
This could negatively affect the fiscal situation and push up the country’s level of indebtedness.
In 2005, the authorities eased the monetary stance following the large build-up of excess liquidity in the banking system during 2004.
The discount rate for openmarket operations was reduced from 5.5% to 5.25% in February 2005.
This, in turn, pushed up demand for credit to 13% (compared with 5% in 2004).
Personal loans increased (14%), with the highest growth rates recorded in consumer credit and residential mortgages Buoyant demand for credit, combined with import growth, facilitated the reduction of commercial banks’ excess liquidity (US$ 156 million).
This was in contrast with the US$ 157 million inflows from operations related to natural disasters.
The result was a 13% contraction in external reserves, which at year end represented the equivalent of 19.5 weeks of non-oil merchandise imports (compared with 23.3 weeks in 2004).
So far in 2006, the surge in commercial banks’ excess liquidity (which is double the level observed in 2005) has forced the monetary authorities to implement additional measures to stimulate activity in the inter-bank market.
The authorities relaxed restrictions on capital transactions in foreign currency by reducing the premium levied on such operations.
They also reduced the refund on repatriation of invested capital from 20% to 10%, and introduced an allowance for investments of Bahamians abroad.
In 2005, total tourist arrivals edged up slightly (0.9% as opposed to 8.9% in 2004), mainly owing to the effects of hurricanes Katrina, Rita and Wilma on the United States (the country’s main tourist market).
Cruise arrivals decreased marginally (0.3%) in 2005, while stopover visitors increased by 4.4%.
Accordingly, tourist spending heightened by 9.9% to stand at US$ 2.1 billion.
Hotel industry earnings strengthened as a result of increased occupancy rates (70% up from 66% in 2004) and higher room rates (up 4%).
Changes in United States tax legislation will benefit the country: from 2006, United States companies will be able to make tax deductions against conferences hosted in the Bahamas.
The country will also continue to benefit from increased competition in the airline industry, which has reduced the effect of higher oil prices on transport costs.
Lastly, the Atlantis tourist complex is due to complete its Phase III expansion in New Providence in 2006, after which major construction is expected to begin in Cable Beach.
Construction activity picked up thanks to increased investment in tourism and to reconstruction projects in the wake of the natural disasters that struck the country in 2004.
The number of residential mortgage commitments increased by 61%, and those for commercial mortgage commitments by 98%.
This was mainly attributable to a 1.6% decline in clothing and footwear and the small increase in transport and communications (-0.2%), as airline competition neutralized the rise in international fuel prices.
Other major components, such as food and rentals, increased by 2.9% and 3.2% respectively.
Construction is the largest employer (22% of the labour force), followed by social and personal services, which employ 20% of the total.
This was because the capital and financial account surplus (equivalent to 7.2% of GDP, compared with 8.6% in 2004) was not sufficient to offset the considerable widening of the current account Reserves therefore contracted by US$ 88 million (compared to the US$ 183 million increase in 2004).
The current account balance is attributable to the widening of the trade deficit, which was mainly due to Not including errors and omissions. the higher oil bill, which represents 24% of international merchandise purchases.
The increase in non-oil imports was another contributing factor, albeit a less significant one.
The positive balance in the services account (19.3% of GDP compared with 17.9% in 2004) reflected buoyant tourist activity, yet was only able to partially offset the merchandise trade deficit.
The deficit on the income balance narrowed from 2.5% of GDP in 2004 to 1.8% in 2005, thanks to an improvement in the net creditor position of commercial banks.
The surplus on the capital and financial account is due to increased foreign direct investment flows to the tourism sector (6.1% of GDP in 2005 compared with 4.8% in 2004).
Increases in share capital investments, private debt and real estate sales also contributed to this result.
In 2005 Barbados recorded moderate economic growth (3.9%) compared with 2004 (4.8), owing to the decline in tourism, the mainstay of the country’s economy.
Construction, on the other hand, picked up significantly in relation to the previous year.
The fiscal stance was loosened slightly in 2005 and the overall fiscal deficit widened.
Fiscal performance reflected a decline in the tax burden and increased expenditure.
Despite lower GDP growth, inflation climbed to 7.4% in 2005 (compared with 4.3% in 2004), which reflected higher fuel prices and excess demand for construction materials.
The monetary authorities adopted a tight policy stance to combat rising inflation and moderate the effects of higher fuel prices on demand for imports.
This Economic policy was directed towards containing the surge in inflation and the balance-of-payments current account deficit.
Structural reforms were also introduced to boost private-sector activity; these included the liberalization of the telecommunications market and strengthening of the programme to develop domestic production.
This was the combined effect of the smaller tax burden and increased expenditure fuelled by the extension of loans.
Personal income tax receipts decreased as a result of the downward revision of the tax rate from 40% to 37.5%, and an increase in the personal tax allowance from B$ 8,750 to B$ 10,000.
Corporate tax takings, however, increased by demand rose considerably and the resulting increase in the balance-of-payments current account deficit was not entirely offset by the surplus on the capital and financial accounts.
Higher GDP growth (4.3%) is expected in 2006 as a result of the positive impact on tourism and construction of preparations for the 2007 Cricket World Cup.
Larger revenues from tourism should cover the increased demand for imports of construction materials. 13%.
Indirect taxes climbed thanks to higher receipts from excise taxes on some classes of motor vehicles, while the VAT intake stood still.
These loans went mainly to small and medium-sized enterprises and the Barbados Tourism Investment Corporation (BTIC).
Includes hidden unemployment. l Includes net lending. helped to push up imports.
Another policy objective was to maintain price stability in view of worsening inflation.
To this end, the Central Bank of Barbados tightened its monetary stance and raised the discount rate by 2.5 percentage points.
This was backed up by three increases in the minimum deposit rate, which rose from 2.25% to 4.25% in the first nine months of the year.
At the same time, commercial banks hiked up the price of credit and the weighted average nominal rate on loans increased from 7.8% to 9.5%.
These measures, together with the decrease in the stock of international reserves, slowed the growth rate of the money supply from 22.1% in 2004 to 6.8% in 2005 in the case of narrow money, and from 14.7% in 2004 to 9.2% in 2005 in the case of broad money, and checked the expansion in commercial banks’ surplus liquidity.
The bulk of the increase in credit (over 45%) in 2005 corresponded to large personal loans, reflecting demand for mortgages and consumer durables, while credit to tourist enterprises recovered well and was up by over B$ 77 million.
The economic growth rate slowed down in 2005 as the tourist sector contracted.
Tourism value-added fell by almost 4% after having made a comeback in 2004.
Activities related to both the long-stay and the cruise-ship sectors suffered, in the former case partly because there was no English cricket tour in 2005, which always affects the number of visitors.
The cruise-ship sector was affected by the home-porting of a number of cruise ships in the United States.
Another negative factor is that Barbados is regarded as a costly destination.
The performance turned in by the construction sector (2.8% in 2004 and 13.4% in 2005) was the result of buoyant residential construction, work on a cricket stadium and other major infrastructure projects.
Agricultural output picked up (-5.7% and 3.5% in 2004 and 2005, respectively), with sugar production rising by 11.3% thanks to favourable weather conditions.
Similarly, the growth rate of manufacturing output (2.9%) was one percentage point higher than the previous year.
For a long time, manufacturing was hampered by competitiveness problems stemming from high production costs and weak productivity.
In 2005, however, increased demand for certain manufacturing products boosted overall value-added.
Activity in business and financial services expanded by over 4%, propelled by an increase in the registration of international businesses and offshore companies.
This was the result of higher international fuel prices (11.5%) which, in turn, pushed up the price of transport services by 9%.
The overall impact was cushioned by food prices, however, which climbed by a moderate 4%, compared with 7% the previous year.
The introduction of the import tax in September 2005 also contributed to the rise in inflation.
In the framework of the tripartite agreements, public-sector wages rose by 3% in 2005 (less than half the rate of inflation).
Meanwhile, continued buoyancy in the labour-intensive construction sector helped to lower the unemployment rate (9.1%).
This benefited male employment, since men form the bulk of the labour force in the construction sector.
The surplus on the services account (23.8% and 24.3% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively) swelled despite the decline in tourist activity (27.6% in 2004 and The capital and financial account performance was linked to the expansion of tourism capacity, infrastructure projects and preparations for the Cricket World Cup.
In 2006, the balance-of-payments position is expected to improve, with the overall deficit projected to stand at 1.2% of GDP.
Moderate growth of imports (5%) will slow the increase in the merchandise deficit.
Merchandise exports are expected to decline marginally, but this will be offset by an upturn in services, particularly tourism, thanks to the Cricket World Cup.
This growth was driven by the buoyancy of tourism and fishing, which offset the contraction in construction and manufacturing and the stagnation of agriculture.
The widening of the fiscal deficit was mainly due to the considerable increase in debt servicing, despite the combined effects of tax increases, a cutback in capital spending and the rise in official grants and donations.
The monetary authorities adopted a restrictive policy in order to at least partially neutralize the impact of the fiscal expansion on spending and the balance of payments.
The external sector posted a positive balance equivalent to 1.6% of GDP, mostly owing to the increase in the capital and financial account surplus, which more than compensated for the deterioration in the current account.
Projections for 2006 include growth of 2.5% and a fiscal deficit of less than 3% of GDP.
The central government’s deficit widened from 6% of GDP in 2004 to 6.4% in 2005 owing to the higher level of current spending and a drop in government revenues.
The rise in tax revenues, was due to the increase in corporate taxes and taxes on consumption and trade, among others.
Non-tax current income was higher because of the rise in licenses and the return of loans to the Belize Social Security Board.
Current expenditure climbed from 22.6% of GDP in 2004 to 25.1% in 2005, mainly owing to debt servicing (31% of total current expenditure) and, to a lesser extent, the increase in the public wage bill (10% of GDP) and purchases of goods and services.
Capital expenditure contracted (by 8.7% and 5.3% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively) despite higher spending on infrastructure, which accounted for 52% of the total.
The widening of the fiscal deficit pushed up the external debt stock from 82.2% of GDP in 2004 to 84.3% The authorities hope to reduce the fiscal gap to a figure below 3% of GDP in 2006.
This is based on the expectation of higher economic growth, as the government does not plan to introduce any further tax measures. (b) Monetary and exchange-rate policies In 2005, the monetary authorities adopted a contractionary policy in order to counteract the effect of the expansion of net external assets and public and private spending.
International reserves were buttressed by increased external borrowing, bond issues, exports of traditional products and income from the sale of equity in Belize Telecommunications Limited.
As part of this strategy, in May 2005 the legal reserve requirements for commercial banks were raised from 7% to 8% for cash reserves and from 20% to 21% for assets.
The commercial banks’ lending capacity was also reduced, except for long-term loans of its liquid assets to the government.
Consequently, interest rates for loans rose by 10 basis points, to 8.9%.
The interest rate hike dampened the demand for credit (19.7% and In 2006, the central bank has maintained its restrictive policy, raising the legal reserve requirement for commercial banks by one percentage point.
In 2005, the 3.1% expansion in economic activity (compared to 4.6% in 2004), was driven by tourism, transport and communications and distribution sectors.
The tourism sector, the spearhead of the economy, grew by 3.5%, with a 3% increase in the number of long-stay visitors, thanks at least in part to the expansion of hotel and air transport capacity.
The number of cruise passengers, which has much less impact on the economy, was down.
The performance of the construction industry reflected the completion of hydroelectric infrastructure projects and the cutback in government capital spending.
Manufacturing declined by 1.2% owing to the closure of operations in the sugar industry and the poor performance of most products intended for the domestic market, while a rise in taxes discouraged consumption.
This contraction in manufacturing was softened by growth in the output of concentrated juices.
Agriculture stagnated, with growth of scarcely 0.3%, compared to 9.2% the previous year.
This poor performance was due to a variety of factors, including: adverse weather conditions, as in the case of sugar; lower prices for some traditional crops, such as bananas; a decrease in the lobster industry’s production capacity and in some other activities; and pests, including outbreaks affecting forestry activities.
These factors were exacerbated by increased production costs due to higher international energy prices.
The inflation rate rose from 2.8% in 2004 to 3.1% in 2005 as a consequence of higher international oil prices, utility rates and taxes.
A breakdown of the consumer price index (CPI) shows that the categories of transport and communications; food, beverages and tobacco; and rent, water and fuel posted the highest increases (5.7%, 4.7% and 4.2%, respectively).
The sectors where job creation grew most rapidly were tourism, public services, and community, social and personal services The overall balance showed a positive result of 1.6% of GDP (-3% in 2004), as the current account deficit was easily financed by the capital and financial account surplus.
The trend in the current account reflected the strong performance of the services account (thanks to the tourism boom), but the trade gap actually widened.
The increase in the overall trade deficit was attributable to the rise in the value of merchandise imports associated with the country’s hefty energy bill, in addition to the stagnation of exports.
External sales were hurt by the drop in volume of the country’s main traditional exports and by a decline in the average export price for lobsters.
The balance on the capital and financial account reflected the increase in the government’s liabilities associated with the refinancing of its net loan balances.
All this was despite adverse weather conditions, including the worst drought in a century and three hurricanes which created direct and indirect damage estimated by the government at US$ 3.661 billion (7.9% of GDP in 2005).
For the third consecutive year there were surpluses on both the current account (US$ 7 million) and the balanceof-payments capital account (US$ 500 million), which boosted foreign reserves, providing improved protection against possible external shocks.
Goods and services imports (35.2%) grew faster than exports (19.3%); family remittances declined and net factor service payments rose.
The fiscal gap widened from 3.5% in 2004 to 4.2% in 2005 and there was a sizeable increase in cumulative monetary liquidity (M2) in the hands of the population (35.5%), although inflation was not affected (3.7%).
The Government estimates that growth in 2006 will exceed 10%, thanks to growing trade with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and China.
Oil and gas extraction is expected to rise, and an increase of about 70% is planned in public investments, with priority for social programmes, housing, the energy sector, tourism and nickel.
Sugar production should hold steady at its 2005 level, but 4.6% growth is expected in the non-sugar sector.
A growth rate of 15% is projected in construction and transport, and the numbers of foreign tourists and gross tourism revenue are also forecast to rise (10% and 8%, respectively).
Official estimates point to another current account surplus, resulting from an increased trade surplus, but partly counteracted by increased net factor service payments and reduced current transfers.
Exports are expected to rise by 17.7% and imports to fall by 1.5%.
The fiscal gap is expected to fall to 3.4% of GDP, and retail sales should be up 26% thanks to increased supply of goods and services to the population.
The Cuban economy has various strengths and weaknesses which have to be taken into account in formulating economic policy.
The strengths include highly skilled human resources, and the universal provision of basic services such as education, health care, culture and sport.
However, the economy suffers from weaknesses such as the lack of efficiency in the use of available resources and poor business management.
These are reflected in the country’s external financial deficit, although there have been some improvements.
The functioning of the economic system is also hindered by market segmentation and the duality of monetary and price structures.
Legal restrictions on own-account work do nothing to improve the supply of goods and services to the population, stimulate job creation or increase tax revenue.
Increased import capacity, resulting from the greater availability of foreign exchange, has paved the way for improvements in the supply of goods and services in response to higher wages and pensions, and in the relative price structure through reduced subsidies and price increases for electric power and other goods and services.
This policy was pursued in order to avoid more acute shortages of goods and services, expansion of the informal market, and a decline in labour productivity.
Revenue increased by slightly less than expenditure (24.3% and 25.2%, respectively), leading to a larger fiscal deficit.
Fiscal revenue was boosted by improved production; current income rose by 23.7%, but capital income stagnated.
Receipts from indirect taxes rose faster (22.8%) than those from direct taxes (9.7%).
Circulation and sales tax receipts were up 24.1%, but service tax receipts by only 10.2%.
Within direct taxes, social security contributions increased by 14.9%, receipts from the tax on the utilization of the labour force by 8.2%, and those from profit taxes by 6.9%.
On the expenditure side, capital outlays rose faster (39.2%) than current expenditure (23.4%).
In accordance with the social content of fiscal policy, the largest spending increases were on social welfare (67.9%), social security the arts (18.2%), education (14.3%) and housing and community services (12.7%).
Particularly noteworthy in the category of transfers to the business and cooperative sector, which increased at the same rate as current expenditure, were economic assistance to basic cooperative production units (196.7%) and compensation for losses (18.4%).
Increases to social-security and social-welfare pensions implemented in April 2005 involved additional spending equivalent to 2.6% of GDP.
In 2005, monetary policy focused on implementing the measures adopted in 2004 as part of the institutional reform, including centralized control of foreign currency and the strengthening of the national currency.
As of November 2004 cash transactions in United States dollars were prohibited and the circulation of the convertible peso was extended nationwide, to protect national sovereignty in monetary policy.
A 10% commission will be charged for changing dollars into convertible pesos.
As of 18 March 2005, the exchange rate in the parallel market was cut from 26 to 24 non-convertible Cuban pesos (CUP) for the sale of convertible pesos or United States dollars, for personal transactions in the network of State currency exchange offices, and from 27 to 25 pesos for personal purchases of convertible pesos.
On 9 April 2005 the convertible peso was revalued by 8% against all foreign currencies, including the United States dollar and the euro.
The purchasing power of the Cuban currency has strengthened, and the authorities have announced that they will continue to revalue it gradually until monetary unification is achieved.
As a result, the population’s bank balances in dollars declined by 57% in 2005, balances in convertible pesos more than tripled and those in Cuban pesos increased by 35%.
First, international reserves have increased and have been concentrated in the Central Bank of Cuba, giving the financial system improved security.
There is now greater control and efficiency in the use of resources, and Cuba’s financial institutions have more liquidity and are more solvent.
The centralization of the State’s foreign-currency income has facilitated the payment of external debt and of obligations arising out of new external financial commitments.
There is more precision in the measurement of the money supply, facilitating decision-making to protect monetary and financial stability.
Similarly, the authorities have improved the use of the banking system for domestic and external financial transactions, and the use of United States dollars in cash inflows to Cuba has fallen from 80% to 30%.
Lastly, exchange control has been consolidated, leading to improved commercial and financial discipline and greater efficiency in spending.
Investment grew faster than consumption, and was particularly strong in the energy sector, the nickel industry, education, health and international tourism services, and works implemented to mitigate the impact of the severe drought affecting the country.
Despite a fall in family remittances, household consumption rose because of salary increases.
The upturn in community, social and personal services was due to the provision of professional services (in areas such as health, education, culture and sport) to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Guatemala, Pakistan and other countries, as well as improvements to those services within Cuba.
Despite problems relating to the efficient use of resources, construction was boosted by strong investment, the development of tourism infrastructure and the repair of direct and indirect damage caused by the hurricanes.
In particular, housing construction grew by 160%, after having remained depressed for a long period.
International tourism expanded thanks to improved international promotion, greater efficiency in the use of available resources and the expansion in the accommodation available (6.4%, equivalent to 48,100 rooms).
Tourists came mainly from Canada (26%), Spain (8.4%), the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela Communications and data-processing services grew by 8% thanks to capital formation in that area, which has led to improved service for both Cubans and tourists visiting the country.
Commerce, restaurant and hotel services expanded owing to growth in tourism and stronger domestic demand.
The agricultural sector declined sharply, owing to the effects of the hurricanes and the intense drought and also inefficiencies in the use of available resources.
Levels of activity were down in both the sugar-cane and non-sugarcane segments, and also in livestock production.
Electric power generation continued to decline in 2005 (-2%) owing to breakdowns in electric power plants, the lengthening of their maintenance periods and the impact of eight hurricanes over the past four years.
The crisis in the electric power system is due to the technical obsolescence of equipment, leading to low levels of efficiency, high self-consumption rates in thermoelectric plants (7% of the power generated), considerable transmission and distribution losses (17%), and outdated domestic equipment affecting households’ electric power consumption.
A crash programme to improve saving and efficiency is being implemented, and the provision of electric power already showed some improvement in the first few months of 2006.
The performance of manufacturing was uneven, with output rising in 12 out of 20 segments.
Although production was damaged by the drought and hurricanes, inefficiency in the use of available resources was also a factor.
The consumer price indices in local and foreign currency rose by 3.7% and 5%, respectively.
This inflation resulted from higher monetary liquidity in the hands of the population, supply difficulties resulting from the drought and hurricanes, stronger domestic demand due to higher pensions and wages, and rising hard-currency fuel prices.
Prices in the formal and informal markets were up by 8.4% and 3.3%, respectively, but prices in the free markets for agricultural products edged up by On 1 May 2005 wage increases were promulgated for 1.6 million workers, raising the minimum wage from 100 to 225 Cuban pesos, and resulting in additional budgetary outlays equivalent to 2.3% of GDP.
A new wage increase was implemented as of December 2005, benefiting 2.2 million workers, with an annual cost equivalent to 2.7% of GDP, and resulting in an average monthly increase of 44 Cuban pesos per worker (12.7%).
This measure meant that all public-sector workers had received a wage increase.
The unemployment rate remained virtually unchanged at 1.9%, thanks to increased waged employment in the State sector.
The country’s main exports of traditional goods made up the following percentages of the total: nickel (50%), medicines (13%), tobacco (11%), and sugar and sugar cane derivatives (8%), compared with the 2001 World prices for nickel and sugar were up.
The increase in nickel sales was considerable, but sugar and sugar cane derivatives had fallen to fourth place in just five years.
Exports of non-traditional products continued their upward trend, particularly in areas such as pharmaceutical products, biotechnology and genetic engineering.
There was a reduction in the role of family remittances as a source of external financing in the economy, but sales in dollar shops increased by 6%.
The number of joint ventures with foreign corporations fell from 313 in 2004 to 287 in 2005, but there was a considerable upswing in foreign direct investment from China, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Canada.
Imports of goods and services also rose, with an increased volume of higher-priced goods, especially petroleum and foodstuffs.
The surplus on the services balance climbed steeply as a result of growth in international tourism, professional services and telecommunications.
There has been a significant change in Cuba’s trade in goods with the Americas (50%), Europe (29%) and Asia respectively.
Imports from the European Union crept up slightly (0.5%), to US$ 1.553 billion, but exports to the European Union declined by 2.5%, to US$ 817 million.
Trade with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has been rising rapidly, with goods and services exports to that country climbing from US$ 500 million in 2000 to US$ 2.5 billion in 2005.
This is due in large part to the 90,000 barrels of oil per day supplied to Cuba by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In 2005, the value of Cuba’s imports of hydrocarbons from that country totalled US$ 1.8 billion.
Cuba’s trade with China also increased significantly, by 67%, or US$ 873 million.
Only 27% of the country’s obligations are now short-term ones, and the rest is medium- and long-term credit, whereas formerly the majority of Cuba’s liabilities were short term ones.
Main trends The economic recovery was consolidated in 2005 and GDP growth surpassed all expectations, at 9.2%.
The number of employed was up by 2.1% and real minimum wages climbed significantly.
Inflation dropped from 28.7% to 7.4% and the public-sector deficit narrowed to 3.3% of GDP.
These trends have strengthened in 2006 and an annual growth rate of 8% is projected.
A strong recovery in domestic demand fuelled the upturn in imports of inputs and capital goods.
The balance-of-payments current account moved from a surplus to a small deficit although family remittances expanded again.
Broader availability of foreign currency in 2005 fuelled the appreciation of the exchange rate and helped to replenish international reserves.
Legislative elections in May 2006 turned out well for the government, thus creating the conditions to deepen the economic reforms of the past biennium.
Fiscal and monetary policies were again coordinated with a view to maintaining the credibility of macroeconomic policy.
The targets set in government and monetary programmes and in the agreement signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were easily met.
The central government deficit was 0.7% of GDP (compared to 4% in 2004) and the non-financial public sector (NFPS) deficit was equivalent to 0.4% of GDP (2.8% in 2004).
The public sector closed the financial year with a consolidated deficit equivalent to 3.3% of GDP, which was slightly less than half of the previous year’s negative balance.
The central government’s total revenues rose 15.8% in real terms, with revenues from taxes, particularly indirect taxes, generating most of the increase.
This was thanks to the tax reforms of late 2004, which raised the goods and services transfer tax (ITBIS) from 12% to 16% and increased the selective consumption tax (ISC) on alcoholic beverages and cigarettes.
The fiscal reform of December 2005 broadened the base and coverage of ITBIS, raised the ISC rate to 20% and introduced a selective tax of 13% on the consumption of petroleum products.
Revenues from direct taxation rose by 17% in real terms, with the bulk of receipts coming from income taxes, but the fastest-growing item in 2005 was assets tax, which generated additional revenues of 1.632 billion pesos, 70% more than a year before.
Under the fiscal reform of 2005, the tax on real property, luxury dwellings and unbuilt urban sites approved in 2004 was replaced in December 2005, in the case of single-owner businesses, with a new assets tax.
The 2005 reform also created a tax of 17% of c.i.f. value on newly imported vehicles and established new income tax rates effective as of 2006.
The new rates were 15%, 20%, 25% and 30%, depending on income bracket, for natural persons and a single rate of 30% for legal persons.
Spending policy was consistent with budget ceilings, the central government’s expenditure obligations and public debt servicing commitments.
Outlays on domestic debt servicing declined because of falling interest rates, but other components of current spending rose.
Unlike what had occurred in 2004, transfers —almost all to the electricity sector— declined slightly.
Capital spending rose substantially, particularly fixed investment, which recorded a real increase of 78.4%.
The cost of servicing the external public debt totalled US$ 872 million, 2.3% less than in 2004, thanks to the negotiation of maturities with the Paris Club, the London Club and sovereign bondholders.
Arrears in the servicing of external public debt were well down on 2004.
Monetary policy management resulted in the reduction of inflation to single digits.
The median rates of interest on zero-coupon certificates and on certificates directly sold to the public declined by 12 and 11 percentage points, respectively, to close at 13% and 12%.
The maturities of certificates, which stood at 30 days in early 2004, lengthened gradually to an average of 14 months at the start of 2006, which significantly changed the central bank’s maturity profile and lowered the cost of its liabilities, despite an increase of almost 30% in the balance of certificates.
Reflecting the lesser cost of interest payments, the quasi-fiscal deficit narrowed by one GDP percentage point, 0.2% of GDP more than expected.
Net international reserves in the central bank expanded by US$ 1.038 billion, exceeding the established target.
The downward trend in the interest rates on central bank certificates spilled over to bank rates.
With inflation falling, the real cost of money turned sharply positive: the real average annual lending rate was 17.9%, compared with -13.1% a year earlier, and the real deposit rate was Money expanded by 10.4% in real terms, which was consistent with the overall upturn in the economy and reflected the increase in sight deposits and cash in circulation.
Local-currency liquidity (M2) and broad liquidity recorded real increases of only 4.4%.
Commercial and consumer lending accounted for over half of this portfolio (55.1%), although loans for building and home buying grew at an extraordinary pace (annual rates of 68% and 210%, respectively), increasing their share from 5% to 9% of the total.
The peso’s tendency to appreciate, which had begun in the second half of 2004, reached an inflection point in August 2005 at around 29 pesos to the dollar.
From September 2005 onwards, the exchange rate moved gradually upwards to averages of over 33 pesos to the dollar and even, in the first two months of 2006, above 34 pesos to the dollar.
The result of these trends was a year-on-year depreciation of 11% in December 2005, but a 28.3% average appreciation of the real exchange rate. (d) Other policies In 2005 new regulations were put in place to enhance the oversight capacity of the Superintendence of Banks.
In 2006 a programme was launched to inspect the asset quality of full service banks.
The results of such inspections will form the mandatory basis for the preparation of financial statements.
In the energy sector, a contingency plan was created to improve the operational and financial management of distribution companies.
In view of the sector’s fragile financial position, the government proposed in 2006 to conduct a monthly performance evaluation in order to implement measures as required to offset the fiscal impact of any deviation, so that the non-financial public sector balance would not be affected.
The new Letter of Intent submitted to IMF in April 2006 includes a structural reform programme which, if approved by Congress, will modernize the institutional structures needed to process economic policy.
The economic recovery strengthened in 2005 with a higher-than-expected expansion of GDP (9.2%).
Per capita GDP grew by 7.6%, taking it almost four percentage points higher, in real terms, than it had been before the crisis of 2003.
This momentum carried over into the first quarter of 2006, with a rate similar to that recorded in the second half of 2005 (12.6%).
In 2005 private consumption was up by 11.7% after contracting the year before, and gross fixed investment rose by 12.2% after two straight years of shrinkage.
As a proportion of GDP, private consumption is now close to regaining pre-crisis levels, though the investment ratio is still more than six percentage points short of the 2001-2002 average.
In the first quarter of 2006 growth in investment began to gather strength, with a year-onyear rate of 26.6%.
If this trend continues, in 2006 the investment ratio should fully regain the ground lost.
Agriculture posted a positive growth rate (7.4%), more than triple the 2004 figure, which pushed the general production index above the level seen prior to the 2003 crisis.
This expansion was almost entirely attributable to livestock activities, which grew strongly (14.2%) for the second year running, boosted by official development programmes.
By contrast, crop-farming output contracted for the fourth year in a row.
The dip of 1.8% in 2005 reflected sharp downturns in sugar cane (12.6%) and cocoa (38.4%), which account for a large share of the total.
The fall in output of these two crops —and of others such as pineapples, oranges and beans–– was largely due to weather conditions.
Crop-farming output did, however, show clear signs of increasing as of the period July-September and into the first quarter of 2006 (with a 19% rise in volume).
Unless there are adverse weather conditions, in 2006 agriculture should enjoy a positive annual growth rate for the first time since 2002.
An overall increase of 7.9% was driven by local non-sugar industry, which was up by 8.5%.
The dynamic performance of manufacturing was directly liked to the upturn in domestic demand and the first-quarter data for 2006 suggest that performance will be good this year too.
Nationwide total. k Unemployment rate as a percentage of the economically active population, nationwide total. l 90-day certificates of deposit. m Average of the prime rate. n Includes grants. o The monetary figures are annual averages. p Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. of industrial inputs.
Although some of these problems persist, there are now clear signs of a recovery.
The end of the Multifibre Arrangement in January 2005 accounts to a large extent for the minus signs among the free zone production figures.
With the elimination of preferential access to the United States market, 56 textiles firms closed, while 15 firms in other lines of business were forced into liquidation by other types of problems.
Taking into account the establishment of 69 new firms (20 of them in the textile segment), the sector experienced a net loss of 17,900 jobs in 2005.
This segment of the Dominican economy does not appear to have finished adjusting to the new market conditions, judging by the 4.7% fall in its output in the first quarter of 2006.
The decline in nominal rates of interest and the price of some key inputs, combined with increases in mortgage loans and public works, fuelled an upturn in construction in 2005 (6.8%).
Driven by these same factors, the industry gathered further momentum in January-March 2006, when it recorded a year-on-year expansion of 31.8%.
In 2005 the communications sector made further gains on the rapid expansion seen in the preceding years, with an upswing of 22.2%.
This pattern has continued into 2006 with a real variation of 30.3% in the first quarter.
Production of electric power and water improved on the 2004 figures, with growth of 3.6% thanks to an upturn in generation capacity and despite a shortage of fuel and persistent technical problems in power plants.
Rising tourist numbers, combined with longer stays and higher average expenditure, made 2005 another year of expansion in the hotels, bars and restaurants sector.
Value added and foreign direct investment (FDI) were up by 6.8% and 132% on the respective 2004 figures in this branch of activity.
Tourist arrivals continued to increase in the first quarter of 2006 (8.8%), underpinning a positive outlook for the sector in the coming months.
With annual growth of 4.9%, the financial sector began to recover from the downturn of 2003 and stagnation of 2004.
In the first quarter of 2006 the volume of transactions conducted rose by a sharp 21.3%, consistently with the upturn in the wider economy.
Rising levels of economic activity, together with increased employment and purchasing power, helped to bring about an ample recovery in the commerce sector after the contraction of 2004.
The December-December rate of inflation was 7.4%, compared to 28.7% a year earlier.
The largest price hike occurred in transport services, with an annual variation of 24.7%.
By contrast, the index for goods, beverages and tobacco, which represent almost half of the consumer basket, recorded a small annual variation (0.5%), which helped to soften the impact of hydrocarbons on inflation.
The effect of international oil prices on the consumer price index continued to be felt strongly in 2006.
Cumulative inflation in the first four months of the year (2.12%) clearly indicated an upward pressure that will last for the rest of the year, suggesting that inflation will exceed the 2005 figure.
Not including oil, the rate of cumulative inflation for the first four months was 0.9%.
In 2005 the main labour market indicators stopped deteriorating and the employment survey conducted in October showed the broad unemployment rate declining, at 17.5%, compared with 19.7% a year earlier, which brought the annual average down from 18.4% to 18%.
Commerce and tourism generated the largest numbers of jobs; employment continued to contract in manufacturing and other services.
The consolidation of economic momentum in 2006 should stimulate an improvement in the basic labour market indicators.
After a series of nominal increases that started in late 2004, the average real minimum wage rose substantially across all sectors in 2005: almost 18% in the public sector, 10.5% e Average in the free zones and nearly 20% in the rest of the private sector.
This represented a break with three consecutive years of sharp declines, but real minimum wages are still below 2001 values.
After running a surplus for two years, the balanceof-payments current account reverted to a negative balance in 2005, moving from a surplus of 6.1% of GDP to a deficit of 0.5%.
This reflects an increase of US$ 1.529 billion on the trade deficit, equivalent to a variation of 78%.
Merchandise imports rose 21.9%, driven entirely by non-maquila activities, since free-zone imports contracted by 4.5%.
Consumer goods imports were up 44.2%, reflecting an upswing in personal consumption.
Imports of capital goods and of raw and intermediate materials also climbed strongly (29.9% and 30.6%, respectively).
A rise of 33% in international petroleum prices pushed the oil bill up by US$ 784 million.
In the first quarter of 2006, imports of raw materials increased by 15.8%, as a result of the sustained drive of domestic activity.
Three quarters of the US$ 197 million increase (3.3% up on 2004) came from national exports, of which a very large proportion were national goods bought by foreign tourists during their stay in the country.
Free-zone exports, which account for 77% of all merchandise exports, registered little variation (1.1%).
Textile manufactures, which represent two fifths of freezone exports, contracted sharply, by 10.2%.
National exports kept up the momentum in 2006 with a 22% climb in the first quarter.
The surplus on the services account increased by 8.9%, thanks to additional tourism revenues.
Family remittances continued to be an important source of income, standing at almost US$ 2.39 billion (8.1% more than the 2004 figure).
Remittances continued to expand in the first quarter of 2006, with a year-on-year increase of 14.3%, and are expected to keep up this pace for the rest of the year.
These funds went mainly to tourism, construction of new free zones and telecoms.
International reserves were boosted US$ 1.103 billion by the balance of payments, reaching US$ 1.843 billion at the end of 2005.
Guyana The adverse effects of the floods on Guyana’s main economic sectors, coupled with rising oil prices in international markets, resulted in a contraction in the country’s economy in 2005.
Nevertheless, the overall balance of payments showed a surplus equivalent to 1% of GDP, largely attributable to substantial capital inflows.
Fuelled by surging international oil prices and tight agricultural supply conditions in the domestic market, inflation trended upwards to 8.2% (compared with 5.5% in 2004).
Public sector wages were raised by 7% in 2005, which, given the inflation level, meant that real incomes declined marginally.
The public finance position weakened in 2005, reflecting the economic downturn combined with a broad public investment programme that encompassed reconstruction and rehabilitation following the flood damage and preparations for the Cricket World Cup.
The monetary policy stance was loosened early in the year, in order to stimulate credit demand for the financing of reconstruction work, but was later tightened to counter the expansion of liquidity in the system.
Economic activity is expected to recover in 2006, in spite of fresh flooding in the early part of the year, since the damage was less severe than that caused in 2005.
GDP is projected to grow by 4.3%, while inflation will be around 6%.
Public finances are expected to improve as growth in total revenues should exceed expansion in total expenditure.
The balance of payments will worsen to show an overall deficit of over US$ 6 million.
This expenditure went mainly to infrastructure work, modernization of the public sector and the economic rehabilitation following the floods of early 2005.
The poor performance of the non-financial public enterprises contributed significantly to the total deficit.
The increase in current expenditure from 32% of GDP in 2004 to 36% in 2005 was due to an expansion in purchases of goods and services, transfers to the Linden community and support to the rice industry.
Current revenues increased to 35.7% of GDP, reflecting improved tax administration and receipts.
The growth in domestic debt stemmed from sterilization operations, while the expansion in external debt reflected obligations contracted in order to finance the modernization programme of the State-owned Guyana Sugar Corporation (GUYSUCO) and the construction of the new cricket stadium.
In total, US$ 283 million in debt were written off. (b) Monetary and exchange-rate policies In 2005, monetary policy was aimed at achieving price and exchange-rate stability, while fostering privatesector credit to productive sectors to promote growth and employment.
During the year, the monetary base expanded owing mainly to the increase in net international assets (25% in 2005), since the central bank’s net domestic credit was flat.
The flow of remittances and official emergency assistance following the natural disaster account in part for the growth in net international assets.
This was reflected in an increase in the narrow and broad monetary aggregates (by 10.2% and 7.9%, respectively), as well as by increased liquidity in the commercial banking system (up by 48% in 2004, compared with 7% in 2005).
First, combined with rising oil prices, it generated stronger demand for foreign exchange, which forced the monetary authority to intervene in the foreign-exchange market.
Second, there was a stronger demand for low-risk financial instruments, such as treasury bonds, whose yield diminished as a result (from 3.79% at the end of December 2004 to 3.74% at the end of December 2005).
In turn, the lower yield of these instruments forced commercial banks to channel their resources towards alternative uses.
Thus, the average lending rate fell from 16.6% in 2004 Consistently with this trend, credit to the private sector expanded quite significantly (33.4%) as demand for loans from the productive sector and from private individuals rose in the wake of the flooding; in the former case for the rehabilitation of productive enterprises and in the latter for consumption.
Mortgage loans increased considerably as well, reflecting in part the flood damage caused to housing.
The increase in personal loans was driven by demand for consumer durables and other household goods.
The level of economic activity of the main productive sectors was severely hurt by the impact of the floods on the main productive sectors in the early part of the year.
Sugar production plummeted by 23.9%, while rice output showed a smaller reduction.
Another reason for the lower sugar output was the diminished sucrose content of the canes in the wake of the flood and this situation was compounded by strikes and worker absenteeism.
A significant part of the rice crop was lost to the floods, with some fields not harvested.
Gold declarations1 fell by over 27%, reflecting the depletion of reserves in the OMAI Gold Mines, which later shut down.
Increased output by individual operators seeking to capitalize on higher international gold prices was not enough to offset this downturn.
Diamond production was down by 21.5% owing to the temporary closure of mining operations because of the threat of flood-borne malaria, and to lower prices.
Manufacturing output declined by 14% in 2005, compared with an expansion of 2.5% in 2004, reflecting the sharp contraction in sugar production.
Other sectors, such as alcoholic beverages and paint production were up, but could not compensate for the lower sugar output.
Higher inflation in 2005 was due to domestic shortages following the floods, with a 7.8% rise in the cost of food, especially fresh fruits, vegetables, milk and meat products.
Transport and communications and housing prices also increased (by 13.8% and 11.6%, respectively), the former reflecting rising international oil prices and the latter, strong housing demand.
In an effort to contain demand for wage hikes, the government raised public sector wages by only 7%, slightly below inflation.
In the framework of public-sector restructuring and rationalization, employment in this sector declined by 1.7% in 2005.
Employment losses in public enterprises, including Guysuco (4.5%) and Aroaima Bauxite Company (9.8%) were offset by a 3.2% gain in the number of employees in the central government.
The overall balance of payments position improved significantly in 2005 to post a surplus of US$ 8 million, equivalent to 1% of GDP, compared with a deficit of US$ 43 million in 2004.
This outturn was facilitated by an upturn in capital inflows, associated with private investment, and by reduced debt payments.
The current account deteriorated, the structural deficit doubling to reach US$ 150 million (19.6% of GDP).
The current account was affected by the sharp rise in oil prices and the decrease in the quantity and value of commodity exports.
Export volumes were down for all the major commodities, except bauxite and timber.
Revenues from sugar exports contracted by 13.6% and those from exports of rice declined by 16.1%, in both cases as a result of the floods in the early part of the year.
The import bill increased by over 21%, reflecting higher oil prices, flood rehabilitation and the higher demand generated by an expanded infrastructure expansion programme, partly linked to the Cricket World Cup.
Imports of consumer goods increased significantly in response to rising demand in the wake of the flood.
Intermediate goods imports climbed strongly as a result of higher fuel prices.
A positive development was a 14.1% increase in imports of capital goods for capacity-building in mining and agriculture, which is important for future growth.
The services account deficit worsened again in 2005, while net factor service payments continued to decline, reflecting lower debt service payments thanks to forgiveness of part of the country’s liabilities.
Interest payments on public-sector and Bank of Guyana debt declined by US$ 0.5 million and US$ 1.9 million, respectively, in 2005.
Meanwhile, current transfers increased to US$ 167 million (21% of GDP), reflecting a strong increase in grants extended to mitigate some of the impacts of the flooding.
The surplus on the capital and financial account increased six-fold to stand at US$ 158 million or 20.6% of GDP.
This was partly due to the increase in private investment, larger disbursements on existing commitments and lower debt service payments.
Foreign direct investment stood at US$ 76.8 million, owing largely to capacitybuilding in mining and telecommunications, especially cellular telephony.
With the improvement in the balance of payments position, international reserves at the Bank of Guyana strengthened to US$ 251 million, equivalent to three months of import cover.
In 2006, the balance of payments position is expected to weaken, to yield an overall deficit of US$ 6.7 million.
The merchandise account will also deteriorate, since imports are expanding at a faster rate (4%) than exports (2.5%).
Gold revenues will decline owing to the closure of OMAI Gold Mines, the largest producer.
Imports are expected to expand owing to the continued rise in fuel costs and to expenditure on public infrastructure and private-sector projects.
The current account is also expected to show the effects of higher net payments for services and a fall-off in remittances, leading to a deficit of around US$ 199 million.
The overall balance-of-payments deficit will be financed by debt relief under the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative.
General trends1 Following two years of transitional government, the elections held in February and April 2006 heralded a more settled political and institutional situation, with René Garcia Préval sworn in as President in May and the formation of a new parliament.
Yet considerable challenges remain, particularly in terms of normalizing the social climate in a framework of justice and security, establishing a forum for national dialogue and building up the new authorities’ capacity to respond to the numerous long-deferred social demands.
The social peace plan announced by the new authorities consists of a set of emergency measures focused on humanitarian aid, job creation, basic public services (electricity, water and sanitation) and economic revival, with a view to dealing with unfinished business left over from the transitional period.
This will be funded by resources approved as part of the Haiti Interim Cooperation Framework (ICF), some of which have already been assigned to specific projects, although no disbursements have yet reached the stage of actual expenditure.
In 2005, GDP grew by only 1.8%, despite improvements in the benchmark indicators of macroeconomic equilibrium.
Inflation stood at 14.8%, the fiscal deficit narrowed to 0.5% of GDP and net international reserves amounted to US$ 68 million.
Two thirds of the way through the 2006 fiscal year, many question marks remain although the post-election political stabilization process, the new government and the programmes announced by the new authorities bode well for the rest of the year.
Uncertainty surrounds issues such as the source of additional funds for extending the ICF until December 2007, the scope of new cooperation agreements, the benefits of Haiti’s eligibility for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative (approved in April) and a possible Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF).
Despite the announced efforts to jump-start the economy immediately, current trends for the year point to a modest increase in GDP (2.5%) in a context of fiscal discipline, a stabilized exchange rate and relatively well-controlled inflation (15%).
The latter was arranged in January 2005, and a recent IMF assessment report suggests that it will be renewed until September 2006.
In order to access such programme benefits, however, the new authorities will have to follow precise guidelines.
In particular, they will have to comply with The analysis refers to fiscal year 2005 (October 2004-September 2005) and 2006 (October 2005-September 2006). a Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRS), ensure they are HIPC eligible and establish mechanisms for monitoring spending on poverty reduction.
According to the economic policy guidelines announced by the new President, the government’s main objective is to protect the achievements made in terms of macroeconomic and financial stabilization, and this will facilitate implementation of the EPCA programme.
This was largely due to a sharp drop in capital expenditure using national financing.
Indeed, capital expenditure in real terms amounted to less than half the previous year’s figure, because investment fell below the level originally provided for in the Economic Recovery Programme (PROREC), and the authorities actively tightened fiscal control.
However, this was partly offset by investments based on external financing, either in the form of budget support (donations) or in accordance with the Interim Cooperation Framework (ICF).
Total expenditure in real terms was down 4% as a result of lower capital expenditure.
The 9.1% rise in current expenditure (resulting from the 21% wage increase for civil servants) was mitigated by a substantial expansion of current revenues (11.5%), particularly from customs (7.7%).
Additional resources approved during the current fiscal year, including those from multilateral sources (the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the World Bank and the European Union) and bilateral sources (Canada and Spain), will provide the financial authorities with more room for manoeuvre in the rest of the year.
This should enable them to expedite expenditure on socio-economic programmes without jeopardizing the IMF-agreed targets in terms of budgetary and fiscal control.
The better-than-expected performance of fiscal revenues to March 2006 was mainly due to the widening of the corporate tax base.
The fiscal outcome was also improved because expenditure was delayed by hold-ups in obtaining certain external funds and by the limited absorptive capacity of the public sector.
This was despite the subsidy (approximately 1.30 billion gourdes) granted to the State electricity company, which did not benefit from “extraordinary donations” as in the previous financial year.
External budgetary financing required for the rest of the fiscal year will have to cover a shortfall of around US$ 18 million.
Both constitute very short-term challenges that the new authorities will have to overcome in consultation with international financial institutions and bilateral counterparts. (nominal rate of 18.9%) on the bonds of the Bank of the Republic of Haiti (BRH) in order to contain any surge in inflation.
The composition of reserve requirements (legal reserve 31%) in gourdes and foreign exchange was changed between February and May 2006 to free up more dollars on the market and reverse the depreciation of the exchange rate that had been observed at the beginning of the year.
By the third quarter of the 2006 fiscal year, a degree of stability had been achieved in terms of the exchange rate, which even appreciated in real terms.
However, there is concern surrounding the banking system’s arrears rate (nonperforming or delinquent loans as a percentage of the loan portfolio), which soared to 14.1% compared with 8.5% at the end of the previous fiscal year.
The increased availability of dollars in the economy has enabled BRH to build up reserves in excess of US$ 200 million (including foreign exchange deposits of commercial banks).
The Bank’s purchases of foreign exchange (US$ 42.3 million) contributed to this performance, which surpassed the targets agreed upon with IMF for the current fiscal year.
During the first nine months of the 2006 fiscal year, the average real exchange rate showed an appreciation of the gourde in a continuation of the trend observed during 2005 (real appreciation of 13%).
This was the result of the increased inflow of foreign exchange into the economy.
During 2005, a smaller monetary base (-2.9%) in real terms, stalled net domestic credit (0.9%) and other monetary indicators reflected a monetary policy stance that was generally tight, while designed to permit a certain degree of recovery.
Positive growth was recorded for M1 (7%) and M3 (7.8%), with the latter being due to the dramatic surge in foreign-exchange liquidity (18.6%).
Net domestic credit to the economy (29.6% of GDP) was down two percentage points on 2004, largely owing to the public sector component, which declined by 10% in real terms.
The authorities maintained high yields The standstill in per capita GDP (while overall GDP edged up by 1.8%), the chronic job creation deficit, the loss of purchasing power, international but mainly national volatility and a structural vulnerability based on the prevailing deep-seated inequality and inequity have hardly been conducive to getting the country back on track towards growth.
During 2005, low growth in agriculture (2.6%) and construction (3%) contributed to the small rise in GDP, and will probably once again be the main reasons for the predicted outcome for 2006 (2.5%).
In the manufacturing sector, the most noteworthy performer was the maquiladominated textile industry, with a 3.6% expansion (almost twice the 1.7% rate for the sector as a whole) and positive growth for the third year in a row.
Agriculture benefited from steady inflows of resources from commitments under the Haiti Interim Cooperation Framework (US$ 30 million) and from the public purse.
These resources were largely channelled towards recovering production supply and strengthening certain high-potential agricultural niches.
Within the latter, particularly impressive performances were turned in by maquila exports (33%) and mangos (15%).
During the first half of 2006, however, mango exports to the United States suffered a major decline in real terms (-69%).
Investment growth (1.4%) was less than expected due to delayed disbursements of external resources for public works.
The 2.2% rise in consumption was not enough to improve per capita consumption, which remained stagnant (0.4%).
In 2005, the hike in international petroleum prices pushed up hydrocarbon import prices by 44%, which in turn had a strong impact on various links in the price chain including transport (22%).
In March 2006, prices increases slowed, with hydrocarbon prices up by 18%, leading to an 11.3% rise in transport prices.
The cost of the basic basket of foodstuffs, on the other hand, continued to grow (16.7%) at almost the same rate as the previous year (18%).
In April 2006, annualized inflation was higher for imported basic foodstuffs (21.6%) than for those of national origin (15.2%).
Meanwhile, few job created, and they were temporary, unskilled and poorly paid, to boot.
This was a far cry from the expectations announced in the transitional government’s programmes.
In 2005, the balance of payments posted a current account surplus of US$ 67 million, or 1.5% of GDP.
Net inflows of remittances (US$ 925 million) and donations (US$ 212 million) successfully offset the US$ 1.034 billion trade deficit, which was largely caused by worsening terms of trade (-10.3%).
Forecasts for 2006 predict a similar pattern, resulting from two major constraints: the continuing rise in international hydrocarbon prices, and problems with availability of external resources.
Unlike in 2005, the capital account is nonetheless expected to reflect a net income of resources.
The main agricultural export products —mangos, essential oils, cocoa and coffee— accounted for only 15% of overall exports, totalling US$ 217 million (for the maquila industry, only value added is counted).
Maquila products remain the largest category of exports, representing US$ 155 million, 71% of the total.
Coffee exports declined despite favourable international prices, while export volumes rose for mangos (15%) and essential In the first half of 2006, there was a considerable reversal of the strong performance of the three main products, as mangos slumped by 70%, essential oils by 24% and cocoa by 16%.
Besides hydrocarbons (which make up 19% of the total), imports were concentrated on rice, wheat, chicken and dairy products, a subset that represents 40% of food imports and 10% of total imports.
The balance-of-payments financial account recorded net outflows of US$ 18 million, largely due to the US$ 70 million capital flight from the private banking system.
Disbursements resulting from external debt (US$ 98.1 million) were similar to payments for services (US$ 101.2 million).
Expectations of greater foreign investment were not generally fulfilled except in telecommunications, where a new mobile telephone company began operating in May 2006, competing directly with the two existing enterprises.
With the return to political normality, expectations for the rest of fiscal 2006 should largely reverse the situation that prevailed in 2005.
Most multilateral and bilateral financial institutions have expressed their commitment to provide increased resources.
IDB agreed to new loans totalling US$ 540 million over the next three years, US$ 140 million of which are part of new ICF commitments from July 2006 onwards.
The many donors showing their commitment to helping the new government deal with future challenges include the European Commission (20 million euros), the World Bank (US$ 20 million), Canada (US$ 48 million) and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID) (US$ 40 million).
These signals, while positive, will require the implementation in the medium term of additional measures such as debt relief schemes under the HIPC initiative and creditor programmes to grant forgiveness for more of Haiti’s external debt.
Jamaica maintained modest growth (1.4% in 2005, compared with 0.9% in 2004 and) due to the negative impact that rising international petroleum prices and natural disasters have had on production.
Growth was led by buoyant tourism, construction and mining sectors, while manufacturing and agriculture contracted.
This sluggish economic growth —coupled with the fall in government income in the wake of hurricanes and the partial implementation of a tax reform package— caused a reduction in the tax burden that prevented the government from balancing its fiscal accounts.
Nevertheless, efforts to control expenditure enabled the government to reduce its overall fiscal deficit from 4.8% of GDP in 2004 to This performance is partly attributable to the reduction of interest rates resulting from the stance taken by the monetary authorities during the first half of the year.
In the second half of the year, a rise in inflation expectations forced the authorities to act with greater caution in order to maintain the stability of prices and the exchange rate.
The overall result of the balance of payments was positive, which swelled the stock of international reserves.
The current account deficit, which widened owing to In 2005, economic policy was centered on the reduction of the public debt.
This entailed adopting an expansionary monetary policy (which was called into question because it triggered a rise in inflation) and containing the expansion of the public wage bill. rising petroleum prices and decreased earnings for certain traditional export products, was amply offset by the surplus in the capital and financial account.
The surplus is attributable partly to increased inflows of foreign direct investment in the tourism and mining sectors, and partly to the rise in official flows resulting from the placement of Eurobonds on the international market.
The forecast for 2006 is 2.8% growth on the back of a rebounding agricultural sector, the continued dynamism of mining and tourism and 9% inflation.
The government intends to continue focusing its efforts on reducing the fiscal deficit and the public debt, the latter being one of the main obstacles to Jamaica’s medium- and long-term development.
The fiscal objectives are based on expectations of stronger growth, a favourable international climate, an expansionary monetary policy and the renewal of the Memorandum of Understanding between the government and the Confederation of Trade Unions.
The fiscal year runs from April 1 to March 31 of the following year.
Includes hidden unemployment; nationwide total. l Average rates. m Includes grants. n Includes statistical discrepancy. o The monetary figures are annual averages. p Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other partially neutralized by the reduction of the tax effort from 27% of GDP in 2004 to 25.6% in 2005.
The deficit was financed through two Eurobond issues amounting to US$ 550 million: one with maturities of 10 years and a rate of return of 9%, and the other with a 20-year maturity and a 9.2% rate of return.
First, inflows were interrupted by external shocks (in particular natural disasters), and this had a negative effect on tax receipts.
Second, the authorities were unable to put into effect all the tax measures contemplated in the Report of the Tax Policy Review Committee (November 2004).
The measures included increases in the income tax threshold, the general consumption tax (from 15% to 16.5%), taxation on the tourism sector and the special consumption tax, plus a reduction in the corporate income tax.
Third, the decrease in interest payments and wage payments and the increase in the income tax threshold diminished receipts for taxes on interest and pensions.
Lastly, revenues from the special consumption tax dropped owing to the closure of Jamaica’s only cigarette factory.
The total expenditure result was attributable to the contraction of current expenditure, since capital expenditure increased due to reconstruction efforts aimed at alleviating the destructive effects of recent natural disasters.
In the case of wages, this was primarily due to compliance with the Memorandum of Understanding between the government and the unions, which seeks to freeze the wage bill.
The government’s fiscal efforts, coupled with a strategy aimed at financing its fiscal deficit through fixed-rate bonds with longer maturity periods, helped to reduce the public debt balance from 143% of GDP in For 2006, the government predicts a fiscal deficit of 2% of GDP.
The government and unions are considering a new wage agreement that includes a wage bill increase of between 13% and 26%.
In the first half of the year, favourable external conditions enabled the Bank of Jamaica to increase its stock of net international reserves and adopt an expansionary monetary stance, lowering interest rates on its main instruments.
Returns on reverse repo bonds fell three times in a row during the year, with a total reduction of 120 basis points for 30-day bonds 190 basis points for 365-day bonds.
The Bank of Jamaica operated with greater caution in the second half of the year.
During this period, natural disasters and high petroleum prices put pressure on financial and goods markets.
Expectations of lower yields prompted investors to avoid potential capital losses by seeking refuge in instruments indexed to inflation.
The Bank of Jamaica abstained from reducing interest rates and intervened in the exchange market to curb the excess demand for foreign exchange.
It also mopped up some of the domestic liquidity by means of sterilization operations.
The consequent reduction in net foreign and domestic assets resulted in a reduction of the monetary base.
Between February and December, the weighted average rate of return on treasury bonds dropped from 13.83% to 13.34% for three-month bonds and from 14.4% to 13.55% for six-month bonds.
The weighted commercial bank lending rate fell from 5.3% to 4.9% in real terms.
The drop in the interest rates of commercial banks resulted in a rise in demand for credit (from 0.5% in 2004 to 3.2% in 2005).
Demand for loans was driven primarily by tourism (23%), construction (6%), and transport and communications (5%).
The nominal exchange rate depreciated by 4% between December 2004 and December 2005, in line with the downward trend in interest rates, which was in turn counteracted by central bank interventions in the foreign-exchange market.
Mining, construction and tourism were the most dynamic sectors, while agriculture and manufacturing turned in sluggish performances.
Agriculture contracted by 8.9% in 2004 and 7.3% in 2005, owing primarily to adverse climate conditions and, to a lesser extent, rising production costs.
The sector is expected to rebound in 2006 by 3% as it recovers from the destructive effects of natural disasters.
The poor performance of manufacturing (down 1% in 2005, compared with an increase of 3% in 2004) is attributable to the closure of the Petrojam petroleum refinery, the effects of flooding and rising production costs resulting from high international petroleum prices.
A decline of 1.3% is expected for 2006 as a result of rising petroleum prices, an unstable industrial climate, the closing of the only cigarette factory in the country and a diminishing supply of cement.
In the mining sector (up 2.6% in 2004 and 2.8% in 2005), the positive effect of the expansion in bauxite production (6.2%) was partially offset by the slower growth in alumina production (1.6%).
Bauxite benefited from an increase in production capacity, while alumina production suffered from the destruction caused by natural disasters and labour unrest.
Expansion in the construction sector (up 5% in 2004 and 7% in 2005) was fuelled by reconstruction activities, robust tourism and increased public spending on infrastructure.
The current economic growth rate for the sector is expected to carry over into 2006 despite constraints affecting the cement industry.
Growth in the tourism sector (up 4.6% in 2004 and 3.4% in 2005) slowed due to cooling external demand and the effects of natural disasters.
Natural disasters in other countries, however, had the positive effect of directing tourism toward destinations located in Jamaica.
Inflation fell slightly, but remained in double digits responded partly to external shocks such as rising international fuel prices, increased food prices and the effects of natural disasters.
They were also attributable to the rise in controlled prices, including increases in the minimum wage, the rates for general and special consumption taxes and public transport fares.
A breakdown of the consumer price index (CPI) reveals that the categories posting the most significant increases were food and beverages and transport, which represented 59% and 13% of total price movements respectively.
The minimum wage rose by 20% in January of that year, and an amendment to the Memorandum of Understanding between the government and unions was also approved.
The amendment includes the payment of a temporary allowance (from 19 September 2005 to 31 March 2006) to compensate government employees for lost purchasing power.
The unemployment rate fell relative to the previous reflected reductions in male and female unemployment rates (the former falling from 7.9% in 2004 to 7.6% in 2005, Projections for 2006 suggest a return to single-digit inflation.
This prediction is based on the standardization of agriculture prices and the adoption of a prudent monetary policy.
The possibility of future hikes in international petroleum prices and the wage increases being contemplated in the Memorandum of Understanding may jeopardize this goal.
The global balance registered a positive result, as the widening of the current account deficit (from 6% of GDP in 2004 to 10% in 2005) was amply offset by the surplus in the capital and financial account.
Consequently, net international reserves expanded (from 21.1% of GDP in The performance of the current account is due mainly to the widening of the deficits on the trade balance and the income account.
The trade balance result (-US$ 1.945 billion in 2004 and -US$ 2.587 billion in 2005) reflected expanding imports of petroleum, chemicals and agricultural commodities resulting from the rise in the prices of these products on international markets.
Exports expanded only slightly, as the increase in external sales of bauxite and alumina (23% and 13%, respectively) was partially offset by the contraction in sugar and bananas (down 22% and 63%, respectively).
The number of long-stay visitors grew by 4.5%, while the number of cruise ship passengers grew by 3%.
Factors contributing to this performance included the increased capacity of air transport, rising hotel capacity, marketing efforts by the authorities and the redirecting of visitors toward Jamaica in the face of natural disasters that struck other tourist destinations.
The negative income balance result (-US$ 583 million and -US$ 637 million in 2004 and 2005, respectively) reflect increased debt-servicing payments (US$ 66 million) and profit repatriation outflows.
Suriname The indicators show a good level of macroeconomic stability in Suriname.
GDP looks set to continue its rapid growth, driven by high commodity export prices and rising foreign direct investment in mining.1 President Venetiaan was re-elected in August 2005 for a second consecutive five-year term, and the new Government’s objectives are to strengthen economic strategy, reform the public sector and pave the way for poverty reduction.
By law, the Multiannual Development Plan must be approved by the National Assembly before the first annual budget may be submitted.
The plan was sent to the Assembly in June 2006, so the Government is operating on an extended 2005 budget.
Meanwhile, the country is enjoying a degree of fiscal and monetary stability, The most complex issue facing the new Government relates to the size, functions and efficiency of the public sector.
A draft of the five-year plan dated March 2006 acknowledges that 40% of the economically active population is employed by the State and that the efficiency of public services is unsatisfactory.
Social subsidies and transfers weigh heavily on the budget but fail to target the most vulnerable groups.
Lastly, the existence of many of the State-owned corporations (which number more than 100) has been called into question.
Three Inter-American Development Bank projects are under way to address public-sector reform. thanks to a conservative approach to spending and increased revenues.
Heavy rainfall in May 2006 caused rivers in the south to burst their banks.
This natural disaster, unusual in Suriname, reflected the lack of development in the interior of the country and the plight of indigenous and Maroon communities.
In the field of economic policy, the private sector should promote growth and job creation.
The Caribbean Single Market and Economy (CSME) took effect on 1 January 2006, but the private sector is showing little interest.
A new investment law has been adopted, in order to harmonize conditions within CARICOM and improve the investment climate.
The Suriname Debt Management Office (SDMO), which began operating in 2004, has improved the transparency of information on public debt, and this has strengthened the country’s position in international credit ratings.
Preparations are under way for negotiations on arrears on certain bilateral loans, which have been detrimental to the country’s access conditions for entering international capital markets.
In 2005 the overall fiscal deficit widened by 1.3 percentage points to 2.1% of GDP.2 Despite strict control of public-sector employment and wages, higher spending on goods and services more than offset the growth of tax receipts.
The budget for 2006 anticipates a still higher deficit, but actual spending, particularly capital spending, usually falls well short of what is planned.
Fiscal revenue will continue to depend mainly on the prices of commodities such as bauxite, alumina, gold and oil.
In 2005, the State Oil Company of Suriname (Staatsolie) contributed US$ 80 million to the treasury, almost 17% of total revenue and about three times the previous year’s amount.
Another factor in the vulnerability of fiscal revenues as of September 2005 was the fuel taxing mechanism.
Fixed retail price for fuels were in place, and had not been revised since March 2003.
Distribution margins were also fixed, and the difference between costs and the retail price accrued to the Government.
This represented a positive contribution to the State, equivalent to 4% of GDP in 2003; by mid-2005, however, rising fuel costs meant that the Government was no longer receiving revenue from that tax, but paying a subsidy equivalent to 1% of GDP.
In September 2005, the new Government was forced to double domestic fuel prices, and in December 2005 a new pricing and taxation mechanism came into effect.
In the area of fiscal policy, the five-year plan’s main proposals on the revenue side relate to the creation of a Tax Authority and the introduction of value-added tax instead of the sales tax.
Fiscal expenditure rose by more than one percentage point of GDP owing to the strong increase (2.2 percentage points of GDP) in spending on goods and services, for which the authorities have offered no explanation.
Expenditure on public-sector wages and social subsidies did not grow as fast as GDP; they have not been adjusted since late 2004, except for the introduction of an allowance to compensate for increased fuel prices.
The current-account fiscal balance is still positive, but less so than in previous years.
The global deficit is due to increased capital spending and diminishing grants, and was financed by the issue of treasury bonds.
The 2002 legislation on public debt established a ceiling of 15% of GDP for domestic public debt, but the actual ratio is higher (15.6% according to ECLAC estimates) and is trending The fiscal data are preliminary, and GDP figures are only projections. upwards.
Since the external debt has practically not increased, total public debt as a percentage of GDP has been declining rapidly in recent years.
Monetary policy has been aimed at providing liquidity in response to the needs of the economy.
In this context, the draft five-year plan provides for a maximum M2/GDP ratio of 25%.
Monetary policy was expansionary in terms of the local-currency market, but not in foreign currency.
The cash reserve requirement in local currency was lowered from 30% to 27%, and the part of that requirement that may be fulfilled with long-term mortgage loans for social housing was expanded from 7% to 8%.
Consequently, domestic credit to the private sector increased by almost one percentage point of GDP.
In foreign currency, however, reserve requirements were increased from Treasury bonds have become an instrument of monetary policy.
The draft fiveyear plan proposes the establishment of an auction system for treasury bonds, to improve the functioning of the domestic capital market.
As for its exchange-rate policy, Suriname has moved closer to a fixed exchange-rate system.
The authorities increased the exchange rate from 2.75 to 2.78 Surinamese dollars to the United States dollar, and imposed a “code of conduct” instructing exchange houses not to exceed a rate of SRD 2.80.
This exchange-rate policy is intended to restore public confidence in the national currency and contain inflationary expectations. (c) Other policies The March 2006 draft of the five-year plan offers a gamut of policy proposals.
Together with sectoral plans to channel and coordinate international aid, such as the “Vision 2020” project, a medium- and long-term development strategy is emerging based around the Millennium Development Goals.
In the energy sector, electricity prices do not cover the cost of production, so resources for investment and maintenance are scarce.
A national energy advisory committee was established in January 2006 to review the pricing policy.
The transport and communications sector has seen positive developments, mostly owing to intensifying regional and international integration.
The Government has pledged to build roads in the interior of the country during the five-year planning period, as well as improving land transport linkages with South America.
An integrated master plan for the development of waterways has also been announced.
In addition, an air transport authority will be set up and the air travel sector will be further liberalized.
As of 1 May 2006, the air route between Amsterdam and Paramaribo was opened up to competition.
A new draft mining law was submitted to the National Assembly, providing for increased taxation, shortened concession periods, and a reduction of maximum concession areas.
A Minerals Institute will be established, to guide policy in the sector.
A figure of about 6.4% is expected for 2006, depending on fluctuations in commodity export prices.
International prices for oil, gold and alumina continued their upward trend in 2005.
The first half of 2006 should see increased exploration activities, greater demand for mining-related services and higher tax revenue.
Gold production at Cambior’s Gross Rosebel mine was 25% higher and, in January 2005, the Suriname Aluminum Company (Suralco) boosted its capacity by 15% by expanding the alumina refinery in Paranam.
Service sectors showed considerable growth, boosted by the strong performance of the commodities sector.
Projections from the National Planning Office show that after mining (15.4%), the sectors with the strongest growth were transport and communications (10.6%) and construction (10.3%).
Prospects vary for these sectors: the rice industry is looking at a new organizational setup based on commodity boards (productschappen), and solutions are being considered for the debts inherited from the former State company.
Rice production was down 18% in the last four months of 2005, compared with the same period in 2004.
The privatization of the banana company is pending confirmation of new arrangements for accessing the European market.
In the same four months, production was up 50% compared with the year-earlier period.
The fisheries sector, which includes shrimp fisheries, has been going through a severe crisis (-9%), owing to high fuel costs, obsolete equipment and inadequate organizational and regulatory structures.
The number of visitors to the country rose by 20% in the first seven months of 2005 compared with the same period in 2004, but the emerging ecotourism sector was hit by the floods that struck the country in May 2006.
Since January 2006, however, public servants have been receiving a bonus to compensate for rising fuel prices.
The average gross labour cost per worker for large employers, including State bodies, was 18% higher from May to August 2005 than in the same period in 2004.
Wages in the banking sector climbed steeply, and other upswings are reported in insurance companies and hotels and restaurants.
In his New Year speech, the President mentioned a figure of 8% for unemployment in 2005.
Such a figure would be very close to the 8.4% rate recorded in 2004.
The current-account deficit (US$ 144 million) was mostly due to the deficit in the services account (US$ 148 million), made up of the deficit on the transport services account (US$ 65 million) and on the other services account (US$ 111 million), which relates to mining industry operations.
The income account remained negative owing to the repatriation of mining-industry profits.
The difference was due to rising commodity prices and the beginning of operations at the large-scale gold mine at Rosebel.
On the one hand, the country’s exports are very importintensive and, on the other, imports were affected by rising oil prices because Suriname depends on a number of types of imported fuel.
Arrears on the servicing of certain large bilateral loans have had a negative effect on the country’s rating with international credit agencies.
Net international reserves were up by US$ 19 million, although import coverage remained below the two-month mark.
The economic growth rate in Trinidad and Tobago remained high, as in the previous year (6.5% and 7% in 2004 and 2005, respectively), helped by the strong performance of the energy sector.
The upward trend in oil prices had a positive impact on construction, manufacturing, government revenue and external sales.
The government increased its fiscal surplus (2.5% and 5.5% in 2004 and 2005, respectively) thanks to a marked increase in tax revenue from oil companies, and this helped to finance higher public spending.
The fiscal surplus was used to create a petroleum stabilization fund to protect the economy from fluctuations in world oil prices.
Increased liquidity resulting from higher foreign exchange inflows, increased public expenditure and rising inflation (5.6% and 7.2% in 2004 and 2005, respectively) led the authorities to adopt a contractionary policy.
The central bank based its policy mainly on the discount rate, complementing it with open-market operations.
The overall balance of the external sector was positive (6% and 13.7% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively), which boosted international reserves.
The current-account surplus, strengthened by exports of oil and petroleum products, was accompanied by a downturn in the capital and financial account deficit.
Central government showed a higher positive balance than in the previous year thanks to increased current income (29% and 35% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively), which exceeded the rise in public spending (26% and 29% of GDP).
Increased State revenue was mostly due to the positive impact of rising oil prices.
On the other hand, tax receipts from the non-energy sector stagnated, and this situation is expected to worsen as a result of the Government’s tax reforms, which came into effect in 2006 and have led to significant cuts for most taxpayers.
Among other things, the reforms involve increased personal allowances and tax exemptions.
A single rate of 25% was introduced for individuals’ incomes, and the rate for legal persons was cut from 30% to 25%, except for petrochemical and energy companies, which will continue to be taxed at 33% and 55%, respectively.
As of 1 January 2006, small and medium-sized enterprises may, in certain circumstances, benefit from a five-year tax exemption regime.
The growth of overall spending was mostly influenced by increases in transfers and subsidies (11% and 13% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively) and capital expenditure (2.1% and 3.4%).
Resources allocated to transfers and subsidies, amounting to half the total, were mostly spent on reforming State-owned corporations and improving their infrastructure.
Nationwide total. l Unemployment rate as a percentage of the economically active population.
Nationwide total. m Weighted average. n Includes interest. o The monetary figures are annual averages. p Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. remained at the previous year’s levels.
To enhance spending capacity and efficiency, many State-owned corporations were created or strengthened.
These include the Urban Development Corporation of Trinidad and Tobago Limited (UDeCOTT), which is involved in a number of projects.
Other recently-established corporations include the Educational Facilities Company Limited (March 2005), responsible for building schools, and the Rural Development Company of Trinidad and Tobago Limited (May 2005), which is mostly involved in public investment projects in rural areas.
The growing fiscal imbalance in the non-energy sector is giving rise to increasing concern.
If oil is excluded from Government accounts, the fiscal balance is strongly negative (-8% and -11% of GDP for 2004 and 2005, respectively).
The non-energy fiscal deficit will grow still further when measures to reduce the tax burden for the non-energy sector come into force and fiscal expenditure on development projects is increased.
This will greatly increase the dependency of spending and of the overall orientation of fiscal policy on the surplus generated by the energy sector. commercial banks’ nominal interest rates, in real interest rates, which actually fell, and in demand for credit, which grew, mostly owing to rising demand for personal loans.
Monetary policy had a limited impact in terms of controlling liquidity and inflationary expectations, but it boosted demand for long-term government bonds.
Investors showed a preference for six- and twelve-month bonds rather than the more usual three-month ones, and this steepened the yield curve for such investments.
On the foreign-exchange market, the pressure for devaluation increased because of higher demand for foreign exchange resulting from the narrowing of the gap between internal and external interest rates, rising prices, stronger demand for imported construction materials, and foreigncurrency purchases.
The central bank intervened heavily, given its high level of reserves, and was able to protect the stability of the nominal exchange rate (6.29 and 6.33 Trinidad and Tobago dollars for one United States dollar).
Nonetheless, the real exchange rate rose because of the increased price differential between tradables (external inflation) and non-tradables (internal inflation). (c) Other policies The country’s economy showed a considerable increase in liquidity in 2005, mostly owing to rising international reserves and the monetization of oil revenue, which were reflected in expansion of the monetary base and money supply.
Growing liquidity, inflationary pressure, the narrowing of the gap between internal and external interest rates and the resulting pressure on the foreign-exchange market, and the scarcity of certain foodstuffs led the monetary authorities to adopt a contractionary policy.
As a result, the central bank applied eight 25-basis-point increases to its benchmark rate, bringing it up from 5% in early 2005 The central bank strengthened its monetary position by means of open-market operations in local and foreign currency, in order to sterilize liquidity.
In keeping with that measure, it abolished the interest rate for bank deposits with the central bank, seeking to deter the placement of commercial banks’ excess liquidity in that type of deposits and encouraging them to purchase central bank securities.
The legal reserve requirement was not reduced as had been planned for 2005, but remained at 11%.
Lastly, in December, the central bank adopted an unusual measure, requiring the commercial banks to deposit one billion Trinidad and Tobago dollars (TT$) in a one-year interest-bearing account.
These measures, however, were not sufficient to decisively influence fluctuations in the range of the The authorities hope to make Trinidad and Tobago a regional financial centre.
Owing to the banking crises of the past, it is recognized that achieving that goal will require the regulation of the financial system to adapt to the rapid development of local financial activities in recent years.
In 2005, efforts continued to strengthen the financialsector supervision and regulation regime in order to improve compliance with international standards and best practices.
One of the pillars of the regulatory reform is the replacement of regulation based on compliance with established standards and auditing services with a system based on risk estimation.
This would aim to identify as quickly as possible the early signs of potential problems in financial institutions, and to restrict their spread to other institutions in the sector.
The Financial Institutions Act, 1993, has been amended in order to centralize the regulatory function, the promotion of financial efficiency and the prevention of unfair practices.
The monetary authorities are also taking measures to ensure that the commercial banks comply with the Basel Core Principles, including the changes to regulatory and supervisory frameworks, in preparation for the signature of the New Basel Capital Accord (Basel II).
The central bank also has the power to supervise financial conglomerates engaging in interlinked transactions, and ensure improved supervision of insurance companies and non-banking financial institutions, particularly credit unions.
As of 2005, insurance companies are required to produce quarterly reports, and guidelines were adopted for the financing of pension funds and the presentation of their financial statements.
All this is essential to prevent any mismatch of assets and liabilities, and inappropriate risks which might affect consumers.
As for the capital market, the Securities Industry Act has been updated to bring the regulatory system into line with international standards, and an independent credit rating agency has been established.
Subsequently, in 2005, a clearing house was set up to process high-volume electronic payments.
The economic growth rate in Trinidad and Tobago was similar to the previous year’s (6.5% and 7% in 2004 and 2005, respectively).
The energy sector was the main engine of growth, contributing over 40% of the country’s GDP.
The energy sector (8% in 2004 and 11% in 2005) benefited from rising world oil prices and expanding production capacity, with the launching in 2005 of the world’s biggest methanol plant (leading to a 38% increase in methanol exports), and Atlantic LNG’s fourth naturalgas plant.
Trinidad and Tobago is currently the world’s fifth largest exporter of liquefied natural gas (LNG).
Lastly, a new discovery of crude oil reserves boosted the production rate (17% in 2005).
Manufacturing was strengthened by growing demand for cement from the construction sector, whose growth figure of 8.1% was due to increased private- and publicsector spending, especially through expansion in productive capacity in the energy sector and in infrastructure.
The sugar subsector, however, lost about 25% for raw sugar and 15% for refined sugar, and citrus fruits slumped by 35%.
The agricultural sector was faced with rising production costs, adverse weather conditions which hit the sugar industry hardest, and technical difficulties.
This trend was due to increased liquidity, rising world oil prices, insufficient supply of certain staple foods, and rising demand for cement in the construction sector.
A breakdown of the consumer price index shows that the most significant increase was in the food component, making up 70% of the total.
The unemployment rate dipped slightly (8.4% and 8.0% in 2004 and 2005, respectively), reflecting the upswing of employment in certain sectors such as construction and energy.
This improvement made up for falls in other activities, including manufacturing (with the adoption of more capital-intensive methods) and agriculture.
The labour force participation rate rose from 63% in 2004 to The overall balance of payments result was positive, and higher than the 2004 figure.
The current-account respectively) more than made up for the deficit on the capital and financial account (11% and 1% of GDP).
The performance of the current account was basically due to rising exports of goods and, more specifically, to increases in both the price and the volume of the country’s main exports (31%, 15% and 38% for crude oil, petroleum products and methanol, respectively).
Imports rose by 17%, mainly owing to economic growth, especially rising demand for raw materials and intermediate goods.
The balance of the capital and financial account was due to reduced net flows from commercial banking and regional bond issues, and net foreign direct investment remained stagnant.
Turks and Caicos Islands1 In 2005, the Turks and Caicos Islands turned in a strong performance with growth of 12% (compared to 11.6% in 2004).2 The economy was driven by tourism, which is the mainstay of the economy.
The expansion of the tourism industry was a catalyst for the other sectors, especially construction and communications and, to a lesser extent, manufacturing.
The authorities managed to reduce the fiscal deficit from 3.6% of GDP in fiscal 2004 to 1% in fiscal 20053 despite unforeseen increases in expenditure on health and education.
The deficit was financed with external resources, which led to an increase in the external debt stock.
The balance of payments posted a positive result, both in the current account and in the capital account.
The current account surplus was due to the increase in tourism income, which amply compensated for the significant rise in the energy bill.
The trend in the capital and financial account reflected larger flows of foreign direct investment and official aid.
The government reduced its fiscal deficit, thanks to the significant increase in current income, from 24% of GDP in fiscal 2004 to 28% in fiscal 2005.
This result was due to the rise in the collection of revenues from import duties, stamp duties, work permits and residency fees, as well as the high level of economic growth, the buoyancy of the tourism sector and the increase in commercial and residential construction.
In 2006, the authorities hope to maintain the current economic growth and inflation rates (11% and 3.5%, respectively).
Projections include an increase in the fiscal deficit to a figure close to 4% of GDP and a public debt stock of 25% of GDP.
One of the government’s main medium- and long-term goals is to diversify productive activity (which hitherto has been concentrated geographically in Providenciales Island) in order to achieve more balanced economic development and to create a stable framework that will be conducive to tourism development and will help to attract adequate inflows of foreign exchange.
Government expenditure, which was equivalent to 25% of GDP, climbed by 17% in 2005 owing to the increase in overseas medical costs, student grants and disbursements relating to public security, which amounted to 70% of current expenditure for fiscal 2005.
The government increased the police budget by 50%, police wages rose by 30% and 40 new officers were recruited.
Fiscal accounts will probably show a deficit equivalent to 4% of GDP in fiscal 2006.
The government plans to In its resolution 628(XXXI), ECLAC granted the Turks and Caicos Islands the status of associated member of the Commission.
Includes hidden unemployment. f Includes grants. g The monetary figures are annual averages. h Refers to net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. raise its tax revenues by 20%.
The main sources, which account for 58% of tax receipts, include import fees, stamp duties on transactions, hotel taxes and fees for work permits.
Expenditure will probably increase by 40% owing to outlays on health and education.
The public debt stock represented 17% of GDP in fiscal 2005, with maturities ranging between 12 and 15 years and a fixed interest rate.
The debt servicing and net debt ratios in relation to GDP were lower than the limits agreed upon between the Government of the Turks and Caicos Islands and the United Kingdom in 2002 (8% and 80%, respectively).
In 2006, public debt is expected to reach 25% of GDP, in line with the planned expansion of expenditure.
The economy maintained its high growth rate thanks to the buoyancy of tourism, construction and telecommunications.
With regard to expenditure, consumption and gross capital formation accounted for the bulk of economic growth (amounting to 60% and The expansion of tourism (15% in 2005 compared with 6.5% in 2004) reflected an increase in air transport capacity, improved marketing initiatives and higher levels of investment in ports and infrastructure.
Higher numbers of cruise ship arrivals and long-stay tourists were also recorded (increases of 6% and 16% in 2004 and 2005, respectively).
Hotel occupancy rates showed a rising trend in 2005 and were over 65% on average.
As part of the continuing effort to develop the tourism sector, the government completed the construction of the first cruise-ship port in the Islands, which will be operational in the first half of 2006.
In 2006, the authorities projected a growth rate of 18% for the sector and an increase of 20% in tourist arrivals.
The main goods-producing sector, fishing, moderated its growth rate, which was 8% in 2005 compared with 16% in 2004.
This was attributable to the decline in the volume of lobster and conch catches, which were down by 13% and 7%, respectively, between January-October 2004 and January-October 2005.
These items account for 55% and 45% of total exports of goods.
The performance of the fishery sector was hurt by illegal fishing practices, which are a cause of concern to the authorities in view of their detrimental effect on marine resources.
An additional 5% drop in the growth rate for this activity is forecast for 2006.
Construction, which grew by 28% and 25% in 2004 and 2005, respectively, benefited from the expansion of the tourist sector and from public spending on infrastructure works, health and sports.
An increase of 8% is projected for 2006 thanks to the completion of a number of infrastructure projects.
The telecommunications industry returned to its past trend and expanded by 8% in 2005, following an unprecedented upswing of 25% in 2004, owing to the expectations created by the imminent liberalization of the sector in 2005.
During the year, four new telecommunications licenses were issued, which put an end to the monopoly within that sector.
Greater competition has brought lower prices and more efficient provision of services.
The financial sector expanded by 24% and 19% in 2004 and 2005, respectively, as a result of greater confidence in the economy, increased capital flows and product diversification.
In December 2005, the country opened its first locally-owned bank, which increased the number of financial institutions to seven.
The inflation rate rose from 3.3% in 2004 to 3.7% in 2005, mainly as a result of the rise in international oil prices and, to a lesser extent, the higher cost of construction materials and food items.
Price rises were tempered, however, by the drop in the cost of telecommunications services.
For 2006, the government plans a restructuring of public-sector employment, which will include a reclassification of existing posts.
As a result, a retroactive increase effective as of April 2006 is expected in the wage levels for reclassified posts.
The public sector is the largest employer in the Turks and Caicos Islands and accounts for over one third of the workforce.
During the year, 159 new posts were created, which represents an increase of 6% in relation to the previous year.
The expansion of public employment benefited the police force, the immigration department and health facilities, which received 26%, 19% and 9% of the total, respectively.
In 2006, the authorities plan to increase the number of work permits by 6% in order to alleviate the current labour shortage.
The external sector posted a positive result, as both the current account and the capital and financial account recorded surpluses.
These results also helped to increase the country’s stock of international reserves.
The decline in the current account surplus from 20% of GDP in 2004 to 7% in 2005 was basically the result of the increase in merchandise imports from 52% to 62% of GDP for those same years.
The boom in external purchases was a response to the buoyancy of the economy, especially tourism and construction, as well as the rise in international oil prices, construction materials and food items.
Non-factor services registered a surplus equivalent to 75% of GDP, as in 2004, thanks to the increase in passenger flows.
As in previous years, this offset the structural deficit in the trade balance for goods, which was 43% and 51% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively.
The capital and financial account balance, which rose from 35% of GDP in 2004 to 45% in 2005, reflected official aid and foreign direct investment in the tourism sector amounting to US$ 222 million, as well as the increase in external borrowing.
In 2006, the country is expected to post a surplus on its overall balance of payments as a result of surpluses on its current account and its capital and its financial account of 12% and 45% of GDP, respectively, while a deficit equivalent to 57% of GDP is forecast for the trade balance.
Some economies took advantage of increased tax revenues while controlling expenditure in order to close the fiscal gap (Anguilla, Dominica, Montserrat, and Saint Kitts and Nevis).
Others chose instead to raise public expenditure in order to improve their infrastructure and basic services and stimulate economic growth by increasing aggregate demand (Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Lucia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines).
The overall result of the balance of payments was negative, as the current-account deficit was greater than the The OECS member States reduced the government deficit from 6.0% of GDP in 2004 to 5.7% in 2005.3 The fiscal performance varied between countries, however, as the fiscal gap closed in Anguilla, Dominica, Montserrat surplus in the capital and financial account.
The currentaccount deficit widened due to rising international fuel and food prices and the loss of competitiveness in traditional exports.
The performance of the capital and financial account reflected higher investment in the tourism sector, greater flows of government transfers and the completion of infrastructure projects.
In 2006, the OECS economies will continue to benefit from preparations for the Cricket World Cup.
It is hoped that activities linked to these two sectors will serve to attract foreign direct investment.
At the fiscal level, the OECS countries plan to modernize their tax systems with the introduction of a value-added tax (VAT) and then adapt them to current economic circumstances by eliminating the gasoline subsidy. and Saint Kitts and Nevis, while it widened in Antigua and Barbuda, Saint Lucia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
The budget result for Anguilla (-4.6% of GDP in 2004 and -4.4% in 2005) was attributable to the decrease in capital expenditure, which more than compensated for the decline in current revenue.
The analysis presented in this section refers to all the member territories, with the exception of the British Virgin Islands, which have a monetary union administered by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank.
The authorities approved a package of tax measures intended to reduce the fiscal deficit and the public debt balance.
The measures include the reintroduction of the income tax, a 5% wholesale sales tax, and a special excise tax of 7%.
Dominica (-9.3% of GDP in 2004 and -0.4% in 2005) adjusted its public finances primarily by reducing capital expenditure and, to a lesser extent, by increasing tax efforts and containing current expenditure.
Capital expenditure returned to its usual levels after posting a sharp increase due to reconstruction efforts to repair the damage caused by Hurricane Emily in 2004.
Tax efforts were most visible in the rise in revenues from corporate taxes.
The government controlled current spending by freezing public wages and implementing operations to restructure the public debt, thereby facilitating the reduction of interest payments.
In 2006, the government of Dominica plans to reduce the public wage bill by 20% and introduce VAT.
Grenada (-10% of GDP in 2004 and 2005) continued its strategy for reconstruction and recovery in the wake of the devastation caused by Hurricane Ivan in 2004.
Capital expenditure rose as a result of reconstruction efforts, but this effect was offset by increased revenues from taxes on companies and on international trade and by reduced spending on salaries and interest payments.
The introduction of a special income tax for a five-year period and a more efficient tax system also contributed to this result.
Like Antigua and Barbuda and Dominica, Grenada is in the process of restructuring its public debt.
Montserrat contained its government deficit, which remained very large nevertheless (-81% and -63% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively) as a result of the drop in payments from transfers and subsidies.
The fiscal result for Saint Kitts and Nevis (-8.2% of GDP in 2004 and -6.6% in 2005) was partly attributable to increased tax revenues and lower capital expenditure.
The rise in the tax yield responded to the strong performance of taxes on companies and on international trade.
The reduction in capital expenditure was the result of the closing of the sugar industry.
In 2006, the government plans to improve the efficiency of public administration and modify the system of assessing real estate properties for tax purposes.
It will also generalize the tax on international telephone calls to include all calls.
In order to make the tax system more progressive, the government intends to raise the social services levy from 8% to 10%.
Finally, the authorities indicated their plans to introduce an excise tax on tobacco and alcoholic beverages.
Saint Lucia’s fiscal balance (-3.3% and -3.9% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively) responded to higher capital expenditure, which offset the reduction in current expenditure.
The rise in capital expenditure owed partly to the demand for construction in preparation for the Cricket World Cup in 2007, and partly to government efforts to stimulate aggregate demand and economic growth.
The contraction of current expenditure was the result of the reduction in the wage bill, despite retroactive payments made to government employees.
Tax revenues remained at the same level as the previous year despite the decrease in taxes on companies from 32% to 30%.
For 2006, the government announced plans to reduce the excise tax on various goods in order to counteract the effects of inflation on consumer purchasing power.
The budget result for Saint Vincent and the Grenadines influenced considerably by increased current expenditure and diminished tax receipts.
Fiscal spending reflected the expansion of the wage bill and increased payments to service the external debt (which rose by 11% relative to 2004).
Decreased revenues were attributable to the poor performance of taxes on goods and services and on external trade.
In 2006, the government plans to pave the way for the introduction of VAT and a system of special excise taxes.
In accordance with this objective, the government intends to discontinue a series of taxes including the general consumption tax and stamp duties.
At the same time, the authorities plan to increase the tax base for excise taxes and taxes on foreign trade by halving exemptions.
The economies that make up the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States have been a monetary union since 1983 with their own currency, the Eastern Caribbean dollar, which is linked to the United States dollar at a fixed exchange rate of EC$ 2.70.
The monetary authority of this union, the Central Bank of the Eastern Caribbean, acts as a currency board and is required by its statutes to maintain reserves equivalent to 60% of its monetary liabilities.
Since the creation of the monetary union, the institution has maintained a neutral monetary position and has changed the reference rate of interest only slightly.
The monetary union has two characteristics that explain its neutral position: The first is that its management of foreign assets and liabilities has allowed it to maintain a reserve that far exceeds the statutory requirement.
The second is that the commercial banking system is a closed circuit that strictly adheres to the obligation to maintain a balance between assets and liabilities.
In accordance with the regulations for currency boards, the financial system accomodated the demand for money, which expanded commensurately with economic activity.
Domestic credit (8% in 2004 and 15% in 2005) was driven by activities in the private sector and to a lesser extent by government operations (91% and 9% of the total, respectively).
Total loans, credit advances, and overdrafts increased from 8% to 13% between 2004 and 2005 owing to the demand for commercial lending (47% of the total).
Of the productive sectors, transport and storage, tourism, financial services, and construction posted the strongest expansion (30%, 18%, 15%, and 11%, respectively).
The largest borrowers were Anguilla, Saint Lucia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, and Montserrat In 2005, the discount rate of the Central Bank of the Eastern Caribbean held steady at 6.5%, as economic conditions did not justify an increase.
Similarly, interest rates for commercial banks remained the same (the prime lending rate remained at 8.5% (minimum) and 12.0% (maximum)).
The OECS member States posted a higher growth rate in 2005 (5.4%) than the previous year (4.1%) due to the buoyancy of the construction sector.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines posted a growth rate of 2.8% in 2005 (just over half the rate in 2004), while Montserrat fell by 3%.
Agriculture contracted in most of the OECS countries the primary sector was attributable to adverse weather conditions, pests, the accumulative effects of past natural disasters, high production costs, and limited access to financing.
Traditional crops reflected the drop in banana production (-26% for the Windward Islands) and the destruction of nutmeg crops in Grenada caused by Hurricane Ivan.
The contraction of sugarcane production (-24%) due to the shutting down of sugar industry operations in July 2005 also contributed to this result.
Despite the negative effect that the rise in international petroleum prices had on productive activity, manufacturing (-1.4% and 5.4% in 2004 and 2005, respectively) benefited from improved growth prospects due to the expansion of tourism and construction.
At the country level, the manufacturing sector in Saint Kitts and Nevis turned in a positive performance (despite the decline in agricultural production) due to expanding productive capacity and the diversification of certain product lines in various national companies.
In Saint Lucia, the food and beverage and paperboard sub-sectors benefited from the increase in long-term visitors and more buoyant commercial activity.
In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, beverage production surged while flour production contracted.
Lastly, in Grenada the manufacturing sector showed signs of recovering from the damage caused by Hurricane Ivan.
Contributing to this result were the rise in petroleum prices (which drove up hotel rates and airtransport costs), a severe hurricane season, and faltering external demand.
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines posted the highest rates of expansion in the tourism sector (24%, 12%, and 18%, respectively) thanks to an energetic campaign to create market niches, the expansion of hotel and air-transport capacity, the hosting of sporting and musical events and greater efforts to attract cruise ship passengers.
The sector experienced some difficulties, however, such as a cement shortage and the rising international prices of construction materials.
The OECS member States initiated plans to construct sports facilities, improve the infrastructure of ground, sea, and air transport, and expand hotel capacity.
Also, tax concessions offered for activities related to the Cricket World Cup have attracted some investments in fixed capital.
The majority of the construction activities for this event have been financed with foreign direct investment.
In the case of Antigua and Barbuda and Grenada, these activities have been made possible by donations from the People’s Republic of China. owing to higher international petroleum and food prices, faltering agricultural production and the resulting increase in freight charges, rising costs for construction materials and higher mark-ups.
Breaking down the consumer price index into individual components reveals that the categories showing the most significant hikes were fuel, food and electricity, and transport and communications.
The rise in the consumer price index did not fully reflect the increase in international petroleum prices, as energy consumption is subsidized in OECS countries.
Real wages retreated in the majority of the countries, as increases in nominal wages did not keep pace with rising prices.
The overall result for the balance of payments was the widening of the current-account deficit (from 18% of GDP in 2004 to 22% in 2005) exceeded the surplus in the capital and financial account (22% and 21% of GDP).
The result for the current account was attributable to poor export performance and the expansion of imports.
The performance of external sales reflected faltering aggregate demand, the contraction of banana, sugar, rice, and flour production, and the detrimental effects of natural disasters on the productive capacity of the agricultural sector in Grenada.
The increase in external purchases was the result of the rising international prices of petroleum, construction materials, and food products.
The balance of non-factorial services fell (24% of GDP in 2004 and 21% in 2005) as tourism stagnated in a context of external conditions that were unfavourable to development in that sector.
The total number of visitors remained at lower levels than in 2004, as did tourist spending.
The balance of the income account (-9.5% and -7.9% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively) reflected debt payments and the repatriation of profits.
Debt-service payments dropped in some countries due to efforts to restructure (Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica and Grenada) and reduce (Saint Kitts and Nevis and Saint Lucia) the external debt.
The surplus in the capital and financial account reflected a lower level of official flows (5.2% and 4.9% of GDP in 2004 and 2005, respectively) due to the implementation of new procedures for obtaining official financing from the European Union and the completion of infrastructure projects.
Antigua and and Grenada (9.1% of GDP in 2004 and 9.5% in 2005) are exceptions, having received donations from the People’s Republic of China for the expansion of sports infrastructure.
Flows of foreign direct investment remained were similar to levels recorded in the previous year (13.9% of GDP in 2004 and 13.3% in 2005), amid favourable expectations for the tourism and construction sectors and for the financial and monetary stability of OECS in general.
At the same time, the amount of the fiscal policies being pursued by Latin American and investment required for reconstruction should diminish, Caribbean governments have swung back towards a and high international oil prices will help restore tax more austere stance.
Some of the pressures that existed Ecuador followed suit in the first semester of this year, on both the revenue and the expenditure sides in 1999 and the effort to meet the fiscal targets that have been have eased in 2000, and this has paved the way for these established will bring greater austerity to fiscal policy in budget cuts.
The region's major currencies began to appreciate during the first quarter, but some of them later slipped back due to a combination of international factors related to interest rate hikes in the United States and domestic factors, many of which were not economic in nature.
Nevertheless, the trend towards a real appreciation of these currencies is likely to prevail for the year as a whole.
In spite of the existing level of uncertainty regarding the international environment, as the semester drew to a close nominal exchange rates were expected to follow a moderate trend, given the less disturbing outlook with regard to future increases in international interest rates and the encouraging reaction of the region's major foreign-exchange markets to political disturbances.
Improved growth expectations and more favourable terms of trade for 2000 in the region as a whole -and, in the particular case of the Andean subregion, the decreased risk of macroeconomic destabilization- make for a more favourable scenario for the year.
This stabilization of exchange rates is occurring against the backdrop of a more flexible market than in previous years.
In 1998 and 1999, the countries' currency bands, which limited the range of variation around a central reference rate, had failed to withstand speculative attacks when the market lost confidence in their sustainability.
The devaluation of the real in January 1999 may be the event that best illustrates the trend of the region's exchange rates.
Three other countries (Chile, Colombia and Ecuador) have since abandoned their exchange-rate bands and allowed their currencies to float.
With the exception of Chile, this move was prompted by the fact that it had become impossible to sustain the reference rate, and the shift over to the new exchange-rate regime was accompanied by steep devaluations.
In Ecuador, confidence in the local currency could not be restored in 1999, and in early 2000 the authorities opted for the formal dollarization of the economy.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean * 1999-2000 25 Three waves of anxiety -corresponding to the devaluation of the real, Ecuador's partial external debt moratorium and apprehension about interest rates in the United S ta tes - rippled through the region ' s foreign-exchange markets in 1999.
Exchange-rate swings were particularly sharp in South America but were also felt in the rest of the region.
The Mexican and Central American exchange markets quickly returned to normal in the second quarter, however, thanks chiefly to capital inflows in the case of Mexico.
With a few exceptions, such as Jamaica, the Caribbean countries were free of these disturbances and generally continued to follow the pattern of slight devaluations that has prevailed in recent years.
Thanks to these exchange-rate adjustments, which did not impinge to any great extent on national inflation indicators, in 1999 the value of the Latin American currencies continued along the downward path it has followed since the second half of 1998, thus correcting the overvaluation that had built up since 1993.
Meanwhile, the Caribbean countries continued to exhibit an almost diametrically opposed medium-term trend, although the international financial situation has slowed the appreciation of their currencies somewhat over the last two years.
In particular, the first quarter saw a further decline in real interest rates which brought them close to the pre-crisis levels of the fourth quarter of 1997.
However, the rise in international interest rates suggests that monetary policies in the region as a whole may be tightened up somewhat in the second half of 2000.
Monetary expansion also slowed at the beginning of 2000, following an upturn in the last two quarters of 1999.
Monetary policy was very restrictive at the start of 1999 owing to the uncertainty prevailing in the external sector, particularly in connection with capital market access.
In the second quarter, however, there began to be signs that the phase of increasingly tight monetary policy that had started in the last quarter of 1997 was bottoming out, and monetary policy in Latin America began to ease.
The real variation in the monetary base, which had been negative since September 1998 for the region as a whole, started on an upward trend that put it back into positive figures as of November 1999.
The trend in the money supply (Ml) was quite similar to that of the monetary base, although it did grow more rapidly as the economic recovery that began in the second semester of 1999 boosted demand.
Nonetheless, over the year as a whole, monetary policy was generally very tight.
Since the second half of 1999, interest rates have been falling steadily from the high levels reached in 1998.
Despite the drop in nominal rates, however, real rates have remained comparatively high in relation to the years preceding the Asian crisis due, among other factors, to the abatement of inflation (see figure 1.9).
Banking spreads widened, which also helped to keep the real cost of credit high.
As in the case of exchange rates, the Caribbean countries followed a very different pattern, with a tightening of monetary policy in the second quarter of 1999 breaking the cycle of accelerating growth that had begun in 1997.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 27 Domestic credit remains tight Domestic lending activity has been fairly sluggish during the last few quarters in both Latin America, where monetary policy has been somewhat more relaxed, and in the Caribbean, where policy constraints have been greater.
The real growth of credit to the public sector turned negative again in 1999, after a brief upturn in late 1998, and is likely to maintain this trend in 2000.
In contrast, a moderate upswing is expected in credit to the private sector as the trend towards the reactivation of production and growth in investment firms up.
The expansion of private credit in Latin America had become virtually flat by the end of 1999.
A number of short-term and sectoral factors are to blame for the lack of lending activity, which was so marked in some countries that it assumed the nature of a true credit crunch and acted as a brake on the reactivation of domestic demand.
Demand for credit was affected by high interest rates and the devaluation of various local currencies, especially in highly dollarized countries, since this made borrowing more expensive.
Demand was also hurt by slack activity in some sectors, such as construction, which is still reeling from the effects of the recession.
On the supply side, the fragility of Latin America's financial sector and the fact that the structure of loan portfolios need to be improved in a number of countries caused lenders to adopt a very cautious attitude.
Reforms regain momentum in 2000 The fallout from the Asian crisis had a profound impact on the region's structural reform process in 1999, since governments focused their efforts on addressing immediate needs instead.
This not only relegated structural reforms to a lower order of importance, but in some cases government measures even put the process into reverse, which had a particularly adverse effect on international trade.
In addition, uncertainty in the political arena, in combination with the problems some of the countries were having in maintaining public order, did not provide an environment that was conducive to the implementation of reforms.
With the improvement of the international climate and the reactivation of the region's economies in 2000, the structural reform process is expected to gain momentum once again.
Many privatization projects that were originally scheduled for 1999 were postponed until 2000.
Privatization revenues, which barely topped US$ 12 billion last year, could be much more substantial this year but are unlikely to reach the 1998 record figure of US$ 42 billion.
Argentina and Brazil led the field in privatizations in 1999, while the Dominican Republic stood out among the smaller economies.
The sectoral diversification of privatizations and concessions continued as transactions of this sort were undertaken in connection with road works, railways, ports, airports, drinking water systems, telecommunications, electricity generation and distribution, oil and natural gas.
Attempts to strengthen State institutions and regulate monopolies are continuing in the region.
In the first of these spheres, the struggle against corruption merits special mention as a new issue that is occupying an increasingly important place on governmental agendas.
In some cases, legislation on this problem has been passed or supervisory institutions created, while in others anti-corruption programmes have been put in place.
The economic crisis and the authorities' response to it, mainly in the form of tight monetary policy, posed serious problems for the region's financial systems in 1999.
As a result, several countries set up programmes to assist financial institutions that are still under way in 2000.
The sector continued to come under tighter supervision and oversight in 1999, especially in Central America, and two countries (Nicaragua and Guyana) gave their central banks greater autonomy.
The difficult position in which the region's financial systems found themselves triggered a drastic restructuring and consolidation process involving numerous mergers and acquisitions, particularly in Colombia, Ecuador, Panama and Peru.
All of these processes continued into the first half of 2000, but they did so within a context marked by less urgency and more liquidity, thanks to the overall improvement of the economic situation.
The economic crisis had a major impact on international trade in 1999.
Many of the region's countries implemented a variety of adjustment measures, including devaluations and, to a lesser extent, tariff increases and non-tariff measures, in order to curb imports.
The friction that this caused was particularly strong among the Mercosur countries, but it also affected the Andean Community.
However, as economic activity recovers and some international prices improve, such protectionist measures are likely to be rolled back.
The integration process continues despite the economic crisis, although with some delays in the implementation of agreements that have already been reached.
The Caricom countries have made progress towards the establishment of a common market and unified economy, and Haiti was admitted as a member in 1999.
Guatemala and El Salvador decided to form a customs union; Chile signed a free trade agreement with the Central American countries and another with 28 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean Mexico; and Mexico reached an agreement with the European Union which was expected to lead to a free trade arrangement starting in July 2000.
Finally, Brazil signed a preferential tariff agreement with the Andean Community countries in 1999, and Argentina followed Considering the adverse environment and the internal difficulties that the countries of the region had to Rapid recovery in 2000 after the crisis of 1999 A significant upswing in the economic growth of the region is expected in 2000.
Growth is forecast at around 4% based on the positive performance of many Latin American and Caribbean countries in the first half of the year and a bright outlook for the international economy, which should make for high growth rates in most developed and developing countries alike.
Growth prospects for Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean have been placed at a minimum of 4.5%.
Data from the first months of 2000 confirm that this expansion will be led by the Dominican Republic, an upswing in Honduras and a faster growth rate for the Mexican economy.
For the countries of South America, a major improvement in economic growth is expected in 2000; in fact, growth is set to reach 3.3%, compared with a 0.9% fall in 1999.
The highest rates are expected in Brazil, Chile and Peru (see figure 1.10).
In 1999, the regional economy had suffered a significant slowdown in activity levels for the second year running, leading to the stagnation of GDP (0.4%) after an expansion of 2.1% in 1998 and of 5.5% in 1997.
The first three quarters of 1999 yielded negative growth rates, followed by a clear upturn at year's end.
Since the region has high population growth rates as well, per capita output fell by 1.2% in 1999, bringing the increase in this variable over the decade to just 15%.
The regional average reflected very different growth rates in the various groups of countries.
Generally speaking, Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean turned in a better performance, benefiting from their links with the strong United States economy.
The South contend with, it is noteworthy that none of the subregional processes was overtaken by a serious crisis.
Furthermore, during the first semester of 2000 there were clear signs of economic recovery, and at the same time steps were being taken to reactivate regional integration processes.
In particular, Mercosur and the Andean Community have been working to achieve an increasing alignment of their macroeconomic policies.
American countries made a poorer showing, since they were hit harder by trends in world and intraregional trade and by the effects of more sluggish domestic markets.
In 1999, the r eg ion ' s economies were characterized by slower growth of all the components of supply and demand, with the exception of exports and factor income, which improved slightly.
Among the components of domestic demand, investment took the steepest fall, down by 9.6%, while growth in consumption was similar to that of output.
Investment recovers in 2000 from its steep fall of 1999 The upturn in output forecast for Latin America as a whole also entails a considerable improvement in savings and investment.
Projections place the increase in investment at similar or slightly higher levels than GDP growth, in contrast to the 9.6% drop of 1999.
Investment will pick up in the northern portion of the region, particularly in Mexico, where it is set to increase by over 6% in 2000, in comparison with just 2% in 1999.
A major recovery in investment is also forecast in South America after a slump of over 10% last year.
In Brazil, an increase of over 6% in investment is expected to be the driving force behind that country's economic recovery.
An analysis of the composition of investment shows machinery and equipment to have been the hardest hit sector in 1999, although construction slipped as well.
In general, the slide was steeper in private investment and especially in small and medium-sized industry, which saw its access to bank credit abruptly restricted.
Measured as a percentage of GDP, investment fell from 23% to 21.5% in 1999 due to a steep reduction in external savings.
National savings remained unchanged from 1998, at one of the lowest levels since the beginning of the 1990s.
Gross investment is expected to be slightly more robust in 2000 thanks to an increase in domestic saving, while external saving will stay in more or less the same range as the year before (see figure 1.11).
The decline in investment during 1999 was due to a combination of factors, including the effect of the international crisis and shrinking external demand, tight economic policies that dampened domestic demand and the conclusion of investment cycles.
Intraregional demand had a significant impact in Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay, which were affected by the devaluation in Brazil.
Most of the South American countries were also hurt by weak world commodity markets, which led to a fall in their export volumes.
Argentina, Chile and Colombia also registered major downturns in domestic demand, which sent contractionary signals to investors.
In contrast, buoyed by the strength of the United States market, Mexico and the Central American and Caribbean countries were able to increase the volume of their exports, which had a positive effect on investment.
Inflation remains low In the first half of 2000, the annual rate of inflation in the region overall was just under 10%, which was similar to the 1999 rate and slightly lower than the figures for the two preceding years.
This is the region's lowest inflation rate in the last 50 years and is the result of a drop in the pace of price rises from almost 900% in 1993 to around 10% in 1997.
This noteworthy slowdown stems mainly from changes in economic policy since the 1980s, when stabilization came to be the top priority.
The moderate pace of the price rises seen since that time has been maintained even after the financial crisis that erupted in some regions of the world in the second semester of In 1999, five of the 22 countries for which information is available recorded annual inflation of below 3%, and in another 13 it came in below 15%.
Only two countries posted higher inflation rates -Venezuela (20%) and Ecuador (60%)- and only two others witnessed significant rises: Brazil, where the figure rose from 2.5% in 1998 to just over 8% in 1999, and Ecuador, where the already high rate of the previous year (43%) increased by 17 percentage points.
Continued austerity in monetary policy offset the clear deterioration in fiscal accounts.
The recession in the region was also an important factor in keeping inflation down, as GDP shrank in six economies and rose by 3% or more in only five.
In this recessionary climate, consumer prices benefited from reduced profit margins on imported products.
The most significant supply-related factor in terms of its impact on inflation in 1999 was the exchange rate, but this variable behaved quite differently from one economy to another.
In some countries, where difficulties in the external sector drove the authorities to gradually abandon their policy of using the exchange rate as an anchor, the movement in this rate pushed inflation upward, with the nominal exchange rate for the dollar climbing by 60% in Brazil, 160% in Ecuador and by 10% to 25% in another eight countries.
Wholesale prices rose steeply due to the large proportion of tradables in the market; however, these higher costs did not lead to matching rises in consumer prices as market conditions prevented the full effect of the devaluation from being passed on to the consumer.
In contrast, the stability or slow slide of the nominal exchange rate in other countries helped to keep inflation in check.
Wages did not have an inflationary effect in 1999, since adjustments were moderate.
The rise in oil prices did, however, since it called for drastic adjustments in the domestic prices of petroleum products in addition to the adjustments that had been already made to compensate Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 31 for the effects of the devaluation of several of the countries' currencies.
In 2000, moderate rises in most countries were compensated for by better results in four economies, including the region's two largest.
In Brazil, inflation has fallen by four percentage points, thus practically returning to the 1998 pre-devaluation rate, while Mexico is giving clear signs that it is consolidating its stabilization process, with inflation under 10% for the first time in several years.
Inflation has also slowed in Peru, where moderate rates have been consolidated, and in Venezuela, where inflation will probably be less than 15% for the year as a whole.
In 11 countries, inflation in the first semester rose very slightly, and no major changes in that pattern are expected in the coming months.
In Nicaragua and Paraguay, the 12-month variation in inflation showed an increase from 5 to 7 percentage points, propelling it back into double digits.
These setbacks are largely explained by continued devaluations in some countries, fresh rises in international oil prices and the economic reactivation that has followed the recession of 1999.
The exception to the rule continues to be Ecuador, where price rises have become even steeper in 2000, with the 12-month variation to June amounting to over 100%.
As a consequence of the dollarization of this economy, however, the annualized rate of inflation is expected to decline in the fourth quarter (see figure 1.12).
In 2000, job creation and wages are responding favourably to the upswing in several of these countries, in combination with sustained growth in Mexico and many Central American and Caribbean countries.
This positive impact has thus far been somewhat muted, however, since, firstly, labour demand has, as is typical, been slow to respond to the upturn in economic activity and, secondly, the labour supply has increased as more job opportunities become available.
Moreover, other countries have yet to send out clear signals of recovery, and this has been reflected in high or even rising unemployment.
Thus, the region as a whole can be expected to attain no more than a modest decrease in unemployment over the year.
As the labour situation worsened in 1999, the region continued to follow the pattern that prevailed for most of the second half of the 1990s.
With most countries posting low or negative growth, unemployment rose from 8.1 % to 8.7%, thereby not only reaching it speak level of the 1990s, but even outstripping the levels recorded during the debt crisis of the early 1980s.
Given the fact that, in the region's largest countries, unemployment actually fell (Mexico) or held steady (Brazil), the record regional unemployment figures clearly signalled a worsening situation in a number of South American countries.
Indeed, as was also true the year before, there was a marked difference in the labour market's performance between Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, on the one hand, and South America, on the other, mainly as a result of these subregions' very different economic situations.
The effect of the international financial crisis on economic growth -exacerbated by domestic events in some cases- drove down the demand for labour, and this was reflected in sharp decreases in employment together with jumps of 2% or more in unemployment in Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay and Venezuela and smaller increases in Argentina, Peru and Uruguay.
Brazil was the only South American country not to record a rise in open unemployment, but the levels reached in 1998 and 1999 were the highest since 1981.
In contrast, more dynamic economic growth stimulated demand for labour in several Caribbean and Central American countries and in Mexico; the favourable effects of this trend included a reduction in average unemployment.
The main culprit in the rise in unemployment at the regional level has been the weak demand for labour, which is a clear reflection of slack economic activity.
In fact, at the regional level, wage employment grew by a mere 0.4%.
Under these conditions, the countercyclical nature of self-employment in many countries was clearly demonstrated, as it accounted for 63% of all new jobs in 1999.
This was not enough to compensate for the slow rate of job creation for wage-based positions, however, and employment as a whole therefore expanded by just 1.1%; this was reflected in a fall in the employment rate from 53.6% to 52.7% (a weighted average of 12 countries).
This average masks sharp contrasts within the region since employment grew by just 0.2% in South America, while in the rest of the region it expanded at rates of over 3%.
The effects of sluggish job creation also showed up in poorer job quality indicators, particularly because of the difficulties people had in obtaining full-time posit ions.
Labour-income indices were up in several countries, in line with the trend in real wages in formal-sector firms, which rose in some countries as inflation abated.
In other countries, however, the economic crisis and the acceleration of inflation caused wages to lose a great deal of ground.
Given this mixed picture, although real wages rose by a modest amount (1%) in most countries of the region, both the simple and weighted averages were lower (0.9% and 1.8% respectively).
Minimum wages performed slightly better: at the regional level, the real median increase was 1.7% and the real simple and weighted averages amounted to 0.7% and 0.5%, respectively.
Some improvement was seen in employment at the regional level at the beginning of 2000, chiefly due to a greater demand for labour in Brazil and Mexico, and to a lesser extent in Colombia.
In a group of eight countries for which information on the labour market is available for early 2000, the employment rate reached 52.9%, compared with 52.4% during the first semester of 1999.
Only Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela reported a level of employment below the figure for the same period of Owing to the simultaneous increase in the supply of labour, however, the expansion of employment has not yet resulted in a reduction in unemployment.
In fact, in the above-mentioned group of countries, unemployment stood at 9.1 %, slightly above the 9% figure posted for the first semester of 1999.
This was partly due to rises in unemployment in 2000 in Argentina, Colombia, Ecuador and Uruguay; Chile and Mexico were the only countries to record an improvement in this indicator, while in Brazil and Venezuela the unemployment rate varied only minimally (see figure 1.13b).
Nevertheless, the higher rate of job creation is likely to have a moderately positive impact on unemployment Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean » 1999-2000 33 over the year in view of the greater economic buoyancy to be observed in a number of countries and the projections for economic growth to reach around 4% at the regional level.
Available information also points to a moderate increase in real average wages in the formal sector for the region as a whole thanks to the rises expected in such countries as Chile, Colombia and Mexico, along with a decrease in the rate of decline of average wages in Brazil.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 35 Chapter II Macroeconomic Policy In 1999, macroeconomic policy was heavily influenced by the international crisis that has been affecting many of the region's countries since the final quarter of 1997.
A series of external shocks and a downturn in several economies -particularly in South America- have given rise to a pattern marked by monetary prudence, more flexible exchange rates and widening fiscal deficits.
Apart from concerns sparked by the vagaries of immediate circumstances, in most of the countries the authorities had to continue focusing on the prudential regulation of the financial system.
The fragility of the banking sector, rising financial costs and the recessionary expectations that prevailed in 1999 created an adverse environment for domestic lending activity.
O N E OF THE SIGNIFICANT developments seen in 1999 was a weakening of the link between domestic prices and the exchange rate, although this was partly accounted for by the recessionary climate prevailing in many of the economies that devalued their currencies.
This had the effect of strengthening arguments in favour of more flexible macroeconomic policies, especially since the region's economies remain exposed to major, recurrent external shocks.
What happened in Brazil after it was obliged to abandon its currency-band policy was a particularly decisive factor in this respect.
The country was just emerging from a long period of hyperinflation, and at the start of the year all the economic forecasters feared that, having lost the nominal anchor for its exchange rate that had underpinned the success of the Real plan, the economy would relapse once more into instability and stagflation.
In the event, this did not happen; indeed, far from plunging into recession, the 36 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean economy actually expanded (albeit slightly) without prices rising by more than a fraction of the nominal devaluation.
In Colombia, which floated its currency after having been obliged to devalue (24%), price rises were held below 10%, while in Chile, under qualitatively very different conditions, the flotation of the exchange rate was also accompanied by very low inflation.
Nonetheless, the progress made in controlling inflation has provided more scope for autonomous management of national macroeconomic policy and has made it possible to lengthen its time horizon.
Exogenous factors generally do not allow governments much discretion in managing fiscal policy and, ideally, the deficit will tend to function as an automatic stabilizer. international funds.
As mentioned earlier, the increased credibility gained by the monetary authorities thanks to the success of previous counter-inflationary policies and the successful management of recent crises enabled a number of countries to abandon the currency-band approach and adopt more flexible arrangements.
This greater flexibility of the exchange-rate regime also gave monetary policy-makers more autonomy.
Many of the countries that have floating exchange rates are gradually shifting towards the implementation of monetary policies based on inflation targets and moving away from the use of fixed standards for the exchange rate or for the behaviour of monetary aggregates (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, Mexico and Peru, among others).
The use of these targets gives the authorities greater manoeuvring room in determining the policy mix needed to cope with external or domestic shocks.
In this context, a successful outcome increasingly depends on how well the different aspects of macroeconomic policy are coordinated, and it is especially important for inflation targets to be compatible with fiscal policy.
Fiscal policy needs to be flexible enough to meet the needs of macroeconomic management when circumstances so require, without putting key domestic balances at risk.
Several steps in this direction were taken in 1999 and again in the first half of 2000, with fiscal responsibility pacts being signed in four countries (see box II. 1 in the section on fiscal policy and public finance).
Regional macroeconomic policy coordination was also assigned a higher priority in 1999.
The crisis that arose in Mercosur as a result of Brazil's devaluation and the more specific difficulties faced by the Andean Community were some of the main reasons for this new interest in macroeconomic coordination as part of a scheme of open regionalism.
Fiscal income, especially tax revenues, move closely in line with the rise and fall of the business cycle, while budgetary rigidities on the expenditure side, in particular consumption spending and debt service, make this economic tool a fairly inflexible one.
Accordingly, they were able to bolster domestic demand and avoid any steps that would dampen the countries' already low growth prospects even further.
The combination of this policy and the effect of the automatic stabilizers resulted in an increase in the average fiscal deficit for the non-financial public sector (NFPS) amounting to about 3% of GDP,3 its highest level of the decade.
Meanwhile, savings rates fell for the second year running, dropping to their lowest level of the 1990s.
In fact, only three countries (Ecuador, Panama and Venezuela) managed to make a sizeable reduction in their borrowing requirements.
The fiscal situation in most of the non-Spanish-speaking Caribbean countries also deteriorated, as spending rose and revenues shrank in most cases; the only exceptions were Grenada, Guyana, Jamaica and Montserrat, which saw their finances improve.
The widening deficit in 1999 did not undermine macroeconomic stability in the short run because the potential effects of greater demand pressure from the public sector on inflation or on the external deficit were offset by other variables (see chapters IV and VII).
Nonetheless, the behaviour of the primary surplus is seen as a warning sign as to the long-term sustainability of current patterns of fiscal income and expenditure.
In 2000, most governments have returned to the austerity policies that typified the 1990s, with major cuts being made in fiscal budgets in an effort to preserve macroeconomic stability.
For the most part, these targets are aimed at trimming the countries' deficits back to their 1998 levels.
Apart from budgetary laws, several countries have entered into agreements with the Internationa] Monetary Fund, and some have even passed fiscal discipline legislation (Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador and Peru) prescribing multi-annual targets (see box II. 1).
Budget cuts in the region should become easier to make as some of the pressures that existed in 1999 ease.
For example, expenditure on reconstruction work in areas devastated by natural disasters and emergency transfers to sectors hit by the international crises of 1997 and 1998 can both be expected to diminish in 2000 thanks to stronger growth prospects.
Improvements on the income side of the ledger are expected on two fronts: tax revenues should be driven up by the economic recovery in most of the countries, and a number of governments are implementing tax reforms and are taking steps to reduce tax evasion in order to boost both direct and indirect receipts.
Non-tax revenues are also expected to continue rising thanks to higher oil prices, since oil is the main export of public-sector enterprises in Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Trinidad and Tobago, and Venezuela.
One of the priorities for a number of them was to support the economic sectors that were hit the hardest by the international crises of 1997 and 1998 in the hope of averting a potential contraction in 1999.
Expenditures in this connection included additional investment by public-sector enterprises, the expansion of infrastructure, and transfers or subsidies, especially for agriculture.
A second major area was the continuing flow of investment to rebuild zones devastated by the natural disasters that have befallen the Caribbean, Central American and Andean countries in recent years.
The third factor was that debt service once again approached the level of the deficit; this is a somewhat alarming development since, barring an improvement in other accounts, any further increase in debt service would drive up net borrowing requirements.
The higher sales recorded by State-owned oil 2 Nonetheless, during the 1990s the fiscal deficit did tend to increase in slower-growth years and vice versa. 3 This figure is the simple arithmetic mean of the fiscal deficits of 19 of the region's countries.
Central government financial results also ended the 1990s with their highest deficit of the decade (2.7% of GDP).
To smooth out the effects of the cycle, a number of governments also reformed their tax laws, with implications for both direct and indirect taxation.
The fact that current expenditure rose faster than current income pushed down the NFPS savings rate.
This development was part of a trend that had begun to worsen in 1998 as a result of the cyclical behaviour of current income and the growth of expenditure.
Most countries in the region generated a lower level of current saving in 1999, and four actually registered dissaving (Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica and Haiti).
The first three of these countries all saw a substantial upturn in debt service, a situation that has been chronic over the last five years.
In Haiti, on the other hand, recurrent income has been insufficient to finance expenditure throughout the 1990s even though spending levels have held steady.
In most cases, governments financed their deficits with external funds in 1999.
This constituted a departure from the pattern seen in 1998, when foreign borrowing diminished in the wake of the international crises.
The preference for external funding was particularly noticeable in the small and medium-sized economies, whereas the larger countries opted for domestic borrowing.
The widening of the region's average fiscal deficit has generated significantly higher levels of total public debt in some countries.
The domestic component of the total debt has recently been increasing, after having remained at relatively low levels until a few years ago.
This has come on top of an upswing in the external debt which has brought it to disturbing levels in some of the region's countries.
The task of servicing this debt was made more difficult in 1999 by higher international interest rates, which are expected to continue rising in the second half of 2000.
In a different context marked by floating exchange rates, Brazil and Peru also decided to impose formal controls on their governments' capacity to run up recurrent fiscal deficits.
Although the economic policy climate and the degree of legal compulsion incorporated into fiscal reforms vary among these four countries, they share a common core content.
The first basic principle involves setting limits or targets for the fiscal deficit and for the medium-term growth rate of expenditure.
The Government of Argentina intends to restrict its deficit to 1.5% of GDP in 2000 and to achieve a balanced budget by 2003.
In Peru, the consolidated public-sector deficit may not exceed 1% of GDP and its total debt may not grow faster than the deficit.
In times of emergency, however, the deficit will be allowed to rise to as much as 2% of GDP.
The law also restricts the real growth of general government expenditure to 2% per year and includes measures designed to delink public finances from the political cycle.
In neighbouring Ecuador, the Fiscal Responsibility Act prohibits the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit from presenting a budget with a deficit greater than 2.5% of GDP in any given year and requires fiscal accounts to balance, on average, over a three-year period.
Expenditure, meanwhile, may not grow by more than 5% over the previous year's inflation rate.
In Brazil, where the focus has been more on enhancing the fiscal decentralization process than on setting specific quantitative limits, tie Government has committed to setting yearly budgetary targets for all the various levels of government for revenue, expenditure, the nominal and primary fiscal accounts and the public debt for the current and the following two years.
Another common feature of these reforms is that they all seek to achieve fiscal transparency by requiring that biannual budgetary performance reports be prepared at the various levels of government to ensure compliance with established short* and medium-term fiscal targets.
The Governments of Argentina and Peru are also setting up stabilization funds to help them meet their fiscal targets.
Foreign exchange policy Foreign exchange policy has perhaps been the most active macroeconomic domain during the period under review.
Regional currency markets exhibited a great deal of volatility, as they had during 1998 as well, in the wake of the international financial crisis.
Following two years of relative calm, the median rate of devaluation in 1998 and 1999 was higher than it had been in 1995, which was also a crisis year.
As had occurred in Mexico at that time, these tensions revealed the fragility of currency regimes based on exchange-rate bands when markets are moving towards devaluation.
Four countries (Brazil, Colombia, Chile and Ecuador) abandoned this system and allowed their currencies to float; as is shown in table II.2, flotation is now the most common exchange-rate regime in Latin America.
In general, however, floats are not entirely free, as central banks intervene from time to time to prevent excessively sharp movements in the exchange rate.
Intervention in a currency float has two objectives: one is to influence expectations when market movements reflect a great deal of uncertainty; the other is to cushion the transmission of exchange-rate shocks to the domestic economy and maintain liquidity in the banking system.
The latter is becoming very important in the region, especially in countries with a highly dollarized credit portfolio.
Two countries with very different exchange-rate histories -Brazil and Peru- provide an illustration of this situation.
In Brazil, the authorities had to play a very active role in the market in order to give direction to expectations, after having been obliged to abandon the currency-band regime that had been so instrumental in stabilizing this country's hyperinflationary economy.
The interest rate climbed to 45% in March and did not descend until preliminary inflation figures began to show that domestic price indexation mechanisms were weakening.
Peru, on the other hand, is one of the few countries in which the use of the exchange rate as an anchor did not figure as one of the main planks of the stabilization programme implemented during the 1990s; instead, it has allowed its currency to float from the very outset.
For the first time in several years, however, the authorities had to sell a portion of the country's reserves on two occasions (fourth quarter of 1998 and first quarter of 1999) in order to smooth out swings in the exchange rate and, above all, maintain foreign-exchange liquidity in the country's highly dollarized banking sector.
Bolivia and Costa Rica represent interesting and special cases in terms of their experiences with a crawling-peg system.
In both of these countries, for several years now the goal has been to maintain the stability of the real exchange rate in order to enhance these economies' external competitiveness.
The variation in these countries' real exchange rate indices since the beginning of the 1990s has been very small (5.0% and 2.9%, respectively) compared to the regional average of 11.5%.
Only Barbados and Panama -very open economies that maintain a fixed parity against the dollar- have had even more success in maintaining the stability of their real exchange rates.
There was an intense debate on the relative advantages of free floats and fixed exchange rates in 1999, but some degree of consensus eventually emerged as to the virtues of a flexible system when the stability of the domestic situation and the depth of the domestic financial market are sufficient to permit suitable forms of monetary policy management.
The smaller economies, however, continue to prefer to use exchange-rate targets as their main point of reference, whether in a fixed-rate or crawling-peg system, since their domestic financial markets are shallow and their foreign trade flows account for a large percentage of GDP.
In any event, as noted earlier, the region's floating exchange-rate regimes generally involve a significant degree of intervention.
Unlike the years prior to the crisis, when financial factors had predominated, exchange-rate trends in 1999 largely mirrored the behaviour of the real economy.
As was to be expected under these circumstances, there was a negative correlation between external accounts in 1998 and movements in the real exchange rate between 1998 and 1999.
Countries with large external deficits were more inclined to devalue, and the devaluations were fairly successful in correcting those imbalances (see figure II.2).
Nevertheless, under the circumstances prevailing in 1999, it has not always been easy to identify the relative contributions made to these results by the price effect (transmitted via devaluations) and the income effect, as many of these devaluations took place in a recessionary setting.
Since currency markets were more closely in step with the trends in fundamentals than they had been in the past, they behaved very differently in the South American economies, which were hit by domestic recessions and the aftermath of external shocks, than they did in the rest of the region.
This economy managed to keep its currency within a crawling band at a 1.3% monthly devaluation rate, thanks to the intervention of the Central Bank, which was able to draw upon the substantial increase in international reserves generated by higher oil prices.
In the rest of the subcontinent, where the real economy behaved in a more normal fashion, the currency market was calmer.
In Mexico, apart from a short period of volatility on international markets caused by the devaluation of the Brazilian real (which pushed up interestrates), the peso tended to strengthen.
The copious capital inflows received by this economy were mainly attributable to the faster pace of economic activity, to favourable expectations regarding the prospects for the real sector and to the improvement seen the perceived level of financial risk.
Exchange rates in the Caribbean and in Central America generally moved along their medium-term trend lines.
Guatemala was an exception to this general rule, in that it registered a nominal depreciation of 16% as a result of lower domestic interest rates and concern about its large external deficit.
Mention should also be made of the situation in Haiti, where renewed tensions in the foreign-exchange market towards the end of the year brought about a sudden reversal in what had been an appreciating trend.
Monetary and credit policy Monetary policy in Latin America changed course in 1999, especially in the South American countries.
At the start of the year, tight monetary constraints inherited from the previous year's external shocks prevailed throughout the region.
Once they were free from the need to defend an overvalued exchange rate, however, the monetary authorities in countries that had devalued were able to relax their policies somewhat in order to support the reactivation of production.
In addition, the positive trend in domestic prices enabled central banks to adopt a relatively looser policy stance in the second half of the year, since they had already met their inflation targets.
In addition to these factors, the Y2K phenomenon had a collateral effect that drove up the volume of currency in circulation quite sharply during the final quarter of 1999.
Worried by the widely predicted possibility of Y2K system failures, the region's central banks stepped up currency issues to avert potential (but ultimately not forthcoming) problems in the processing of bank transactions.
To deal with this situation, in January the authorities announced the dollarization of the Ecuadorian economy based on an exchange rate of 25,000 sucres to the dollar.
This was followed in March by the passage of the Ecuadorian Economic Transformation Act, which set out the main features of a new monetary and exchange-rate scheme.
This Act also placed a 2.5% cap on the non-financial public-sector (NFPS) deficit as from 2001 and set up a stabilization fund to be financed out of windfall gains, especially those generated when oil prices exceed the price used for budget estimates.
The transition to the new framework involves exchanging sucre banknotes currently in circulation for dollars.
To this end, the international assets held by the Central Bank of Ecuador (CBE) were split into four different accounts.
The first of these accounts however, and its effects were limited to the second half of 1999.
The net effect of a first semester of very tight monetary policy, followed by a second semester that was somewhat more expansionary, was nonetheless a definitely restrictive stance for year as a whole.
As had also been the case in 1998, the monetary behaviour of the Caribbean economies was almost diametrically opposed to that of their continental counterparts.
This had put an end to the recovery and sucres, which will only be issued in exchange for old sucre or dollar bills.
To provide the banking system with liquidity, a fund was established that was initially financed with external credits and bank contributions.
A swap of the existing credit portfolio was provided for within a maximum range of interest rates (a lending rate of 16.82% and a deposit rate of 9.35%) with an interest-rate cap calculated as the London interbank offered rate (LIBOR) plus a margin for country-risk based on bond spreads and a bank operations margin of up to 4%.
The terms for deposit insurance were altered (50% as from the second year of the law's entry into force, with a minimum of US48.000; 25% from the third year on, with a minimum of US$ 8,000: and up to US$ 8,000 as from the fourth year).
As figure II.5.a shows, in the space of just 18 months the average growth trend for real base money slowed from a positive rate of over 30% in August 1997 to a contraction that hovered around -5% in the first quarter of 1999.
The trend in the money supply (Ml) mirrored the variation in base money, whereas savings accounts and time deposits (quasi-money) were much less affected by short-term fluctuations.
This regional trend is the sum total of widely differing situations in the various subregions, however (see table II.3).
The trend in monetary variables resembled the behaviour of the real sector, and here again there was a clear dichotomy as South America endured a year of serious difficulties and monetary austerity, while the rest of Latin America continued along its moderate growth path. (the exchange account) contains a portion of the Bank's unencumbered reserves and covers sucres in circulation.
A second account consisting of another portion of the unencumbered reserves is used to cover banks' deposits with the CBE and monetary stabilization bonds (the financial reserve account).
A third account (the operations account) has been set up as a tool for recycling liquidity.
The assets in this account include the balance of unencumbered reserves, repo operations and government bonds owned by toe CBE; its liabilities consist of deposits held by the NFPS and private individuals at the CBE, together with other CBE financial obligations.
A fourth account (the "other operations" account) contains the Central Bank's remaining assets and liabilities.
A six-month deadline has been set for the exchange of sucres for dollars (with the possibility of an extension for a further six months if necessary).
Within South America itself, there were differences of degree, but not of trend.
The Southern Cone countries experienced a moderate contraction of the monetary base which began in September 1998 with the financial tensions arising from the crisis triggered by the Russian moratorium and lasted until the end of the third quarter of 1999.
The Andean countries followed a similar pattern (with the exception of Ecuador, see box II. 2), albeit with more pronounced cyclical fluctuations both in the downswing and when indicators turned positive again in the final quarter of 1999.
The situation was marked by much sharper contrasts in Brazil, which until August 1998 had maintained a rate of expansion averaging 30%, but was forced to change course abruptly in the fourth quarter of 1998.
The subsequent devaluation of the real in January 1999 did not affect this policy change; on the contrary, the contraction in the real money supply approached 40% in August, after which it began to subside as the outlook for production activity and inflation brightened.
Nevertheless, the monetary base did not start to expand again until the end of the year.
In Centra] America, real monetary growth was much more moderate than in the previous few years, but except in a few cases it remained at positive levels throughout the period under review.
Mexico stood out against this Latin American backdrop of austerity and contraction.
In view of the unsettled international environment, the monetary authorities' goal was to maintain the level of net reserves and restrict the expansion of the monetary base by reining in domestic credit.
There was a strong demand for base money, however, given the sustained pace of economic activity, while capital inflows and an increase in reserves boosted the supply of monetary assets.
The Caribbean countries felt the monetary and real effects of the global financial crisis less strongly than the rest of the region, and they continued on their previous course of monetary expansion (see figure II.5.b).
The latter stemmed from a reluctance on the part of businesses and households to take on debt, together with the very cautious attitude adopted by the banking system in the face of short-term uncertainties and the need to improve the quality and structure of bank portfolios.
As part of a parallel phenomenon, lending activities in some countries have been developing outside the bounds of the banking system both in the business-loan and in the consumer-credit and home-loan segments.
Mexico provides what is perhaps the clearest example of these spontaneous responses to the scarcity of bank credit.
There are a number of systemic risks associated with this development, however, as many of these credit mechanisms do not fall within the supervisory purview of the superintendencies responsible for regulating and monitoring financial activity.
Disintermediation can also destabilize the production sector if a credit crunch induces an involuntary expansion of supplier credit, which is actually nothing more than an increase in the chain of overdue payments.
In 1999, domestic lending activity was reduced by factors on both the supply and demand sides.
In Latin America as a whole, real interest rates, which had begun to rise in 1997, peaked at the beginning of 1999.
Following a decline in the second quarter, the real deposit rate then settled at what were still high levels compared to those seen before the outbreak of the Asian crisis.
The rise in rates was accompanied by wider spreads (the difference between deposit and lending rates) as part of a trend that had begun in late 1997.
In the specific case of South America, while the demand for credit was certainly discouraged by these high financial costs, the strongest restraint was actually the prevailing level of uncertainty, which caused businesses and households to adopt a cautious attitude and reduce their borrowing.
In the region as a whole, supply-side factors also played a part in reducing credit activity, as the still fragile situation of the banking system in the vast majority of countries, and the need to improve the prudential profile of the banks themselves, led to discrimination in favour of higher-quality borrowers.
As these borrowers can often obtain more favourable terms and conditions on the international market, competition to attract such clients intensified, thereby contributing to greater segmentation of the local credit market.
This, in turn, held back investment and job creation in smaller firms, which caused the recessionary trends inherited from the previous year's external shocks to last until the final quarter of 1999 in a number of countries.
Thus, real growth in domestic private-sector lending, which had been slowing down since the fourth quarter of 1997, continued to fall in 1999, despite signs of a recovery in GDP during the second half of the year.
Meanwhile, lending to the public sector shrank again in real terms, the larger fiscal deficit notwithstanding.
In the Caribbean, financial trends were similar to those in the rest of the region's countries, in contrast to the situation with respect to the cycles in the real sectors of these two groups of economies, which are almost diametrically opposed.
The growth rate of private-sector domestic lending had been declining in real terms since the fourth quarter of 1997, and in 1999 it even lagged behind GDP growth.
Structural reforms The region's ongoing structural reform processes came to a halt in 1999 as governments concentrated on short-term economic management in an effort to deal with the international financial crisis.
Not only did this leave structural reforms on the back burner, but in a number of cases the measures that were introduced represented a step backward and had particularly negative effects on international trade.
The difficult international situation made both foreign and local investors more cautious and less enthusiastic about making further commitments in the region, and this held up the execution of many projects that were already in the pipeline.
In addition, the economic authorities reacted to the international financial crisis by tightening up monetary policy, which drove up interest rates and put a number of national financial systems in a difficult position.
Many of the countries' monetary authorities also sought to mitigate the impact of devaluations in other countries, both within the region and elsewhere, by introducing measures to curb imports.
Within this context, short-term economic management took centre stage, and structural reforms faded into the background.
Given the economic authorities' limited capacity to pursue their agendas, this change in priorities led to the absence or postponement of new reform initiatives.
Another important factor was the political cost involved in carrying out certain types of reforms -such as those involving privatizations- at a time when unemployment was on the rise.
Argentina and Brazil led the field in this respect, but the Dominican Republic was the most active country in relative terms, bringing in privatization revenues equivalent to 6% of GDP in 1999.
The sectoral diversification of privatizations and concessions continued, with transactions being undertaken in a wide range of areas, including highways, railroads, ports, airports, drinking water systems, telecommunications, electric power generation and distribution, and natural gas.
In order to cope with the economic crisis and with the resulting deterioration of fiscal accounts, the authorities sought to generate additional revenues through tax hikes, especially on domestic financial transactions.
Such levies were applied in several countries because they are easy to implement and collect.
In order to preclude future fiscal deficits, four countries passed laws making it mandatory to keep public accounts in balance.
Progress was also made in strengthening State institutions and, to a lesser extent, in the regulation of monopoly markets.
The anti-corruption measures that were introduced as part of the authori t ies ' institution-building efforts merit special mention, since they address a new issue on government agendas.
Some of the countries' financial sectors experienced serious problems as a result of both the crisis and the authorities' response to it.
In order to deal with this situation, programmes were designed and put in place to assist financial institutions and debtors.
Efforts to strengthen supervision and oversight of the sector continued, especially in the Central American countries, and two nations (Nicaragua and Guyana) gave greater autonomy to their central banks.
The Caribbean countries concentrated on introducing regulations to cut down on money laundering.
Public-sector reforms (a) Privatizations The economic crisis dealt a severe blow to privatization processes in the region, and many planned projects were either postponed or cancelled altogether.
Consequently, whereas privatization proceeds in 1998 amounted to a record US$ 42 billion, in 1999 they barely cleared the US$ 12 billion level.
In quantitative terms, region's financial systems also sparked numerous mergers and acquisitions aimed at restructuring and consolidating the sector.
The few labour and pension system reforms that were implemented included a move towards universal social security coverage in Venezuela based on provisions included in that country's new constitution; pension system reforms in Costa Rica; and the introduction of further labour law amendments in Argentina and Ecuador.
The economic crisis had an even greater impact on international trade than it did in other spheres.
The various adjustment measures adopted by many countries to restrain imports included devaluations, tariff hikes and the establishment of non-tariff measures, and these moves generated considerable friction within Mercosur and the Andean Community, in particular.
However, in view of the economic recovery and the improvement in the terms of trade (especially in the case of oil-exporting countries), it is expected that such protectionist measures will be withdrawn in the future.
The Caribbean and Central American countries were less strongly affected by the crisis, thanks to their strong links with the United States economy.
Despite the economic crisis, integration processes continued to move forward, although there were some delays in implementing agreements that had already been reached.
Given the adverse economic climate and the domestic difficulties experienced by the countries of the region, it is noteworthy that no subregional integration process was abandoned or overtaken by an insurmountable crisis.
In fact, as soon as clear signs of an economic reactivation began to emerge in the first half of 2000, efforts to relaunch regional integration processes began; the plans being made to coordinate the macroeconomic policies of Mercosur and the Andean Community constitute a particularly significant step in this regard.
Argentina and Brazil led the field in the region, raising slightly over USS 4 billion each.
In the case of Brazil, however, this sum was just afraction of the privatization proceeds posted in 1998 (US$ 36 billion), as the devaluation of the real and the uncertainty associated with the modification of the exchange-rate regime led to an abrupt slowdown in privatization activity in that country.
Another relevant factor was the absence of any Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 51 large-scale project comparable to the privatization of Telecomunica tes Brasileiras (Telebras) in 1998 or Companhia de Vale do Rio Doce in 1997.
In Argentina, on the other hand, the amount of privatization revenues received in 1999 approached the levels attained during the great wave of privatizations of the early 1990s (see table III. 1).
Another country that received a relatively high level of revenues from the sale of State assets during the year (US$ 1.434 billion) was Chile, the region's privatization pioneer, which returned to the field in 1999 following several years of inactivity to sell off State-owned companies in the water and sanitation subsector.
In relation to economic size, privatization activity was also particularly significant in the Dominican Republic in 1999, which took in US$ 1.054 billion (the equivalent of 6% of its GDP).
In several other countries, however -particularly in the Andean subregion, where the recession was deeper- privatizations had to be postponed.
Unlike what had occurred the year before, when the telecommunications sector had dominated privatization activity, the electric power industry was the most active subsector in 1999, accounting for nearly 40% of total privatization proceeds (see figure III.l).
This was partly due to the absence of major privatization projects in the telecommunications industry, since most countries had already opened this area up to private capital.
Another consideration is the fact that, although Brazil's move to open up the electric power industry to private ownership did indeed generate massive revenues, this was only because it is the region's largest economy.
The oil and gas sector was in second place in terms of revenues, contributing 26% of total privatization proceeds.
Taken together, these two sectors thus accounted for 65% of the region's total earnings from privatization in 1999, a fact which underscores the attractiveness of these two industries, whose potential had largely been ignored in the past.
Not surprisingly, very high premiums were received, as in the case, for example, of Companhia de Gas de São Paulo (Comgas), for which a consortium consisting of British Gas and the Royal Dutch/Shell Group paid 119% over the reserve price.
Somewhat unexpectedly, the energy subsector was followed in the ranking by water and sanitation, which accounted for 14% of the total revenue raised.
Although privatizations in this area had begun several years earlier, activity has been sporadic.
In 1999, however, a number of large enterprises were sold, including numerous water and sanitation companies in Chile, which raised a total of US$ 1.29 billion.
Oil and gas companies generated 90% of the total in Bolivia and 50% in Argentina, while 90% of privatization revenues in Chile came from the water and sanitation subsector.
Other industries did not play a major role, as the firms that were sold generally brought in smaller amounts.
Europeans were active buyers of the region's State-owned firms in 1999, with all of the Chilean water and sanitation companies, for example, being acquired by investors from that continent.
United States investors also maintained a strong presence in the region, while participation by local capital was once again led by Brazil and, to a lesser extent, Chile.
A broader definition of privatization would also include concessions, where there is a long list of projects involving airports, ports, telecommunications, oil and gas, highways, railways, sanitation systems, etc.
As the number of State-owned firms in the region that remain to be privatized diminishes, concessions are likely to become an increasingly important area of activity, especially since this way of opening industries up to private-sector capital generates less controversy than privatization as such.
This qualitative change entails a new type of relationship between the State and the private sector based on mutual trust and cooperation and marks the emergence of a new dialogue between the two as they work together to provide the necessary goods and services.
Thus, although the State still has an important role to play, it is now as a regulator of private-sector activity, rather than as a producer.
Following the postponement of many projects in 1999, privatization activity is expected to be more buoyant in 2000.
Continuing divestments in the electric power subsector, together with the sale of a minority holding in the giant Petróleo Brasileiro (Petrobras), should boost privatization earnings in Brazil, while Argentina's and Columbia's plans for the energy industry during the year should also generate sizeable revenues.
The sale of water and sanitation companies is expected to continue in Chile and Brazil, while Columbia and Honduras are planning to place telecommunications firms in private hands.
The list of planned concessions includes oil and gas projects in Brazil, Columbia and Peru; highways, railroads and inland waterways in Colombia; airports in Honduras, Mexico and Peru; and drinking water systems in Peru.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 53 (b) Institutional changes and market regulation In the second half of the 1990s the region began to see the need for a more comprehensive modernization of the State that would go beyond the boudns of privatization-based downsizing.
This led policy-makers to abandon the simplistic idea that it was merely a matter of changing the relationship between the State and the market at the expense of the former.
The central idea that is now steadily gaining ground is that efficient markets cannot exist without an efficient State.
The State needs to become more efficient in activities where the private sector fails to supply goods and services at a socially optimal level, occupies the position of a natural monopoly or either has no incentive to provide certain socially necessary services or lacks the necessary legitimacy to do so (national security, law and order).
Public-sector involvement is crucial in all of these cases in order to raise service provision to socially optimal levels.
This does not mean that the public sector necessarily has to produce the corresponding goods and services itself, however, because many of the above problems can be resolved through appropriate fiscal policy (taxes and subsidies) or a suitable regulatory framework.
It is also essential for the State to become more efficient in implementing economic and social policies, and in order for it to perform these more functions effectively while using fewer resources, a high-quality, well-trained and transparent public sector is vital.
Hence, as the decade comes to an end, the reform agenda has become considerably broader than it once was.
Some of the activities carried out in 1999 fall within the above framework.
In the area of fiscal policy, four countries passed laws or regulations making it mandatory to meet specified fiscal targets.
The significance of these initiatives is multi-faceted (see box II. 1), but two aspects are particularly important from the standpoint of the reform process.
Firstly, the requirement that a fiscal balance or surplus be achieved in the future means that fiscal discipline is now likely be stricter than before.
On the other hand, in order to overcome the region's "social deficit", social spending will have to be increased or be made more efficient, or both.
Given these two opposing elements, the public sector will clearly have to become more efficient, at least in the areas of tax collection and social programme delivery.
In addition, the competition for increasingly scarce public resources could well make the resource allocation process more transparent.
Secondly, within the context of regional integration schemes, stricter fiscal discipline is an essential element for the future coordination of macroeconomic policy, and the implementation of these laws and regulations may therefore contribute to a greater integration of the members of such schemes.
Another area of activity within this framework which is a relatively new item on the authorities' agenda is the fight against corruption.
Governments are unlikely to be able to achieve their goals if corruption exists in the policy- and programme-implementation phase, and attitudes about this issue in the region are changing.
State objectives are, by definition, intended to be in the public interest, and corruption is the antithesis of any such effort, since it sacrifices collective interests in order to serve individual aims.
The outcome is that the State loses credibility as its operations become increasingly inefficient and less transparent.
The specific anti-corruption measures adopted in 1999 varied considerably from country to country.
Some passed legislation to combat corruption (Ecuador, Chile) while others set up institutions to do so (Argentina); still other countries chose to implement programmes to deal with this problem (Colombia).
In Mexico, the driving force came from civil society, which developed a proposal for setting up a network of civic education institutions to study the phenomenon and to work to inculcate the values of an anti-corruption culture, not only at all levels of government, but also in the private sector and among the general public.
Bolivia pressed ahead with the ambitious anti-corruption programme launched during the current Administration, whose main components are reforms to the judicial system, a civil service statute and changes in the customs system.
A new customs law was passed in 1999 aimed at professionalizing the service, increasing its efficiency, and combating contraband, corruption and nepotism.
In Brazil, legislation was passed under which corrupt election practices will be severely punished.
An appropriate regulatory system is essential in order to deal with situations involving monopolies, externalities or major economies of scale, yet many of the region's countries have no antitrust agencies, and in those cases where they do exist, they often lack resources and political support.
This situation is not entirely surprising, however, since the need to counter monopolistic practices has been very low on the list of government priorities.
What is more, different government agencies may be working at cross-purposes, since ministries responsible for privatization tend to want to sell 54 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean State-owned assets on an "as is" basis in order to maximize the sale price, while antitrust agencies prefer to break up State monopolies to ensure competition in the newly privatized sector.
In addition, in many cases the purchaser is guaranteed uncontested access to the market for several years in order to enable the local firm to consolidate its position before it has to deal with outside competition.
This is tantamount to using antitrust policy to achieve an industrial-policy goal, while leaving consumers to foot the bill.
Such practices are no longer the rule in the region, however, and efforts were made throughout the 1990s to put an end to monopolies in privatized sectors.
The telecommunications subsector is being opened up to competition in Argentina, Jamaica and Peru.
In Brazil, legislation was passed in 1997 to put an end to the oil monopoly in that country, although genuine competition did not begin until 1999, following the award of 12 exploration concessions; this process was given an additional boost in 2000 with another round of 27 concessions.
Ecuador plans to open up the oil subsector to competition in the course of the year, while the scope of the latest constitutional changes on this issue in Venezuela has not yet been fully clarified.
A number of recent changes in the region have helped to set sectoral integration processes in motion.
The combined effect of privatization, market liberalization and more open trade has given rise to a new sectoral configuration in which economic interests predominate over political considerations.
One example is Brazil's growing integration with its neighbours in the field of energy.
The demand for electric power in Brazil is growing faster than local supply, and this has stimulated energy projects in neighbouring countries.
The existing gas pipeline between Bolivia and Brazil is shortly to be supplemented by others connecting Argentina, Uruguay, Peru and Venezuela to the region's largest economy.
Since these are binational or multinational projects, they could well represent a significant step towards greater regional integration.
Until recently, however, this type of cooperation in the energy sector would have been unthinkable both because of political factors and because of the restrictive nature of the regulations in force.
Another example of integration in this field is the Electrical Interconnection System for Central America (SIEPAC), a project scheduled for completion in 2004.
This initiative aims to promote private investment and to consolidate the integration of the electric power markets of Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Costa Rica and Panama.
The multilateral banking system has already pledged financing for this project, which is now entering the execution stage. (c) Social security reforms Unlike what occurred in previous years, none of the countries of the region made any major changes in their social security systems in 1999.
A pension reform bill was submitted in Ecuador in an effort to replace the current system, which is beset by financial difficulties.
As a consequence of the economic crisis and the relatively weak position of the present Administration, however, the bill foundered in its initial stages.
Venezuela's new Constitution provides for universal social security coverage, but questions relating to the cost of this initiative and the State's capacity to implement it remain to be resolved.
Brazil passed legislation intended to encourage workers in the private sector to postpone their retirement by reducing the benefits paid to people retiring at the usual age.
This is just one of the pieces of pension legislation that have been awaiting congressional approval for several years now.
In Colombia, the finances of the public pension system continued to deteriorate at a swifter rate than had originally been foreseen, and this prompted the Administration to initiate a debate on the future of the country's social security system.
In Panama a new pension system for civil servants began to operate which is based on individual accounts and voluntary contributions.
This scheme could eventually cover up to 160,000 public-sector employees and is seen as a testing ground for a future private system covering the entire economy.
In the first half of 2000, a pension reform bill was passed in Costa Rica that introduces the concept of voluntary saving and increases the supervision of the various retirement schemes.
Nearly all the countries with private pension systems moved forward with their consolidation and concentration.
Apart from a reduction in the number of pension funds, there were two other trends in this area that grew stronger during the period under review.
Firstly, banks are increasingly becoming involved as owners of pension fund management companies, since their experience in portfolio management makes them natural candidates for the administration of such pension funds' relatively vast resources.
Another clear trend is the entry of foreign investors (generally banks) into the pension fund business via acquisitions.
Spanish banks have been the most active participants in this type of Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean « 1999-2000 55 operation and now hold an interest in most of the countries' banking systems.
In the space of just a few years, the recently merged Banco Bilbao Vizcaya y Argentaría (BBVA) has gained control of about 30% of the Latin American pension market.
Since Banco Santander Central Hispano (BSCH) holds another 15%, In the last two years, the international financial crisis, and the very tight monetary policies with which the authorities have responded to it, have weighed heavily on the region's financial sector.
Several countries tried to maintain their currency-band systems, but this drove up real interest rates to their peak levels for the decade, which dampened the demand for financial services and consequently held back business activity in this sector.
What is more, these high interest rates, coupled with the economic crisis and rising unemployment and bankruptcy rates, have caused default indicators to worsen and the number of non-performing loans to rise steeply.
Finally, under pressure to replenish State coffers, a number of governments imposed taxes on financial transactions in 1998 and 1999, thereby undermining the intermediary functions of the financial system still further.
The situation has become especially critical in Ecuador, where the financial crisis has lasted for three years and deepened further in 1999.
The year saw bank runs and failures, bankruptcies of other financial institutions, a freeze on deposits, and government intervention in 14 financial institutions that together accounted for 65% of the entire system's assets.
The crisis in Colombia was less severe, thanks to the fact that the authorities had declared an "economic state of emergency" in November 1998 and taken steps to improve the positions of the financial system, borrowers in the social housing system and savers in the cooperative system.
In addition, the Financial Institutions Guarantee Fund (Fogafin) was strengthened and steps were taken to begin restructuring State financial institutions, which sustained greater losses than the private sector did.
Other countries' financial systems were not as troubled, but measures were nonetheless taken to prevent a widespread deterioration in the situation.
In Peru, for example, the economic authorities approved a US$ 400 million programme to strengthen the banking system. these two banks now control nearly half of this market, which has considerable growth potential.
The degree of concentration that is developing is a cause for concern, however, as it facilitates a variety of harmful practices such as bandwagon behaviour, collusion and price-fixing.
Under this programme, the government took over the banks' non-performing loan portfolios in exchange for their agreement to implement a plan designed to put them on a sounder footing.
In Mexico, the situation of the financial system is improving, thanks to the steady economic growth the country has enjoyed since the 1995 crisis.
The only exception in 1999 was the failure of Banco Serfin, but this did not have repercussions on the rest of the system.
In countries such as Jamaica, Paraguay and Venezuela, which had gone through banking crises several years ago, the gradual improvement in financial-sector indicators continued.
The situation in 2000 promises to be less problematic, as a revival of growth in the region can be expected to lead to lower default rates.
The shift towards floating exchange rates has given the monetary authorities additional manoeuvring room, and this has resulted in a significant increase in liquidity.
A revival of lending activity -and, as a result, the financial sector's resumption of its intermediation functions- can therefore be expected.
On the other hand, the taxes levied on financial transactions, which have such a harmful effect on the sector, remain in force and, in fact, legislation has actually been proposed in Brazil and Colombia that would make such taxes permanent.
One of the side effects of the financial crisis has been an intensive restructuring and consolidation of the sector.
Economic crises are particularly effective catalysts for such processes, since large institutions can usually weather them more easily than small ones.
Moreover, they are usually associated with a decrease in asset prices, which makes mergers and acquisitions more attractive.
The most recent crisis was no exception, with the number of financial institutions shrinking in various countries as a result of acquisitions, interventions or bankruptcies.
The foreign banks that flooded into the region's financial sectors during the decade played a leading role in this connection.
Apart from being able to Financial and capital market reforms 56 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean provide more efficient service because of their more advanced technology, these foreign banks are also provided with massive financial backing by their parent companies.
This last factor is particularly important because it helps to reduce systemic risk during financial crises and thereby lowers the cost of bailing out troubled financial institutions.
Another outcome of the crisis was that the economic authorities launched an intensive effort to set up prudential regulatory frameworks and strengthen their financial systems.
Labour reforms Changes in the labour market were conspicuous by their absence: just two initiatives have been implemented during the year, in addition to the constitutional changes made in Venezuela.
In Argentina, a law was passed in the first half of 2000 to encourage job creation and boost the competitiveness of business firms by lowering labour costs.
This legislation decentralizes the collective bargaining process; puts an end to the traditional automatic renewal of such contracts without the express 5.
Progress in implementing integration process (a) Trade reforms The international financial crisis has had a profound impact on trade reforms in the region.
As previously abundant capital inflows began to wane, the region could no longer draw on these flows in order to cover its widening trade deficit.
Consequently, a number of countries found it necessary to implement institutions in Ecuador.
In addition, legislation has been passed to curb money laundering in Honduras and Saint Lucia, and a number of proposals have been presented in Caribbean countries aimed at tightening up the regulation of their financial systems.
An important event in the capital market was that trading began on the new euro-based Latin American stock market, LATIBEX.
This new exchange, established with Spanish capital, is designed to help generate financing in European markets for firms in the region.
A new stock exchange law was adopted in Panama to complement the banking legislation passed in 1998 and, in the first half of 2000, the Argentine, Brazilian and Uruguayan stock exchanges signed an agreement that will allow them to interconnect their operations in the future.
This represents an important additional step towards integration within Mercosur. agreement of both parties; extends the trial period for new workers from one to six months; and reduces employer's contributions for newly hired workers' social security benefits.
A reform introduced in Ecuador, also in 2000, includes requirements to standardize wages and the rules on hourly-based hiring.
Lastly, the new Venezuelan Constitution alters the regulatory principles governing labour relations in ways that will make them more rigid and is likely to raise labour costs as well. trade reforms and in the regional various adjustment measures, including devaluations, tariff hikes and the imposition of non-tariff barriers aimed at restraining imports from all sources.
The upshot of all this was a nearly 18% contraction in intraregional trade and a proliferation of trade disputes among the region's countries.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 57 The South American economies were hit the hardest, and nearly all of them posted negative growth rates for the year.
On the other hand, Mexico and the Central American and Caribbean countries were not as strongly affected by the international financial crisis, thanks to their close ties with the burgeoning United States economy.
In South America, a great deal of friction arose within Mercosur as a result of disagreements between Argentina and Brazil over macroeconomic management and within the Andean Community owing to the depth of the recessions in Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela.
The measures that were adopted in response to this situation included safeguards in Chile; administrative controls on imports in Argentina; import permits in Brazil; import quotas in Argentina and Brazil; import restrictions in Colombia; a system of minimum import prices in Argentina; and certification programmes for agricultural imports entering Argentina, Bolivia and Brazil.
However, the economic recovery taking place in 2000, together with stronger international prices for certain export products (especially oil), could cause the use of protectionist measures in the region to subside. (b) The integration process The fallout from the Asian crisis also had a major impact on the integration processes that are unfolding in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The effects were particularly adverse in the cases of the Andean Community and Mercosur, while the countries of the Central American Common Market (CACM) and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) suffered far less.
The adverse effects of the crisis put a halt to the institutional development of the first two of these integration schemes and brought about a substantial reversal in terms of the degree of trade integration they had achieved in the past.
Soon thereafter, this country's trade relations with its three Mercosur partners began to fray.
These tensions were most intense in the case of Argentina, where the authorities took steps to stem the rising tide of cheaper Brazilian merchandise that was flooding the market.
However, although friction between the two countries in this area has increased significantly, so far it has proved possible to cope with the situation through bilateral negotiations.
Firstly, the level of merchandise exports traded within Mercosur fell significantly; secondly, debate was renewed on the need to consolidate and deepen the integration process by strengthening the scheme's institutional structure and complying with existing agreements; and lastly, a higher priority was assigned to the harmonization of macroeconomic policy.
The creation of the Mercosur free trade area is moving ahead on schedule, and the tariffs on products included on the exceptions and adaptation lists should be lifted at some point during 2000.
The customs union is also well on its way to completion, since Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay are at this point applying the common external tariff (CET) to nearly 90% of all products; only Paraguay still has an extended deadline of 2005.
Capital goods, along with products related to information technology and telecommunications, will be brought into line with the CET no later than 2006 in all the member countries.
The sugar and automotive industries are not yet included either in the reciprocal free trade regime or in the CET, however. (ii) The Andean Community In the Andean region, Peru's exports were depressed by falling commodity prices and by shrinking demand on Asian markets, which are a major destination for the country's foreign sales.
The reduced availability and higher cost of external financing forced all the Andean countries to make sharp adjustments in their economies.
The members of this group have, for the most part, mounted unilateral responses to the crisis in the form of devaluations, temporary tariff surcharges and non-tariff barriers on imports.
Several of these measures were particularly harmful to intra-community trade, which shrank by nearly one-third after a flat performance in 1998; during the rest of the decade, trade within the Community had grown vigorously.
Progress in the negotiations aimed at forming a larger free trade area that would embrace both the Andean Community and Mercosur has been fitful ever since their commencement was first announced at the second Summit of the Americas (Santiago, Chile, April 1998).
The process was jump-started, however, by Brazil's decision to undertake unilateral negotiations with the Andean Community.
In August 1999, these 58 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean talks culminated in the signing of an economic complementarity agreement under which a preferential trade area covering a wide range of products was established between Brazil and the Andean countries.
The Andean Community countries reached a similar agreement with Argentina in 2000 and hope to begin negotiations with Paraguay and Uruguay in the near future with a view to establishing a free trade area encompassing all the member countries of the Andean Community and Mercosur.
In September 1999, Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela signed a new complementarity agreement for the automotive industry which did away with subregional content rules in order to bring this sector into line with commitments undertaken in the World Trade Organization (WTO).
As in Mercosur, motor vehicles and vehicle parts have become one of the fastest-growing segments of subregional trade.
Honduras and Nicaragua have been two of the hardest hit countries, especially because of the destruction suffered by their transport and communications infrastructure, which has hurt subregional trade.
Recent presidential summits have addressed the needs of these countries in particular.
At one such meeting, the President of the United States announced his country's intention to provide debt relief for Nicaragua and Honduras.
He also pledged to set up a strategic framework for reducing the effects of disasters in Central America and making the subregion less vulnerable to them.
At the most recent summit, the Permanent Secretariat of the General Treaty on Central American Economic Integration (SIECA) was asked to propose an institutional arrangement for establishing a mechanism to settle trade and investment disputes.
As was the case with the region's other integration schemes as well, during much of the 1990s CACM made significant progress towards establishing a customs union among its member countries and thus bringing about a revival of subregional trade.
This momentum faded somewhat in the second half of the decade, however, as the countries sought to deal with the problems involved in implementing a common external tariff.
Accordingly, in mid-1997 the countries agreed to postpone the full application of that tariff -originally scheduled for 1999- until 2005.
More notable progress was made in re-introducing free trade, which was expanded to include 95% of the tariff universe, although there were later some isolated setbacks in this respect. (iv) The Caribbean Community (CARICOM) CARICOM also decided to rationalize its common external tariff in the early 1990s.
The new structure for this tariff was approved in late 1992 and called for a five-year programme intended to conclude with tariff rates ranging between 5% and 20%.
Fulfilling this commitment has proved to be problematic, however, since it entails a reduction in fiscal revenues for the countries concerned.
With regard to the free movement of goods among CARICOM member countries, in late 1999 the Community's secretariat observed that seven countries were still requiring permits for imports of a series of products that are also produced locally and are classified as "sensitive".
The structural conditions of the CARICOM economies bear some resemblance to those of the Central American countries.
Both groups are closely linked to the North American economy, although the Caribbean countries also have long-standing ties with members of the European Union.
Thanks to these bonds with other regions of the world, the Asian crisis has had less of an impact on this group of countries than it has had on South America. (v) Other integration processes In addition to the four established schemes, a number of bilateral integration processes continue to forge ahead.
Guatemala and El Salvador agreed to form a customs union, while Chile signed a free trade agreement with the Central American countries and another with Mexico in 1999.
Mexico also reached an agreement with the European Union with a view to concluding a free trade treaty by July 2000 and signed another pact with Israel.
In 2000, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras signed a free trade treaty with Mexico that is to take effect in January 2001.
Another significant event in 2000 was the passage of legislation in the United States granting Caribbean countries the same conditions as those provided in Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean « 1999-2000 59 certain sectors under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
NAFTA remains the most successful of all the integration schemes in the continent, with the Mexican economy becoming ever more closely integrated with the United States and, to a lesser extent, with Canada.
The spectacular upswing in Mexican exports to the United States, which averaged a growth rateof20% per year between 1994 and 1998, is a direct result of NAFTA, and has turned Mexico's export sector into the engine of the country' s economic development.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 Chapter IV REGIONAL OUTPUT fluctuated widely during 1999, falling in the first three quarters and then picking up strongly late in the year, this upswing carried over into the first half of 2000, and growth is therefore projected at just under 4% for the year as a whole.
Economic performance in 1999 was noticeably worse in Latin America than in other regions of the world, where the vast majority of countries saw a recovery.
The clearest example of this pattern can be found in Asia, which grew by 4.6% in 1999, compared to less than 1% in 1998 (see figure IV.1), thanks to expansionary macroeconomic policies and favourable external conditions.
Africa saw a slight improvement, primarily as a result of higher oil exports.
The sharp divergence seen in 1999 is unlikely to be repeated in 2000, however, as the region's economic performance is forecast to be more in Une with other parts of the world this year.
Economic growth in Latin America had slowed sharply in 1998, following the robust results of the two preceding years.
In late 1998, regional output was jolted by the deepening international economic crisis, which intensified in August when Russia declared a moratorium on its external debt.
This adverse state of affairs then persisted until the third quarter of 1999, with existing problems being further compounded by a steep devaluation of Brazil's currency, which hurt regional trade among the Southern Cone countries, in particular.
A major turning point was reached in the final quarter, however, when regional economic activity expanded by nearly 3% following four quarters of negative growth (see figure IV.2).
The main reasons for this were a significant improvement in the external economic climate, an easing of monetary policy in several countries in the region, and a relatively rapid restoration of economic stability in Brazil.
There were also significant differences among the individual economies of the region in 1999.
Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean generally posted growth rates of around 4%, whereas the South American economies shrank by 0.9%.
The first group tended to perform better because of these countries' closer links to the United States economy, which has been extremely buoyant in recent years.
The poor showing of the South American economies, on the other hand, was attributable to the decline in intraregional trade, smaller capital flows and negative trends on domestic markets (see figure IV.3).
Three phases can be distinguished in the economic activity of these two subregions during the 1990s.
The north grew more vigorously in the first part of the decade, South America performed better from 1992 to 1996, and since 1996 the northern subregion has again taken the lead.
Taking a longer-term view, the region as a whole grew by an average annual rate of 3% during the 1990s, with South America posting a rate of 2.7% and the countries to the north one of 3.6%.
In 1999, economic activity declined in seven of the region's countries (Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Honduras, Uruguay and Venezuela), compared to just two in 1998 (Paraguay and Venezuela); in 1997, all the countries had registered positive GDP growth.
Six of the seven countries where output shrank were South American, while another six countries (Brazil, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Peru) posted better growth figures than they had in 1998.
The Caribbean grew faster (4%) than the rest of the region as a whole.
At nearly 5%, projected GDP growth is higher for the countries in the northern portion of the region.
This upswing will be led by Mexico, which enjoyed high growth rates in the early months of 2000.
Based on figures at factor cost. in the South American countries are also set to pick up sharply, with a projected increase of 3.5% overall (Brazil, Chile and Peru are expected to post the highest individual rates).
Domestic availability of goods and services (2 + 3 - 4) = domestic 6.
Supply and demand The Latin American and Caribbean economies turned in a poor performance with respect to virtually all components of supply and demand in 1999, except in the case of the physical volume of goods and service exports, although even here some categories also contracted.
Total supply was generally flat as a result of sluggish output growth and a smaller volume of imports.
Domestic demand shrank by nearly 2% in the wake of sharply lower investment (-9.5%); consumption rose very slightly (0.7%), although still somewhat faster than output (see figure IV.4).
Regional export volumes grew by 7.5%, which was similar to the 1998 figure, with the expansion of Mexico's exports acting as a very influential factor in this respect.
Despite these higher volumes, however, the value of foreign sales was driven down by the tumbling prices of the region's main export products.
This was the net effect of an across-the-board decrease in South America and an upswing in most of the other countries in the region.
Thus, unlike the case of exports, the volume of imports declined along with their value, although the latter did so even more steeply because of the drop in import prices (see chapter VII, "The external sector", for a more detailed analysis).
Investment is usually one of the most volatile elements of aggregate demand, and 1999 was no exception (see figure IV.4).
In fact, investment was the component of aggregate demand that was hit the hardest by the slowdown in growth rates and, in turn, was the main factor underlying the weakness of economic activity (see chapter V, "Investment and saving").
Per capita consumption declined by an average of 1.2% in 1999, with more pronounced slumps in South America, and especially in Ecuador and Venezuela.
Even so, average per capita consumption levels were still higher than in 1990, although by just 10%.
Per capita consumption in 1999 was below the 1990 figure in only four countries (Ecuador, Haiti, Paraguay and Venezuela).
Production sectors In most cases, the secondary sector of the economy was the one that was most seriously affected by the 1999 crisis, and its output actually shrank.
Sectoral growth figures indicate that the services sector expanded at much the same rate as overall GDP.
The primary sector, which had been quite depressed in 1997 and 1998, was the strongest performer in 1999 thanks in large part to the results turned in by agricultural activities.
Tourism is one of the most dynamic sectors in several Latin American and Caribbean countries, especially in the northern part of the region.
This branch of activity is not classified as a sector in its own right for national accounts purposes, and its output is recorded under a number of different headings, including transport, commerce, and hotels and restaurants.
The available information indicates that in 1999 the tourism industry benefited from favourable circumstances in developed countries, particularly the United States.
Tourism expanded in most Caribbean countries, especially Cuba, the Bahamas and the smaller islands, while in Central America it was particularly buoyant in Costa Rica and Nicaragua.
The performance gap between the northern and southern portions of the region was not as wide in agriculture as in other sectors of the economy.
The rapid growth of this sector in the two largest economies -Mexico and particularly Brazil, which posted an increase of 9.5%- was a key factor in the expansion of this sector at the regional level since, between them, those two countries account for nearly 60% of the region's agricultural output.
Although the sector's growth rate was three percentage points higher in 1999 than it was in 1998 for the region as a whole, the number of countries where output declined nearly doubled, from four to seven.
There was considerable volatility in individual countries as well, since those economies that registered a contraction in 1999 (Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Honduras, Uruguay and Venezuela) had all grown faster than the regional average the year before.
Weather conditions were generally favourable for agriculture in most of the region in 1999.
There were adverse conditions in some countries (hurricanes in the Caribbean, rains and drought in the Southern Cone), but they were less severe than they had been in the two preceding years.
Several economies were also affected by a contraction of external demand in the sector and, in particular, by the low prices that most agricultural products consequently brought.
Output in a number of countries was also undermined by phytosanitary problems, as in the case of Ecuador and Panama, where White Spot Syndrome Virus (WSSV) hurt the shrimp industry, and in Colombia, where coffee plantations were hit by an outbreak of coffee berry borers (CBB).
There was a significant decline in demand for a number of mining products, and this was compounded, in most cases, by sharply lower prices on international markets.
The region's two largest mining producers, Chile and Venezuela, posted very different growth rates for the year.
In Venezuela -the region's top producer- this sector's output shrank by 9% due to a steep drop in oil production.
In Chile, however, mining production expanded by 17%, thanks to the conclusion of a major investment cycle and the start-up of a number of large-scale projects, especially in the copper industry. (c) Manufacturing The manufacturing sector endured one of its worst years of the decade, shrinking by 0.7% regionwide.
The contraction in South America was widespread (with the only exceptions being Bolivia and particularly Peru) and was attributable to a slackening of both domestic demand -Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador, Uruguay and Venezuela- and external demand -Argentina and Uruguay- as a consequence, in large part, of the downturn in the Brazilian market.
The growth seen in Peru was based mainly on the expansion of agribusiness, which was boosted by an increase in the supply of agricultural products and the recovery that followed upon the previous year's slump.
Manufacturing output expanded in virtually all the countries in the northern portion of the region except Panama, and in Mexico the sector expanded by 4.1%.
The buoyancy of manufacturing in these countries was generally driven by an upturn in domestic demand, a larger volume of exports of manufactures to the United States and, in several of these economies, higher output from export processing zones (EPZs). (d) Construction The construction sector fared worse than any other in 1999, as output slumped by 4.2%.
As is well known, construction is the most volatile industry in terms of its reactions to fluctuations in the overall level of economic activity, and it is also highly sensitive to macroeconomic policies on monetary variables (via its effect on credit) and on fiscal matters (via its impact on the execution of public works).
Here again, there was a clear-cut difference between the sector's performance in South America, where production was down everywhere except in Paraguay and Uruguay, and in the northern part of the region, where construction activity generally trended upward. (e) Services The services sector as a whole expanded by 0.7% in 1999, which was slightly higher than overall GDP growth.
The performance of the different subsectors was mixed, however, with basic services up by 3.3%, which was better than the other sectors in 1999 but below this area's own trend level for the decade as a whole.
These results stood out in contrast to the performance of the commerce, restaurants and hotels segment, for example, which registered an average downswing of 1.1%, with very steep declines being recorded in Argentina, Ecuador and Venezuela.
The growth rate for electricity, gas, water and sanitation services was a 10-year low.
Many countries were affected by adverse weather conditions that reduced their hydroelectric power generation levels, but elsewhere the output of hydroelectric power improved thanks to abundant rainfall.
In several countries, these events served to strengthen the position of groups advocating an expansion of electric power interconnections and the extension of oil and gas pipelines as a means of reducing the volatility of hydroelectric power generation.
The production and use of natural gas increased in a significant number of countries (Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Uruguay and the Central American nations) thanks to better integration and interconnection.
The 3.5% upswing seen in transport, storage and communication services was led by Mexico (8.8%) and by some Caribbean countries (Dominican Republic and Haiti).
Inflation As measured by consumer price indices (CPI), inflation came in at just under 10% for the region as a whole in 1999, marginally lower than in the two preceding years.
Inflation had been explosive in the 1980s and early 1990s, with price increases at three- and four-digit levels and even some instances of hyperinflation.
Prices began to rise more slowly in 1994, however, dropping to 10% by 1997 and then settling around this level.
As a result, inflation for the last three years has been the lowest in half a century, and no cases of repressed inflation have been observed either.
Five of the 22 countries for which information is available registered annual inflation rates of under 3% in 1999, or even deflation, while average price increases were held to under 13% in a further 15 economies.
Inflation was higher that that figure in just two countries: Venezuela, where it topped 20%, and Ecuador, which recorded a level of 60%.
In the vast majority of economies, inflation rates either fell or stayed very low.
What is more, there were significant increases in just two cases: Brazil, where inflation climbed from 2.5% in 1998 to slightly over 8% in 1999 although, following a sharp rise early in the year, it then fell back significantly; and Ecuador, where the already high rate in 1998 (43%) surged by a further 17 percentage points in 1999.
This level of inflation, which is atypical by current regional standards, has not been seen since 1996, when Venezuela posted a rate of just Wholesale prices (or producer prices where this other measurement does not exist) rose by 21.5% for the region as a whole in 1999, compared to just 7% the year before.
The divergence of this indicator from the pattern of consumer prices was also mainly due to negative results in Brazil and Ecuador, where wholesale price indices outpaced the CPI, rising by 20 and 126 percentage points, respectively.
Once again, the exception was Ecuador, where price increases continued to accelerate, running at just over 100%.
In another three countries, the 12-month inflation rate climbed by between two and seven percentage points, while nine other countries experienced much smaller increases.
Apart from Ecuador, these setbacks cannot be seen as a turning point in the prevailing trends of the second half of the 1990s, since they are basically accounted for by continuing devaluations, the recent oil price hikes on international markets and the reactivation of individual economies following the 1999 recession.
The major slowdown in inflation during the decade had basically been due to a change in the direction of economic policy in nearly all countries since the late 1980s.
The slow rate of inflation achieved with these new policies held firm even after the outbreak of major financial problems in several parts of the world starting in the second half of 1997.
Nonetheless, difficulties have arisen in the foreign-exchange market in a number of countries and this has complicated monetary and fiscal policy management.
The problematic external situation, involving large current account deficits, has become a critical factor in some of the stabilization processes being pursued in the region.
The factors influencing inflation rates in 1999 and the first half of2000 -some positive and others negativecan be divided into demand-side and supply-side variables.
The first group includes monetary, fiscal and financial factors, together with the recession.
Monetary policies in 1999 were more relaxed than in 1998, when they had generally been kept very tight because of the acute crisis originating abroad; but they still remained austere, thus helping to keep price increases under control.
Monetary policy management has become more difficult in recent years because fiscal accounts have deteriorated significantly, as evidenced by the fact that all 19 Latin American countries for which information is available posted deficits in 1999, with the most serious being in Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador.
Solvency and liquidity problems in the banking system, which in the past had been one of the main sources of quasi-fiscal expenditures, had a significant effect only in Ecuador in 1999; isolated problems arose in other countries, but were overcome fairly easily.
Consequently, there was no need to resort to money creation to meet the public sector's greater borrowing requirements in 1999, except in the case of Ecuador. 72 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean The recession in the region in 1999 clearly played an important part in restraining inflation.
Output grew modestly in the region as a whole, but GDP shrank in six economies and grew by 3% or more in only five.
Domestic demand in the region retreated by nearly 2%, with negative figures being posted in 11 of the 19 countries for which information is available.
The recession prevented cost pressures from carrying over to consumer prices, which also benefited from smaller profit margins on imported products, since prevailing market conditions prevented the full impact of the devaluation from being passed on to consumers.
Supply-side factors influencing inflation in 1999 included cost increases stemming from trends in the exchange rate, wages, oil prices and public utility rates, together with the supply disruptions caused by natural disasters.
The most important of these factors in 1999 was certainly the exchange rate, although the situation varied from country to country.
In some cases the exchange rate put pressure on inflation, while in others it once again served as the mainstay of the stabilization process.
Heightened vulnerability on the external front led to much more significant changes in stabilization policies than in previous years, with the authorities gradually abandoning the practice of using the exchange rate as an anchor in some countries as a consequence of the mounting difficulties being experienced in the external sector.
As a result, the nominal exchange rate for the dollar rose by 60% in Brazil, 160% in Ecuador and by between 10% and 25% in a further eight countries.
In nearly all cases the depreciation of the exchange rate considerably outpaced the rise in consumer price indices.
Nonetheless, fighting inflation continues to be a priority and, despite some setbacks, inflation remains low, with the exception of Ecuador.
The brisker pace of devaluation did not generate similar rises in consumer prices owing to the cost effect of the recession.
Wholesale prices rose more sharply than the CPI, however, given the greater weight of tradables, and particularly imported goods, in the corresponding index.
In a number of other countries -particularly Argentina, Barbados, El Salvador, Honduras, Jamaica, Mexico and Venezuela- nominal exchange rates held steady or showed no more than a slight depreciation, and this helped to restrain inflation.
The anchor provided by the exchange rate therefore held firm, as in previous years, in a majority of the countries of the region, and in most of these instances, the pattern was thus diametrically opposed to that seen in the cases discussed above, as wholesale prices rose less sharply than consumer prices.
Depreciation of the euro and the real against the dollar also helped to keep inflation down in countries for which Europe and Brazil are important trading partners.
The region's external accounts were generally more solid in 1999, after the major difficulties experienced the year before.
This was the result of adjustments made in a number of countries and a partial restoration of capital flows starting in the second quarter, which helped to ease pressures on foreign-exchange markets and thus avert an upsurge in inflation.
This new state of affairs gave a boost both to economies that continued to use the exchange rate as an anchor and to those that had already phased it out.
Pay raises were not a source of inflationary pressure in 1999, as increases were moderate.
In some countries wages rose less than prices did owing either to the effects of a serious economic crisis or a deterioration in labour-market conditions.
In others, where inflation was already on a downward track, pay raises were lower still, thereby helping to consolidate the stabilization process.
On the other hand, the rise in oil prices was a contributing factor to inflation in 1999, as it became necessary to make steep adjustments in the domestic prices of petroleum products, in addition to the adjustments made in response to the devaluation of the local currency in several of the region's countries.
Prices were also pushed up by higher public utility rates, including the rates charged for electric power and telecommunications.
In both cases these increases were largely due either to clauses in service providers' privatization contracts that tied rate hikes to the behaviour of specific price indices, or else to clauses that provided for adjustments in cases where rates had lagged behind in real terms.
Supply disturbances, including those caused by the string of weather-related natural disasters that have hit the region since the second half of 1997, were less significant in 1999, except for some lingering effects of Hurricane Mitch in Central American countries during the early part of the year.
Generally speaking, the countries that sustained damage in 1998 registered either a fall or a very small increase in agricultural prices in 1999, thanks to the recovery of output in the affected areas.
The consolidation of the countries' stabilization processes hinges largely upon the elimination of existing indexation mechanisms, which came into widespread use in the region during episodes of high inflation, especially in the 1980s.
In the ensuing decade, however, they became less prevalent as inflation was brought under control, and by 1999 they were no longer very common.
Nonetheless, as the demise of indexation occurred during a recessionary period, there is some fear that it may make a comeback if the region's economies Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 73 regain momentum.
Thus, external or domestic shocks that generate temporary price increases, compounded by potential difficulties on the fiscal or external fronts, might create conditions conducive to a revival of indexation systems.
Escalation clauses based on past inflation could be reintroduced into labour contracts, the practice of setting interest rates on an ex post basis might again become common, and monetary correction mechanisms could once again appear in a wide range of contracts.
In a new scenario of this type, inflation would accelerate while policies for controlling it could pose serious problems, given the renewed inertia that price increases would begin to exhibit.
The price controls that had played an important role in the past were gradually phased out during the 1990s and are now only used in specific cases involving sensitive products.
Thus, repressed inflation would have been unlikely, given the absence of rationing or shortages, except in the case of the supply disruptions associated with natural disasters.
Nor were there any cases of lags in public utility rates, since such a situation has been made quite unlikely by the privatization of public utilities under existing regulations.
Despite the rapid slowdown in price increases during the 1990s, in some countries inflation has continued to hover at levels above those commonly seen in developed countries, although it is still well below historical standards for the region.
Recent turbulence, compounded by devaluations and substantial wholesale price hikes, raise doubts as to the consolidation of stabilization processes.
The delicate situation in Ecuador, the Brazilian currency crisis of January 1999 and the difficulties faced by Venezuela in 1996 have all fuelled these fears.
Negative factors could reappear either on the external (a deterioration of the terms of trade, rationing of capital flows, sharp interest-rate hikes) or domestic fronts (widening fiscal deficits, imprudent monetary policies, large devaluations, financial crises, natural disasters), with negative impacts on individual economies that could set the scene for new outbreaks of inflation.
Although success in controlling inflation was widespread in 1999, sharp differences could be seen across countries.
In some cases, inflation was non-existent or very low, while in others inflation was moderate but there were no clear signs of its imminent disappearance.
Disturbing situations were observed in only a few economies, however, either because inflation remained high by current regional standards or because it was up sharply.
Some countries fall clearly into one or another of these groups because their inflation rates have been in the corresponding bracket for over a year.
Other countries are only in a given group provisionally, having recorded the corresponding price increase for one year only.
Five of these countries have been in this group for several years now, while the others entered the category for the first time in 1998 or 1999.
Argentina has been a member of the group for a number of years, thanks to the considerable progress made by its stabilization process since the introduction of its dollar convertibility regime in 1991.
The country experienced deflation in 1999 which carried over into the early months of 2000 in the wake of the recession that began in the second half of 1998.
The slowdown was particularly notable in the case of goods, although service prices also fell.
The largest increases were seen in fuels (9%) and public utility rates.
El Salvador also experienced deflation, thus consolidating the achievements of the preceding years, when inflation had been brought down to very low levels by tight monetary policies and a stable nominal exchange rate.
The decline in food prices was especially notable Three other countries maintained their customarily low inflation rates.
In Barbados, inflation rose by one percentage point due to increases in the prices of food, housing, education and, especially, oil.
In Panama, inflation has traditionally been very low and stable, and there was little change in 1999, as prices rose by 1.5%, which was virtually the same as in 1998.
Wholesale prices rose faster than the CPI, increasing by 6.8% as a 74 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean result of the hike in international oil prices, which was partly passed on to consumer goods.
Trinidad and Tobago, which has nearly always had low rates of inflation, saw prices rise by 2.3% in 1999 -three percentage points less than the year before- despite the fact that the fiscal deficit widened to 3% of GDP.
The other five countries in this group -Bolivia, Chile, Guatemala, Peru and Uruguay- posted their best results for several decades in 1999, thereby consolidating stabilization processes embarked upon several years earlier.
In Bolivia the slowdown in the growth of aggregate demand led to minor increases in the prices of locally produced products, while higher hydrocarbons prices internationally had both direct and indirect (transport) effects, and proved to be the most inflationary component of the basic shopping basket.
This result was mainly due to weaker demand and high unemployment, which prevented the devaluation-induced higher cost of imported products from being passed on to retail prices.
The moderate scale of increases in labour costs also contributed to price stability.
Wholesale prices, on the other hand, rose much more steeply (13.5%) than the CPI because of the relative weight of tradable goods in that index.
Price rises in Peru were held to just 3.7% for the year, despite a devaluation and higher fuel prices.
This low rate of inflation was mainly attributable to the drop in food prices.
The devaluation pushed up the wholesale prices for imports (10.7%) more sharply than the wholesale prices for locally produced goods, which rose by just 4.1% during the year.
Uruguay joined the moderate-inflation group in 1999, having brought inflation down to just 4% -its lowest rate in 50 years.
Weak demand, revaluation of the local currency against the real and the euro, and the decision to borrow the funds needed to cover the fiscal deficit all helped to hold down retail prices.
As in previous years, the prices of non-tradable goods and services -particularly health care and education- rose faster than those of tradables.
Inflation in Guatemala came in at just under 5% -the lowest rate since 1982 and nearly three percentage points below the previous year's figure- despite a significant depreciation of the quetzal against the dollar.
Factors contributing to this lower inflation figure included a downturn in consumption, surplus production of green vegetables and legumes (thanks to the sector's recovery from the effects of Hurricane Mitch) and the steps taken by the Government to cut electricity rates and overturn increases in some types of telephone charges.
The moderate inflation group consists of 11 countries, four of which (Dominican Republic, Jamaica, Nicaragua and Paraguay) posted price increases below 8%, while another six (Brazil, Columbia, Costa Rica, Haiti, Honduras and Mexico) recorded increases of between 8% and 12%.
Venezuela was at the upper limit of this group with prices rising by 20%.
In Jamaica, inflation was cut back to 7%, one point below the 1998 figure.
This third consecutive year of single-digit price rises was the outcome of policies aimed at achieving macroeconomic stability together with a stable exchange rate and a smaller fiscal deficit.
Inflation in Nicaragua fell to 7.2%, following a steep increase in 1998 that was attributable to food supply disruptions caused by El Niño and Hurricane Mitch.
Factors helping to restrain inflation included a slower rate of devaluation, efforts to regulate primary liquidity and the continued application of tariff rollbacks.
Lower food prices partly offset price increases for fuels and construction materials and higher public utility rates.
In Paraguay, following a brief upsurge in 1998, inflation resumed its downward course to fall to its lowest level in the last two decades (5.4%).
The devaluation in Brazil, which is the source of most of Paraguay's imports, was the key restraint on price increases in this country.
As a result, tradable goods prices climbed the least (5%), with food products rising by just 3.7%.
In the Dominican Republic, consumer price rises were held to around 5%, or nearly three percentage points below the previous year's figure.
This low rate of inflation is accounted for by a rebounding food supply (which had been sharply reduced by the effects of Hurricane Georges in 1998), a tight monetary policy and exchange-rate stability.
In October there was a temporary flare-up of inflation (prices rose by 3.5% in the month) as a result of an increase in the commissions charged on foreign-exchange transactions and a hike in domestic fuel prices, but this effect subsequently subsided.
The fact that Brazil is in this group represents a setback, since in 1998 it had been among the stable-price or very-low-inflation countries (although only temporarily), having posted an average price increase of just 2.5% for the first time since the Second World War.
Thanks to the Real Plan, inflation had been slashed from 5,000% for the 12-month period ending in June 1994 to the very low levels seen in recent years.
The steep devaluation in January 1999, followed by major currency-market turbulence in the ensuing months, led to a setback which initially raised fears that all the achievements of recent years in combating inflation Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 75 would be wiped out.
In the event, however, price increases only accelerated slightly for a few months before resuming the slow pace of the last few years.
Consumer prices rose by just over 8% in 1999 as a whole.
The devaluation of the real raised tradable goods prices, especially in the case of imports, which then fed through into the wholesale price index, pushing it up by 29%.
The situation was compounded by increases in public utility rates (electric power and telecommunications) and the steady rise in international oil prices.
On the other hand, the prices of housing, education, clothing and personal expenses all rose by less than the general index, which suggests that the indexation mechanisms that were so influential in the past did not have a major effect on price formation this time around.
The rate of inflation in Colombia, at 9.2%, represented a 30-year low.
Monetary policy was kept tight in order to maintain a stable exchange rate, and the 15% inflation target was easily achieved as a consequence of the deep recession triggered by that policy.
The prices of housing, clothing, and cultural and leisure activities all rose by less than the other components of the family shopping basket.
This successful outcome was also founded upon an abundant supply of farm products, thanks to favourable weather conditions, which held food price increases to just 7.5%.
In Costa Rica, weaker demand, a tight monetary policy and a slower rate of devaluation combined to ease inflation, which had reached nearly 12% in 1998.
The first half of the year saw a continuation of the tight monetary policy adopted in 1998 in response to inflationary pressures and international reserve losses.
The prices of farm products fell by 3.6%, while fuel products, housing, electric power and health services recorded the largest increases.
In Haiti, the inflation rate was nearly three percentage points higher than the 1998 figure of 7.5%.
The authorities continued to apply a tight monetary policy in an effort to bring price increases under control, but these measures proved insufficient, as the money supply expanded by 18%, which was five percentage points above GDP growth at current prices.
In Honduras, the authori t ies ' approach to macroeconomic management prevented inflation from accelerating at a time when the economy was still suffering from the devastation caused by Hurricane Mitch.
Foreign donations of food, which eased supply problems, together with a moderate rate of devaluation, also helped to keep inflationary pressures in check.
Economic policy was aimed at curbing price increases through tight fiscal and monetary policies while maintaining the floating exchange-rate regime intact.
Following a few bouts of instability early in the year, exchange-rate and interest-rate volatility subsided, and a downward trend emerged.
The strength of the peso helped to curb price increases for tradable goods (prices were up by 10.3%, compared to 14.8% in the case of non-tradables), while moderate price hikes for products such as fruit and vegetables did their part in balancing out higher increases in other prices (e.g., tortillas and telephone rates).
Inflation for the first five months of 2000 came in at 3.8%, and it is therefore reasonable to think that it may well remain below 10% for the year as a whole.
In Venezuela, inflation continued along the downward path it has been following since mid-1997, and the CPI rose by 20%, which was significantly below the figure of nearly 30% recorded the previous year and the lowest rate for the entire decade.
Higher oil prices enabled the central government to cut its budget deficit to under 3% of GDP and helped the Central Bank to maintain the very gradual rate of depreciation.
The bolivar slipped by 15% against the dollar during the year, which, together with weaker demand, contributed to the effort being made to rein in inflation.
The sole member of the high-inflation group at the moment is Ecuador, where inflation climbed to 60% for 1999 as a whole.
In the 12 months ending in June 2000, however, the rate soared to just over 100%, a level unseen in the country since consumer price indices were first calculated in the 1950s.
This sharp acceleration was brought about by the steep depreciation of the currency and a high rate of money creation.
In addition, the wide gap existing between the nominal rate of depreciation and the rise in the CPI, and between this and the producer price index -which rose by nearly 190%- reflected an accumulation of inflationary pressures that began to feed through into consumer prices in 2000.
Since the steps taken to dampen liquidity with a view to curbing exchange-rate volatility and averting a spike in inflation failed to produce the desired effects, in January 2000 the authorities announced a radical change in the monetary system involving the substitution of the United States dollar for the sucre as the country's legal tender.
Despite this move, the troubled economic and social situation led to a political crisis which ultimately led to the ouster of the President and his replacement by the country's Vice President.
The new government authorities maintained the dollarization programme as the main plank of their macroeconomic policy, and March saw the passage of the legislation needed to undertake monetary, exchange-rate, fiscal, structural and labour-market reforms and to introduce the new monetary regime.
The negative impact of these circumstances was stronger than it had been in 1998, as total gross investment retreated by a full 9.5%, with a 5.7% drop in fixed investment and a much steeper downturn in inventory building.
Total investment shrank in all the South American countries, whereas Mexico, the Caribbean and the Central American countries were less affected and posted a small increase. 1 This chapter uses data series at both constant 1995 and current prices.
The investment series are in constant prices, since this provides a clearer picture of the expansion of the economy's production capacity and growth potential.
The saving-investment balance is expressed in current prices, as this is a better indicator of flows, especially financial ones.
These two types of series need to be combined in order to eliminate the distortions created by inflation and permit the construction of regional aggregates.
Accordingly, the data in current prices are expressed as percentages of gross domestic product. 78 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean A S DISCUSSED in another recent ECLAC publication,2 one of the most harmful impacts of macroeconomic volatility is the effect it has on investment, and this was clearly demonstrated by the events of 1999.
Capital formation was one of the components of expenditure that was hit the hardest by the slowdown, whereas consumption edged up by slightly more than gross domestic product (GDP).
In the area of investment financing, a sizeable decrease in external saving was wholly responsible for the reduction in gross capital formation.
Nonetheless, all but three of the countries in the region were net recipients of external saving, which implies that they ran up deficits on their current accounts.
Although this category of saving did shrink, one of its components -foreign direct investment (FDI) -expanded significantly and, for the first time in the 1990s, surpassed total external saving.
National saving in the region as a whole was unchanged from its 1998 level, which was one of the lowest since the early 1990s; the figures for the individual 2.
Investment The sharp cutback in investment seen throughout Latin America and the Caribbean during the year was attributable to several factors, including the international economic crisis, which not only undermined access to external financing but also eroded external demand, and tight economic policies that restrained domestic demand.
In addition, a number of investment cycles in the region were brought to completion.
Access to external financing other than FDI was very limited in 1999, and investment levels fell considerably as capital outflows reached substantial levels in nearly all categories.
The retreat of external demand had a very strong impact on investment in countries such as Argentina, Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay, which were affected not only by lower sales but also by an increase in supply from Brazil as a consequence of the devaluation of the real in January 1999.
Most South American countries were also hurt by the weakness of world commodity markets, countries were also quite stable, except in the case of Venezuela, where the rate rose sharply thanks to the steep rise in oil prices.
Unlike what occurred in 1998, there was no substitution of external saving for national saving.
The trends observed in 2000 point towards a strong upswing in growth, together with an improvement in investment, with the latter variable being expected to keep pace with GDP or to outperform it by a slight margin, after having fallen in 1999.
Investment growth in the northern part of the region is set to accelerate, with Mexico leading the pack with an increase of over 6% (compared to just 2% in 1999).
A strong recovery is also expected in the South American countries, where investment had plunged in 1999.
Investment growth in Brazil, projected to reach at least 6%, is expected to be the driving force behind economic recovery in that country.
The current account deficit is likely to remain in the same range as before and domestic saving ought to rise slightly, thereby opening the way for a limited recovery in investment.
Foreign investment in general looks set to stay at very high levels in 2000, although below those achieved in 1999. which led to a marked reduction in export volumes and lower prices.
Export volumes increased in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, however, thanks to the strength of the United States market, and this had a positive influence on investment levels in those countries.
The sharpest cutbacks in investment in response to weaker domestic demand occurred in Ecuador and Venezuela, although significantly lower domestic demand also sent out negative signals for investment in Argentina, Chile and Colombia.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 79 The combination of these domestic and external factors led to reductions of over 10% in investment in Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru and Venezuela and to smaller decreases in another six countries.
In contrast, Dominican Republic, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama all registered positive growth rates for investment, although only in Honduras and Nicaragua were the percentage increases greater than in 1998 (see table V.l).
All components of investment posted poor results in 1999, but the figures were particularly gloomy in the case of inventory building, which fell by over 40% in the countries for which information is available.
Within total gross fixed capital formation, private and public investment behaved very differently, as private-sector investment fell by an average of 7% and slumped particularly sharply in small and medium-scale industry, where access to bank credit was curtailed quite abruptly.
Public-sector investment did not perform as badly, since it was generally flat.
In several countries the authorities undertook public investment programmes to offset cutbacks made in capital expenditure in other areas in line with austerity policies aimed at controlling macroeconomic imbalances.
In some cases, public-sector investment levels were up significantly thanks to the work required to repair damage caused by natural disasters, in particular the destruction caused by Hurricane Mitch in late 1998.
Investment in construction slipped by 4%, but machinery and equipment purchases fell even more steeply, by 8%, as imports of these products plummeted.
Nonetheless, strong FDI growth helped to offset the negative trend of gross capital formation to some degree, especially with respect to imports of capital goods.
Fixed investment amounted to 20% of GDP in the region as a whole (see table V.2), but this average figure 80 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean masks sharp differences among the rates in individual countries.
GDP growth rates were much higher in the first group than in the second, except in the case of El Salvador.
Saving Domestic investment financing fell from 23% of GDP in 1998 to 21.5% in 1999 as a result of significantly lower external saving, which slipped from 4.5% to 3% of GDP during the same period.
That reversal made this variable one of the most contractionary components of financing for gross capital formation.
National saving, meanwhile, remained stable at a level quite close to its 1998 rate, as did gross domestic saving (see table V.3).
This similarity is explained by the lack of any major swings in current transfers or net factor payments.
The latter trended upward to 2.5% of GDP in 1999, a level likely to be maintained or even increased in the next few years, given the strong flow of FDI into the region.
The previous year's downswing in public saving carried over into 1999 as governments strove to cushion the economy from the negative effects of the international crisis.
By contrast, public saving rose to very high levels in the Dominican Republic and Nicaragua.
The scarcity of external saving was associated with the world economic crisis, which made international capital flows more volatile and undermined economic growth in the region.
Despite the large reduction in external saving generally, however, there were striking differences across countries.
Bolivia, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Panama and Paraguay (which, with the exception of Panama, are the least developed countries in the region) all benefited from very high levels of external saving.
Ecuador, Haiti and Venezuela, on the other hand, had negative external savings rates, which means that their balance-of-payments current accounts yielded surpluses.
National savings rates were high in Chile, Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Honduras; domestic saving was also very high in these countries and in Costa Rica.
A deterioration in the terms of trade did, however, have an adverse influence on national saving in Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Peru, while the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama and Venezuela all benefited from higher international prices.
Unlike external saving, FDI3 was very resilient, approaching 4% of GDP in 1999 and accounting for just under 20% of total investment.
As a result, FDI exceeded external saving by 30%, which was more than enough to make up for large capital outflows in other categories.
Foreign investors tended to concentrate either on acquiring State or private-sector enterprises or else on creating new assets, whereas other capital account categories, such as equity investment and bank loans, registered net outflows totalling nearly US$ 30 billion.
In 1998-1999, the Asian crisis had no impact whatsoever on net FDI inflows to the region, but in other categories it had a very harmful effect.
FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean trended clearly upward during the 1990s (see figure V.2), growing from just under US$ 11 billion at the start of the decade to a record level of US$ $77.5 billion by 1999.
This trend was also reflected in transnational corporations' growing share of total Latin American and Caribbean sales during the 1990s.
At the start of the decade, investment was mainly concentrated in the region's larger countries, but more recently this variable has expanded in nearly all of them.
In terms of the sectoral mix, 80% of investment has been channelled into either services or the manufacturing sector, with this sum being divided fairly evenly between the two; primary activities have received under 20%.
Over 40% of total FDI entering the region in 1999 went to Brazil, where the liberalization and deregulation of financial services, together with privatizations in the telecommunications sector and the electric-power generation and distribution industries, opened up major opportunities for foreign investors interested in acquiring existing assets.
In Mexico, on the other hand, the creation of new assets was the primary mode of foreign investment.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 83 Chapter VI Main trends Sluggish economic activity at the regional level led to a serious deterioration in labour-market conditions.
The employment rate, in particular, dropped sharply, and an especially steep decrease was seen in some of the countries in which GDP actually declined.
The total participation rate also fell slightly, which prevented the sluggish pace of job creation from generating an even larger rise in unemployment.
This was higher than the rates recorded during the debt crisis of the early 1980s and, in fact, set a new record for the entire period in which representative measurements have been available for the region.
In some countries the difficult situation in the labour market also hurt real wages, which fell by 1.8% as a weighted average.
THE LABOUR markets of the South American countries, on the one hand, and those of Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, on the other, turned in even more sharply divergent performances than in 1998.
In nearly all the countries in the first group, economic activity was either flat or declined, and this led to a deterioration (and quite a severe one in some cases) in employment and unemployment indicators.
By comparison, even though Mexico and most of the Central American and Caribbean countries posted slower growth rates than they had the year before, their economies generally expanded faster than those of the countries to the south.
In addition, their labour markets performed far better in terms of employment, 84 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean unemployment, labour demand, job quality and real wages.
Thus, the differences observed in employment trends across countries were largely attributable to their economies' differing growth rates.
In the region as a whole, the worsening situation seen in the labour market in 1998 deteriorated further during 1999 as a result of weak job creation.
In what was the worst year in terms of economic growth since 1990, the demand for labour by firms and the public sector alike was extremely depressed, and this was reflected in a very slow growth rate for wage employment; non-wage employment was unable to take up the slack, although it did display a countercyclical behaviour pattern.
Consequently, the overall number of employed persons edged up by a meagre 1.1%, which implied a sharp drop in the employment rate.
In keeping with the longer-term trend, participation rates rose in most of the countries, however, and this was reflected in an improvement in the simple average.
Nevertheless, the labour participation rate declined in the region's largest economies (Brazil and Mexico), thus driving down the regionwide weighted average.
The slower expansion of the labour supply mitigated the impact of slack job creation on unemployment levels but did not offset it entirely.
The sluggishness of domestic demand in many countries seriously eroded employment in branches of activity such as manufacturing and construction, where the number of jobs actually shrank.
This reinforced the already strong trend towards the concentration of new jobs in tertiary activities, which has been a predominant factor throughout the 1990s.
The slow rate of wage-based job creation further increased the level of informality in the region's labour markets, thereby strengthening a trend that has been in evidence since the 1980s.
With the exception of income levels, which rose in some countries, job-quality indicators also deteriorated in many cases.
Nonetheless, sharply lower real wages in other countries (Brazil, Ecuador, Venezuela) pushed the regional average down in real terms.
As had been the case in 1998, trends in minimum wages were generally more favourable than they were for average wages, since policies were aimed at stabilizing their real values; this line of policy, given the prevailing downward trend in inflation, allowed the real minimum wage to rise slightly.
In early 2000, the situation in the labour market improved in some countries, and, thanks to relatively strong job creation in Brazil and Mexico, the regional employment rate has been rising fairly sharply.
As participation rates have also been climbing at much the same pace, however, the higher rate of job creation has not yet brought about a reduction in unemployment.
In several countries, including Argentina, Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela, the situation in the labour market remains extremely serious and national unemployment rates are far above their historical levels. 2.
Unemployment The regional unemployment rate has been rising sharply since the mid-1990s, with no more than a short-lived hiatus in this trend being seen during a period of robust economic growth in 1997.
In 1999, unemployment climbed quite steeply once again, (from 8.1% to 8.7%), pushing the indicator past the peak levels recorded in the 1980s (see table VI. 1).
In one respect this result is somewhat surprising, since unemployment in the region's largest economies was either flat (Brazil) or fell (Mexico); this apparent paradox is accounted for by the severity of the economic crises that afflicted a number of countries.
As discussed further below, the reason why unemployment did not rise in Brazil was because the labour supply contracted, since the employment rate also fell, in keeping with the pattern seen in other countries of the subregion. 1 In a number of countries the increase is much greater when specific periods in these two years are compared.
For example, between the second quarters of 1998 and 1999, unemployment rose by 4.7 percentage points in Chile, 6.9 percentage points in Ecuador and 4.5 points in Venezuela; in Colombia, comparing the third quarters of the two years yields an increase of 5.1 percentage points (see table VI.6).
Preliminary figures. areas. d Includes hidden unemployments, estimates. 9 Until 1993, the figures are for the Asuncion metropolitan area, in Montevideo. : Represents a large and increasing number of urban The figure entered for 1985 actually relates to 1984.
Official Figures for 1980 and 1985 refer to unemployment The situation was quite different in both Mexico and some Central American and Caribbean countries, where economic growth has been more stable in recent years.
Labour supply In 1999, trends in the labour supply varied widely among the 16 countries for which information is available, with the total participation rate rising in nine of them, falling in six, and staying unchanged in one.
Given the slight predominance of increases, the simple average rose somewhat, although less than it had the year before (see figure VI.
I).3 However, since the countries in which the labour participation rate declined included the region's two largest economies (Brazil and Mexico), the weighted average was dragged down.
The discrepancy between these two measurements, which persisted throughout the 1990s, thus remained in evidence, as a downturn in the labour participation rate in Brazil counteracted the prevailing trend in the rest of the region, which saw increasing numbers of women entering the labour market and a consequent rise in the total participation rate.
Some of the countries that witnessed severe slumps in economic activity also posted the largest increases in the labour participation rate (Colombia, Ecuador, Venezuela).
This reflected the well-known phenomenon of rising participation rates among members of households experiencing such problems as unemployment or a drop in real income, as these people seek to boost their households' disposable resources.
At the opposite extreme, in countries that enjoyed fairly vigorous economic growth (Dominican Republic, Panama), labour participation increased because of the perceived existence of greater job opportunities.
When participation rates are disaggregated by gender, the results point to the existence of quite homogeneous patterns, since in nearly all cases for which information is available, increases and decreases in the participation rate were registered for both men and women alike.
The increases were more pronounced in the case of women, however, and their participation rates also fell less where there were general declines.
Consequently, taking a simple average for 12 countries, the female labour participation rate maintained its upward trend, while the figure for men slipped slightly (see the section on employment and wages in the statistical appendix).
The long-term trend towards a growing proportion of women in the labour force thus persisted.
Employment trends The slackening of economic activity had a serious impact on employment.
The drop in employment rates was quite widespread, as the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama were the only countries out of the 15 for which information is available where employment expanded faster than the working-age population.
At the other extreme, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Uruguay and Venezuela all saw sharp downswings of a percentage point or more.
As a result, both the simple average and the weighted average employment rates for the region declined, from 52.8% to 52.3% and from 53.6% to 52.7%, respectively (see figure VI. 1).
In the latter case the drop was the steepest of the decade and accentuated the downward trend this indicator has displayed during the 1990s.
The weakness of new job creation was also reflected in the corresponding rate, which amounted to a scant 1.1 % for the region as a whole (measured as a weighted average of 14 countries) -clearly below the population growth rate for the working-age population.
In a number of South American countries, the impact of the economic crisis was so severe that employment actually stagnated in absolute terms (Brazil and Venezuela) or even contracted (Chile, Colombia and Uruguay).
Consequently, South America as a whole recorded a very slender increase of just 0.2% in the number of employed persons, whereas the rest of the region saw employment expand by over 3% (see table VI.2).
Although the growth of employment is strongly influenced by the expansion of the labour supply and, in particular, demographic trends, in this case the glaring differences between these two subregions is largely a reflection of their different rates of economic growth (see chapter IV).
By contrast, wage employment grew quite strongly in Mexico (over 4%) and, to a lesser extent, in some Central American countries (2.1% for the group).
In the case of Central America, however, it should be noted that wage-based jobs increased less than total employment did, and their share of total employment therefore decreased, as was also the case in the South American countries.
Analysis of the growth patterns of selfand wage-based employment over recent years can shed light on some aspects of this issue, for although not alt self-employment can be considered informal, nor all wage employment formal, the two categories do largely correspond to these sectors.
By the same token, most formal employment is wage-based, while self-employment is the main category In the informal labour market.
Nonetheless, own-account work also seems to have a procydical component, for it continued to expand rapidly in 1997 even though the economic buoyancy marking that year was reflected in a relatively high rate of wage-based job creation.
It can therefore be concluded that when economic growth picks up, it creates not only wage-based jobs but also new self-employment opportunities, and that faster growth in wage-based employment will therefore not necessarily be accompanied by a decrease in self-employment.
Within the context of the rapid economic growth seen m 1997, at least, these income-earning opportunities, in conjunction with the needs of many households, appear to have stimulated job creation in this category.
A final point to consider in this connection is that economic crises can also limit the creation of self-employment opportunities, thereby undermining the tatter's countercyclical character.
In the late rates for this category were lower than they were between 1995 and 1997, despite the fact that, as discussed earlier, the countercyclical aspect of this variable predominated, at least in 1999.
One possibility is that, after two decades of rapid expansion, the labour-absorption capacity of some informal activities may be waning, which would explain why the weakness of labour demand has been associated with a larger increase in open unemployment in the 1990s than in the 1980s.
Wage-based employment | | Self-employment Unemployment rate c Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 89 Public-sector employment compounded this dismal regional performance by retreating in seven out of the 10 countries for which information is available.
In this case Brazil was an exception, however, as it saw an expansion for the first time in the 1990s.4 When the demand for labour falls sharply in one category, pressure from labour supply usually causes employment to expand in others.
Accordingly, in 1999 self-employment grew by 2.6% and domestic employment by 7.1 %, although in this case there were no marked differences between the subregions.
Within this context, it is somewhat surprising that unpaid family work should have shrunk (-2.5%) in the region as a whole.
A fall in employment in this category is not unusual in itself, since this has been the predominant trend in many of the region's countries throughout the decade due, essentially, to a decline in family-based work (young people) in peasant economies.
What was unexpected, however, was that this trend did not reverse itself under the economic circumstances prevailing in 1999.
As a tentative hypothesis, it may be posited that, aside from the strength of the above-mentioned trend in many peasant households, its persistence in this situation was also the result of constraints affecting the labour-absorption capacity of family-run firms engaged in non-farm activities.
As can be seen in table VI.3, the largest contribution to the region's relatively scant job creation in 1999 came from self-employment (63%), with wage employment (including domestic service) contributing a further 48%.
Given the predominant character is t ics of self-employment, these figures indicate that the trend towards greater informality that was observed throughout the decade strengthened further in 1999.
Once again, in 1999 new jobs mainly corresponded to tertiary activities, and, as in previous years, financial, real estate and business services, together with basic services (electricity, gas and water; transport, storage and communications), posted the highest growth rates (5.3% and 3.8%, respectively).
Employment expanded more slowly in commerce (1.9%) and in community, social and personal services (2.1 %), but these activities still provided the bulk of new jobs (see table VI. 3).
The buoyancy of tourism was once again an important factor in creating service jobs in some countries in the Caribbean (Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Cuba, Dominican Republic and Jamaica) and in Central America (including Costa Rica and Guatemala).
The cooling of domestic demand and a slowdown in intraregional trade seriously eroded employment in manufacturing and construction, and these sectors' output decreased at the regional level in absolute terms (by 1.1% and 0.8%, respectively).
Formal employment in manufacturing was hit the hardest, with declines in Argentina (-6.2%), Bolivia (the average decrease for a group of five different industries was -4.8%), Brazil (-3.4%), Chile (-4.8% between September 1998 and among other countries.
In Mexico, on the other hand, formal employment in the manufacturing sector was up sharply, particularly in the maquila industry, where nearly 160,000 new jobs were created during the year (an increase of 15%).
In contrast, employment in formal non-maquila manufacturing enterprises grew by a modest 1.4% between December 1998 and the same month a year later, and the strong recovery of employment in this segment, which was boosted by the depreciation of the peso following the 1994/1995 crisis, therefore seems to have come to an end.
Employment in the construction industry was sharply lower in Chile (-20%) and Colombia (-10%).
Once again, the situation was brighter in Mexico, where, despite a cutback in public investment, this branch of activity grew faster than total GDP, with employment in this sector growing by 12% overall and by 10% in formal enterprises registered with the Mexican Social Security Institute, as a year-on-year average.
Unlike what occurred in the manufacturing and construction sectors, agricultural employment grew by 2.8% at the regional level, in a reversal of the trend prevailing throughout the 1990s.
In some countries, an increase in the area sown, prompted by better weather conditions, generated a stronger demand for labour.
Significant growth in agricultural output also seems to have spurred the demand for labour in this sector in the Dominican Republic and in Paraguay.
In contrast, a higher level of agricultural employment coincided with lower output for this sector in Colombia and Venezuela.
In these countries, the larger number of workers presumably signals increased underemployment in the peasant economy, which may have served as a refuge for workers who were unable to find more productive alternatives in other sectors.
Firstly, in 1999 there was a weak positive correlation between economic growth and job creation.
The two sectors posting the largest increases in output at the regional level (agriculture and basic services) were among the three sectors in which employment expanded the most, while at the other extreme, two of the three branches of activity in which output declined (manufacturing and construction) also recorded downturns in employment.
As discussed earlier, labour supply exerts a great deal of pressure for both job creation and self-employment, and this was reflected in two developments.
One was that employment grew faster than output in all branches of activity (in the figure these are located above the 45° line) except for two tradables sectors,6 resulting in a 0.7% drop in average output per worker.
Secondly, there was a wide gap between job creation and output growth in the categories of commerce, restaurants and hotels, and financial institutions, insurance, real estate and business services.
The increase in employment in commerce, which accounted for 27% of total job creation in 1999 despite a contraction in this sector's output, was probably due to an expansion of informal activities.
In six of the nine countries for which data on the volume of employment are available (Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Honduras, Peru, Uruguay), the existing problems in this respect 5 Data Analysis System Foundation of the State of São Paulo (SEADE), "Boletim de acompanhamento de demanda de força de trabalho agrícola no estado de São Paulo e no Brasil.
These data indicate that employment in this sector was down sharply in Chile (-12%), Colombia (-22%) and Venezuela (-28%).
Hence, with an increase of 0.6% in sectoral output, output per employee apparently also rose in this branch of tradable goods production. 7 It should be pointed out that most employment in this branch of activity corresponds to business services, with financial institutions contributing a much smaller share.
The improvement recorded in Mexico and the somewhat less significant advances seen in Costa Rica and Paraguay were the exceptions to this general rule.
The situation on the income front was more varied, with the relevant indicators showing slight improvements in Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay and Peru, while the figures for Costa Rica remained unchanged and those for Brazil and Colombia worsened.
Indicators of the degree of instability and/or informality of employment deteriorated in Brazil, Ecuador and Venezuela but improved in El Salvador, Mexico and Uruguay, with the results in these latter cases reflecting more extensive social security coverage.
In Colombia, the proportion of people working in temporary jobs decreased, but in a crisis year such as 1999, this was primarily a result of job losses among the least stable segment of the labour force, rather than of improved job stability.
The bulk of this decline occurred in the construction industry, where many temporary workers are laid off when a building is finished and will then be unemployed unless they are rehired for a new project.
The number and proportion of temporary workers also shrank in transport and, to a lesser extent, in manufacturing and services, however; this may be because in difficult times many firms adopt a strategy whereby workers in the most precarious contractual situations are the first to be laid off.
In Argentina, too, the share of employment in formal activities accounted for by temporary workers diminished, but in this case a 1998 labour reform that did away with several types of fixed-term employment contracts also played a part. 92 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean 5.
Wages Unlike the situation in previous years, wage trends were very uneven.
In one group of countries, real wages fell by over 4% in real terms, either as a result of a serious economic crisis (Ecuador and Venezuela) or because an earlier deterioration in conditions in the labour market had a delayed effect on wages in formal activities (Brazil).
Wages also lost purchasing power in Paraguay and Peru, although to a lesser extent (see table VI.4).
The figure shown in the column for 1980 refers to 1985. d Workers covered by social and labour legislation in six metropolitan areas.
Since May 1993, the general hourly wage index is used. 'Workers in the manufacturing sector. 9 Average declared wages of workers covered by the social security system. h Non-agricultural enterprises with 10 or more employees.
The figure shown in the column for 1980 refers to 1995. ' Average wages, not including payment in kind or other benefits. 1 Asunción. k Private-sectir manual workers in the Lima metropolitan area. 1 Urban non-manual and manual workers; second half of each year.
In a larger group of countries, lower inflation led to higher real wages, particularly where, owing to the depressed level of economic activity, price rises came in below expectations, as occurred in Bolivia, Chile, Colombia and Uruguay.
The most favourable trends were seen in some of the Central American countries, where real wages rose by more than 4%.
Trends in real minimum wages were also very uneven (see table VI.5).
On the one hand, negotiated nominal increases combined with significantly lower inflation to generate improvements in countries such as Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic and Guatemala, which saw real increases on the order of 4% or more.
On the other hand, there were also countries where wages were seriously eroded, either because nominal minimum wages were flat (Haiti, Paraguay and Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 93 Peru) or rose very little (Mexico) or because inflation rose (Ecuador).
Between these two extremes, there was a relatively large group of countries in which real minimum wages rose by moderate amounts of up to 3%; this group included Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Uruguay and Venezuela, among others.
For the region as a whole, the real minimum wage rose slightly, with the weighted average climbing by 0.5%, the simple average by 0.7% and the median by 1.7%.
Thus, in a departure from the pattern seen in virtually the whole of the 1990s (exceptfor 1998), minimum wages in 1999 performed slightly better than average wages.
Five sub-indices were calculated for each of these variables, with improvements in the indicator being expressed in values ranging from 0 to 1 and a deterioration showing up as a value between 0 and minus 1.
The exact calculations were carried out with reference to the best and worst performances, which were assigned the values 1 and minus 1.
The overall labour performance index was calculated as an average of these sub-indices.
It should be borne in mind that figures for each of the variables were not available for every country, so indices were computed only for those countries having data on at least three of these variables.
As shown in figure VI.4, labour performance was fairly negative, since the indicator yielded a value below 94 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean zero in 10 out of 17 countries.
The figures in the graph confirm that, as suggested above, these differences in labour performance were largely due to differences in economic growth.
One of the countries that deviated the most from the regional trend was Costa Rica, where the high rate of economic growth was largely due to the operations of a single firm whose impact on total employment in the country was limited.
If this firm's operations are factored out so that only the growth of the rest of the economy (3.4%) is considered, then the country's labour performance falls much more closely into line with the predominant trend.
Another country that diverged sharply from the trend was Chile, where the economic crisis severely undermined labour performance by generating a steep decline in labour demand (a contraction in wage employment) that was not offset by job creation in other activities (a falling employment rate).
Employment trends in early 2000 The first few months of 2000 saw some improvement in employment patterns at the regional level, mainly thanks to stronger labour demand in Brazil and Mexico.
In Brazil, the employment rate was higher than it had been during the same period of the preceding year for the first time since 1996.
A significant portion of the increase in employment is attributable to a revival of labour demand, as formal wage-based employment expanded by 1.4% in the period January-April.
Employment was up in manufacturing for the first time since 1995, partly as a consequence of earlier efforts to improve this sector's competitiveness and partly thanks to the favourable impact of the devaluation of the real.
In the first few months of the year, the employment rate also rose in Chile and Colombia, but declined in Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela.
Thus, for the eight countries for which information is available on employment and unemployment trends in Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 95 the first half of 2000, the employment rate edged up to 52.9% from the 52.4% level posted a year earlier.
Since the labour supply also increased, however, the higher level of employment did not show through in terms of lower unemployment, which remained around the level recorded in the first half of 1999.
This was also partly because in some countries (Argentina, Colombia, Ecuador, Uruguay) unemployment was higher than it had been during the same period a year earlier (see table VI.6).
In Mexico's manufacturing sector, real wages have continued to climb, although they have still not regained the levels attained prior to the crisis of the mid-1990s.
Chile and Colombia have also seen improvements as compared to the first quarter of 1999, although in Colombia real wage gains are tending to dissipate.
In Uruguay, real wages have held steady, while in Brazil they continue to trend downward.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 97 Chapter VII The external sector For the second year running, the region's external sector felt the effects of a drastic reduction in foreign capital inflows.
Unlike 1998, however, the severe adjustment that the region's economies had to make as a result of the international situation put a stop to the upward trend in the deficit on the region's balance-of-payments current account, which shrank from 4.5% of GDP in 1998 to THIS REDUCTION in the deficit is largely attributable to a decrease in the trade gap.
This, in turn, was accounted for by the significant drop in imports caused by a decline in the level of activity in the southern part of the region and the real depreciation of many countries' currencies.
Export earnings increased, although there were major differences from one country to another.
Higher oil prices and the robust health of the United States economy boosted the incomes of hydrocarbons exporters and of the countries in the northern portion of the region.
On the other hand, many countries' exports were hurt by lower commodity prices and by the sluggishness of the South American economies, and intraregional trade plummeted.
The narrower trade gap offered a respite which was further enhanced by higher incoming current transfers, especially family remittances, which continued on their upward trend in the Central American and Caribbean countries.
Even so, this improvement was counterbalanced by smaller inflows of foreign capital and by higher interest payments and profit remittances.
Together, these two factors resulted in a net transfer of resources out of the region for the first time since the recession of 1990.
As in 1998, the region was obliged to use international reserves and compensatory financing (US$ 6 billion in 1999).
The decline in international reserve assets was less widespread than in 1998, however; Brazil headed up the list, while Chile, Colombia Ecuador and Peru were also affected, although to a lesser extent. 98 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean 1.
External trade Latin American and Caribbean merchandise exports returned to the upward trend that had been interrupted in 1998, increasing by almost 6% in 1999 to over US$ 298 billion.
This improvement was attributable to an increase of over 7% in export volumes, since export unit values were lower than the previous year.
In contrast, merchandise imports decreased both in volume (by almost 3%) and in unit value.
Their total value consequently fell by over 4% to about US$ 302 billion, thus reversing the upward path of this variable, which had been on the rise for the past 15 years running.
The services trade gap also decreased, as the downturn seen in imports was greater in magnitude than the reduction in exports.
The combination of these factors caused the region's trade deficit to shrink by almost two thirds, to about US$ 18.6 billion.
Unlike the previous year, when all the region's countries had recorded trade deficits, in 1999 four countries posted surpluses: the three South American countries whose main export is oil, and Costa Rica.
At over US$ 6.7 billion, the hefty surplus recorded by Venezuela was particularly noteworthy.
The decrease in the volume of merchandise imports signalled a departure from another trend of the 1990s, when these imports had grown faster than GDP (see figure VII. 1); 1999 also marked the second year of the decade in which the growth rate for the volume of imports did not outpace the rate for the volume of exports.
Even so, exports continued to make a positive contribution to economic activity since, although they slowed for the second year in a row, they still grew at a faster rate than GDP, as they have throughout the decade.
Indeed, if Mexico, which accounted for 46% of total Latin American and Caribbean exports, were to be excluded from the equation, then the value of the region's merchandise exports fell would have fallen by 1.7% and imports by almost 16%.
Mexico's weight in the calculations also played an important part in keeping the region's terms of trade at virtually the same level as they had fallen to in 1998, when they worsened by almost 6%.
Some of these factors were country-specific, such as weather conditions and how they affected harvests, but the most influential ones have to do with the external environment.
Two of the main facets of that environment are firstly, conditions in the commodities market in general and the hydrocarbons market in particular and, secondly, world and regional economic activity.
The influence of these external aspects on the value of trade varied, with some having an expansionary impact and others a contractionary one.
Ci) Weak non-fuel commodity markets In 1999 world commodity markets, on which the exports of most of the region's countries are heavily dependent, remained in the recessionary phase of the cycle that began with the Asian crisis.
An oversupply of many commodities continued to drive prices down, and in many instances, they fell to record lows in 1999.
A modest upswing followed which was most visible in the category of raw materials.
The main decreases in average prices in 1999 were seen in the agricultural commodities produced by the tropical and sub-tropical countries of Central and South America.
For example, coffee lost 23% of its value; prices for bananas sold outside the protected European Union market were down by 34% and those of sugar fell by 30%.
The expansionary supply trend which contributed to the decrease in sugar prices was partly due to a steady increase in the supply from Brazil, which has become the world's largest sugar exporter.
In addition to wheat, which saw its average price fall by 14%, raw materials also became cheaper, especially in the case of minerals.
Cotton prices decreased by 20%; copper, lead and silver prices by 5%; iron ore by 11%; steel by almost 10%; and tin by 3%.
In contrast, the average price of beef rose by 7% and mean price levels for nickel and zinc were up by 30% and 5 %, respectively.
The widespread slump in commodity markets pulled down the unit values of the region's exports.
Although the countries' shared vulnerability to the same external disturbances could have some beneficial aspects (for example, by encouraging countries to coordinate their macroeconomic policies), it also poses a risk, since it precludes the potentially positive complementarities that could arise among economies at different phases of the economic cycle which are engaged in an increasing volume of intraregional trade.
Although this was true of most commodity exports, however, the situation in the region in 1999 was apowerful reminder that there is one major exception: hydrocarbons. (ii) Rising hydrocarbon prices What sets the oil market apart from other commodity markets is that a real possibility exists of voluntarily tailoring supply to alter price conditions.
In 1999, this kind of adjustment caused oil prices to depart from the patterns shown by other commodity prices.
The resulting expansionary effect on regional oil exports ran Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean . 1999-2000 101 counter to the contractionary forces affecting other commodity exports, and oil was virtually the sole exception to the general downward trend of export unit values.
The monthly average price for oil, which is of crucial significance in the exports of some of the region's countries and has a considerable impact on the imports of most of them, reached its lowest level in December 1998, when the Brent spot price dropped below US$ 10 per barrel.
The supply cutbacks that were then agreed upon by the world's main oil-exporting countries, including Mexico and Venezuela, drove up prices from March 1999 onward, and the average price for the month of December reached USS 25.6 per barrel.
Thanks to this development, the annual average price of the mix exported by Venezuela, for example, rose from USS 10.6 per barrel in 1998 to US$ 16.1 in 1999, while prices paid for Ecuador's crude oil exports rose from USS 9.2 per barrel to US$ 15.5 in the same period.
At pre-1999 export levels, every extra dollar added to the per-barrel price increased regional export earnings by some USS 1.8 billion.
Worldwide, economic activity grew by 2.7% and trade by 5.6% in terms of volume.1 The geographic distribution of this expansion was far from even, however.
Among the countries of significance to the region, growth was particularly strong in the United States, whose output and imports increased at a rate well above the world average.
The United States market is very important for Mexico and the Central American and Caribbean countries, since it purchases most of their exports, and these countries' exports therefore posted widespread increases in volume.
The same was true of exports to the countries of South and East Asia, whose economies enjoyed an appreciable upturn that benefited their main suppliers, which in Latin America are Chile and Peru.
The growth of the world economy also paved the way for a recovery in the prices of some raw materials, especially in the second half of the year, thus slowing the descent of annual averages.
At the same time, inflation was held down, in part by low commodity prices.
Imports declined across the board within an environment marked by the depreciation of many of the countries' currencies, a factor that hurt Brazilian imports in particular.
Exports to other countries in the region also suffered the consequences of flagging demand, which were particularly evident in the category of manufactured goods, the main component of intraregional trade, and in countries having a greater degree of trade integration, especially the members of the Southern Common Market (Mercosur).
This was a reflection of the trade results in the South American integration schemes.
Exports among Mercosur countries fell by 24%, which was significantly sharper than the decline in the group's exports to other parts of the world.
Asa result, the level of intra-group sales as a percentage of total Mercosur exports, which had increased spectacularly during the decade, jumping from 9% in 1990 to 25% in 1998, fell back to 20% in 1999.
Exports to other countries within the group decreased by 27% and the level of these exports as a proportion of the total fell to below 10% for the first time since 1990.
This performance stands in contrast to trends in the Central American Common Market (CACM), where exports within the grouping increased by 9% and thus maintained their approximately 20% share of total exports. 1 United Nations estimates are available in the World Economic and Social Survey, 2000, New York, July 2000.
The resulting picture was therefore fairly mixed and served to point up the differences that have emerged among the individual countries in terms of their positions in international markets.
Judging from the situation in 1999, at least three groups of countries can be identified based on their differing results (see figure VII.3).
The names of the countries in brackets indicated exceptions to the trend.
All three benefited from the steep rise in the price of hydrocarbons and recorded increases in unit values as well as in the total value of their exports.
In the case of Venezuela, this was largely due to the policy of supply cuts negotiated among the main oil-exporting countries.
Even so, Venezuela, which is more dependent on oil than any other South American country, also posted the greatest increase in unit value (over 30%) and in export income (almost 20%).
In contrast, Ecuador's export earnings barely rose at all, as the increase in oil prices was offset by lower prices for other products, such as bananas, coffee and shrimp, and by the decrease in shipments, despite the devaluation of the sucre.
The maquila industry, which targets that market, played an important role in this respect.
The sole exception was Honduras, where 2 Does not include English-speaking countries, for which detailed information is not available. 104 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean agriculture suffered the after-effects of Hurricane Mitch, which devastated the region in October 1998.
The buoyant performance of the maquila industry in Honduras was not enough to compensate for the drastic reduction in agricultural exports (shipments of the main export product, bananas, plunged by 77%).
Export unit values fell in all the countries of this group except Mexico, owing largely to the deterioration in the prices of their export commodities (bananas, coffee and sugar, mainly).
This reduction was offset by an increase in volume in some cases (Costa Rica, Haiti, El Salvador and Dominican Republic), but not in others (Guatemala and Nicaragua, which was also ravaged by Hurricane Mitch).
The 16% expansion in the value of Mexico's external sales was driven both by the vigorous United States market (which buys 87% of the country's exports) and, like other net oil exporters in the region, by the rise in oil prices.
The latter played a key role in narrowing the country's trade gap.
The remainder of its exports, consisting chiefly of manufactured products, turned in a very favourable performance, thanks in part to the maquila industry, which accounts for almost half of total exports. (iii) The other countries The third group of countries are all South American, with the exception of Panama.
Almost all of them recorded a decline in external sales due to a decline in the volumes exported (in most cases) and the deterioration in commodity prices which affected all the South American countries.
Panama and three of the four Mercosur member countries (Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay) turned in the worst results, with export earnings showing percentage drops in the two-digit range.
Panama's shipments to the depressed South American economies declined sharply, especially in the case of the Andean countries, while these three Mercosur member countries suffered the consequences of the appreciation of their currencies against the Brazilian real.
Despite the devaluation of its currency, the volume of Brazil's exports did not increase enough to compensate for the steep downward slide of export prices, which plummeted by 12% (the sharpest drop in the region, together with Uruguay's).
In contrast, the rise in export volumes in Chile and Peru was more than enough to make up for the decline in unit values and, as a result, these were the only countries in the group to post higher export earnings than the year before. (c) Merchandise imports Imports turned in a somewhat more even performance than exports.
Despite the jump in oil prices, unit values fell in all the countries.
The first group spent less on external purchases, while the second group (with the exception of Guatemala) spent more.
These data indicate that the trend in economic activity was the fundamental determinant of the volume of imports and thus exerted an even stronger influence than exchange rate variations, since no such correlation was observed between exchange rates (in real terms) and external purchases.
In fact, the appreciation of the exchange rate was accompanied by larger import volumes only in Mexico, Haiti and Honduras.
The other Central American and Caribbean countries saw both a depreciation of the exchange rate and an increase in external purchases.
Similarly, in Mercosur, the appreciation of the Argentine, Paraguayan and Uruguayan currencies coincided with sharply lower physical imports; much the same type of situation was observed in Venezuela.
The devaluation of the real at the beginning of the year had an adverse effect on external purchases, and the volume of imports of some products fell faster than their rate of consumption did. (d) Services trade In the region as a whole, service exports turned in a poorer showing than merchandise exports, as their value fell by almost 2%.
Service imports also shrank, by over 8%, which was more than double the decrease in merchandise imports.
As a result, the trade gap on the services account narrowed by about US$ 4.7 billion to under US$ 14.6 billion.
In most of the countries, service imports are closely related to imports of merchandise, since the main category is the insurance and freight services involved in the international transport of goods.
Since the major freight forwarders are all foreign companies, the reduction in the number of shipments was reflected in a decline in outlays on this item.
Thus, payments for the shipment of merchandise followed a similar pattern to the volume of merchandise trade.
The income generated by the shipment of merchandise is much less significant at the regional level.
In Colombia, where this item is more important owing to the existence of a merchant fleet, revenue from shipping services increased by 7%, while in Mexico it fell by 4%.
Another country where transport activity is particularly influential is Panama, since it obtains considerable income from the collection of Canal tolls.
This income, whose level is determined by the volume of regional and world trade, grew by a scant 2%.
Consequently, the downturn seen in offshore banking activities -the other pillar of the Panamanian services economy- resulted in a slight reduction in total earnings from so-called "invisible" exports.
Tourism is the main category of services exports for many countries in the region and is especially important in the Caribbean, Mexico, Central America and Uruguay.
In 1999, tourism activity received a boost from the robust economic performance recorded at the international level and particularly in the United States. 106 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean Worldwide, tourism grew by 3% in volume and 4% in value, according to data from the World Tourism Organization.
In the region, the number of international tourists increased sharply in Central America and the Caribbean, especially in countries such as Guatemala, which recorded an increase of almost 30%, the Dominican Republic (15%), Cuba (12%) and Costa Rica (9%).
In Brazil, which became a more inexpensive travel destination owing to the devaluation of the real, tourism was up by 5%.
In line with the increase in volume, income from tourism rose by 9% in the Bahamas and by over 10% in practically all the countries of Central America and in the Dominican Republic.
Other countries in the region that received higher income were Brazil (2%) and the Andean countries of Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru.
In contrast, tourism earnings fell by 4% in Mexico, which is the main tourist destination in the region and the eighth most popular destination at the world level, and in Haiti.
Most tourists visiting the Southern Cone come from other countries within the same subregion, so tourism revenue was hurt by the poor economic results and exchange rate realignments in those countries.
Visits to Paraguay continued to suffer as a result of the difficulties affecting cross-border trade with Brazil.
Colombia recorded a 7% reduction in tourism income, at least partly as a result of social unrest and problems with respect to personal safety in various areas of the country. (e) Trade in 2000 The factors mentioned above as having an influence on trade took on a brighter hue in 2000.
The prices of The current account deficit for Latin America and the Caribbean underwent a drastic reduction in 1999, narrowing from US$ 87.5 billion in 1998 to US$ 54 billion in 1999, chiefly because of the US$ 34 billion decrease in the region's trade deficit.
Measured in terms most of the region's major commodities took a turn for the better, although in general a modest one.
As a result, the averages for the first five months of 2000 were higher than those for all of 1999 in the cases of soybeans, bananas, shrimp, cotton, aluminium, copper, iron ore, tin and zinc.
Average oil prices were already nearly 50% higher than the 1999 average.
Among the exceptions to this trend were coffee, where price movements failed to consolidate an upward trend, and wheat, which was not expected to stage a recovery until mid-year.
The merchandise trade results available for the first three to five months of 2000 confirm this outlook.
Imports continued to slip only in Ecuador, but held steady in Argentina and Paraguay and increased in another six countries, including Mexico (with an increase of 23%), Brazil (11%), Chile (26%) and Venezuela (21%).
An upswing in exports was recorded in the 10 countries for which information is available, with particularly noteworthy results in Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Colombia, all of which posted increases of between 20% and 24%, and Venezuela.
These figures are based on a comparison with the same period of the previous year, however, during which the results were particularly poor.
In most of the individual countries there was also a notable reduction in the deficit, with the exception of The balance-of-payments current account and its financing Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 107 some Central American and Caribbean countries.
Ecuador and Venezuela generated hefty surpluses that marked a sharp contrast with their 1998 deficits.
Chile and Colombia, however, registered a steep drop of some 4 or 5 percentage points of GDP, while Honduras and Nicaragua saw their deficits widen considerably (see table VII.4).
Current transfers, especially family remittances, continued to follow the upward trend of recent years and consequently made a significant contribution to the reduction in the current account deficit.
The regional balance of current transfers, which had tripled between 1989 and 1999 and had increased year on year throughout nearly that entire period, climbed to US$ 18.2 billion in 1999.
The importance of current transfers for some of the region's economies, especially the smaller ones, stands out clearly in the case of El Salvador, in which this category was equivalent to one half of the country's total goods and services exports in 1999.
The deficit on the factor income account widened slightly, from US$ 51 billion to US$ 54 billion, with a third of this amount corresponding to net profit remittances.
In Argentina and Brazil, net interest payments and profit remittances amounted to significant percentages of external sales (29% and 34%, respectively), while in Bolivia, Ecuador, Panama and Peru the figure bordered on 25%.
Interest payments increased only moderately, since external liabilities rose very slightly and international interest rates were raised by no more than a small amount (see table VII.5).
The largest interest rate hike came in the second half of 1999 and, in fact, the average for the first semester of 1999 was even lower than the average for the second semester of 1998.
The region as a whole did not witness any significant variation in the ratio of interest payments to exports of goods and services exports in 1999; however, in eight countries this ratio was higher than the regional average and in half of them it was over 20%.
Capital flows and international reserves Net inflows of capital to the region in 1999 totalled a paltry US$ 48 billion, after having reached US$ 85 billion in 1997 and US$ 69 billion in 1998.
Since the current account deficit was also much smaller, however, the region's balance-of-payments deficit was just USS 6 billion, a third of the 1998 figure.
For the second year running, this deficit was financed entirely with international reserves.
The region's international reserves hovered around USS 155 billion during the year, peaking in April and May of 1999.
The countries that managed to build up their international reserves the most were Argentina, Costa Rica, Honduras and Mexico; in contrast, Brazil, Chile and Colombia suffered the heaviest losses.
The after-effects of the international crisis that had broken out in mid-1997 continued to be felt in Latin America, although their impact was mitigated somewhat by inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) and, to a lesser extent, by funds made available by multilateral agencies.
Capital inflows to the region were quite uneven for nearly the entire year.
New international issues of debt instruments continued to decline in relation to pre-crisis levels, and access to commercial bank credit was more restricted.
The phase of tight external financing, which had been triggered by the Russian moratorium declared in August 1998, continued in 1999.
The consequences of this were felt mostly in the countries of South America, while most of the countries of Central America and the Caribbean managed to increase their capital inflows.
In keeping with its upward trend of recent years, FDI came in at an unprecedented USS 78 billion.
In contrast, other components of the region's financial and capital accounts posted a hefty negative balance.
In fact, in the course of the year, equity investment flows, short-term bank loans and other capital together fell by close to USS 30 billion.
Net flows of debt instruments on international markets continued to be positive, although they provided little new financing, since a large proportion of foreign exchange inflows had to be allocated to paying off debt arrears. (a) Foreign direct investment The US$ 78 billion of net FDI inflows to the region easily outstripped the already exceptional figure reached in 1997-1998.
The largest single investment in the region in 1999 was Spanish investors' acquisition of the Argentine company Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales (YPF) for US$ 11.6 billion.
Owing to the system used for calculating the balance of payments, this inflow of direct investment entailed an offsetting USS 11 billion decrease in portfolio investment liabilities (since the YPF shares had previously belonged to a large number of small investors, the purchase of that stock by the Spanish company Repsol S.A. altered the type of investment they represented).
Leaving aside the YPF sale, regional FDI amounted to USS 67 billion, which was still a record figure.
The country to receive the largest share of these inflows was Brazil, but flows to Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Nicaragua and Uruguay also reached all-time highs, and flows to Mexico held steady around the USS 11.5 billion-mark posted for the previous two-year period (see table VII.7).
In some of the smaller economies , FDI flows were of considerable relative magnitude; in Bolivia, for example, FDI inflows amounted to around 10% of GDP for the third year running.
In a year in which private debt flows were allocated almost entirely to amortization payments, these inflows were a significant factor in providing financing for the current account in over half the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Part of this figure corresponds to the purchase of shares in the company from non-residents.
The value of these assets constitutes a debit in the portfolio investment entry on the Balance of Payments.
An appreciable proportion of these capital flows continued to be used to acquire existing assets; these operations took the form of the privatization of State enterprises or the purchase of privately-owned local companies.
In the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) countries, recent estimates indicate that around 60% of FDI was used to create new assets3.
Direct investment abroad undertaken by Chilean and Brazilian residents again reached significant levels; in fact, in Chile it bordered on US$ 5 billion. (b) International bond issues Despite the increase in international interest rates, issues of debt instruments on international markets climbed to over US$ 43 billion in 1999.
However, although this was higher than the previous year's figure, it was still well below the 1996-1997 average.
After deducting amortization payments, the net flow in 1999 turns out to have been quite small.
As in the past few years, the bulk of these funds went to central governments and public-sector companies and, also as in recent years, this market continued to be very volatile, with a great deal of activity in March, April and October and very few issues in August and September.
The terms and conditions of placements continued to compare poorly with those offered before the international financial crisis.
The year concluded with an average financial cost for the region of 11 %, which was slightly lower than the end-1998 figure, but much higher than the cost recorded in the pre-crisis period (see figure VII.5), even though the yields of United States Treasury bonds rose slightly in 1999.
The maturities of new issues shortened significantly over the year, standing at just 3 ECLAC, "The nineties: an overview", Santiago, Chile, 30 March, 2000.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 111 four years in the final quarter, which was only half the average maturity recorded at the end of 1998 (see table VII.8).
Although access to the international market continued to be uneven, in April 1999 seven of the region's governments were able to issue bonds on international markets at a premium of 550 basis points.
The euro market was quite active, with issues by Argentina accounting for almost half the total.
Bond issues continued to be concentrated in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, as was the case throughout nearly the whole of the 1990s.
The Brazilian Government made a striking return to international financial markets in April with a US$ 3 billion bond issue.
Other countries also floated bond issues; apart from Chile, Colombia and Uruguay, which have resorted to this type of financing continually over the last five years, this market played an important role in 1998-1999 for a number of smaller economies as well, such as Costa Rica, El Salvador, and Trinidad and Tobago.
Another noteworthy event was a US$ 400 million placement made by the Government of Paraguay which was guaranteed by the Government of the Chinese Province of Taiwan.
For the second year in a row, the considerable reduction in external debt prices on secondary markets encouraged the region's governments to trade in Brady bonds.
In 1999 Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Uruguay exchanged Brady bonds for new issues equivalent to US$ 6 billion, which freed up resources that had been used as collateral and therefore increased the availability of funds for their central governments.
Spread (Differential between the yield on bonds issued and the yield on United States treasury bonds with comparable maturities, 100 basis points equals 1%).
The value of these assets constitutes a debit in the portfolio investment entry on the Balance of Payments. maintained this stance until the end of 1999.
Judging from the available figures on net flows of bank credit up to December, the region appears to have sustained a capital outflow of slightly over US$ 15 billion, partly because of the decline in demand for short-term financing caused by the decrease in external trade operations.
Outflows continued to be heavily concentrated in Brazil, although they were also sizeable in Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru; in contrast, Mexico, Venezuela and some Central American and Caribbean countries recorded capital inflows during the same period.
During the second and third quarters, the region registered a significant outflow, but in the fourth quarter, the region saw a positive net flow of bank lending for the first time since mid-1998 (see figure VII.6).
According to data compiled by the Bank for International Settlements, most Latin American debtor countries increased their average maturities in 1999, mainly by reducing their short-term obligations.
These figures do not consider adjustments in Argentina's balance of payments for the YPF sale.
This timid upturn took place in a context of rebounding stock quotations, which had plummeted in 1998 and triggered an unprecedented collapse in share prices.
Overall, by the end of 1999, the regional index was still 12% lower than it had been in mid-1997, before the Asian crisis broke out (see table VII.9).
This upswing was driven by Mexico, which was the only stock exchange in the region to record a rise in its share price index of over 25% above pre-Asian crisis levels by the end of 1999.
According to preliminary estimates, Mexico also appears to be the only country to record a notable increase in equity capital flows in 1999; buoyed by the upturn in economic activity, this trend was still in evidence as of mid-2000.
In contrast, the flow of bilateral financing to the region was negative for the second year in a row. transfer of resources out of the Latin American and the Caribbean region of US$ 6 billion.
This was the first time a negative figure had been recorded since 1990 (see figure VII.7).
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 115 Nine Latin American and Caribbean countries closed out the year with net outward transfers amounting in total to some US$ 17 billion dollars: Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Ecuador and especially Venezuela registered sizeable negative transfers.
On the other hand, 10 Latin American countries recorded positive transfers for the third consecutive year, this time in the amount of almost US$ 11 billion; the size of these transfers was particularly notable in the cases of Argentina, Guatemala, Panama, Nicaragua and Mexico.
The net transfer of resources into the region during the period 1991-1999 is estimated at an average annual rate of 1 % of GDP.
Over this period Argentina received the largest annual transfer, equivalent to 2% of GDP on average, while Venezuela had an average annual net outward transfer of resources equivalent to 3% of GDP. (b) External debt The level of Latin American and Caribbean external debt reached US$ 757 billion in 1999, rising by 1.5% in nominal terms.
This was the smallest increase to be posted in recent years and reflected the difficulties encountered in obtaining financing on international bond or banking markets during 1999.
In most of the countries whose external liabilities rose, the increase was moderate, including Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, where the figure was around 7% per annum; Paraguay, however, increased its debt by an exceptionally high 33%.
Other countries did not record significant variations in external borrowing, with the exception of considerable decreases in the cases of Jamaica (-8%) and Guyana (-20%), which were able to avail themselves of the heavily indebted poor countries (HIPC) debt relief initiative.
The ratio of total interest payments to exports of goods and services was over 20% in seven economies; this indicator increased further in all of these countries except Peru during the period 1998-1999, and significantly so in Argentina and Ecuador.
According to World Bank estimates, the region's debt service (including amortization payments) has increased to over 35% of the value of its exports, which is the highest figure to be recorded in the 1990s.
Within the prevailing context of rising international interest rates, the region's governments and public-sector enterprises have pursued what has proven to be a successful policy of improving the maturity profile of their external debt in recent years.
The ratio of external debt to goods and services exports in the region improved slightly, since external sales grew at a faster rate than external liabilities; this indicator reached its best level in 1997, when the external debt stood at twice the value of total exports.
In 1999, as in previous years, the results varied a great deal across countries.
The region's two largest economies, Argentina and Brazil, recorded their highest ratios of the 1990s; in both countries the deterioration in this indicator has been concentrated in the last two years.
A second group of heavily indebted countries includes Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru (see table VII. 10), while a number of other countries were able to maintain their debt at moderate levels, including Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Uruguay and Venezuela.
In the Central American countries, with the exception of Nicaragua, the level of external debt is lower than the value of total exports.
Honduras succeeded in having its bilateral external debt written off under the Naples terms, which enabled the country to reduce its external liabilities by US$ 400 million.
Ecuador continued to work on restructuring its external debt, after it defaulted on interest payments on collateralized Brady bonds and other obligations to private creditors in 1999.
Complementary aspects of this process have involved a higher priority for macroeconomic stability -especially in terms of lower inflation- and, more recently, greater social expenditure.
Policymakers expected these changes to enhance productivity and boost economic growth, leading to job creation and greater equality. 1 Introduction This chapter is taken from the summary volume of an ECLAC research project on the impact of the economic reforms in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Only a preliminary assessment can be made at this point, since in many cases the reforms are less than a decade old; nonetheless, the recent search programme by ECLAC (see box Vin.l) suggests a number of tentative conclusions.
Overall, the reforms seem to have had a surprisingly small impact on average regional aggregates; econometric evidence points to a small positive effect on investment and growth, but a small negative impact on employment and income distribution.
It is only at the country, sectoral, and microeconomic levels that evidence of strong effects begins to show through.
The reforms fostered investment and modernization, but they also generated significant differences in performance: highand low-growth countries, dynamic and lagging sectors, a gap between large and small firms, and a growing dispersion between the earnings of the well educated and those of the rest of the population.
The result has been specialization and polarization, along with their attendant opportunities and challenges.
They have also opened up unexpected possibilities, of which the most dramatic are the export potential demonstrated by the region and the dynamism of modern sectors -some of which, like telecommunications, have been radically transformed by technological progress.
The project entitled "Growth, Employment and Equity: the Impact of the Economic Reforms in Latin America and the Caribbean" was a three-year joint venture between the United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) and local researchers in the countries covered by the study.
The project focused on nine "project countries", which were selected because they had the longest history of implementing economic reforms.
Four of them -Bolivia, Chile, Costa Rica and Mexico- have reforms that date to the mid-1980s or, in the case of Chile, to the mid-1970s.
The other five -Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Jamaica and Peru- began their reforms In the early 1990s, although Argentina had a brief experience with reforms in the 1970s.
The results of the project will be published in a number of country volumes.
In addition, a summary and four books on the main topics of the project present the results from the regional perspective.
International context Several features of the international environment have had a major influence on the impact of the reforms on economic performance.
With respect to world trade, the region's share of total global exports declined throughout the postwar period before recovering somewhat in the 1990s.
Part of this recent recovery may be explained by the economic reforms; nonetheless, stronger export growth (in both volume and value terms) has not been matched by growth in output.
Global capital flows have also increased rapidly, and in this case Latin America's share has grown in both the portfolio and foreign direct investment (FDI) categories, although the former has increased more than the latter.
A key feature of capital flows to Latin America has been their volatility, and the cycles of surges followed by steep declines became more frequent in the 1990s (see figure VIII. 1).
Crises also occurred more often, and greater volatility led to uncertainty, which discouraged the investment that is crucial to enable the reforms to bear fruit and generate higher growth in the future.
Compared to the region's participation in world trade, capital flows and GDP growth in Latin America seem to be much more closely correlated: when capital flows increase, growth accelerates; when they fall significantly or are reversed, growth declines.
One reason why the link between exports and GDP growth is weak in Latin America is that creating such a link requires the development of supplier networks, and this takes time.
Investment needs to occur in many sectors and in enterprises of different sizes, including small and medium-size suppliers, so that large exporting firms can transmit growth to other parts of the economy.
Structural reforms and Structural reforms can be defined in a number of ways, but those most prevalent in the region entailed liberalizing imports, opening the capital account of the balance of payments, liberalizing the domestic financial system, privatization and tax reform.
The feature that was common to all of them was greater reliance on market mechanisms, both domestically and internationally. investment process is frequently interrupted, then the necessary incentives will be absent.
The region's highly problematic capital-flow experience during the 1990s raises the possibility that large surges of easily reversible capital flows (e.g., portfolio investment) may have had net negative effects on long-term growth and development.
This contrasts with increasing empirical evidence that foreign direct investment and trade both contribute to long-term growth.
In order to study these five reforms, the project built upon previous work done at the Inter-American Development Bank to create a set of indices for analyzing and comparing reform implementation processes.
The indices measure the degree to which the economy is more open and more market-led, using scores ranging from 0 to 1.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 121 (a) Aggressive vs. cautious reformers Within the overall reform process, it is possible to identify a set of countries that were "aggressive" reformers compared to others that were more "cautious" in terms of the speed and scope of their reforms.
The former group made comprehensive reforms in a relatively short period of time, while the latter proceeded more gradually and partially.
These differences are closely correlated with the initial conditions prevailing in the pre-reform period.
Four elements in particular influenced policy choice: prior growth performance, inflation, degree of economic distortion (here measured by the reform index), and level of governability.
These elements tended to cluster; at one extreme, Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and Peru scored poorly on all four of them.
On average, these countries had annual inflation rates of over 1,200% during the five years preceding the initiation of the reform process, with GDP shrinking by an average of 0.7% in the same period.
The reform index indicated a high governance level of economic distortion, and had broken down substantially.
The consequence of these traumatic experiences was to create an environment in which governments and other important actors became willing to experiment with drastic changes in economic policy.
The initial conditions among the cautious reformers (Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Jamaica and Mexico) contrasted sharply with those of countries that were more aggressive.
Average inflation among these five countries during the preceding period was comparatively much lower, at 168%, while growth was a lot higher at 3.0%.
The level of economic distortion was lower, and problems of governance were minor in comparison.
Another way of viewing the difference between the two groups is that the key actors in the cautious reformers believed their countries were basically sound and had much that was worth preserving.
The greater value attached to macroeconomic stability in the region over the last 15 years (see table VIII. 2) has been as important as the change in the development model.
First, there was a clear focus on bringing inflation down to single digits, or even to the average level of the industrialized countries.
Second, fiscal policy supported the fight against inflation through shrinking deficits, achieved primarily through expenditure cuts, and less frequently by raising taxes or other revenues.
Third, monetary policy was also geared toward stabilization, with interest rates used as the key instrument of stabilization in combination with floating exchange rates and fixed or semi-fixed regimes.
In some countries and in certain periods, the exchange rate was used primarily to reduce inflation; later, it was increasingly employed to maintain international competitiveness and stimulate growth.
The shift from one approach to the other generally proved to be traumatic.
While stabilization policies did manage to reduce inflation, they also restrained growth rates in the short and medium run.
Moreover, they tended to be procyclical, as interest rates were raised and fiscal expenditure cut to slow down price increases, maintain the exchange rate, or deal with balance-of-payments problems.
Output growth in the 1990s thus displayed a stop-go pattern in the project countries as a group, and in most of them individually.
As table VIII.2 shows, growth rates peaked twice in the decade, in 1994 and 1997, and each peak was followed by a sharp decline.
The evidence is mixed, across countries and time periods and also across reform and policy areas. (i) Consistencies At the most general level, the trend toward a more balanced macroeconomic policy stance, together with a set of reforms that opened up new opportunities for the domestic and foreign private sectors, gave a major psychological boost to entrepreneurs.
Reforms plus macroeconomic stability also eased the external financial constraint that had crippled the region for most of the 1980s.
At a more specific level, the most successful mix of reforms and macroeconomic policy occurred in the area of inflation.
The first arose from capital account liberalization, which provoked a substantial short-term capital inflow and caused local currencies to appreciate; this had its counterpart in trade deficits and also sent mixed signals to firms that had taken encouragement from trade reform to invest in new capacity oriented toward exports.
Although the trade deficit could be covered in the short run by the same capital inflows that were causing the exchange rate to appreciate, these flows were eminently reversible and were liable to leave the country as quickly as they had entered in response to domestic problems or international financial trends.
In the best of cases, these capital outflows caused disruptions to the local economy; at worst, they resulted in currency crises that were extraordinarily costly and took years to overcome.
A second inconsistency arose between financial liberalization and monetary policy, which became more difficult to manage under conditions of capital-account opening.
Overshooting was quite typical, since counter-inflationary monetary policies further increased the cost of money, resulting in local interest rates that were substantially higher than their international counterparts; this was especially problematic for small firms that did not have access to the international capital markets.
Even more important were the problems that financial liberalization caused for the banking sector.
Local banks lacked experience in evaluating long-term credit risks and became overextended when large amounts of foreign capital entered their countries.
Problems were particularly severe when borrowing took place in foreign currency, with debts ballooning out of control when the reversal of capital inflows forced devaluation; as a result, banking crises merged with currency crises.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 123 The third inconsistency syndrome involved fiscal policy.
Governments sought to reduce or eliminate their fiscal deficits, but several of the reforms actually made this more difficult, such as tax reform which lowered rates on individuals and corporations.
A third reform, decentralization, exacerbated central government fiscal deficits by shifting revenues to provinces and municipali t ies without always transferring the counterpart obligations.
Privatization, in turn, acted to support fiscal policy in the short run, but created its own trap later on. (d) Social policy and social expenditure Social policy was an integral part of the reform process from the outset, at least in principle.
The basic idea was to get the government out of productive activities, where the private sector could do a better job, thereby freeing up public resources for social expenditure.
These policies were perceived as having a dual value: they would lead to higher productivity and better economic performance, while also enhancing equity and mobility in highly unequal societies.
Social expenditure had declined in most Latin American and Caribbean countries in the 1980s, reflecting the urgent need to reduce fiscal deficits, but countries gave greater priority to the social area in the 1990s, albeit in differing degrees and with differing emphases.
All nine project countries increased their per capita social expenditure, and, except for Peru, the increase more than made up for the decline of previous decade.
Social expenditure as a share of total public spending followed a similar pattern, rising by an average of 23%, and it also grew in relation to GDP in most countries, but more slowly (13%) than the other two indicators.
Aside from the issue of the quantity of social services, there were also serious problems with the quality of those services in Latin American countries at the start of the 1990s, which led many governments in the region to embark upon reforms in this area.
One type of reform aimed to improve central government delivery of education, health, housing, and social security services through better staff training, enhanced facilities and greater participation by beneficiaries.
A second reform focused on decentralizing social services to municipal and provincial levels of government -especially in the case of education and health care.
The third approach was most closely related to the economic reforms, as it entailed privatizing certain aspects of social service delivery: several countries encouraged the establishment of private schools, health care and pension systems for those who could afford to pay, while the rest of the population had to continue to rely on the public system. 4.
Reforms, investment, productivity and growth Reform advocates expected that by opening up Latin American economies to world markets and giving greater space to the private sector, investment and productivity would both increase, resulting in faster growth with exports becoming more important as production shifted toward tradable goods.
Whether a given investment rate is sufficient depends firstly on the growth rate that is desired.
Several years ago, ECLAC suggested that annual growth of 6% was needed to tackle the social issues that were outstanding in the region (poverty and unemployment, for example), and there seemed to be substantial consensus around such a figure.
The transition period, in turn, consisted of a phase dominated by negative factors, followed by another in which positive factors prevailed.
The former was centred on the uncertainty caused by the reforms themselves, often compounded by macroeconomic disequil ibria or problematic international conditions.
Investors tended to react defensively to this by rationalizing production processes and introducing disembodied technical change to raise productivity levels; the more positive transitory factors, involving one-time investments, began when some of this uncertainty had been dissipated.
Once these two transitional phases had ended, investment would again be determined by the "normal" factors that characterize all capitalist economies (such as macroeconomic stability, anticipated demand, relative prices, and technological upgrading).
Immediately following the reforms, investment coefficients declined, while in the second half of the 1990s they returned to levels similar to those seen during the postwar period.
So far only Chile has reached the third phase with its reforms consolidated; all the other countries remain in the transition phase, so it is difficult to predict what their investment rates will be once that period is over.
According to both econometric and qualitative evidence, the two reforms that had the greatest effect on investment patterns were import liberalization and privatization.
Each appears to have had a positive but delayed impact: import liberalization lowered costs for imported items (both inputs and capital goods) and heightened competitive pressures, while privatization introduced new actors to the region, notably transnational corporations.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 125 (c) Reforms and growth While investment and productivity had returned to their pre-debt-crisis levels by the end of the 1990s, the same could not be said for GDP growth.
These simple averages conceal sharply different performances between two groups of countries.
The four that grew most slowly in the base period (Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and Peru) were the fastest growing in the 1990s.
These countries also grew considerably faster in the 1990s than in their own past (except for Peru, which grew at about the same rate).
Average growth in this group in the base period was 4.0%, rising to 5.6% in the 1990s, the largest increase occurring in Chile, where growth rates nearly doubled.
The remaining five countries (Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Jamaica and Mexico) grew more slowly in the 1990s than in the base period, and more slowly in the 1990s than the other four countries.
The simple average growth rate among the five was 6.1% in the base period, compared to 2.5% in the 1990s, with the most dramatic slowdowns occurring in Brazil, Mexico and Jamaica.
The fact that the first two are the largest economies in the region explains the difference between the simple and weighted averages shown in table VIII.3. (i) Growth accounting Part of the explanation for these trends can be found in a growth-accounting framework.
Labour input increased between the base period and the 1990s, and, as hours worked declined in most countries, this implies a larger number of people employed.
Capital accumulation, on the other hand, fell sharply between the base period and the later years.
These averages again conceal diverging trends: the rate of growth of labour input more than doubled among the faster-growing countries in the 1990s, while in the slower-growing countries it actually fell.
Capital accumulation suffered a relatively small decline in the fast-growing countries, but declined much more dramatically in the slow-growing group.
Factor inputs grew at fairly similar rates across the two groups in the 1990s, and education levels were also nearly identical.
But the productivity of labour and capital increased at very different rates, with labour productivity among the faster growing countries rising four times as quickly as in the slower group (2.9% compared to 0.7%).
The productivity of the capital stock increased at 1.6% on average in the fast-growing countries, while declining slightly elsewhere.
These results are also reflected in total factor productivity, which represents all factors combined plus residual elements not captured in the analysis.
Not surprisingly, we find the same pattern here as for labour and capital productivity.
All the fast-growing countries except Bolivia made total productivity gains between the base period and the 1990s, while the slower countries saw the basic productivity measure decline.
Insofar as productivity is a crucial determinant of a country's ability to compete in the world economy, these figures would suggest that the countries that grew fastest in the 1990s -largely thanks to higher productivity- are likely to enjoy additional advantages in the future.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 127 As regards individual country performances, the four countries identified as aggressive reformers were also those that grew most rapidly in the 1990s, while the cautious reformers grew more slowly (see table VIII.3).
On the face of it, this relation appears to provide evidence that more reform leads to higher growth, but in reality the situation is actually far more complex.
The reforms worked in conjunction with macroeconomic and internat ional trends, and the el imination of hyperinflation, in particular, had a very positive impact on growth.
Moreover, the aggressive reformers chose to undertake many reforms in a very short time period because they were in such dire straits in terms of hyperinflation and negative growth beforehand.
Their economies were also much more distorted than those of the other group, and this was often compounded by problems of governance.
Not surprisingly, the change in policy stance led to new investment and faster growth, once economic actors had assured themselves that it would be maintained.3 Countries that had been doing reasonably well in the pre-reform period had less reason to undertake major structural changes.
Although they did implement gradual and selective reforms, the stimulus these provided was smaller because there was no reservoir of opportunities waiting to be exploited.
These countries also encountered serious macroeconomic problems that had a negative effect on growth rates.
Mexico and Brazil already had high inflation rates at the start of the reform period, and the stabilization policies they followed, which relied on an overvalued exchange rate, eventually resulted in foreign exchange crises.
Colombia, Costa Rica and Jamaica also began to suffer from growing macroeconomic imbalance during the 1990s. 5.
Reforms and employment The reforms were expected to impact employment positively through faster output growth and a shift toward more labour-intensive production technologies, while higher demand for unskilled labour was also expected to lower the skill premium and improve income distribution.
None of these expectations was actually fulfilled. (a) Long-term trends Long-term employment trends are generally thought to be determined by changes in labour supply, although other factors, including the impact of reform, can be significant in the short and medium run.
Leaving aside the 1980s, which were clearly atypical, elasticities in the 1990s were not significantly different from those of the 1950-1980 base period, so to the extent that the reforms had their impact in the 1990s, it can be inferred that they had neither positive nor negative effects on the long-term relation between GDP growth and job creation.
Instead, what stands out in the 1990s are lower growth rates, which led to more sluggish job creation, especially for wage earners. 3 Another study (Paunovic 2000) reaches similar conclusions for a larger sample of 17 Latin American and Caribbean countries.
This sector was especially significant in Colombia, and in Brazil, where formal-sector employment declined in absolute terms.
Sluggish job creation led to high rates of unemployment during the 1990s; while average unemployment for the decade was slightly down from the 1980s figure, it remained at levels that were historically very high for the region.
Moreover, the rate rose throughout the 1990s, to average nearly 9% among project countries in 1998.
Theory would predict an inverse relationship between unemployment and wage trends, but this was not evident in the 1990s, as real wages increased or at least held their own in nearly all cases.
In Argentina, the elimination of inflation was accompanied by virtually constant real wages, and only Chile saw continuous increases throughout the period.
The table assigns a plus where conditions improved, a minus where they deteriorated, and a zero where they remained relatively constant.
Real wages displayed the most positive trends, often linked to productivity increases, while rising unemployment appears to have been the biggest problem; this was also frequently related to productivity but in the opposite direction.
Econometric evidence points to two conclusions: firstly, that the generally weak growth rates of the 1990s -compared to the earlier years of the postwar period, although not to the 1980s- caused much of the employment problem; and the stop-go growth pattern of the 1990s discouraged job creation still further.
A second conclusion is that the reforms themselves hindered job creation, since coefficients were negative and significant on the average reform index and the trade-reform and capital-account indices, using both contemporaneous values of the reforms and three-year averages.
Such impacts have been partially offset by economic growth, which was boosted by the reforms, but the direct effect on job creation was clearly negative. (d) Wage differentials Wage differentials increased in the 1990s in all countries except for Costa Rica and to some extent Chile.
A widening of skill differentials is the opposite of what was expected, and one possible explanation might be that relative-price changes led to a higher capital-labour ratio with labour being replaced by capital.
If relative prices cannot explain the widening wage gap, another possibility is company restructuring that was not associated with skilled labour complementing capital.
Restructuring that entailed greater outsourcing of services may have caused more skilled workers to be employed in the tertiary sector and fewer unskilled workers within the firm itself.
The functioning of the labour market provides another possible explanation, with declining union strength probably having a role in some countries, since lower-skilled workers were less likely to be represented by labour unions.
The minimum wage may also have played a part, as it has frequently lagged behind the average wage.
Heterogeneity in the responses of sectors and firms Sectoral and microeconomic analyses provide an essential complement to the aggregate results.
As reform proponents believed that Latin America's advantage lay in unskilled labour, they expected labour-intensive sectors to produce the most dynamic export performance and small labour-intensive firms to grow faster than larger ones.
Trade liberalization in fact led to two different patterns of export growth in the 1990s: integration with the North American market through manufactured exports in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, versus a concentration on natural-resource-based commodities in South America.
The difference was the result of trade arrangements such as the North America Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), which fostered manufacturing exports, particularly from maquila plants. (a) Investment and productivity dynamics: increasing specialization Investment in the post-reform period was concentrated in a relatively small number of sectors.
Only one sector (telecommunications) saw dynamic investment in all countries, and only one country (Chile) increased investment in every major sector (see table VIII.7).
Manufacturing investment was particularly dynamic in certain capital-intensive subsectors (for example, cement, steel, petrochemicals, and chemicals).
Privatization fostered investment in certain tradables (for example, mining and natural gas), although linkages with the rest of the economy remained weak.
Among non-tradables, the largest increases in investment were in telecoms, while results were mixed in electricity and transportation.
When coefficients are not significantly different between the two periods, dynamism is classed as medium.
Large firms were the most active investors, although smaller companies had a minor presence in some activities where investment grew rapidly.
Among large firms, subsidiaries of transnational corporations gained ground vis-à-vis large domestic conglomerates.
The former were responsible for much of the investment growth, not only in the most dynamic areas of manufacturing, but also in mining and telecoms.
Privatization, together with an easing of regulations precluding foreign firms from investing in a number of sectors, and the globalization of major industries, all combined to strengthen the position of foreign corporations.
Nonetheless, these large firms contributed relatively little to job creation as they tended to be more capital-intensive.
Productivity gains were more evenly spread across broad sectors of the economy (agriculture, manufacturing, and services), but there was greater heterogeneity between subsectors -for example, between commercial and family agriculture.
In the manufacturing sector also, some subsectors performed very well while others lagged behind.
Despite productivity increases in the 1990s, the overall manufacturing productivity gap vis-à-vis the United States failed to narrow (see table VIII.8).
Although the gap between large firms and small and medium-size enterprises grew smaller in some countries, performance remained extremely uneven, and, like investment, modernization processes occurred mainly among larger firms.
The importance of external factors in the incorporation of new technologies grew in tandem with the investment process.
The increasing significance of imported capital goods, together with a substitution of foreign inputs for domestic ones and the construction of technologically advanced plants by foreign firms, all contributed to a heavier foreign component in the region's sectoral innovation systems.
At the same time, as the State has scaled down its participation in technology development, private actors have not always stepped in to take its place.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 131 Trade liberalization and privatization were the reforms that had the greatest impact at the sectoral and microeconomic levels.
The former not only put pressure on firms to increase their competitiveness, but also facilitated subregional integration processes that opened up markets for manufacturing exports.
Only the maquila assembly plants, operating under different conditions from the rest of the economy, provided the strong growth in highly labour-intensive activities that the reforms were expected to generate.
Commercial agriculture and manufacturing firms in the formal sector underwent important modernization processes, involving more intensive use of capital; this restrained job creation in sectors where output grew most strongly, such as natural-resource-based commodities and the automobile industry.
Firstly, the inherent contradiction between the reforms on the one hand (which sought to move toward an export-led growth model) and macroeconomic policies (which led to overvalued exchange rates), sent producers ambiguous signals that hindered investment in tradable goods production.
Secondly, assumptions about the region's comparative advantage were wrong, at least at the level of generalization to which they were applied: the regional experience shows that the main advantages of Latin America in general, and the South American countries in particular, lie in natural resources rather than in unskilled labour.
This was compounded by changes in relative factor prices, which occurred when trade liberalization sharply reduced the relative cost of capital goods.
As the concentration of growth in capital-intensive activities created few jobs, services became the residual employer; and while high-quality jobs were created in telecoms, banking, and finance, the bulk of employment in the service sector was low-skill (see table VIII.9).
There was ever greater polarization between activities that had been rapidly modernized and traditional ones employing a low-skill workforce; residual labour tended to be employed by the latter, and this led to slow growth in the overall productivity of the sector.
Microenterprises generated the largest number of jobs, mostly operating on an informal basis; and this, together with the low rate of job creation by large modern firms offering higher wages, led to widening wage differentials.
Weak job creation in the tradables sectors has thus been accompanied by an increasingly heterogeneous and polarized labour market.
Patterns of income distribution The income-distribution concept most closely linked to labour-market outcomes is the primary distribution, which measures incomes accruing to factors of production (mainly labour in our data).
The primary distribution is also the most relevant for measuring the impact of the reforms on distribution, as the operation of the labour market is a key intervening factor.
However, it does not take account of unemployment since it only covers individuals reporting "earned" income.
The data are taken from household surveys, which provide a great deal of information on certain types of income, although not always on all of them -for example, profits are frequently excluded.
Nor do they sample the wealthiest groups in society, which, there is reason to believe, were the prime beneficiaries of the reforms.
The following analysis therefore probably underestimates the impact of the reforms in increasing inequality.
Wide differences in the primary distribution index reflect the particular population subgroup analysed. b Urban only. c Gini coefficient; d Expenditure rather than income data. (a) Income distribution trends Three patterns can be distinguished in the primary income distribution, the first of which involves declining inequality in Chile, Costa Rica and Peru.
A second pattern is found in Brazil, Colombia and Mexico, where inequality increased from the pre-reform period to the most recent year, although none of the changes was very large.
Lastly, Argentina and Bolivia followed a mixed pattern with inequality declining between the pre- and early post-reform periods, after which it began to rise again.
Chile and Argentina both suffered significantly higher inequality during their earlier reform experiences in the 1970s, Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 133 although it is hard to determine whether this should be attributed to the reforms per se, or to the repressive policies imposed by the military governments.
Household income distribution data mostly display trends similar to the primary distribution, except in Argentina where inequality in household income continues to worsen, probably because unemployment has risen rapidly.
Primary distribution trends are correlated with the behaviour of the wage gap: differentials narrowed in Chile and Costa Rica, and income distribution improved; differentials grew in Brazil, Colombia and Mexico, and income distribution in those countries became more unequal.
The situation is more complicated in Argentina, Bolivia and Peru, however, as these countries had very high inflation around the time the reforms were implemented.
Since lowering high inflation has a positive impact on income distribution, this factor was probably at least partially responsible for the U-shaped trends observed, where inequality began to rise again in Argentina and Bolivia following a one-time improvement.
When the impact of the reforms is measured in terms of the Gini coefficient, regressions indicate that the overall reform variable had a small, but negative effect on distribution, thereby confirming qualitative case-study evidence from other sources.
Three of the reforms provide consistent results across several different samples (urban, rural and national): trade liberalization and tax reform were always regressive, while capital account opening was always progressive.
In other words, when added to autonomous household income, the monetary equivalent of the benefits provided through social programs had a significant impact on the welfare of the poorest 20% of the population.
Social expenditure also had a positive impact on income distribution, reducing the gap between the highest and lowest income quintiles.
On average, in the absence of social expenditure, the income of the highest quintile among the four countries would have been sixteen times that of the lowest quintile, whereas social expenditure brought this ratio down to nine.
Despite this improvement in distribution, the concentration of income in the region is still well above that of most low- and middle-income countries in Europe and Asia, even when social expenditure is included. 8.
Conclusions One major conclusion to emerge from the results of this study is that structural reforms should not be considered in isolation but rather as part of a policy package that also includes the macroeconomic and social areas.
These three elements can either collaborate to create a propitious environment that encourages private actors to invest and increase output, or they can be contradictory, sending mixed signals to the private sector and undermining incentives.
Countries that managed to combine the three elements have so far fared better.
Secondly, the initial conditions in the various countries were quite diverse, and this affected not only the extent 134 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean of the reforms adopted, but also their subsequent performance.
Thirdly, the reforms were often slow to produce an impact because of the uncertainty they generated, especially when combined with macroeconomic instability; moreover, their positive effects were frequently undermined by unfavourable trends in the international economy.
Fourthly, effects on productivity growth and employment were extremely heterogeneous across sectors.
Lastly, certain assumptions about the region's comparative advantages proved to be incorrect, and, consequently, reforms in the area of employment and equity have produced unexpected results, with some problems being exacerbated.
Although high and stable growth rates would help to mitigate this, active public policies are also needed.
In brief, 15 years of reforms in the region have resulted in significant accomplishments, but much remains to be done and many problems still persist.
Further progress requires policies to accelerate economic growth through greater investment and faster technological progress, together with a social offensive to create jobs and improve equity, and better macroeconomic management.
Policy implementation requires cooperation between governments and the private sector in order to build institutions capable of extending the benefits of the new economic model to the vast majority of the population.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 135 Second part The countries Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 137 The level of activity fell by 3% in 1999, and the downturn in domestic spending had an impact on consumption and, above all, investment.
For the first time in seven years the volume of goods and services exports actually decreased.
Although the aggregate decrease in quantity was slight, the slump in unit prices led to an appreciable reduction in the value of merchandise exports .The decline in imports caused the trade gap to narrow by a significant amount, however, and this helped to scale back the negative balance on the current account.
Against a backdrop of flagging demand, and with the exchange rate firmly tied to the dollar, the country witnessed price deflation, with the CPI dropping by 1.8% in 1999.
For the year overall, the rising labour participation rate, combined with weaker demand for labour, raised the unemployment rate.
However, although high, it did not approach the levels recorded during the recession of the mid-1990s.
The compressed tax base hurt government revenues and, although capital inflows offset the impact of this trend to some extent, the national government deficit did rise somewhat.
The adverse fiscal outlook prompted the new Administration, which took office in late 1999, to adopt adjustment measures based on spending cuts and tax changes.
V a r i o u s i n t e r n a t i o n a l t r e n d s influenced macroeconomic developments.
The terms of trade for goods again moved against Argentina in 1999, and export prices fell in what amounted to a cumulative decrease of over 20% from the peaks recorded three years earlier.
Sales to Argentina's main trading partner, Brazil, were also hurt by prevailing macroeconomic conditions there.
External financing conditions had been affected when the prices of Argentine assets sustained heavy losses in 1998, after the turmoil in Russia, and the subsequent upturn in asset prices suffered another setback with the Brazilian exchange crisis in early 1999.
However, this time the effect on Argentine markets was not as intense as it had been in 1998, despite the interdependence of these two countries' trade flows.
Moreover, the impact on the demand for assets tended to fade during the following months.
As the year progressed, credit markets performed erratically, partly in response to the proximity of presidential elections in October, but these variations were relatively moderate.
In general terms, credit supply in 1999 was less fluid than in previous years, although there were no serious disturbances (such as those of the 1995 crisis), nor was the operation of the banking system impaired, although credit to the private sector did decrease.
The economic downswing was clearly perceptible as early as the second half of 1998, with sharp falls in spending and industrial output, and it persisted throughout the first half of 1999.
These contractionary trends eased in the latter part of the year with the first 138 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean l~l n r-i n n • National non-financial public-sector balance a I • Current account balance 8 Does not include provinces or municipalities.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 139 signs of an improvement in international prices and the recovery of Brazilian demand, while domestic interest rates also moved downward slightly.
The level of activity began to show a tentative upturn as well, and GDP in the fourth quarter was similar to its level of a year earlier, although this was still significantly lower than the previous cyclical peak.
Signals regarding GDP performance were not very clear during the first few months of 2000 since, although financial markets were free of disturbances, domestic demand failed to pick up even though merchandise exports were considerably higher than the previous year and industrial indicators trended upward.
Under these circumstances, the level of economic activity was a particularly important indicator, not only because of its effects on employment, but also because of its implications for public finances, whose performance was closely monitored, particularly by agents in the financial assets market.
The fiscal results for April sparked concern about public finances and this, in combination with interest rate hikes in the United States, drove down the prices of securities.
In response, the government announced sizeable spending cuts which were implemented in late May.
The targets agreed upon with IMF for 1999 were based on a projected upturn in activity from the levels recorded during the latter part of 1998.
The limit on the public sector's borrowing requirements was set at 1 % of GDP (without considering privatizations).
When the targets were reviewed a few months later, however, the projected deficit was significantly higher than the original figure.
Financing conditions for the government also varied considerably during 1999, with sharp fluctuations in country risk spreads at the beginning of the year and somewhat more moderate swings during the third quarter.
Even so, the government was able to cover its financing needs during the period as a whole by maintaining a cushion of credit operations in advance of its immediate funding requirements.
The status of government finances and the structure of the tax system were a controversial subject throughout 1999.
Legislation was passed during the year that set a sliding scale for the progressive reduction of the federal government deficit.
The goal for 2000 (close to 1.5% of GDP) was a central issue in the budget debate.
The recessionary environment and the external shocks affecting the economy did not appear to undermine the broad consensus that exists as to the central role played in the economy by the fixed exchange-rate regime.
During this period there was a great deal of debate, however, about the design of monetary institutions, particularly in relation to the possible alternatives between dollarization, on the one hand, and regional macroeconomic coordination, on the other.
Nevertheless, after the presidential elections in late October, the new Administration confirmed its policy of maintaining the existing system of convertibility.
The incoming Administration viewed existing fiscal trends with concern and took the view that, in the absence of strong corrective measures, the public deficit would be high in 2000 and could have serious implications for credit markets.
Spending cuts and tax adjustments were therefore proposed, particularly for income and wealth taxes.
The government also suspended reductions in employer contributions to the social security system that had already been approved.
Negotiations began between the federal and provincial governments concerning mechanisms for transferring resources to local jurisdictions as part of a revenue-sharing agreement.
Then, in January 2000, the government formalized a stand-by agreement with IMF based on a targeted annual public-sector deficit of around 1.5% of GDP.
Among other provisions, these reforms are directed towards decentralizing collective bargaining by giving priority to agreements at the company level, when such agreements exist.
During the second quarter, fiscal accounts and international credit markets were sources of increasing concern for the authorities.
In late May, facing the prospect of a greater deficit than envisaged, the government took steps to curb public spending.
These measures included public-sector wage cuts for staff earning salaries over a certain threshold and deductions from special pension schemes; in addition, several government agencies were slated for restructuring or mergers.
Includes errors and omissions. ' Refers to net interest as shown in the balance of payments, divided by exports of goods and sen/ices. ' Includes the national administration, the national social security system and public-sector enterprises.
Based on final budget figures. k Interest rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the exchange rate.
Although for many years Mercosur had been perceived as playing a key role in economic development, it now became a focus of tension, as trade restrictions imposed by both Argentina and Brazil led to disputes relating to the cross-border trade of various goods.
Schemes to boost investment (such as those used by state governments in Brazil) were also subject to debate.
At the same time, the authorities continued to insist that Mercosur was a high-priority undertaking.
Intergovernmental negotiations were stepped up during the early months of 2000, and one of the issues discussed was the definition of regional criteria for trends in macroeconomic indicators.
An agreement was also reached on a new regional regime for the automotive industry.
These initiatives signalled the authorities' commitment to bolstering Mercosur, even though some major issues relating to its future operation are yet to be resolved.
In 1999, public-sector outlays increased and current revenue decreased, and capital inflows were not plentiful enough to compensate.
The cash deficit rose to 1.7% of GDP (1.4% in 1998) while, excluding privatizations, the fiscal deficit reached around 2.6% of GDP, versus 1.5% the year before.
Interest payments rose sharply (by 22%, or more than twice the level of just four years earlier).
On the other hand, social security expenditure was slightly lower, and outlays on payroll and transfers (including sums sent to provinces as part of the revenue-sharing scheme) rose very little.
Capital expenditure fell steeply 142 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean (12-month variation, %) Real effective exchange rateb Deposit rate Lending rate a Preliminary figures. b Refers to exchange rate for imports. (by over 15%) to not much more than 1 % of GDP.
At the national level, aggregate public-sector primary expenditure was down slightly, although not enough to offset the downturn in income.
The financial deficit of the provincial governments, meanwhile, climbed to around 1.1% of GDP.
Social problems arose in several provinces, and tensions were running high in 1999 and the early months of 2000.
Federal tax receipts decreased by 5% in 1999 and revenues from social security taxes also suffered a further drop (13%).
Sluggish imports led to a steep slide in foreign trade tax receipts (18%).
The recession also had a strong impact on VAT revenues, which fell more steeply than GDP.
In contrast, receipts from income and personal property taxes continued to climb.
The nation's public-sector debt grew considerably (by around 8%), verging on US$ 122 billion (around 43% of GDP).
Almost US$ 12 billion in bonds was floated on international markets in 1999.
Most of this activity was on the European market, since for a large part of the year it proved more difficult to place bonds on the United States market.
The government also increased its local financing component, particularly through placements with pension fund managers and banks.
The drop in income reflected lower VAT receipts (as a result of sluggish consumption and lower prices) and slimmer receipts from social security taxes and customs duties.
By contrast, income tax revenues were higher, with a year-on-year increase of around 2% in April; even so, the fiscal deficit figures were high. (b) Monetary policy and financial markets Central Bank monetary liabilities were slightly higher in 1999 but were easily covered by international reserves.
The money supply (Ml) shrank by 1.5%, as demand for money waned.
The growth rate for the volume of bank deposits slowed considerably, although the rate for the year as a whole was positive.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 143 The absence of signs of strain in the banking sector marked a contrast with the events that had surrounded the 1995 recession.
Even so, bank credit to the private sector shrank by about 2.5%.
The squeeze on private-sector lending reflected a cautious attitude on the part of the banking industry.
Banks were more willing to grant financing in the early months of 2000, however, particularly to the mortgage market, where loans of up to 30 years were on offer.
The uncertain environment and the level of financial costs also dampened the demand for loans.
Liquidity was reflected in interest rates on deposits, which fluctuated around levels lower than the rates observed during the latter part of 1998.
The prime rate for corporate loans varied considerably, swinging between peaks of around 14% in pesos and 10% in dollars and lows of close to 9% in pesos and 6% in dollars.
The highest figures were recorded in early 1999 and in the closing months of the year; a decline in the first quarter of The level of activity slipped by 3% in 1999, with the drop in national income being exacerbated by higher external interest payments and the deterioration in the terms of trade.
The volume of exports shrank slightly (1 %) but imports were down by 11 % and investment was 7.5% lower.
The decrease was fairly moderate in construction but steeper in durable capital goods.
As a result, capital formation slid, although it was still above 20%.
The first signs of weakening demand were seen in mid-1998, with a slackening of investment.
Later, the squeeze spread to domestic spending in general; then export volumes also recorded a decline.
This widespread reduction in demand continued throughout the first half of 1999.
Then, in the third quarter, consumption showed signs of an upturn and the slide in exports levelled off; this was enough to boost GDP to a level slightly higher than the previous quarter.
The fourth quarter saw an increase in all the components of demand (especially exports) in relation to the third quarter, which pushed GDP back up to its 1998 levels.
Even so, the upturn was 2000 took the rates to just above the previous year's low.
Apart from the fluctuations in these benchmark rates, access to credit varied considerably for different categories of borrowers.
What is more, against a deflationary background, real interest rates were nonetheless well in the positive range.
In January 1999, the demand for shares and bonds plummeted, but prices gradually picked up over the following months, topping those recorded at the end of 1998.
Around mid-year, the uncertainty engendered by the forthcoming elections helped to drive down the prices of financial instruments.
As a result, Argentina's country risk ratings were higher in the third quarter than in the second and exceeded average emerging-market premiums.
In the latter part of the year, financial markets eased up, and the demand for assets began to recover.
Thus, at the end of the review period, bond and equity prices were above their 1998 levels (although still far below the prices seen before the disturbances of 1997).
Financial markets suffered no upsets during the early months of 2000, but in May bond prices fell sharply. still only partial, and the early months of 2000 did not bring reliable signs of the consolidation of this trend.
The slump in output in 1999 was felt in almost all the main sectors of activity.
There was a comparatively steep downturn (7%) in manufacturing, and construction also fell back (4.2%), but the decline in agricultural output was much smaller (0.4%).
The grain harvest (cereals and oilseeds) had peaked in 1997/1998, but price conditions were much less favourable by the following year, and this caused difficulties for the sector and influenced production decisions.
The harvest was significantly smaller (by around 12.5%), although still above the levels recorded prior to the 1997/1998 peak.
The descent was concentrated in cereals, since oilseed production actually rose again, with a particularly sharp increase in the sunflower harvest (27%).
The 1999/2000 agricultural cycle is likely to bring a slight decrease in the oilseed harvest, however, while an upswing is expected in cereals.
Thus, an increase of around 5% is forecast for the grain harvest as a whole.
This also had repercussions on other market segments, such as vehicle parts and tyres.
Output of consumer durables tumbled, while smaller decreases were recorded in activity levels in industries such as cement, paper, and iron and steel products.
Despite the widespread recession, output was up in some parts of the food and chemicals industries, however.
It is probable that a considerable number of manufacturing firms saw their financial situation deteriorate, as many had increased their level of borrowing in previous years so that they could step up their investments.
Although companies did not collapse en masse, bankruptcies and the number of creditor meetings that were called did increase, and there were signs of greater merger and acquisitions activity.
The contraction also seems to have generated a cautious attitude regarding market prospects and new projects.
Possible competition from Brazil in attracting investment, and the effects of the tax incentives being offered there, were a subject of considerable debate.
In the event, however, investment shifts seem to have been limited to certain types of businesses, particularly in the area of motor vehicle parts, and to the location of new plants belonging to transnational companies that maintain a presence in both markets.
In the first quarter of 2000, manufacturing production indicators showed a year-on-year increase, and an upturn in exports appears to have been a contributing factor.
Activity picked up in several industries, including motor vehicles, chemicals, iron and steel, and aluminium processing.
A more moderate upswing was also seen in foodstuffs and paper, but not in the cement industry.
Electricity generation and water distribution were up, but urban transport and rail and air cargo were down.
In the telecommunications industry, there was an increase in long distance connections and a further considerable rise in the number of mobile phones in service, which topped 3.2 million by year's end.
There was an appreciable deflation in consumer prices in 1999, with sizeable declines in goods, particularly food and clothing prices.
The prices of several services also fell (although to a lesser extent) in areas such as tourism and leisure, but there were slight increases in the cost of education, and sharper ones in health services.
The most significant rises were in fuels (9%) and public utilities (electricity, gas and water, transport and communications).
This marked a continuation of the strong upward trend of public utility rates seen over the last few years.
This is attributable to higher commodity prices, since prices of manufactures decreased slightly.
The performance of primary commodities was very mixed: agricultural prices fell by over 15%, while mineral prices (among which oil weighs very heavily) more than doubled.
Lower price levels were posted for practically all categories of manufactured goods, with the exception of petroleum products.
Despite a considerable expansion of employment during the preceding economic upswing, at 12.4% the rate of unemployment was still high.
The unemployment rate climbed again in 1999 and, after reaching levels of 14.5% in May and August, took a slight downward turn which brought it back to 13.8% in October.
The annual average unemployment rate rose as a result of both a higher participation rate and lower employment levels.
Even so, between October 1998 and October 1999, the number of employed persons had increased by around 1.7%.
However, in the third quarter of 1999 the number of employees reported to the social security system was lower than it had been a year earlier, which suggests that the informal sector's share of employment may have grown.
At the same time, labour turnover remained high, with a reduction in the proportion of employed persons covered by permanent contracts.
The percentage of jobs created by manufacturing and commerce slipped back, while various services sectors' share in total employment increased.
Industrial indices reflected a nominal average drop of around 1.8% in manual workers' wages in 1999, with a sharper fall (3.8%) if a year-on-year reading is taken for the fourth quarter.
The current account deficit narrowed to around US$ 12.2 billion in 1999 thanks to the fact that, since imports dropped more steeply than exports, the negative balance on trade in goods and real services shrank.
On the other hand, the increase in interest payments (to over US$ 11 billion) outweighed the slump in foreign companies' profits, so the deficit on the income account continued to widen.
Estimated interest accruals by residents remained Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 145 near the USS 5.4 billion mark.
Net capital inflows thinned, but at USS 14.4 billion, were still considerable.
International reserves showed less variation than in 1998, but the total did rise again due to the sizeable increase recorded in the fourth quarter.
A large part of the net external financing that was obtained was the result of non-financial public-sector operations.
Federal government privatizations brought in significant revenues (USS 3 billion), while local government privatizations supplied over USS 1 billion.
Net credit to the federal government decreased slightly, to just under USS 7 billion; security issues were higher than in 1998, but so were credit amortizations.
Loans from international agencies also declined to a net figure ofUSS 1.5 billion (as against US$2.1 billion in 1998).
Net capital inflows to the non-financial private sector totalled US$ 2.3 billion (versus USS 4.2 billion in 1998).
Of particular note was the sale of a stake in YPF to a Spanish company, an operation which generated an inflow of foreign direct investment and an outflow of portfolio investment.
In fact, purchases of private assets reached the extraordinarily high sum of USS 18.5 billion (compared to USS 5.1 billion in 1998).
However, as a significant proportion of the YPF shares were bought from non-residents, there was a large disinvestment in portfolio assets (close to USS 11 billion).
Apart from the YPF transaction, foreign investment in the form of capital contributions was also significant (USS 3.4 billion), while reinvested profits bordered on USS 900 million.
External placements by the non-financial private sector fell considerably in 1999 (to USS 3.2 billion, or less than half of the previous year's figure), so the net financing obtained by this means was almost nil.
Payments on foreign bank loans taken out by the non-financial private sector exceeded the total of new loans received.
Financial institutions other than the Central Bank obtained external financing through lines of credit (US$ 1.25 billion), direct investment and, to a lesser extent, issues of bonds and securities.
All together, capital inflows to the sector amounted to US$ 2.2 billion.
The gross external debt swelled by around USS 4 billion to USS 144 billion, or the equivalent of about 50% of GDP and a little over six times the value of exports, which was the highest ratio of the decade.
The composition of the debt by type of borrower changed very little: a bit less than 60% of total liabilities corresponded to the non-financial public sector and the Central Bank, 25% to the non-financial private sector and the rest to financial institutions.
The value of merchandise exports fell (by around 12%), for the first time since 1991.
This was the result of lower unit values, since the total volume of exports remained virtually unchanged.
This stagnation of export volumes, which contrasted with the buoyancy of previous years, was attributable to unfavourable conditions on the international market.
The reduction in the value of exports was reflected in almost all the major categories of goods except for fuel, whose price trends diverged from the rest.
Grain sales took heavy losses, and exports of fruit, oils, cotton fibre and meat were down as well.
Fishery exports also slid, as activity in the sector was hurt by the effects of the overexploitation of resources.
One of the main reasons for the decrease in non-traditional manufacturing exports was the strong downturn in sales of transport equipment, although there were also appreciable declines in metal manufactures, electrical machinery, chemicals, textiles and paper.
There was a marked change in the geographical distribution of exports in 1999.
Brazil's share of total exports, which had amounted to over 30% in the two preceding years, fell to less than a quarter (the lowest figure since 1994).
Although the slump in these exports (a drop of about 30%) was observed across all the major categories of goods, it was particularly severe in manufactures (especially automotive products).
Exports to the North American Free Trade Area (NAFTA) and the European Union (EU) increased, particularly in the category of non-traditional manufactures, but these markets are not major ones for Argentine sales of such goods.
The decrease in imports (19%) was also across the board: consumer goods fell by close to 8%, which was less than intermediate goods (21%) and capital goods (17%).
Among the latter, the steepest descent was in machinery for the manufacturing sector, while imports of equipment used in the production of basic services decreased slightly less.
Towards the end of 1999 there were signs of an upturn in export prices, and the Brazilian economy began to bounce back.
As a result, the value of external sales in the fourth quarter was higher than the comparatively low figure recorded for the same quarter of 1998.
Exports for the first quarter of 2000 were over 11 % higher than those of the first quarter of 1999, with a particularly marked increase in sales to Mercosur countries.
Import values were similar to those posted for the first part of 1999, and the quarter's trade deficit consequently narrowed to just under USS 200 million.
This slowdown was associated with the international crisis, which had a particularly strong impact on external transactions, and domestic factors that flattened out domestic demand.
The fiscal deficit shrank to 3.9% of GDP, and this figure actually included pension reform costs amounting to 4.1% of GDP.
Although exports decreased, imports fell more steeply, thus paring down the current account deficit to around 6.5% of GDP.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Bolivia continued to mount in 1999, in keeping with the trend seen throughout the 1990s.
Thanks to large-scale investments in natural gas exploration, proven reserves tripled in 1999, the gas pipeline between Bolivia and Brazil was completed, and the country began to export natural gas to Brazil.
The cumulative inflation rate for 1999 was one of the lowest to be recorded in the second half of the century and, at 3.1%, was well below the year's stipulated target of 5%.
THE GOVERNMENT passed an Economic mining and natural gas) and partly by investment projects, mostly in the mining, telecommunications and hydroca rbons sec tors .
Howeve r , the Government's declaration of a stage of siege and a wave of protests by peasant farmers and other groups could undermine growth.
A second round of negotiations in 2000 is expected to lighten Bolivia's external debt burden under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) debt relief initiative.
The current account deficit is forecast at less than 7% and the fiscal deficit at about 4%.
Inflation increased during the early part of 2000, with a cumulative rate of 2% recorded for the first quarter.
Reactivation Act in April 2000 aimed mainly at boosting the liquidity of the financial sector, providing credit to small producers, promoting exports, and financing the maintenance and upgrading of infrastructure damaged by adverse weather conditions.
The amounts allocated for this programme are estimated at between US$ 300 million and USS 500 million.
Projections for 2000 suggest that growth will swing back into the overall pattern of the 1990s, with an increase in GDP of between 4% and 5%.
No major changes were made in the country's overall monetary and foreign-exchange policies, whose main objective continued to be to preserve the purchasing power of the boliviano and provide the money supply needed for economic growth.
Amid the slowdown in economic activity, the nominal monetary base increased by jus t 3.3%.
The country ' s foreign-exchange policy seeks to maintain the stability of the real multilateral exchange rate within the context of an external economic balance in the medium term.
Thus, in view of the rate of depreciation in a number of neighbouring countries (Brazil, Chile and Peru), the Central Bank decided to step up the pace of mini-devaluations.
The main focus of fiscal policy has been to maintain a structurally balanced budget that is in keeping with the objectives of monetary and foreign-exchange policy.
In fact, if it had not been for the transitory cost of pension reforms, then a slight surplus would have been posted on the public sector's accounts, despite the storm damage sustained by infrastructure and the need for additional expenditure on repairs.
The cost of these reforms held steady at around 4% of GDP, however.
Bolivia's sharp economic slowdown in 1999 can be attributed to a combination of factors, some deriving from adverse external processes and others from domestic circumstances.
A combination of domestic factors also influenced Bolivia's pace of growth in 1999.
Between October 1998 and March 1999, several parts of the tropical region of the country experienced heavy rains and flooding that wiped out rice, maize, soybean and cotton crops in a number of areas.
Despite the medium-term benefits expected, the implementation of two structural reforms (eradication of coca plantations and changes in the customs system) had the effect of reining in domestic demand in the short term, especially in the informal sector.
On the fiscal policy front, the year ended with a public-sector deficit of 3.9% of GDP, thus coming in below the agreed target for 1999 of 4.2%.
Most monetary aggregates slipped, and money creation at the end of 1999 stood at practically the same level as it had in the corresponding period of the previous year.
The Central Bank continued to follow a monetary policy that entailed adjusting the money supply to changes in demand.
Fiscal policy was directed towards maintaining the deficit within the same range as in 1998.
The non-financial public sector's deficit was 3.9% in 1999, but leaving aside the cost of pension reforms, there was a fiscal surplus of around 0.2% of GDP, a slight improvement over the 1998 figure.
During the first half of 1999, receipts fell short of the targets set for internal revenue and customs duties, and for the year as a whole revenues from these sources were consequently down by 2.5 percentage points of GDP (US$ 175 million).
However, This drop was offset by the proceeds from the privatization of State-owned oil refineries of Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB) and a cement plant, the Fábrica Nacional de Cementos.
Consequently, in the aggregate, current income held steady at around 30% of GDP.
Capital expenditure was up from 5.1 % of GDP The fiscal deficit was financed chiefly with external resources, with most of these funds being concessional in nature (2.5%), while the domestic financing that was used amounted to 1.4% of GDP.
In general, the variables influencing monetary policy reflected the effects of the restrictive environment.
Money creation, a key tool for Bolivia's Central Bank, remained at practically the same nominal level as in 1998.
Variables relating to total local-currency liquidity (Ml, M2 and M3) fell by about 3%.
A review of more broadly defined variables reveals similar or even larger decreases in M' 1 and M'2, due to a sizeable reduction in foreign-currency sight deposits.
These declines were offset by increases in M'3 and M ' 4 , however, owing to an upswing in foreign-currency fixed-term deposits and in government securities denominated in foreign currencies and held by the non-financial private sector.
Borrowing and lending rates generally rose by a slight amount, with the exception of the local-currency bank lending rate, which moved down from about 36% in 152 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean Real effective exchange rate b a b Preliminary figures.
Trading on the stock exchange suffered a major setback (a slide of 11%) for the first time since its creation in the early 1990s.
The great majority of the exchange's trading volume (97%) is in securities denominated in foreign currencies (primarily dollars).
The main indicators of the banking system's performance showed an increase in liquidity together with a rise in the proportion of non-performing loans from 4.6% to 6.6% of its portfolio.
The objective of foreign-exchange policy has been to maintain the stability of the real multilateral exchange rate within a framework of external equilibrium.
The Central Bank continued with its policy of setting the parity rate through mini-devaluations, which it implements by intervening in the exchange market through an auction mechanism known as the bolsin.
The Central Bank stepped up the pace of mini-devaluations in 1999, especially between June and September.
The nominal devaluation rate reached 6% in 1999, or almost twice as much as domestic inflation, yielding a depreciation in the real exchange rate against the dollar of almost 6%.
The real multilateral exchange rate for imports held steady during the year, however.
This stability has been made possible by low levels of inflation and by a policy decision to allow the nominal exchange rate to depreciate more rapidly in view of the depreciating currencies of Brazil and other trading partners.
In addition, the devaluation of the nominal exchange rate has kept pressure off domestic price levels, thereby helping to maintain macroeconomic equilibrium. (d) Structural reforms The National Roads Service (SNC) resumed responsibility for the administration of the highway system in 1999.
It is expected, however, that most of the maintenance, repair and construction work on the basic road network will be tendered out to the private sector Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 153 following passage of the Transport Public Works Concessions Act and supporting regulations.
During 1999 the Superintendency of Telecommunications continued to grant broadcasting licences and, by the end of September 1999, 332 radio 3 The main variables Economic growth in 1999 amounted to just 0.6%.
When the country's GDP is disaggregated by type of expenditure, it becomes clear that total demand weakened as a result of a 9% decrease in exports of goods and services and a steep reduction in capital formation (-16%), while consumption rose slightly (2%).
Total supply was a combination of modest GDP growth and a steep downswing in goods and services exports (-16%).
In gross capital formation, the variable that was most affected was private investment, following the completion of the gas pipeline to Brazil.
As a percentage of GDP, fixed capital formation fell by over three percentage points, from over 23% to less than 20%.
Activity in the agricultural, hunting, fishing and forestry sector climbed by 2.5% in 1999.
In contrast, various areas of the tropics were affected by rains and flooding, which led to a slump in production.
The eradication programmes now being implemented, which have established an eradication target of 15,000 hectares, have played an important role in reducing coca production activity.
This legislation provides for the creation of a fund for renegotiating the payment schedules of existing loans, extends the deadline for the payment of various sorts of taxes, and establishes criteria to be used as a basis in writing off the debts of some peasant farmers.
Only moderate growth is forecast for 2000, in view of the drought in the eastern portion of the country and the eradication of coca plantations.
Mineral production was 16% lower in 1999 than it had been the year before.
The output of small- and medium-sized mining enterprises and of cooperatives fell by 13% and 22%, respectively, whereas the production of State mines enjoyed an upturn of 23%.
Increases were recorded in the production of tin (3.1 %) stations were operating legally and with all the required documentation.
The Superintendency invested USS 2 million in an automatic monitoring system which makes it possible to keep a constant check on the use of the frequency spectrum in the departments on the trunk system. and silver (0.7%), but decreases were posted for the output of antimony (-36%), wolfram (-34%), lead (-33%) and gold (-25%).
A compensatory mechanism was created whereby the advance tax payments made by export companies that undertake what the Government considers to be high-priority investments will automatically be refunded to them.
A stronger performance is expected from the sector in 2000 based on a projected improvement in mineral prices, with the recovery of zinc production expected to make this industry one of the frontrunners.
Thanks to major investments in oil and natural gas exploration, Bolivia's natural gas reserves have soared.
In addition, a 46-kilometre gas pipeline extension to the highlands was completed.
This extended line will supply natural gas to the city of La Paz and the towns of Parotani and Sayari and will thus ensure a continuous supply of natural gas for new industries setting up facilities in the Cochabamba-Oruro-La Paz triangle.
YPFB refineries were privatized at the end of 1999, generating proceeds of USS 102 million.
This marked the start of a programme to transfer the refining, transport and marketing of hydrocarbons to the private sector in the course of the year 2000; during this period a major increase in the production of natural gas is also expected as the country begins to export natural gas to Brazil.
The most buoyant segments were: printing, publishing and allied industries (41%); basic industrial chemicals (39%); plastic products (22%); and wine and other fermented beverages (20%).
Segments showing a decrease were: grocery products (-22%); glass and glass products (-18%); cocoa, chocolate and sugar confectionery (-16%) and clothing other than footwear (-13%).
The world financial crisis had an adverse impact on some segments of national industry owing to the 154 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean effect of the devaluation of the real, which encouraged contraband and boosted legal imports from Brazil.
The transport sector grew by 2.3% as a consequence of an increase in road and air transport, even though rail transport slipped by 3%.
The Empresa Nacional de Telecomunicaciones (Entel) continued to lay fibre-optic cable along the length and breadth of the country, completing over 3,000 kilometres of the departmental and 170 kilometres of the interdepartmental networks.
The Empresa Telefonica Celular de Bolivia (Telecel) made an investment bordering on US$ 40 million to install a digital network with a 250,000-customer capacity.
A combination of domestic and external factors had a bearing on inflation in 1999.
The increase in international hydrocarbons prices had an inflationary impact, both directly and indirectly (through transport).
This was the most inflationary component of the basic basket that is used to calculate the rate of price increases and accounted for 1.6 percentage points of the overall rise.
The slowdown in the growth of aggregate demand led to smaller increases in the prices of domestic products, and the effect of this variable on total inflation amounted to 1.9 percentage points.
Price stability in neighbouring countries and the slight variation in the exchange rate served to rein in the prices of tradable manufactures, which added just 0.6 percentage points to total inflation.
Lastly, the prices of agricultural products had a -1 point impact on overall price rises, since they fell by 11 % (the steepest decrease of the last decade) as a result of plentiful harvests,.
It should be noted, however, that the methodology used in conducting the most recent survey differs from previous ones.
In February 1999, the Government raised the minimum wage to 330 bolivianos per month, which represented a nominal increase of 10% over the 1998 rate.
At the beginning of 2000 the minimum wage was increased again, this time to 355 bolivianos.
In the public sector, employees earning the minimum wage received an increase of 10%, and raises for other employees were established on a sliding scale in inverse proportion to their salaries up to a threshold of 3,200 bolivianos; individuals earning salaries over that level received no increment.
The deficit on the current account of the balance of payments declined from 8% to 6.6% of GDP, with the narrowing trade gap being largely responsible for this improvement.
Imports, particularly of capital goods and raw materials, declined significantly (16%) following the completion of the gas pipeline to Brazil; the sagging level of economic activity was another factor in this connection.
The value of exports (mostly commodities) dropped by 8% in the wake of the international crisis as a consequence of lower international prices and shrinking demand.
It is important to understand, however, that a large percentage of the investments made in the complicated international context prevailing during this period are not directly linked to "capitalization", the Bolivian approach to privatizing State enterprises based on investment commitments.
In 1999, foreign investment was directed mainly to the hydrocarbons sector (67%), commerce and services (28%), and agribusiness and min ing (5%).
These inf lows f inanced the current-account deficit and added US$ 42 million to the Central Bank's international reserves, bringing them to US$ 1.113 billion dollars (equivalent to seven months ' worth of goods and services imports).
The external debt was reduced by 2% from its 1998 level as a result of the debt workout negotiated within the context of the original Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC I) debt relief initiative.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 155 General trends The Brazilian economy had been quite fragile since late 1997, and in early 1999 this situation deteriorated into a full-blown crisis.
The Central Bank responded to the instability of the exchange rate with a steep interest-rate hike.
Interest rates were later reduced, however, and by the end of the year they had settled back to rates near their pre-crisis levels.
These measures were accompanied by a policy of fiscal austerity directed at reducing the high public-sector deficit.
An agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) provided access to an ample supply of external financial resources, and this helped to stabilize the volatile exchange market.
In order to provide guidelines as to its future decisions, the Central Bank chose to set specific inflation targets.
Meanwhile, although the pace of privatizations slowed, progress was made on reforms in the social security system.
GIVEN THE SCALE of the devaluation and the severity of the fiscal and monetary measures that had been adopted, in the weeks following these events forecasts for 1999 pointed to a slackening of activity and to higher inflation and unemployment.
In fact, however, the results did not bear out these predictions, since GDP stabilized over the course of the year (although at one of its lowest levels since the start of the Real Plan).
The upturn in industrial output and investment did not begin until the final quarter of 1999, however, so GDP growth was slight (1 %), while per capita output decreased for the second year running.
Even so, it was the highest rate since 1995 and reversed the downward trend of recent years, which had brought it to near zero.
Consumer prices recorded increases of a little over 8%, but wholesale prices jumped by 29% due to the strong influence of imported products.
The annual unemployment rate of 7.6% was practically the same as the 1998 figure, but this was mainly attributable to a reduction in the number of job seekers.
Real average wages fell by 5.5% in 1999, thus steepening the downward slide begun in 1998, when they had slipped by 0.5%.
In the industrial centre of São Paulo, the employment adjustment process continued, and the employment rate was 26% lower than it had been when the Real Plan was launched in July 1994.
Although this was similar to the 1998 deficit (4.5%) in percentage terms, the actual figure was US$ 9.3 billion lower thanks to the reduction of the deficits on both the merchandise trade balance (from US$ 6.6 billion to USS 1.2 billion) and the services account; the latter was mainly attributable to a reduction in travel expenditure.
Net profit remittances fell by over US$ 3 billion, but net interest payments amounted to US$ 15.2 billion, compared to US$ 12 billion in 1998.
The total external debt was US$ 241 billion, which was slightly less than in 1998.
The current account adjustment and the record inflow of foreign direct investment narrowed the balance-of-payments deficit.
The main sector driving GDP growth was agriculture, which expanded by 9% thanks to plentiful harvests.
The momentum gained by the services sector enabled it to maintain a slight growth rate, and this partly compensated for the downswing in manufacturing and construction.
This slump in construction, in combination with a decrease in purchases of both local and imported capital goods, led to a 4.8% reduction in fixed investment, which brought the rate of gross fixed capital formation down to its lowest level since 1994, at 20.3% of GDP.
The economic expansion seen during the latter months of 1999 carried overinto the first quarter of2000, with GDP growth of 3.1% being led by the manufacturing sector, which posted a rise in output of 5.2%.
At 8%, the unemployment rate was higher than the 7.5% recorded in the first quarter of 1999; this was partly a reflection of an increase in the demand for employment, which outstripped the net creation of 968,000 jobs.
The cumulative inflation rate for the first half of 2000 was 1.1%, well below the figure corresponding to the overall target for the year of 6%.
Although more favourable than expected, these results were not sufficient to dissipate doubts about the viability of combining a higher growth rate with a tight external financing environment, which puts pressure on the exchange rate and domestic prices.
Under these circumstances, it was not until March 2000 that the Central Bank reduced the base rate from 19% to 18.5%, after it had remained unaltered for almost six months.
This cautious attitude reflects uncertainty regarding the performance of the world economy, the consolidation of the domestic fiscal adjustment and the prospects for an upswing in exports.
Fiscal policy was made more austere in an effort to reduce the deficit and thus stabilize the debt/GDP ratio.
In relation to monetary policy, the Central Bank set specific targets for inflation control and lowering real interest rates, which had previously been heavily influenced by fears of a devaluation.
One important effect of these monetary and fiscal policies was to soften the impact of the exchange crisis.
Another key mitigating factor was the use of a package of external resources furnished by multilateral agencies and the central banks of other countries.
At the end of 1998, Brazil obtained almost US$ 41 billion as part of an adjustment programme negotiated with IMF.
Of this amount, US$ 17.8 billion was used to shore up international reserves and intervene in the currency market in order to ward off severe foreign exchange shortages.
The Central Bank set inflation targets in order to guide expectations concerning its objectives: the target forthe inflation rate was set at 8% for 1999, plus or minus two percentage points, and at 6% for 2000.
In addition, the Central Bank adopted new procedures for the disclosure of its price trend analyses and made a commitment to indicate not only the level, but also the trend of its base interest rate.
The fiscal policy pursued in 1999 had, to a great extent, been defined in the second half of the preceding year as an initial response to the external pressure that began to be felt following the Russian crisis of August 1998.
In September 1998, a target of almost 1% of GDP was set for the federal government's primary surplus for the year.
The most significant fiscal impact of the rise in the exchange rate was seen in the country's net public debt, which initially rose by almost nine percentage points of GDP, from 42.7% of GDP in December 1998 to 51.7% in February 1999.
This was mainly attributable to the increase in the local-currency value of external debt and to the use of public debt instruments that were indexed to the exchange rate, as well as the losses suffered by the Central Bank on the forward exchange market.
The revaluation of the currency over the following months helped to moderate this initial impact.
At the close of the year, the total net public debt stood at 47% of GDP.
The public sector achieved a primary surplus of 3.1 % of GDP in 1999, thanks to a significant effort by the federal government, whose results more than counterbalanced the social security system's primary deficit.
The other components of the public sector also contributed to this result.
The state and municipal governments also improved their performance by turning the 1998 primary deficit of 0.2% of GDP into a surplus of 0.2% for 1999.
The federal government achieved this surplus by adopting a variety of measures to increase tax collection and cut spending, and it succeeded in boosting revenues by 14.8% in nominal terms and reducing expenditure by 5.9%.
The rise in income came mainly from changes in social items (such as the increase from 2% to 3% made in the social security tax rate and the extension of this levy to apply to the services sector, including financial services) and from administrative measures aimed at eliminating backlogs and gaining quicker access to resources retained under judicial claims.
These steps made it possible to offset the decrease in revenues from traditional taxes, such as the levy on manufactured products.
In addition, the government raised income from other sources by, for example, reintroducing the tax on financial transactions (whose collection had been suspended because of a delay in securing congressional approval for its renewal), as well as from concessions, State company profits and fuel taxes.
The central government reduced its expenditure by the equivalent of 1.1% of GDP.
In real terms, with the exception of transfers to state and municipal authorities (which rose very slightly), decreases were posted for all the other items.
The Government set itself the task of curbing the expansion of the social security deficit, both in the general private system and in the system for civil service employees.
Difficulties arose in connection with the civil service pension system, however, when the courts ruled that people who have already retired cannot be charged social security taxes until the Constitution is amended.
The improvement in the results of state and municipal governments was attributable to the consolidation of debt-renegotiation agreements with the federal government.
The states pledged to generate primary surpluses so that they could service their debts, and it was established that, if they fell into arrears, the federal government could use a portion of its constitutionally-mandated transfers to cover those overdue payments, as occurred in the state of Minas Gerais.
In May 2000, this programme was extended to include some state capitals, such as São Paolo and Rio de Janeiro, which have thus been able to reschedule and consolidate their debts with the federal government over maturities of up to 30 years at real annual interest rates of between 6% and 9%.
The Fiscal Responsibility Act, passed in April 2000, establishes a number of rules regarding spending ceilings for all the various levels of government and provides that no level of government may refinance another.
This regulation is intended to put an end to the almost continuous cycle of state and local government debt workouts with the federal government.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 161 The upturn in the performance of State enterprises was mainly due to the rise in fuel prices and electricity rates.
The privatization process fell short of the targets established with IMF, with only USS 4.4 billion being raised instead of the projected figure of US$ 14 billion.
This sluggish pace of privatization activity is attributable to legal and operational problems which arose when the electricity generation companies and state banks were being readied for privatization.
These better-than-expected primary fiscal balances led to improvements in public debt management.
The National Treasury was able to resume the issue of fixed-rate instruments, although the share of the federal government's total stock of bonds represented by these securities plummeted from almost Economic agents were only interested in instruments indexed to the Selic overnight rate, or to the exchange rate.
Then, with the fulfilment of fiscal targets and declining inflation throughout the second quarter, the placement of fixed-rate instruments became more feasible, and by November 1999 these securities' share of the total had risen to 11.3%.
It also became possible to increase the average maturity to nine months, after it had shrunk to less than five months during the early part of the year.
The new exchange-rate regime allowed for a more flexible form of monetary policy management.
Until the new system was introduced, the function of the domestic interest rate had been to maintain capital flows.
With the adoption of a floating exchange rate, the Central Bank indicated that its main goal was to control inflation and that it would use monetary and credit instruments for that purpose.
In March, seeking to avoid any further deterioration of the exchange rate, the Central Bank raised the annual interest rate to 45%.
Later, when fiscal results improved and sufficient foreign exchange became available to allow intervention, the interest rate took a sharp downward turn, and by September it stood at levels close to those recorded at the end of December 1998 (20%).
With the return of a nominal value similar to rates seen before the Russian crisis, in late 1999 the country witnessed the lowest interest rates it had seen since the beginning of the Real Plan, although they were still positive and, in fact, close to an annual rate of 10%.
As well as influencing the trend of interest rates, the Central Bank attempted to encourage an orderly form of credit expansion, mainly through measures aimed at narrowing interest-rate spreads.
Some of the steps it took to accomplish this were to reduce the reserve requirement on sight deposits from 75% to 65%, lower the tax on loans and encourage greater use of rating services so that banks could assign more accurate credit ratings.
This contributed to a gradual expansion of credit, especially from the final quarter (c) Foreign-exchange policy In January 1999, under pressure from heavy reserve losses, the government had to alter the exchange-rate system.
Until then, it had used a currency band, although in practice it had worked like a managed peg, since the Central Bank intervened continually in the market, with alternating periods of sharp increases and steep decreases in reserves.
Faced with these difficulties, the authorities tried to prop up the exchange-rate regime by widening the currency band, but were forced to abandon this attempt two days later in favour of a free float.
The foreign-exchange market was very volatile for two months, until the situation began to turn around in mid-March.
Then, from April to October, the currency underwent a continuous devaluation (the exchange rate reached two reales to the dollar), after which it began to swing upward again in a slow process of appreciation that lasted until March 2000 (1.72 reales to the dollar).
In May 2000, when United States stock markets became more volatile, the exchange rate slipped back to 1.80 reales to the dollar.
These wide swings between depreciation and appreciation created uncertainty which, at times, required the intervention of the Central Bank.
The initial overshooting of the exchange rate following the devaluation was counteracted by using resources from the external assistance package to finance intervention by the Central Bank, while maintaining international reserves above the specified minimum levels agreed upon with IMF.
In addition, a system of daily reports on the level of reserves was put in place.
This increased supply of foreign exchange was not used to smooth out exchange-rate fluctuations, however. 162 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean 2.
The main variables The level of activity in 1999 was largely determined by the adjustments made in the latter months of 1998.
In the environment of the increased uncertainty created by the use of high interest rates to maintain the government's exchange-rate policy, industrial output decreased significantly, and this translated into a drop of 6.3% in the final quarter of that year.
This adjustment continued throughout the first nine months of 1999 and, as a result, the level of idle capacity was quite high in several branches of the manufacturing sector, such as the automotive industry, whose output was 35% lower than the 1997 figure.
There was less idle capacity in the intermediate goods sector, since the level of investment in this sector has been lower under the Real Plan and domestic demand has been more stable, thanks in part to the import substitution process observed since the devaluation in January 1999.
The expectation was that this idle capacity would make for a rapid expansion of exports of manufactures in 1999.
As it turned out, however, even though the volume exported grew by 4.3%, the value of exports fell by 7%, since the devaluation brought down external prices.
Exports did not start to rebound until the final months of 1999, when volume increased by 22% and value by 9%.
This upward trend continued throughout the first quarter Although the impact on exports was not as expected, industrial activity did benefit from import substitution, as well as from more favourable trends in agriculture, commerce and services, and the sector's output consequently fell by only 1.6%.
Textiles posted a positive growth rate after four consecutive years of declines.
There was a sharp decrease in automobile sales, but sales of domestically-manufactured equipment such as tractors and harvesters increased by 3.5% and 18%, respectively.
Agricultural output expanded by 9% in 1999, thanks both to record harvests and to an upturn in the livestock industry.
The rice crop was excellent, with a 46% increase in output, and cotton, maize, sugar cane and wheat all performed well, with increases of between 7% and 13%.
Only the soybean harvest recorded a decrease (-2%), after having expanded by 34% over the previous two years.
The grain harvest consequently reached an impressive total of over 82 million tons.
Livestock activity expanded by 5.7% as a result of the recovery of external beef and poultry markets.
In commerce, sales were hurt badly by the slump in the automotive market, which amounted to 32% in São Paulo.
This was partly offset by a 7.8% increase in other sales, which were stimulated by low price rises.
The devaluation, together with hikes in public utility rates and fuel prices, raised merchants' costs, but the recessionary environment prevented them from passing the full increase on to consumers.
In the services sector, communications were again the most dynamic performer, marking up a growth rate of 8.6%, compared to 5.9% in 1998.
This strong expansion was attributable to the implementation of investment plans, as in the case of mobile telephones, and to the transfer of management to the private sector.
The transport industry remained flat due to the poor performance of production activity and external trade.
This adverse scenario had a negative impact on investment decisions during most of 1999, so the downward trend observed since early 1998 continued.
By the third quarter, the rate of investment had fallen by almost four percentage points of GDP, and an especially large decrease (-20%) was seen in the volume of capital goods imports.
Then, in the last quarter, investment prospects took a decided turn for the better, and this positive trend carried over into the early months of 2000.
Thus, construction expanded by 1.6% in the first quarter and the production of capital goods by 11%. (a) Prices, wages and employment Consumer prices rose by 8.4% in 1999, compared to only 2.5% in 1998.
The acceleration of inflation was attributable to three different shocks: the devaluation of the real in January, the adjustment of public utility rates and the rise in fuel prices.
The new exchange-rate regime significantly altered price formation in several sectors, especially in the case of imports, and this had a particularly strong impact on the wholesale price index, which jumped by 28.9%.
The rise in public utility rates, such as electricity and telecommunications, also put pressure on prices.
In both cases, the hikes were a result of the fact that, when the companies providing these services were privatized, the terms of the contracts linked rate changes to trends in the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 163 general price index, which includes wholesale prices, or to adjustment clauses for lags in these rates.
In 1999, the regulatory body overseeing the energy sector approved rates increases amounting to 20.9%.
Fuels were another managed-price commodity that pushed inflation upward, since the uninterrupted rise in international prices of crude oil was exacerbated by the devaluation of the Brazilian real.
In addition, the end price of fuels includes a tax whose proceeds are to be used to pay off the debt that the federal government owes to the oil company Petróleo Brasileiro (Petrobras) as the result of a differential between international prices and local production costs.
Changes in other prices that have a major impact on the indices, such as housing, education, clothing and personal expenses, underwent only moderate annual variations of between 2.8% and 6.3%.
This would suggest that the indexing mechanisms that were used so frequently in the past did not have a major influence on price formation.
Employment patterns reflected trends in economic activity and can be divided into two distinct periods in 1999.
The first period, covering the first eight months of the year, was the less favourable, with the lowest participation rates of the last two years as a result of a decline in the number of people seeking work and the net loss of 64,000 jobs.
From September on, the situation was reversed: the participation rate rose by one percentage point and 480,000 new jobs were created.
This expansion did not, however, extend to formal urban employment, which decreased by 2.5% in the steepest slide since 1992, exacerbating the trend towards the informalization of the labour market observed since 1996.
The worst figures were seen in construction, where the employment rate plunged by 9.6%, and in manufacturing, where it declined by 3.4%.
Even the services sector witnessed a drop of 1% in employment, after two years of growth.
Because the participation rate was down, the average rate of unemployment in major metropolitan regions was the same as in 1998 (7.6%).
Later, however, as the participation rate increased in the latter months of the year, the unemployment rate in the first quarter of 2000 rose to 8.4%, thus exceeding the rate of 7.8% observed in the first quarter of 1999.
Total wages and the real average wage both slipped back in 1999.
The previous year had already broken with the steady upward trend observed in these indicators since the start of the Real Plan in 1994, which had made it possible to accumulate increases of 36% and 29%, respectively, in total and average wages.
In contrast to other crisis periods, this adjustment was not concentrated solely in the lower wage brackets.
Fiscal restrictions shaped the trend in the minimum wage, given their importance in the determination of periodic adjustments in social security benefits.
In May 1999 the minimum wage increased by 4.6% (to 136 reales), in step with the rise in the consumer price index.
The government brought forward the date set for its review to April 2000 and raised it to 151 reales, for a real increase of 5%.
The declines seen in the deficit on trade in goods and services and in net profit remittances contributed to a major improvement in the current account balance, with the deficit narrowing from US$ 33.6 billion to USS 24.4 billion.
The capital account registered an inflow of US$ 30.1 billion in direct investment, a record figure which made it possible to amortize USS 50 billion of debt and attract net financial capital inflows of USS 34.2 billion (including short-term funds).
All in all, the balance of payments closed out the year with a deficit of USS 10.7 billion.
In addition, funds included in the external assistance package, which were entered below the line, increased the supply of foreign exchange available to the Central Bank.
Thanks to this less pressured situation, at the end of the year the Central Bank was able to pay back USS 5.5 billion of the USS 17.8 billion disbursed in the aid package.
The sharp devaluation triggered an adjustment in foreign trade, but it was not as severe as expected.
Although exports performed poorly, this was more than offset by the decrease in imports.
The 7% downturn in external sales was attributable to weaker export prices, which were 20% lower than they had been in 1996.
The prices of many major agricultural products suffered particularly steep slides, such as coffee (-24%), soybeans (-17%) and orange juice (-16%), as well as mining products such as iron (-25%) and aluminium (-24%).
As a result, the terms of trade deteriorated significantly Contagion from the Brazilian crisis dampened demand in its trading partners in the region: sales to Mercosur countries fell by 24% in 1999 and by 16% to other members of LAIA.
In 1998, these markets had accounted for close to 26% of Brazil's total exports.
The European Union's share of the total (close to 28%) fell by 6.8%.
Only exports to the United States increased, by 164 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean Manufacturing exports were down by 7%, since the increase in quantity was not large enough to compensate for the decline in prices.
A number of factors were involved here: the difficulties being experienced by the country's main export markets (especially Argentina); limitations on access to international credit lines during the early months of 1999; and the higher cost of this type of credit.
Even so, two areas that did record an increase were exports of aircraft and communications equipment (mobile telephones).
The rise of the exchange rate and its volatility deepened the downswing in merchandise imports that had begun in 1998 when the level of activity stalled.
The sharpest decrease (-31%) was in consumer goods; capital goods fell by 16%, and intermediate goods other than fuels, by 13%.
In contrast, purchases of fuels and other petroleum products were up by 3.7%.
The higher exchange rate also discouraged international travel, which slumped by 38%; as a result, the deficit on the services account shrank by US$ 3.3 billion in 1998 to US$ 1.4 billion in 1999.
After reaching an all-time record of US$ 7.2 billion in 1998, net profit remittances tumbled to US$ 4.1 billion.
Net interest payments continued to rise, reaching US$ 15.2 billion, 27% higher than the 1998 figure.
This was attributable to the previous year's increase in the external debt and to the fact that, for Brazil, the costs of raising capital became higher in the wake of the Asian and Russian crises.
One notable development on the capital account was the trend in foreign investment, which reached a net figure of US$ 30.1 billion in 1999.
The sector to benefit the most was manufacturing, which received US$ 7.8 billion.
Once again, the main sources of these flows were the United States, Spain and Portugal.
Brazil's access to cash loans and bond issues on financial markets fluctuated widely in 1999.
As a result of this uncertainty, interest payments (particularly on bank notes and loans) were moved forward during the first quarter, when a total of US$ 12.8 billion was paid.
A net outflow of resources was seen during the third quarter as well.
On average, once access to capital flows was regained, the level of transactions amounted to 40% less than in 1998, with shorter maturities and higher costs.
In 2000, with a view to improving Brazil's access to financial markets, the government took the lead with six issues totalling US$ 3.9 billion, which represents almost two thirds of Brazilian borrowings.
Private banks' and businesses' interest in these transactions waned, however, as the spread between domestic and external interest rates narrowed.
The favourable balance-of-payments situation was sustained during the first quarter of 2000, with the trade account remaining balanced and a smaller deficit being posted on the current account.
The abundant inflow of investment also continued, as did a net inflow of financial capital.
In April, the Central Bank regularized flows and paid back over US$ 10 billion to the creditors that had put its assistance package together, thereby reducing the pending balance to just over US$ 2 billion.
The Central Bank's international reserves stood at US$ 29 billion, which was fairly close to the US$ 35 billion held in reserve prior to the crisis of January 1999.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 165 In 1999, the Chilean economy was convalescing from the external shock and the adjustment policies of the previous year.
This translated into decreases of 1.1 % in GDP and of 9.9% in domestic demand (17% in investment), along with higher unemployment, which peaked in August at a nationwide rate of 11.5%.
The government responded to the fall in private spending by expanding public spending more than had originally been planned.
This, added to the drop in government revenue, generated a global deficit in the non-financial public sector (1.6% of GDP) for the first time in 12 years.
Nevertheless, the year ended on a brighter note, as the balance in external accounts was regained and the inflation rate barely topped 2%. 1 HE CAUSES of the economic recession date back to 1997, when the economy's excessively high rate of expenditure was reflected in a current account deficit on the balance of payments equivalent to 5.0% of GDP.
This situation made the Chilean economy vulnerable to the worsening external crisis.
Then, in 1998, the terms-of-trade effect deteriorated by 3.5% of GDP, and dwindling external financial flows made a harsh adjustment necessary.
That year was also marked by a number of speculative attacks on the peso and by bouts of uncertainty, which caused credit to shrink during certain periods and led to interruptions in credit flows, particularly in September and October of 1998.
All these factors, together with the scarcity of rainfall, which triggered a serious electric power shortage during the first quarter of 1999, combined to dampen expectations (which had been running high throughout the 1990s) so severely that spending plunged (-9.9%) and the banking sector began to proceed with extreme caution.
The bleak outlook combined with the low prices of the country's main export products to generate an environment in which an expansionary fiscal policy and looser monetary policy took a long time to make their effects felt.
Thus, the reactivation did not begin until the fourth quarter of 1999.
Sluggish demand was the main factor that slowed inflation, which came in at an annual rate of 2.3% in December; this was less than the Central Bank's projected figure for 1999 and the lowest in 60 years.
The uncertainty typically seen in a general election year was compounded by the underutilization of installed capacity, the financial system's cautious approach to lending and high interest rates early in the year (to defend the peso against the 1998 attacks).
As a result, gross fixed capital formation, measured in constant 1986 prices, dropped from 31.8% of GDP in Slacker economic activity and the low price of copper curbed public revenues at a time when spending estimates had been based on what turned out to be overly optimistic projections of GDP growth.
This, added to the need to bring forward labour-intensive public investment and offset the fall in private spending, generated a non-financial public-sector deficit of 1.6% of GDP.
The economic contraction and the rise of almost 11% in the real exchange rate paved the way for the correction of the external imbalance, and the current account went from a deficit of 5.7% of GDP in 1998 to a near-zero balance in 1999.
This achievement was partly attributable to the placement of a US$ 500 million sovereign bond issue in the second quarter of 1999 that had the narrowest spread over United States Treasury bond rates of any country in the entire region.
After a costly adjustment, the Chilean economy ended the year on a more auspicious note.
Even so, there were other imbalances that will need to be corrected in the course of 2000 and 2001.
As part of this effort, both private investment and unemployment will have to be restored to their traditional levels, and the public sector will need to regain its surplus position.
Against the backdrop of more buoyant international and, particularly, Asian economies and following the correction of the external imbalance and the relaxation of monetary policy, prospects for 2000 appeared to be good.
Despite the rise in oil prices, which have a strong impact on domestic prices, the authorities forecast an inflation rate in the 4% range.
The external sector is expected to have a balanced trade account, while a slight deficit (around 2% of GDP) is forecast for the current account.
With improving external conditions and a return to macroeconomic stability, the government envisaged a rapid reactivation of the economy.
This was to be brought about by an increase in exports -made possible by an improved exchange rate- and an expansionary monetary policy.
Fiscal policy was planned in such a way that employment and investment could be reactivated within a framework of austerity.
Thus, the year began with an austere fiscal policy and an expansionary monetary policy.
However, the high interest rates prevailing at the beginning of the year, the electricity shortage, the banking system's cautious attitude -which made it difficult to satisfy credit demand- and high unemployment generated an atmosphere of poor expectations that prevented economic activity from making a rapid recovery.
As a result, activity levels continued to slide throughout the first half of the year.
These events led the economic authorities to put together a policy package designed to speed up the reactivation.
For the Central Bank, this entailed making successive reductions in the reference interest rate for monetary policy and abandoning the exchange-rate band in favour of a free float.
Other steps were also taken to revitalize and deepen the capital market.
Meanwhile, fiscal policy-makers implemented a series of measures to encourage spending, especially on employment, but also on investment.
What had originally been designed as a contractionary fiscal policy gradually became more expansionary as the year went on.
Owing to changes in the methodology used, the ' Includes entries under the heading "other" which ' Interest rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the exchange These policies led to an expansion of total expenditure that had a macroeconomic effect equivalent to 1.4% of GDP.
The combination of this increase in spending and the downturn in fiscal income (5.7% in real terms) caused by the economic recession resulted in an overall deficit for the non-financial public sector of 1.6% of GDP.
The new economic authorities consider this deficit to be temporary, and expect to reduce the shortfall to half a point of GDP in 2000 and to balance their accounts by 2001.
Another step taken by the Ministry of Finance to improve expectations and reassure foreign investors was to launch a USS 500 million sovereign bond issue in April.
The interest-rate spread on these bonds between the second quarter of 1999 and the first quarter of 2000 varied from 160 to 200 points over United States Treasury bonds, which is very narrow compared to the rest of the region.
Since the 3.5% inflation target did not appear to be an obstacle to an expansionary monetary policy, reactivation became the sole objective of monetary policy in 1999.
The Central Bank adjusted the benchmark interest rate downward on several occasions over the course of the first semester until finally steadying it at 5% in an attempt to send out clear signals to buoy the reactivation.
These signs were considered positive, but they were not enough to speed up the very hesitant reaction of economic agents in the wake of the deterioration in corporate finances and sharp drop in sales caused by the severe monetary shock of 1998.
Broad money, including sight deposits, increased by a yearly average of 6%.
The new instruments to receive authorization included futures, forwards, swaps and local/foreign-currency combinations thereof.
External expectations began to have an impact on the peso in the second half of the year, and in September the Central Bank responded to this situation by suspending its formal commitment to intervene in the currency market to defend the band.
It would thereafter intervene only in exceptional cases and would announce its decisions to do so.
As a result, the real exchange rate began to climb, peaking in November, when the cumulative 12-month annual rate of increase amounted to 14%.
This measure also removed a factor that had been undermining Central Bank Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 171 credibility and gave monetary policy more breathing space by freeing it from the external interest rate.
In addition, it was well-timed in terms of external condition, with calm reigning in international financial markets and a good rating for Chile's sovereign bond.
In line with the prevailing policy of streamlining and liberalizing international exchange operations, the authorities relaxed the restrictions on external credits to give exporters unhindered direct access to overseas credits to finance their operations.
The authorities also did away with the requirement for prior Central Bank authorization for sales of foreign exchange to be used in payments of royalties, technical assistance services, foreign-currency employment contracts, leasing arrangements, export promotion expenses, etc.
The process of privatizing the country's water and sanitation companies was begun in 1999.
A consortium formed by Aguas de Barcelona (50%) and Suez Lyonnaise des Eaux (50%) acquired a 42% stake in the water utility company Empresa Metropolitana de Obras Sanitarias (Emos) for US$ 960 million.
Dock concessions in the ports of Valparaiso, San Antonio and San Vicente were also tendered to consortiums formed by Chilean and foreign investors.
There was very little movement in 1999 on the Ministry of Public Works' call for bids on highway concessions.
It was not until late in the year that the concession for the Santiago-Talca leg of the Pan-American Highway was awarded to the Spanish company Cintra Concesiones, which committed itself to a US$ 750 million investment.
This company also won the bid for the Cerro Moreno Airport concession in Antofagasta, involving a further US$ 2 million investment.
The year was marked by a recessionary cycle that began in November 1998 and lasted until the third quarter of 1999, and a 1.1% contraction in GDP was consequently recorded for the year as a whole.
The upturn seen in the fourth quarter was driven by supply -and particularly exports of goods and services, which rose by 7%- while consumption made a tentative move towards recovery.
The continued fall of gross fixed capital formation, the rundown of inventories and the contraction of private consumption led to a drop of almost 10 points in domestic demand.
In line with this pattern, goods and services imports fell by 14%.
Since the terms-of-trade effect took a turn for the worse for the second year in a row, real disposable national income shrank by 1.5%, which translated into a 2.8% decrease in per capita income.
The slump in gross fixed capital formation brought investment down from 26.5% to 21.1% of GDP (measured in current pesos), of which 20.9 points were financed by gross national saving and just 0.2 points by external saving.
A complex set of sectoral phenomena combined to magnify the adverse impact of macroeconomic conditions on activity and employment levels, particularly during the first semester.
One of these factors was the rationing of electricity, which lasted almost the whole of April and depressed the level of activity by leading to a partial paralysis of industry and interfering with commerce in general.
In the fisheries industry, the closed seasons on certain species used in the production of fishmeal and fish oil blocked a stronger recovery from the sharply lower catches of 1998 caused by El Niño and La Niña.
In addition, one of the road works concessions was halted due to financial problems, which also hurt employment.
At the sectoral level, GDP was boosted by growth in mining (17%) and fisheries (1.8%), as well as by services as a whole, with increases of 2.7% in transport and communications, 1.8% in electricity, gas and water, and 172 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean 2.9% in financial services.
Although manufacturing managed to raise its output considerably in the last quarter, for the year as a whole it recorded a negative figure of almost 1%; construction was clearly the hardest hit sector, with a slump of 10%.
In 1999, inflation came in well below the 4.3% target set by the Central Bank authorities, reaching just 2.3%.
This achievement was a result of the severe contraction of domestic demand and high unemployment, which prevented the increase in the exchange rate, which began in May, from being passed on to retail prices; the effect of this was to be seen in 2000.
The moderate performance of wages and the cost of labour, which increased by 4.7% in nominal terms (three points less than the previous year), also contributed to price stability.
Wholesale prices rose much faster than the consumer price index (CPI), with an increase of 13.5% in 1999, thereby generating expectations that cost pressures will gradually carry over to prices once the economy reactivates.
The 1999 rise in oil prices, whose effect on fuel prices was held back on the eve of the forthcoming presidential election, will also increase inflation in 2000.
By December, however, unemployment had fallen to 8.9%, signalling the beginning of a return to more normal conditions on the labour market and ending the year with a single-digit rate.
There was some degree of lag in the adjustment of real wages, which rose by 2.4%, to the scarcity of jobs.
The balance of payments ran up a deficit of US$ 748 million in the course of the year, while the international reserves held by the Central Bank fell from US$ 16 billion to US$ 14.7 billion.
The current account deficit shrank to 0.2% of GDP (almost 6 points less than in 1998), thanks to an improvement in the trade balance, which yielded a surplus of US$ 1.7 billion.
The negative balance recorded on the current account was almost entirely attributable to payments for financial services amounting to US$ 1.88 billion and for non-financial services of US$ 310 million.
External trade figures demonstrate the severity of this expenditure-based adjustment, which led to a 19% drop in the value of imports.
The downswing encompassed consumer, intermediate and especially capital goods, which were 36% lower than in 1998.
The value of exports was up by US$ 790 million despite the deterioration in the prices of Chilean export products.
The top exports in terms of volume were copper, forest products, and paper and pulp.
Copper prices improved throughout the second semester but, in spite of the upturn, at 71.4 cents per pound the average price remained below that of the previous year.
In 1999 there was an outflow of US$ 5.3 billion of short-term capital, which was offset by a net inflow in the form of foreign direct investment of US$ 4.4 billion.
This income came from the sale of the water and sanitation companies, the Banco de Santiago and Endesa, as well as the completion of energy and mining investment projects that had been started in previous years.
Unlike the situation in 1998, the net balance for portfolio investment was positive, with inflows of US$ 2.5 billion and an outflow of US$ 2.4 billion.
The latter included US$ 2.07 billion in foreign investments made by privately-managed pension funds.
This demonstrates that, although capital outflows are useful in offsetting excess foreign inflows, they can also play a counter-productive role during runs on the peso by increasing volatility.
The total external debt amounted to US$ 34 billion, which was US$ 2.3 billion more than in 1998.
The bulk of this figure corresponds to the private sector, as total public debt remained at around USS 5.8 billion, or just 17% of the total.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 173 In 1999 the Colombian economy experienced its deepest recession of the entire twentieth century.
A drastic adjustment of private-sector spending in the wake of the international financial crisis led to a 4.5% drop in gross domestic product (GDP) and pushed unemployment up to 20% in urban areas.
As capital flows reversed direction, an adjustment had to be made in the current account, and it took the form of devaluation and recession.
The magnitude of the external adjustment amounted to 4% of GDP, while inflation registered its lowest rate in 30 THE INTERNATIONAL financial crisis revealed major external and fiscal imbalances in the Colombian economy, both of which reflected an excess of expenditure over income during the decade.
The adjustment process required in order to overcome these imbalances was precipitated by a fierce speculative attack on the local currency, which began in January 1998 and lasted, with varying intensity, for more than 18 months.
The monetary authorities' decision to defend the currency band merely postponed the inevitable, thus prolonging the siege and increasing the cost of the adjustment in the real sector, which had to endure six consecutive quarters of shrinking output.
The prolongation of the crisis and the postponement of corrective measures in the fiscal and external sectors led to a reduction in the country's sovereign debt rating and raised the cost of external financing.
As a result, the effort to defend the exchange-rate band was eventually abandoned, in September, and the currency was allowed to float freely.
The economic authorities were also forced to turn to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the third quarter of the year.
The crisis that broke out in the financial sector in late 1998 not only placed additional demands on the Treasury, but also had a corollary in the form of a credit crunch that practically closed off financing for the real sector altogether.
The second quarter of the year was marked by political uncertainty, however, which sparked sharp fluctuations in the exchange rate and increased the cost of Colombian debt instruments on international markets.
The previous year's defence of the currency band had resulted in high interest rates and a slowdown in economic activity, and this was followed by a crisis in the financial sector.
Given these circumstances, monetary policy sought to alleviate the effects of the resultant liquidity squeeze by adopting a less contractionary stance, so long as the real exchange rate remained stable.
The fruits of this policy were seen in a sharp drop in nominal interest rates, although the reduction was less pronounced in real terms given the substantially lower rate of inflation.
When faced with renewed speculative attacks towards the end of the second quarter, the Banco de la República (Colombia's central bank) decided to devalue the peso by shifting the exchange rate band for the second time in nine months.
The impairment of the economic authorities' ability to carry out the necessary adjustments triggered further onslaughts which eventually forced the central bank to do away with the currency-band regime altogether, after having lost nearly US$ 500 million in reserves in September alone.
This policy shift, together with a commitment to undertake a fiscal adjustment as stipulated in the agreement with IMF, made it possible to adopt a more expansionary monetary stance. (a) Foreign-exchange and monetary policy The currency crises in Brazil and Ecuador early in the year did not cause major disturbances in Colombia.
From April onward, however, exchange-rate pressures mounted as economic agents began to realize that no significant adjustment measures were being taken; as a result, the exchange rate hit the ceiling of the band in June.
The consequent loss of reserves forced the central bank to devalue the Colombian peso by shifting the band upward by nine points and widening it.
This measure had a temporary effect, but it also undermined credibility in the exchange-rate regime then in force, and it thus proved impossible to absorb a further round of attacks stemming from the country's low sovereign-risk rating in the third quarter of the year.
Following a fruitless attempt to ease pressures by selling off international reserves, the central bank finally gave way and, on 25 September, put the local currency into a free float.
The absence of upheavals since that time is accounted for by the cumulative depreciation of the previous months, which had brought the real exchange rate close to its equilibrium level, by the large amount of external funding secured from the multilateral banking system (US$ 6.9 billion), and by the agreement reached with IMF.
The cumulative nominal depreciation as of the end of September was on the order of 30%.
In the following months, however, the general calm reigning on the currency market and the petroleum sector's increasingly abundant foreign-exchange earnings led to a slight appreciation, and the local currency thus ended the year with a nominal depreciation of 23%, equivalent to 10% in real terms.
In order to build up international reserves and dampen exchange-rate volatility, the Banco de la República adopted a new framework for intervention in the foreign-exchange market in November based on auctions of foreign-exchange options.
The foreign-exchange market remained tranquil in the early months of 2000, but turbulence returned in April and May in the wake of political events.
Monetary policy in 1999 sought to mitigate the effects of the previous year's squeeze, while at the same time holding the exchange rate steady.
With these goals in mind, an inflation target of 15% was set, and a number of steps were taken to boost liquidity.
Some of these measures were aimed at streamlining access to central bank funds, while others were designed to lower their cost.
Accordingly, discount rates, which were the main monetary policy instrument used in 1999, were lowered by the Banco de la República on 10 consecutive occasions.
Interest rates thus fell rapidly until June, after which they held steady for four months because of the instability on the foreign-exchange market before rising again.
The financial system benchmark rate (the average rate of interest paid by the financial system on fixed-term deposits) dropped from 34% in January to 16% in December 1999.
Other interest rates followed the same pattern, reaching their low point in February 2000 (rates on fixed-term deposits fell to 10%).
To forestall an upturn in inflation, however, the central bank raised its intervention rates, and this caused market interest rates to rise slightly.
Monetary aggregates (except for M3 plus bonds) started the year with negative growth rates, but these gradually turned positive thanks to the steps taken by the central bank.
Means of payment expanded by 21%, but the broadest liquidity measure (M3 plus bonds) grew by just 6.3%.
This was largely due to the fact that economic agents shifted into cash to avoid paying the "two per thousand" tax on financial transactions.
Credit expansion trended downward to end the year in negative territory (-4%), with net local-currency lending decreasing by 1 % and foreign-exchange lending activity shrinking by 42%.
This credit crunch can be attributed to a series of events: the Colombian financial sector had suffered substantial losses in 1998 (0.8% of GDP), as high interest rates undermined many borrowers ' ability to pay and pushed up the non-performing loan portfolio from 10% in early 1999 to 16% in November, before it slipped back to 14.4% in December.
The consequent higher credit risk was also accompanied by a loss in the value of collateral owing to the steep decline in real estate prices.
In addition, loan-loss provisions were increased as a result of the higher percentage of non-performing loans, and this reduced the supply of resources available for new lending still further.
Apart from this, an "inverse wealth effect" occurred on the demand side of the credit market.
Business losses, together with an increase in unemployment, precipitated a drop in household income and cutbacks in consumption.
As many clients of the financial system were over-extended when the monetary squeeze of 1998 supervened, the increase in debt led to a reduction in payment capacity and the resulting failure to meet obligations.
The result was very weak credit demand in 1999, despite lower interest rates.
Thus, the financial sector moved from a situation of high growth rates and over-expansion in 1992-1997 to the opposite extreme.
The government's efforts to overcome the financial crisis produced the desired results.
The measures adopted to cope with the economic emergency of November 1998, followed by others in 1999 aimed at restructuring debts and recapitalizing financial institutions, prevented a general collapse of the financial system and set it on the road to recovery.
The substantial deficit was mainly generated by cyclical factors, whose influence grew rapidly in the wake of lower tax receipts.
Apart from this, unforeseen expenses arising from the January 1999 earthquake (0.2% of GDP) added to the central government fiscal deficit (-7.6% of GDP), although this was partly offset by the surpluses posted by the social security system (1%) and Ecopetrol Measured using the previous methodology, the central government deficit widened from 5.1% to 5.7% of GDP in 1999.
One of the most significant changes in the new methodology is the exclusion from current government income of profits earned by the Banco de la República, which in 1999 amounted to 0.8% of GDP.
Another decisive factor in 1999 was the feeble nominal increase in total revenues (13.2%), despite the collection of a new tax on financial transactions (0.6% of GDP) and the effects of fiscal reforms approved in December 1998.
Capital income grew by 72% thanks to the transfer of financial surpluses to the government from the National Social Security Fund (which was closed down), while current income increased by 11.1%.
Tax receipts, excluding the effect of the reform and the "two per thousand" tax, expanded by 3.8% 5.4% fall in real terms as a result of the recession and the collapse of imports.
Central government expenditure grew by 21.5% in nominal terms, as the net result of lower investment (-1.1%) and higher current expenditure (23.9%).
The Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 179 latter was pushed up by higher interest payments (23%) and operating expenses (24.1 %), which were themselves driven by larger transfers to departmental and municipal governments (29.3%).
Half of the central government At the start of the year the Colombian economy had already endured two quarters of negative growth, and the economy's low point was reached in the second quarter of 1999 when it shrank by more than 7%.
Growth rates were less negative in the second half of the year, thanks to the steep fall in interest rates and a depreciation of the local currency; taking the year as a whole, however, GDP shrank by 4.5%.
In contrast, strong export growth and the buoyancy of the manufacturing and agricultural sectors augured well for 2000.
The adverse conditions prevailing in 1999 mainly affected the private sector, with investment reaching only half its 1998 level; public-sector investment, meanwhile, declined by about 6%.
Private-sector consumption fell less sharply (-5.1%) and was partly offset by growth in public-sector consumption (4.1%).
Domestic demand retreated by about 9% as a result, and, with imports falling as well (15.4%), aggregate demand shrank by 6.4%.
Except for mining, which was buoyed up by higher extraction rates for crude oil and metallic minerals, and social, community and personal services, all the economic activities posted negative growth rates.
Construction was affected the most, dropping back by one quarter of its total value added compared to the previous year.
This came on top of three years of zero or negative growth resulting from the oversupply that had accumulated during the boom of the first half of the decade.
High interest rates hit the construction sector both on the supply side (costs) and on the demand side (mortgage lending).
Manufacturing production declined less steeply (-12.8%), partly because one segment of this sector's production activity is tradable.
The only industries to achieve positive results were sugar, tobacco products and oil refining.
Financial services slipped back for the second year in a row (-7.3%), reflecting the depth of the financial crisis.
The rate of inflation, measured by the variation in the consumer price index (CPI), amounted to just 9.2% in 1999, which was 7.5 percentage points lower than in 1998.
Greater progress than expected was made in this area for two reasons.
First, the deep recession, stemming from the 1998 credit squeeze, tended to mitigate relative price adjustments and weaken indexation mechanisms.
As a result, the prices of housing, clothing, and cultural and recreational activities increased by less than the other components of the household shopping basket.
Second, an abundant agricultural supply made possible by favourable weather conditions held down the increase in food prices to just 7.5%.
The other components of the index rose by more than the average, but by less than they had the year before.
In contrast, the producer price index (PPI) rose by 12.7% in 1999 -only slightly less than the year before- as the effects of real depreciation and higher oil prices began to show through in the second half of the year.
In the early months of 2000, these same delayed effects, compounded by the higher prices of certain agricultural products and a gradual dismantling of subsidies for public utility customers, led to a slight upturn in the CPI.
Given the widespread indexation of collective bargaining contracts, wages in the manufacturing sector benefited from the favourable trend in inflation.
In real terms, wages increased by 6% for white-collar workers, and by half this amount for manual workers.
This was accompanied by a very steep increase in the urban unemployment rate, which jumped from an annual average of 15.2% in 1998 to 19.4% in 1999 in the country's seven major metropolitan areas.
On the demand side, the sluggish economic activity of the past four years has stilted job creation.
Labour supply, on the other hand, as measured by the overall 180 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean participation rate, continued to increase (by more than one percentage point in 1999), partly because increasing numbers of women and students have been joining the economically active population.
As a result, unemployment rose sharply, and the employment rate fell back by 1.5 percentage points.
The revival of economic activity in the first quarter of 2000 eased these trends but had still not managed to bring unemployment down to below the 20% mark.
The external adjustment carried out in 1999 was closely linked to the economic slowdown.
The deficit on the current account of the balance of payments narrowed billion), while the surplus on the financial account decreased from 4.5% of GDP to 0.5% (US$ 460 million) over the same period.
This lower net inflow led to a reduction of almost US$ 640 million in net international reserves.
In the first half of the year, monthly growth figures for merchandise exports were negative in value terms, despite the larger volumes exported, as a result of the decline in prices, especially for the most important export products (oil and coffee).
Thus, as the international price of oil increased, the country's export performance improved.
The vigorous upswing in the value of oil exports (over 60%) was mainly due to the higher price levels, but there was also an increase in the volume of these exports.
The opposite was true for coffee (-30%), which registered decreases in both the international price and in the volume of exports.
Non-traditional exports slipped by a slight amount (-3%), as the beneficial effects of the currency's depreciation did not begin to make themselves felt until the early months of 2000 (this category of exports soared by 30% during the first quarter of that year).
Export performance would have been more buoyant in 1999 if it had not been for the recessions in Ecuador and Venezuela, which caused exports to these economies to drop by 45% and 19% in value terms, respectively.
Merchandise imports descended steeply until the final months of the year, and did not begin to recover until the first signs of a revival in economic activity appeared.
Imports of capital goods dropped the most (-34%), owing to their close link with investment patterns, while other merchandise import categories suffered less pronounced falls.
The deficit in factor income, meanwhile, widened by more than 40% as a result of higher interest and dividend payments and larger profit remittances.
The reduction in imports was accompanied by meagre capital inflows (US$ 460 million), equivalent to one-tenth of the 1998 figure.
This was the outcome of a radical change in economic agents' expectations as to the sustainability of the Colombian economy's external position.
After several years of sizeable capital inflows, foreign direct investment (FDI) plunged from US$ 2.91 billion to US$ 870 million, partly as a result of lower privatization revenues.
Net long-term borrowing was down by US$ 1 billion on expectations of a further depreciation of the local currency and the higher cost of external financing.
Net outflows of short-term capital were estimated at US$ 1.17 billion, reflecting a greater inclination among Colombians to invest abroad, less willingness to take out new loans, and greater difficulty in obtaining credit.
The private sector thus reduced its outstanding external debt to US$ 14.72 billion.
The public sector, on the other hand, increased its external borrowings by US$ 1.3 billion, with total external debt outstanding rising to US$ 34.43 billion, the equivalent of 41% of GDP.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 181 Costa Rica General trends For the second year running, the Costa Rican economy witnessed rapid GDP growth (8.4%), to a great extent thanks to the operations of the company Componentes Intel de Costa Rica, which accounted for around 60% of this increase.
Indeed, if the company' s operations were excluded from the calculations, the figure would have been 3.4% instead.
THE TIGHT ECONOMIC policy in place since late 1998 made it possible to curb the expansion of monetary aggregates, moderate inflation and diminish the deficit on the balance-of-payments current account, but it also had a detrimental effect on the domestic economy.
Restrictions were loosened towards the middle of the year, but this was not enough to boost economic activity unrelated to the operations of the Intel subsidiary.
In addition, the locally-based export sector, which has a significant influence on the income of the population, encountered adverse conditions which were reflected in a 12% drop the value of its exports.
The slump in domestic activity brought down consumption, (per capita consumption was down by 1.5%) and raised both unemployment and the percentage of households that were unable to meet their basic needs, with the latter variable rising to 22% from its mid-1998 level of 19.2%.
This, in combination with the restrictive monetary policy, was influential in holding price rises below the previous year's figure, and the economy thus met its projected inflation target of 10%.
Price containment and a larger supply of foreign exchange made it possible to rein back the daily slippage of the exchange rate in the second semester, with the result that its depreciation for the year as a whole (11%) was within the targeted range.
The fiscal deficit, which registered a nominal increase despite an upswing in central government revenues, continued to be one of Costa Rica's most worrisome problems.
Recurring shortfalls on central government accounts have led to the expansion of the public debt, which rose to the equivalent of 45% of GDP in current values in 1999; 73% of the total debt is made up of domestic liabilities and the rest corresponds to external debt.
Interest payments on the country's unwieldy domestic debt continued to weigh heavily on public finances, since they absorb almost one third of the sector's income.
In order to lighten this burden, for the second year running the government covered a portion of the fiscal deficit with foreign-exchange proceeds from an international bond issue.
The 1999 issue totalled US$ 300 million and was floated at an interest rate well below the going rate on the domestic market.
In the country's external accounts, the deficit on the income account more than tripled (largely due to the outflow of Intel profits) and, even though the trade balance ran a hefty surplus, this translated into a current account deficit of US$ 488 million, which was just 1.3% less than in 1998.
Nonetheless, the inflow of foreign capital was voluminous enough to offset this deficit and boost reserves by US$ 480 million.
Although monetary policy-makers plan on an inflation rate of 10% (the same as in 1999), a less restrictive monetary and credit policy is likely to bring greater credit expansion and a lower interest rate.
No changes are to be made in the exchange-rate policy, and the authorities will continue to apply the existing system of daily exchange-rate adjustments, which will make the devaluation of the colón over the year similar to the 1999 rate.
The combination of these factors is likely to make for GDP growth of around 5%.
From the last quarter of 1998 to mid-1999, monetary policy was tightened up in an effort to correct the imbalance caused by credit expansion, lower the growing deficit on the balance-of-payments current account, curb the slide of international reserves and safeguard the progress made in stabilizing prices.
These restrictions were loosened midway through the year when a number of indicators showed some degree of improvement.
Fiscal policy was chiefly aimed at raising revenues by combating tax evasion, and major reforms in the Tax Rules and Procedures Code came into effect in October which will provide the government with the means to do so.
In the case of the consolidated public sector, however, this coefficient was higher than it had been the year before.
The upturn recorded in current income was associated with the expansion of the income tax base, which included the Costa Rican Electricity Institute (ICE) for the first time, and the decision to treat corporate Tax Credit Certificates (CATs) as taxable benefits.
The tax amnesty granted when the new Tax Rules and Procedures Code came into effect also enabled some delinquent taxpayers to regularize their tax situation.
Indirect taxes, which account for over 70% of current income, increased at only half the previous year's rate, as levies on consumption and imports were affected by sluggish demand and the slow pace of growth in domestic economic activity.
In an unusual turn of events, investment portfolio transfers by some public institutions generated capital income, which placed more resources at the government's disposal; this was offset by the increased expenditure of some State-owned enterprises, however.
The growth rates for some items of current expenditure plunged, as in the cases of goods and services and transfers, but interest payments rebounded sharply.
Interest on domestic debt jumped by close to 40%, as capital yields remained high, but also as a result of the deferral until 1999 of the redemption of zero-coupon bonds issued in June 1998.1 Interest on the external debt, though lower than in the case of the domestic debt, soared by over 70% due to international bond flotations.
Wages and salaries were also influential in pushing up expenditure, as jobs were created in order to support high-priority education and public safety programmes; wage increases were a secondary contributing factor.
Following a flat performance in 1998, capital expenditure rebounded by 28%, mainly as a result of higher transfers to public-sector agencies, although real investment also recovered from the previous year's slide.
The central government covered two thirds of the deficit with a late-April flotation of US$ 300 million in 10-year bonds on the international financial market at an interest rate of 9.33%.
The consolidated public-sector deficit more than doubled, rising from 0.8% of GDP to 1.6%.
Since 1992, the maquila industry's exports are included in these figures. 1 Interest rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the exchange rate.
The first semester saw the continuation of the monetary policy adopted in September 1998, when inflationary pressures and thinning international reserves led the monetary authorities to take restrictive measures.
Open-market operations were stepped up in order to sop up extra liquidity; the suspension of the phased reduction of the minimum reserve requirement remained in place, and the legal reserve requirement for new financial agents and instruments continued to edge upward.
Lastly, private-sector lending remained subject to a 26% ceiling from October 1998 to December 1999.
Although monetary policy was relaxed somewhat following a review in mid-1999, it remained tight in order to hold prices steady.
Following a better-than-expected performance for GDP, reserves and some external-sector variables, together with price levels and exchange rates similar to the projected figures, the ceiling on personal loans was raised to 30% for this period and, as of 1 October, the reserve requirement was reduced by one point to 14%.
However, open-market operations designed to soak up liquidity were continued, chiefly in order to sterilize government issues of securities on the international market and, to a lesser extent, to offset the surplus on the private exchange market.
Foreign-currency deposits expanded only 21%, versus 41% the previous year, and this was reflected in the 18.5% growth rate for the broad money supply (M3), down from 26% the year before.
Savers' diminishing preference for financial assets denominated in foreign currency was associated with the slower pace of the local currency's programmed devaluation, since this means savers are assured of higher yields for local instruments than for foreign-currency investments.
Loans to the public and private sectors crept up by a scant 1%, in contrast to the rapid increase of the preceding two years (28% and 38%).
Government borrowing shrank by 23% as a result of movements in accounting entries involving the recording of government debt with the Central Bank, since net credit received was similar to its level as of December 1998.
Credit to the private sector grew by 19%, which was substantially less than the previous year (51%), as a consequence of the ceilings established by the Central Bank.
In marked contrast to the previous year, when net reserves were down by a small amount, reserves climbed by 53% in 1999 as a consequence of the US$ 300-million international bond issue, the inflow of private external capital and the virtual stagnation of imports.
During the first four months of the year, the deposit rate (as measured by the base rate2) was similar to what it had been during the last two months of 1998 (24.5%).
In May it began to slip, and by year-end it stood at 18.25%. 2 Calculated by the Central Bank, the base rate is the weighted average of the six-month interest rates of commercial banks, non-banking financial institutions, the central government and the Central Bank of Costa Rica.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 187 This trend was associated with the lower returns offered in the joint auction run by the Central Bank and Finance Ministry, which dropped almost seven points as a result of slacker demand for central government resources.
The deposit rate paid by State and private banks also fell, but less sharply.
Loan rates did not decrease, however, so these institutions' spreads widened. (c) Exchange-rate policy In 1999 the country's foreign-exchange policy was aimed at maintaining an exchange rate that would safeguard foreign competitiveness, keep domestic production profitable and hold import 3 The main variables The most buoyant element of the economy was external demand, while domestic demand edged downward.
The scant 1 % rise in gross fixed investment was principally attributable to an upturn in public investment (mostly in road building and electricity generation infrastructure), since private investment was dampened by the completion of the work involved in setting up the Intel plant and by the slump in residential construction.
Total consumption was flat, as the timid rise in public consumption (1%) was too slight to offset the downturn in private consumption.
Expanding external demand (17%) was boosted by Intel exports and, to a lesser extent, by increased tourism, with other areas of activity generally recording negative results or growth below the previous year's figures.
Goods and services exports rose from 42% of GDP in On the supply side, at 8.4%, GDP exhibited its biggest growth spurt in the last 20 years.
This can be attributed in large measure to the expansion of Intel's operations, since it accounted for 5 points of this percentage, which means that the contribution of all the other activities amounted to 3.4%.
Because of Intel's high level of profit remittances, however, gross national income actually dropped slightly.
Imports of goods and services shrank by 1%, basically because of the downswing in external purchases of consumer and capital goods, since purchases by intermediaries climbed prices steady.
At year's end, the price of the dollar stood at about 300 colones.
During the first semester, the colón was devalued by an average of 12 cents per day, but in the second semester the daily rate of depreciation eased to 9.2 cents.
This was made possible by a slower increase in domestic prices and favourable external conditions.
As a yearly average, however, the real exchange rate rose by due to the acquisition of inputs by Intel and other in-bond (maquila) industries.
Manufacturing was the second-most dynamic sector after construction, which achieved a slightly higher growth rate than the preceding year's thanks to the boost it received from public investment.
After the healthy pace of the previous year, the expansion of agriculture slowed as production for the overseas market, especially of bananas and sugar, dwindled; coffee, despite a price drop on the international market, actually enjoyed an upturn in growth.
Production for domestic consumption intensified with the help of good weather conditions, and there were actually oversupplies of some products.
Manufacturing activity expanded thanks to the buoyancy of the maquila industry and especially Intel, which more than doubled its value added and was responsible for around 90% of the increase in this activity's output.
Because of the importance that the maquila industry has acquired in the economy, industrial policy has been focused on promoting the development of national suppliers for this segment.
Slacker demand, a tight monetary policy and a slower rate of devaluation all helped to lower inflation, which had reached 11.7% the year before.
The rise in fuel prices had an adverse influence on this indicator, as there were several hikes during the year.
Higher housing costs, electricity rates and health care costs were also influential.
In the category of food, beverages and tobacco, however, the prices of agricultural products were down by 3.6%.
The average minimum wage climbed by 12.5%, which translated into an increase of 2.2% in real terms.
The situation varied according to the type of employer concerned: real average earnings of workers in the private sector went up by 4% and those of central government employees rose by 1.5%, but wages in the rest of the public sector fell by 3%.
Underemployment, measured in terms of equivalent unemployment, rose from 7.5% to 7.8%. (d) The external sector The current account deficit totalled US$ 488 million, 1.3% less than 1998, and dropped from 3.6% to 3.2% of GDP.
Goods and services exports jumped by 17%, while imports increased only 1%.
As a result, the trade balance yielded a surplus of US$ 914 million, in contrast to the US$ 163 million deficit of the previous year.
The impact of this accomplishment was diluted, however, by the increase in payments for factor services, which skyrocketed from US$ 607 million to US$ 1.67 billion, as remittances of profits and dividends almost quadrupled.
The performance of the external sector was heavily influenced by the expansion of Intel.
This company's exports (parts for modular circuits and electrical microstructures) soared by 163%, and its share of total merchandise exports consequently jumped from 17% in 1998 to 38% in 1999.
Foreign sales by other maquila companies increased just 5.2%, and their export share thus slipped from 18% to 16%.
In all, maquila industries were responsible for over half of the country's exports of goods.
The remainder of the manufacturing sector's exports dropped by 5%, bringing its contribution to the total down from 29% to 23%.
All together, exports of manufactures represented over three quarters of the total, marking a radical change in the country's export structure.
Commodity exports fell by 18%; coffee and bananas, the two major exports in this category, slid by 21% and 5%, respectively, owing to poor conditions on the international market.
Only meat and some agricultural products, such as pineapples and melons, achieved an increase.
This small rise was attributable to purchases of inputs, since imports of both consumer and capital goods sagged in response to the stagnation of domestic demand.
The upturn in imports of intermediate goods for industry, which accounted for 80% of the increase, was associated with activity in the maquila industry, especially Intel.
The services trade account posted a larger surplus than the year before, thanks to an increase in income from tourism.
This industry has been doing very well for a number of years now.
Capital inflows were considerably higher, in part due to the government's US$ 300 million bond issue on the international market and the use of external credit by ICE to continue its electricity generation projects.
The bulk of this sum, however, came from inflows of private capital directed towards the maquila industry, the banking sector and services.
The significant inflow of foreign capital enabled the country to cover its current account deficit and build up its reserves by US$ 480 million.
Debt service was down by 4%, thus dropping from the equivalent of 8.9% of goods and services exports to the more acceptable figure of 7.3%.
Per capita GDP improved for the sixth consecutive year (5.7%) following the steep downswing of 1990-1993.
The fiscal deficit was maintained at 2.2% of GDP and the rate of exchange remained stable (at 20 pesos to the dollar on the parallel market), which helped to keep inflation under control (-3%) within an economic environment marked by the stability of government-regulated prices and declining prices on the open market.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit (0.6% of GDP) narrowed for the third year in a row and was the lowest in the decade in relative terms, thanks to a decline in the deficit on trade in goods and services and an increase in family remittances from abroad.
Inflows from international tourism were up, but the merchandise trade deficit widened further despite the increase in the volume of commodity exports owing to a severe deterioration in the terms of trade.
The positive balance on the capital account was sufficient to cover the current account deficit and add a small amount to the country's meagre international reserves.
G D P GROWTH was driven by the recovery of sugar production (and its multiplier effects on other production activities), the buoyancy of international tourism and a stronger performance by the energy sector.
Weather conditions (a long winter and good rainfall) contributed to growth in agriculture (10.1%).
The chronic problems facing the external sector were expected to lead to a 4%-4.5% slowdown in production in 2000, but even this estimate was based on a projected upturn in overall production efficiency.
These projections pointed to an improvement of 3.5% in labour productivity, a 1.4% decline in energy intensiveness, a 4.6% increase in investment efficiency and a 7% drop in the ratio of foreign-exchange expenditures per dollar of gross income.
A 4.5% upturn was expected in manufacturing output based on higher production figures for both the sugar industry and other industrial activities, with the 1999/2000 sugar crop expected to exceed 4 million tons.
In the energy sector, total crude production was projected to increase by 24% to 2.6 million tons, while natural gas production was expected to total 600 million m3 and oil refining capacity to come The reform process consolidated the advances made earlier in the government and financial sectors and in the area of foreign investment.
Further efforts were made to boost the efficiency of public enterprises and to foster greater transparency, order and inner consistency in public resource management.
On the other hand, the number of own-account workers making up the country' s small private sector, which began to emerge in 1993-1994 as a first step towards liberalization, has continued to decline. 190 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean in at 2.6 times above the 1999 figure.
National energy production was therefore expected to cover 70% of total electricity generation by the end of 2000.
The fiscal deficit was projected to rise to 3% of GDP, as a result of a higher increase in expenditure (1.8%) than in income (0.9%).
Tax and non-tax revenues were expected to expand at similar rates (1% and 0.8%, respectively).
The fiscal deficit was held in check (2.2% of GDP), since the expansion of total revenues (7.3%) covered the increase in expenditure (7.4%).
Tax receipts were up by 13.9%, whereas non-tax income declined by 11.5%.
These higher tax receipts reflected a larger increase in indirect (14.3%) than in direct tax revenues (13.2%).
Receipts from circulation, sales and excise taxes strengthened, owing mainly to higher sales of cigarettes, beer and other alcoholic beverages.
A 17.8% improvement in tax receipts from services was due to stronger activity under the headings of restaurants, hotels and electricity generation.
The growing number of companies being incorporated into the new tax system helped boost revenues from corporate taxes (17.8%), the labour force use rate (15.7%) and social security contributions (8.8%).
Personal income tax receipts climbed by 5.2% despite the decline in the total number of own-account workers (the only persons subject to personal income tax are own-account workers, private transport operators, artists, real estate lessors, small-scale sugar-cane producers and intermediaries involved in the open agricultural market).
Current outlays for defence and public order were higher (40.1%), as were those for sports (35.2%), education (21.2%), housing and community services (21%) and health (15.5%).
Most of these increases were accounted for by wage hikes and incentive payments for persons employed in those activities.
Product and price-differential subsidies also The balance-of-payments current account deficit was expected to narrow in 2000 due to a reduction in the trade (goods and services) deficit, an increase in net current transfers (remittances from family members) and higher factor service payments.
Despite higher international oil prices, exports of goods and services were expected to outpace imports, largely as a result of higher volumes of sugar and nickel exports and an expansion of the tourism industry.
The surplus on the capital account was expected to finance the current account deficit and to boost international reserves.
The price control policy was maintained, and the parallel exchange rate declined to 20 pesos to the United States dollar, after which it held steady, while the official rate remained the same (1 peso to the dollar).
The government's monetary income rose at almost the same rate as government disbursements (11.8%).
Under the heading of income, charges for housing, electricity, gas and water went up (17.9%), as did merchandise sales (9.4%); the cost of transport services increased more gradually (1.9%).
The most notable increases in disbursements were in day wages, salaries and payments to UBPCs (7.9%), while savings account balances were lower.
As part of the policy aimed at the de-dollarization of the Cuban economy, new savings mechanisms were established in the form of certificates of deposit which, in relative terms, made it more attractive to save in Cuban pesos or in convertible pesos.
The interest rates on deposits in United States dollars for residents are well below international rates and represent only a fraction of the opportunity cost, measured as the cost to Cuba of accessing external financing.
March 2000, 12-month fixed-term deposits in dollars, convertible pesos and Cuban pesos carried interest rates of 1.25%, 2.50% and 3% per annum, respectively.
In 1999, the national financial system extended approximately US$ 1.5 billion in short-term credit to production units, compared to US$ 993 million in 1998.
In 1997-1999, US$ 500 million in external medium- and long-term loans were obtained for the purchase of equipment for use in the sugar industry, construction of airports and telecommunications.
The terms of financing for the reactivation of production are gradually improving, as companies which have viable projects and qualify for satisfactory risk ratings with commercial banks can obtain working capital loans of up to US$ 1 million.
There has also been an increase (32%; 5.2 million Cuban pesos) in local-currency loans to production companies. (c) Economic reforms The process of opening up the economy to foreign investment has proceeded in the real estate and energy sectors, and the restructuring of the banking system has been consolidated.
In all, 370joint ventures representing a total investment in excess of US$ 4 billion have already been set up.
Most of these enterprises are engaged in international tourism, nickel production, oil production and telecommunications, and Spain, Canada and Italy have been particularly active in these industries.
Bilateral investment protection agreements have been signed with 45 countries, and double-taxation agreements already exist with two countries and are being negotiated with five others.
The three existing customs-free areas have 294 operators engaged in commercial and service activities.
One foreign operator has been awarded the contract for managing and operating the airport terminal at Cayo Coco, in the north-eastern part of the island.
Further progress has been made with the corporate development programme designed to improve the efficiency of more than 1,200 public enterprises.
This new independent management system is based on the principle of self-financing, according to which each firm must be able to generate enough income to cover its costs and turn a profit.
These enterprises have decentralized control over a portion of their profits and can reinvest them in order to improve the working and living conditions of their workers and to offer incentives to the most efficient employees by expanding existing public-sector salary scales.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 193 Decree-law No. 92 on the financial administration of the State was enacted in 1999 to foster transparency and efficiency in the management and control of public financial resources.
This legal instrument regulates various operational aspects of fiscal affairs and public credit.
A superintendency of insurance was also created to oversee this activity in accordance with the financial reform programme.
Decree-law No. 177 of 1997 established standards for the insurance market as a whole together with prudential regulations governing insurance activities in order to protect the rights of policyholders.
In addition to the free farmers' markets established in 1994, which are regulated by the Ministry of Domestic Commerce, in 1999 the Ministry of Agriculture set up parallel agricultural markets (referred to as "plácitos de acopio" or farm produce centres) to bring down prices.
Local authorities set price ceilings in these markets, based on local conditions, which usually work out to be lower than those of the open market, but higher than the prices that can be obtaiñed with the allowance booklet.
The State thus increased its supply of agricultural products from 28% of the total for both markets in 1998 to 45% in 1999.
Private enterprise's share of these two markets declined as a result of this competition from State suppliers, but still had the largest share (53%) of total supply.
The consolidation of the economic reform process still appears to depend on the design of new measures to help bring about the full recovery of the agricultural sector, a phasing out of the two-tier exchange-rate and pricing systems, consolidation of the macroeconomic adjustment and a more flexible management of private forms of self-employment.
Total supply expanded considerably (5.6%) thanks to an increase in output (6.2%), since imports of goods and services grew more slowly (3%).
The 11 % increase in exports of goods and services was mainly accounted for by larger export volumes of sugar and mining products, together with a growing influx of international tourists.
Investment grew by 9.4%, while the increase in consumption was more gradual (2.7%).
The authorities are continuing to give priority to capital formation in key foreign-exchange-generating activities, such as tourism and telecommunications, and to import-substitution sectors (energy).
In 1999, 4,300 new hotel rooms for international tourism were completed and a number of thermoelectric plants were modernized.
By contrast, other activities unconnected with foreign exchange, such as housing and transport (including road infrastructure), continue to show the effects of a shortage of investment funds.
Sales were up on the State-controlled market (6.5%), in State-run public food centres (18.2%) and on the open market for agricultural products (36%).
This made it possible to increase the population's daily food intake, although it has not yet reached the level recorded prior to the 1989 crisis.
The value of domestic sales made in dollars increased by 9%, and some 62% of the population had access to this market, compared with 56% the year before.
Growth was recorded across the board, with the most notable improvements occurring in tourism (13%), agriculture (10.1%), commerce (9%), manufacturing (7.6%) and construction (7.5%).
Slower growth was seen in transport, storage and communications (6.4%), the financial sector (6.3%), government services (2.3%) and Gross income from tourism rose by 8.1% owing to an increase in the number of visitors (13.2%) to 1.6 million persons.
The overall growth rate for tourism slowed in 1999, however, as a consequence of the decrease in December arrivals caused by international uncertainty over the Y2K problem.
The agricultural sector rebounded (10.1%) from its 1997-1998 downturn, with the output of agricultural items other than sugar climbing more sharply than sugar production itself.
In the fisheries industry, the gross catch was up 8% thanks to the increase in aquaculture (11%) and coastal fishing, since the output of the high-seas fleet diminished.
Industrial production expanded, with increases in both the sugar and non-sugar sectors.
The upturn in the 194 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean sugar industry has fuelled an expansion in various sugar products, including refined sugar (15%), blackstrap molasses (15%) and rum (11%).
The food industry benefited from the larger volume of raw materials generated by the upturn in agriculture.
Increases in beverages and tobacco were attributable to the greater availability of inputs and to the strength of market segments linked to tourism and sales in dollars on the domestic market.
Beer production was up by 14%, soft drinks by 8%, rolled tobacco by 8% and cigarettes by 5%.
The expansion of construction was accounted for by the work carried out in areas of activity that generate foreign exchange, including hotels and motels, and by budgeted projects such as schools and public health centres.
Road and housing repair and maintenance work in both the State and private sectors also increased, but the number of completed housing units declined (-6.6%; In the energy sector, oil production topped 2 million tons (an increase of 25%), while associated natural gas output was 3.7 times higher at 460 million m3.
Electricity generation also expanded (2.5%) thanks to production incentives and the entry of foreign investors.
National oil and gas production was sufficient to cover one third of the country's energy requirements, including 41% of its electricity needs, and efforts were made to substitute more efficient and cleaner energy products.
Increases in wages and other production costs were counterbalanced by a substantial expansion in the supply of goods and services available to the population and by higher subsidies on price-controlled products, while the parallel exchange rate remained stable.
The consumer price index declined by 3% as prices moved downward on agricultural markets and in the informal economy, whereas on the controlled market, no changes were reported.
The value of agricultural sales rose by 36% as a net result of a 75% expansion of supply and a 25.8% decrease in prices.
The increase in the average monthly wage (5.7%; 223 pesos) was in line with the upswing in average productivity and benefited 60% of the public sector.
The system of foreign-exchange incentives was extended (6%; 1,080,000 workers), while the system of productivity-linked local-currency incentives was applied to 781,000 persons.
These increases notwithstanding, real purchasing power is still not on a par with its level of 10 years ago.
Open unemployment slipped to 6% despite a 5.4% rise in labour productivity.
Unemployment was highest in the eastern provinces of the country, even though 87,000 new jobs were created there.
The number of own-account workers declined by 8% owing to stiffer competition and tighter controls.
The merchandise trade deficit widened as the result of a 14.1% deterioration in the terms of trade, since export volumes grew faster (10%) than import volumes (2.5%).
Particularly large increases were seen in export volumes of sugar (16%) and mining products (15%).
International sugar prices dropped, resulting in a loss of potential earnings of US$ 265 million, but the price of nickel exports picked up.
Smaller amounts of petroleum and petroleum products (-17%) were imported, but at higher prices.
The positive performance of the services account was attributable to growth in international tourism and telecommunications, as net factor service payments remained practically the same as the year before (US$ 600 million).
Cuban products accounted for 51% of supplies to the tourist industry and 47% of sales in dollar stores.
The external debt edged downward (-1.9%) to stand at US$ 11 billion, but it still represents a very high percentage of the value of exports of goods and services (2.4 times).
Talks have begun with the secretariat of the ad hoc group of Paris Club creditor countries with a view to negotiating a multilateral restructuring of Cuba's official debt with the member countries of that group.
Between 1998 and 1999, renegotiation agreements were signed with Japanese suppliers and with the government export credit insurance agencies of Italy, the United Kingdom, Belgium and Japan, and negotiations along the same lines are being conducted with other countries.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 195 Ecuador Ecuador's economy suffered a deep financial and foreign exchange crisis that had severe monetary and fiscal repercussions and drastic effects on production.
GDP shrank by over 7%, imports plummeted, unemployment shot up to over 14% and inflation soared to 60%.
Towards the end of the year, faced with the rising fiscal cost of the local currency' s depreciation, the authorities suspended public external debt servicing.
The financial sector had been enjoying robust growth since 1994, with hefty inflows of external capital being attracted by the relative stability of the real exchange rate and high interest rates.
This process was not adequately supervised, however, and the sector's existing weaknesses (lack of precaution on the part of banks, mismanagement) were exacerbated during the boom, leaving it ill-prepared to deal with the series of adverse events which began to unfold in 1998.
The effects of El Niño undermined many companies' ability to service their debts, and foreign credit flows were interrupted as a result of a string of international financial crises.
This, in combination with the financial disintermediation caused by the introduction of a capital circulation tax, seriously reduced the liquidity of many banks.
WHEN, IN ADDITION to all these circumstances, foreign capital inflows were interrupted in early 1999, the exchange-rate regime, which was based on a pre-established currency band, became untenable.
Over the course of the year, waning confidence in both the financial sector and the local currency translated into an increasingly marked preference for cash, particularly dollars.
In March, the authorities responded to signs that a growing number of banking institutions were weakening by freezing a large portion of deposits in an attempt to protect the financial system as a whole from a massive withdrawal of funds.
This affected payments the system, further depressed the economy's already sagging domestic demand and placed additional limitations on the production sector's possibilities of recovery, all of which drove unemployment up sharply.
The measures taken to stabilize the financial sector and the exchange rate did not produce the desired results and, by the end of the year, the Deposit Insurance Agency (AGD) had intervened in 14 banks, including some of the country's largest, while the exchange rate shot up by 39% in real terms in the year.
The measures adopted to bail out the banking system and the steep drop in the sucre boosted inflation, although this was partly offset by slack domestic demand.
The severe deterioration of the population's living conditions and the erosion of political confidence triggered a crisis that culminated in the removal of the President elected in 1998.
Nevertheless, the new Administration continued with the dollarization plan and passed major legal reforms during the first quarter to pave the way for its implementation.
Macroeconomic policy had to deal with a debilitated financial system and a loss of confidence in the sucre.
Early in the year, dwindling capital flows pushed the exchange rate upward, obliging the authorities to do away with the currency band and allow the sucre to float, after having tried unsuccessfully to defend the exchange-rate band by selling foreign reserves and raising interest rates.
From then on, the main objectives of economic policy were to stabilize the banking system and rein in the fiscal deficit.
The policies that were implemented at this point had a high cost in terms of economic growth and monetary expansion, however, and failed to re-establish internal and external equilibrium.
In March, the authorities froze a large proportion of bank deposits in an effort to forestall what they feared would be a widespread run on the banks, to halt the depreciation of the exchange rate and to block the threat of an inflationary surge.
Exchange-rate volatility persisted, however, and the rate of depreciation escalated midway through the year and again in the last quarter.
This hindered debt servicing and, even though tax reforms in late 1998 and April 1999 and higher oil prices helped to lower the non-financial public sector's deficit to 4.8% of GDP, dollar-denominated interest payments to private creditors ceased in September.
At the same time, measures taken to bail out the banking sector (recapitalization of banks in which the AGD had intervened, deposit guarantees) had a strong expansionary impact on the monetary base.
As these measures proved unsuccessful, a far-reaching change in the monetary system was announced in January 2000 which called for the United States dollar to replace the sucre as the country's new legal tender.
The difficult economic and social situation sparked a political crisis which culminated in the removal of the President, who was replaced by the Vice President.
Dollarization continued to be the pivotal element of macroeconomic policy, however, and in March the Economic Transformation Act was passed.
This act sets out a series of monetary, foreign-exchange, fiscal, structural and labour reforms as a means of regulating the transition to the new monetary scheme1 and its subsequent operation.
In April, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) approved a 12-month stand-by arrangement to bolster the authorities' efforts to stabilize the economy and resume negotiations with the international financial community.
In order to reduce the fiscal deficit, which had reached 6% of GDP in 1998, the income tax was replaced by a 1 % capital circulation tax (ICC) in the 1999 budget.
A new surcharge of between 2% and 10% was applied to imports in February.
Even so, a first-quarter deficit of over 8% of GDP made further measures necessary, and in April a fiscal package was passed that reinstated a 15 % income tax rate, eliminated some of the exemptions from the value added tax (VAT) and, for 1999 only, levied a tax on corporate equity and luxury automobiles.
From 1993 on, refers to the free-market exchange rate. h Includes errors and omissions. ' Refers to net interest as shown in the balance of payments, divided by exports of goods and services. ' In 1994,1995,1998 and 1999, includes expenditure on downsizing. k Interest rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the exchange rate.
This slight reduction in the deficit was attributable to a marked expansion of real income, which, when measured in terms of the country's shrinking GDP, rose from 20.3% to 25.1% of that aggregate.
The main factor underlying this increase was an external one, i.e., the rise in oil prices, since oil revenues climbed from 4.6% to 7.5% of GDP.
The tax reforms also had an impact, however, since the ICC and the income tax together contributed 3.3% of GDP to income, compared to the 1.8% contribution made in 1998 by the income tax alone.
In contrast, VAT, excise taxes and tariff proceeds were dampened by the economic crisis and, taken together, dropped from 7.8% to 6.7% of GDP.
A major part of this increase came from the higher interest payments (up from 5% of GDP to 8.7%) resulting from the steep depreciation of the sucre.
In contrast, staff cuts and falling real average wages trimmed the wage bill from 8.5% to 7.1% of GDP.
Capital expenditure crept up from 5.8% to 6.9% of GDP, mainly owing to the reconstruction work undertaken in regions devastated by El Niño and to increased investment in State-owned companies.
The NFPS deficit does not include the costs of bailing out the banking sector, which reached 1.1 % of GDP in 1999.
Within this same context, the central bank recorded a quasi-fiscal deficit of 1.2% of GDP, which brought the consolidated public-sector deficit to around 7%. 200 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean of preceding year) b (12-month variation, %) Exports, f.o.b.
Real effectrive exchange ratec Money (M1) Deposit rate Lending rate a Preliminary figures. b Based on figures at constant domestic prices. c Refers to the exchange rate for imports.
The ICC tax rate was lowered from 1% to 0.8% and, for natural persons, was converted into an advance payment against income tax. (b) Foreign-exchange policy The sucre came under severe pressure in late 1998 when financial flows were halted following the Russian Federation's moratorium.
The situation was exacerbated by the Brazilian crisis and, in February, the exchange rate shot through the ceiling of the exchange-rate band that had been the pivotal mechanism of the stabilization regime since 1994.
After suffering heavy losses of international monetary reserves in their bid to defend the exchange rate, the authorities replaced the band system with a dirty float.
The sucre plummeted, and from January to March the real exchange rate jumped by 24%.
In March, the reduction in liquidity caused by the freeze imposed on a large portion of bank deposits succeeded in reducing the exchange rate temporarily, but it remained highly volatile.
At year's end, the suspension of external debt payments to private creditors and growing political uncertainty drove up the demand for dollars.
The informal dollarization of the economy expanded, speculation and exchange-rate spreads increased, and the currency's depreciation accelerated.
The authorities tried to halt the ascent of the exchange rate by implementing measures to restrict liquidity in sucres (raising the reserve requirement and interest rates).
Again, however, these measures had only a transitory effect, and the year ended with a nominal exchange rate of around 20,000 sucres to the dollar, compared to 7,000 sucres at the end of 1998.
This brought the real exchange rate up by 39% in comparison with the 1998 and 1999 averages and by 67% taking a December-December reading.
Unable to hold back the slide of the sucre, in mid-January 2000 the government announced the formal dollarization of the country's economy, based on an exchange rate of 25,000 sucres to the dollar, which thereafter held steady.
Hefty inflows of foreign capital attracted by high interest rates and the relative stability of the real exchange rate provided by the currency-band system were two of the factors driving its growth.
Inadequate banking supervision failed to signal the growing weaknesses of the system, however, which were exacerbated by mismanagement (linked loans, lack of control over offshore transactions).
Then, in 1998, the effects of El Niño on the production sector's payment capacity, the shrinkage of foreign capital flows as a result of a series of international financial crises, the repercussions of the capital circulation tax on financial intermediation and the resulting erosion of public confidence led to the outbreak of a crisis that affected the entire financial system.
In 1999, saving in the financial system fell in nominal terms by 2% and private bank loans by 25%,2 while the percentage of non-performing loans soared from 10% to 61% of the total portfolio.
Since its creation in late 1998, the Deposit Insurance Agency (AGD) has intervened in or closed down 14 financial institutions whose holdings represented 65% of the system's total assets.
In March, believing a run on the banks was imminent, the authorities declared several days to be bank holidays and froze some deposits.
This freeze began to be lifted in August based on a schedule that differentiated among the various types of savings.
The measures implemented to assist banking institutions that passed into the hands of the AGD were funded by the Finance Ministry, which issued US$ 1.4 billion in bonds up to the end of 1999 in order to clean up the banks' finances and cover the corresponding deposit insurance payments.
These bonds were rediscounted or sold to the The crisis in the financial system and the steps taken to contain its effects contributed to a 7.3% real decrease in GDP, while a 9% drop in per capita GDP brought this indicator to its lowest level since 1976 (with the central bank.
This had a strong expansionary effect, and neither the fall in international reserves nor the implementation of an open-market policy (through the use of monetary stabilization bonds, which skyrocketed by 236% between December 1998 and December 1999) were enough to compensate.
Efforts to soak up excess liquidity were also hindered by the fact that many banks paid off their obligations to the central bank with government paper or immovable assets.
When these liquidity control measures proved ineffective, the authorities opted for dollarization.
The bank reserve requirement was standardized at 9%. (d) Structural reforms Early in the year, a series of minor public agencies were closed and the Ecuadorian Electrification Institute (INECEL) was split into six generation companies, one transmission company and 19 distributors in preparation for their subsequent privatization.
In the course of the year, political instability and the difficult economic situation impeded further structural reforms, but progress was made in the preparatory work for privatization and the award of concessions in the electrical power industry, telecommunications and ports. exception of 1987, when oil production was brought to a halt).
Domestic demand sagged by 18.3%, as economic and political instability caused private investment to dry up.
Thus, gross fixed capital formation shrank by 35.5%, falling to 11% of GDP, and public and private consumption dropped by 15.5% and 9.7%, respectively.
The impact on GDP was mitigated by a 39% slump in imports, while exports stagnated.
The agricultural sector performed poorly in 1998 due to the damage caused by El Niño.
This climatic phenomenon did, however, have a positive impact on the following year's production by improving soil conditions, and agricultural production consequently increased by 2.4% in 1999, chiefly thanks to the banana, coffee, cocoa and maize harvests.
Even so, the scarcity of financing prevented the sector from making full use of its natural advantages, and its growth in 1999 was not enough to offset the previous year's shortfall.
In addition, livestock production was down and fishing output fell by 10% as a result of problems in the shrimp industry (due to the White Spot Syndrome Virus, or WSSV), and this translated into a moderate decline of 1.3% for the agricultural sector as a whole.
While these activities were hindered primarily by supply-side problems, weak domestic demand was the main cause of the decreases of between 8% and 12% in output recorded for manufacturing, construction, commerce and transport.
Financial and government services also contracted sharply and, apart from agricultural activities, only electricity, gas and water, and oil and mining were able to resist this downward slide.
In the first quarter of 2000, GDP slipped by 1.3%, and the authorities were projecting a growth rate of around 1 % for the year as a whole.
The consumer price index (CPI) soared by 60.7% between December 1998 and December 1999 -compared with 43.4% in the previous 12-month period- due to the rapid depreciation of the currency and the high rate of money creation.
Slack domestic demand averted even greater price increases but, even so, accumulated inflationary pressures widened the gap between the nominal depreciation of the exchange rate and the CPI, as well as between the CPI and the producer price index (PPI), which climbed by 186.9%.
The cumulative increase in the CPI for the first six months of the year 2000 amounted to 65%, which translated into a 12-month inflation rate of 104% as of June.
The economic crisis had a heavy impact on the labour market, where demand was limited while household needs drove up the labour supply (the participation rate rose from 58.4% to 60% between November 1998 and November 1999).
The quality of employment also underwent a marked deterioration, and urban underemployment increased Against the background of flagging demand for labour and high inflation, the downward trend observed in the real wages being paid by formal-sector companies since 1997 deepened, while the minimum wage (plus additional allowances) fell by 10.7% in real terms.
Deteriorating conditions in the labour market helped push poverty up from 46% to 69% nationwide; in rural areas the situation was extremely serious, with the poverty level there reaching 88%.
The economic crisis was reflected in many different ways in the balance of payments.
Merchandise imports plunged by 50%, with consumer goods, raw materials and capital goods all being affected.
This did not reflect success in capitalizing upon the favourable conditions created by the depreciation of the sucre, however, but instead resulted almost exclusively from the upturn in oil prices.
In fact, thanks to its higher price, oil recovered the lead export position it had lost the previous year, despite a decline in export volume.
In contrast, almost all the other major export products saw foreign sales drop owing to low prices in some markets (bananas, coffee) and production problems that limited the volume of supply in others (shrimp).
In fact, cocoa was the only traditional export product that posted an upswing.
Non-traditional products, which had expanded strongly until 1996, suffered a further drop, and only petroleum products and products derived from cocoa recorded significant increases.
As foreign capital flows dwindled and large amounts of short-term capital were withdrawn from the country, the financial account (including errors and omissions) recorded a deficit of US$ 1.8 billion.
The only source of significant inflows to the financial account was (thanks to the oil sector) foreign direct investment, although it did drop from US$ 830 million to Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 203 US$ 635 million.
Thus, the overall balance amounted to a deficit of US$ 850 million, which meant reserve assets fell by US$ 400 million.
The steep depreciation of the sucre and the country' s balance-of-payments problems led to growing difficulties in servicing the dollar-denominated public debt.
Given the sharp downturn in GDP as measured in dollars, the public external debt came to the equivalent of 100% of GDP.
At the end of September, the government announced to its Brady bond creditors that, of the interest payments that had fallen due in August, it would service only past-due interest (PDI) bonds, and proposed that holders of collateralized bonds should call in their guarantees.
This proposal was rejected, and the government decided to cease servicing all dollar-denominated debt held by private creditors (Brady bonds, eurobonds, domestic debt in dollars).
By year's end, debt arrears had reached US$ 925 million, most of which corresponded to the Paris Club.
However, a stand-by agreement with IMF signed in April 2000 has enabled the government to begin negotiating agreements with its different groups of creditors.
This was in line with the projections made for the monetary and financial programme but less than the 1998 figure (3.5%) and well below the robust, sustained annual increase of 6.9% achieved during 1992-1995, after the peace accords were signed.
Per capita GDP posted a negative growth rate (-0.2%) after having expanded by 1.4% in 1998.
National income stagnated as the terms of trade deteriorated and net external income payments Increased.
A NEW ADMINISTRATION -of the same party as its predecessor- was elected and took office in 1999.
Passage of the general budget was delayed, which held back projects dealing with physical infrastructure and basic services.
Restrictive monetary policies helped to vanquish inflation, stabilize the exchange rate and strengthen the financial system.
These policies also had the effect of curtailing domestic demand, however, owing par t icular ly to an 8.8% reduction in public investment, which explains why the gain in GDP was so modest in 1999.
In addition, merchandise exports were weakened by s teep decreases in the international prices of coffee and sugar and by flat sales to Central America.
The increase in current expenditure raised the non-financial public-sector (NFPS) deficit to 2.9% of GDP -slightly above the 1998 figure- while the tax burden remained virtually the same even though the authorities continued to implement measures aimed at widening the tax base, reducing evasion and modernizing tax administration.
December-December inflation was negative (-1 %), the nominal exchange rate remained stable, as in previous years, and the real average wage rose by less than one percentage point; minimum wages have shown no significant variation since 1990.
Nominal interest rates for both lending and borrowing rose slightly; this was consistent with the indicators, which signalled a financial regrouping and the stability of both this sector and inflation.
Family remittances continued on their upward trend and, at the equivalent of 55% of merchandise exports, were sufficient to finance a small trade deficit.
The current account ran a moderate-sized deficit, but net international reserves increased nonetheless.
Prospects for 2000 centred on a continuing effort to preserve macroeconomic stability, while the debate on the dollarization of the economy continued to intensify.
A steady flow of transfers from overseas capable of sustaining the current account was expected.
Economic policy and structural reform The basic objectives of economic policy were largely the same as in 1998: to bolster macroeconomic stability as a means of achieving sustained growth based on measures directed at keeping domestic inflation in line with the international rate and safeguarding the stability of the exchange rate and the financial system.
Mainly as a result of the deterioration of the external environment, however, the targets for growth and per capita income were not met; in fact, the country's economic performance in 1999 was the second worst of the entire decade.
The fiscal deficit widened, current saving trended downward and, given the significant increase in current expenditure, real public investment slowed.
Previously financed in large part by non-recurrent income from the privatization of State-owned companies, the deficit in 1999 was covered by net external financing.
Major fiscal measures were implemented during the year in an effort to widen the tax base and reduce evasion.
The NFPS deficit totalled 2.9% of GDP, which was less than the 3% that had been set as a policy objective.
Current saving dwindled to almost nothing, as current income stagnated and current spending expanded considerably.
The increase in consumption expenditure was particularly notable, and this counteracted a sizeable reduction in capital expenditure.
The central government turned in a deficit of 2.2% of GDP, given the rise in current expenditure, particularly on wages, and the fact that current income edged up by a mere 0.5%.
Tax receipts rose by 5.5% in nominal terms, bringing the tax burden to 10.5% of GDP, which was similar to the 1998 figure.
Although receipts from direct taxes climbed by 11.1%, easily surpassing the preceding year's figure of 5.1%, receipts from indirect taxes increased by just 3.1 %, as a result of a 3% VAT hike and a slight upturn in import duties.
Non-tax income fell sharply (32.3%) and current transfers nearly dried up altogether, in keeping with the downward trend of recent years.
The monetary and financial programme had projected a 3.6% decline in public investment in absolute terms, but the actual decrease amounted to 8.8%, owing largely to the five-month delay in approving the budget -which held back public investment- and to the authorities' austere spending policy.
The combination of these factors had the effect of dampening aggregate demand.
The deficit was largely financed by short-term external borrowing, since in 1999, unlike 1998, the government did not receive any income from privatizations.
If the Administration continues to encounter difficulties in raising income, the fiscal deficit is likely to come under increasing pressure, particularly in view of the pension payments that will have to be made by the Treasury over the coming five-year period, which will amount to over USS 1 billion.
The need to increase spending on health care and education could also push up deficit figures in the future.
In view of this situation, the Finance Ministry has programmed increases in the tax burden designed to raise it to 14.5% of GDP by 2005.
Within this context, a package of VAT and income tax reforms was approved in mid-September and, in October, an enforcement plan to ensure the issuance of VAT receipts was put into effect.
The main income tax reforms refer to indemnities, bonuses, equity earnings and the elimination of tax credits.
The use of a simplified tax regime, the passage of a new tax code and the elimination of VAT exemptions for basic grains and medicines are also awaiting approval.
Other measures under discussion are the re-introduction of a wealth tax, an increase in excise taxes, discontinuation of the drawback scheme and a phased increase in the municipalities' budget allocations from 6% to 12%.
In addition, new tax options for municipal authorities have begun to be analyzed within the framework of the Omnibus Municipal Tax Act.
Budgeted expenditure amounts to 16% of GDP, which was almost the same proportion as in 1998.
The aim of these measures is to guarantee monetary stability to economic agents and forestall pressure on prices.
The main instruments of monetary regulation continued to be reserve requirements and open-market operations, which have paved the way for the stability of both prices and the financial system.
The reserve requirement has been the most heavily used and most influential mechanism, while open-market operations have been employed as short-term measures to adjust liquidity.
In 1998 the authorities introduced an additional 3% reserve requirement which they then phased out in 1999, but open-market operations were stepped up to compensate.
This increase in broad liquidity was partly accounted for by the central bank's net international reserves, which climbed at an annual rate of 11.6% and turned in a balance of US$ 1.97 billion, and partly by banking credit and investment operations with the private sector, which increased by 9%.
Since 1993, the nominal exchange rate has been held to a fixed rate by means of central bank intervention in order to sterilize excess dollars.
During this time the real exchange rate has slipped considerably, and in 1999 it continued to act as an inflation-control mechanism and as a nominal anchor for the economy.
In recent years, the small size of the differential between the inflation rates of El Salvador and its main trading partners has also contributed to the stability of the nominal exchange rate.
The Banking Act entered into force on 9 October 1999 as part of the process of modernizing and tightening up the regulation and supervision of the financial system.
Negotiations on a free trade agreement between Mexico and the Northern Triangle countries (El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras) are in their final stage, with the issues yet to be resolved relating to the committee on regional issues, safeguards for agricultural products and an agreement on some sensitive products.
The Dominican Republic has not yet ratified it, but El Salvador has already done so.
Preliminary negotiations have been undertaken with the Andean Community to define a partial reciprocity agreement covering a list of 200 products.
Discussions are also under way with Chile to complete the tariff reduction programme, as the regulatory portion of that scheme has finally been agreed upon.
El Salvador has been negotiating with Panama for the last two years in an effort to establish a free trade arrangement with an emphasis on maritime transport and financial services, and preliminary talks have begun with Canada regarding liberalization and negotiations.
In August El Salvador signed a customs union agreement with Guatemala with a view to creating a model customs arrangement and concluding agreements on the regulation of trade and investment between the two countries.
This has implications for the country's trade policy, since it establishes specific goals in terms of tariffs, customs administration, tax policy, services and investment, and health records.
Then, in October, an investment act was passed which was designed to give the external sector a boost by attracting more foreign investment to the country and establishing an appropriate legal framework for it.
The provisions of this act include one that authorizes the creation of the National Investments Office (ONI), whose main purpose is to facilitate, centralize and coordinate government procedures in order to streamline the process for investors.
The slowdown in economic activity in 1999 was accounted for by the steep downturn in public investment and slack public and private consumption; the combination of these factors choked off domestic demand, which grew by barely 0.9%.
As in previous years, the invariably considerable level of family remittances (almost USS 1.4 billion in 1999, slightly more than the 1998 figure) exerted a positive influence.
Agriculture was the fastest-growing sector, with a rate of 6.6%, thus surpassing the pessimistic projections (d) Structural reforms After considerable progress was made in carrying out structural reforms in 1998 with the privatization of the National Telecommunications Administration (Antel) and the State's thermoelectric power generation plants and distribution companies, 1999 saw no major action in this field.
The idea of privatizing the Banco Hipotecario (a mortgage bank) and the Banco de Fomento Agropecuario (an agricultural development bank) has apparently been discarded.
In fact, the government announced it would make a capital contribution to the Banco Hipotecario so that it could meet the borrowing requirements of microenterprises and small and medium-sized businesses, and another to the Banco de Fomento Agropecuario in order to enable it to channel financing to small agricultural producers.
The structural reform process was consolidated in 1998 when the five pension fund management companies (AFPs) became operational.
Since then, funds have accrued, and there has been increasing interest in having the AFPs diversify their investment options.
Progress was also made in 1999 with the establishment of mechanisms for the surveillance and supervision of the financial system.
One such mechanism is the Banking Act, which, among other provisions, introduces new capital requirements for banks, one of which raises the capital fund requirement to 12% of all risk-weighted assets.
In addition, the minimum amount of capital stock required to establish a bank was set at 100 million colones. made following the passage of Hurricane Mitch.
This result can be attributed to increased coffee production, since although coffee prices fell during most of the year, an upswing was recorded in the latter months.
A strong expansion was also seen in the production of beans (46.4%), maize (19.6%) and rice (15%), while livestock rebounded vigorously.
In contrast, sugar cane production slumped by 4.1 % and sugar exports suffered the effects of lower prices on international markets.
Manufacturing, which had been the best performer in recent years and the most powerful engine driving GDP growth, thanks to the robust maquila industry, grew 212 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean by just 3.7% in 1999, or half the 1998 rate.
This meagre increase stems from the decline in intraregional exports and a substantial slowdown in non-traditional exports.
The construction industry's growth rate was the lowest to be recorded in the last three years (2.2%) owing to delays in investment projects and a decline in the construction of housing (-37%) and service facilities (-87%).
Commercial construction increased by 14.6%, while total construction, measured in terms of area, plunged by almost 45%.
Commerce grew by 1.7% and financial services and insurance by 1.9%, half their respective 1998 rates.
As measured by the consumer price index (CPI), December-December inflation fell back by 1%, with an abrupt decrease in the category of food products (-5.2%).
El Salvador thus continued to boast the lowest inflation rate of all Latin America, differing by a fairly wide margin from the other Central American economies.
Minimum wages in seasonal agricultural activities have not changed since May 1998.
Coffee and sugar refinery workers earned 31.20 and 22.80 colones per day, respectively, while in the rest of the agricultural sector the minimum wage remained at 21.60 colones per day.
In manufacturing, commerce and services, the minimum wage has stayed at 42 colones per day since May 1998, and no adjustment was planned in 2000.
The current account posted a deficit once again, this time of USS 205 million, or the equivalent of less than 2% of GDP.
This imbalance was easily offset by the surplus on the capital and financial accounts, which enabled the central bank to build up US$ 1.97 billion in net international reserves, a sum equivalent to five months' worth of imports.
The trade balance showed a deficit of US$ 1.5 billion, which was similar to its 1998 level.
Traditional exports, which accounted for only 12.6% of total merchandise exports, fell as coffee, sugar and shrimp prices tumbled.
The maquila industry, on the other hand, which accounted for 53.4% of total exports, continued to expand quite rapidly (12.1%), although more slowly than during 1995-1998.
Sales to Central America, which accounted for 25% of total exports, slipped by 1.7% (after an increase of 6.6% in 1998) as a result of the regionwide economic slowdown and the steady real appreciation of the colón.
Central American sales were also affected by the non-tariff barriers imposed by some countries.
The most significant change in this regard was a 9% increase in purchases of consumer goods, especially durables.
Of total imports, intermediate goods accounted for 31.8%, consumer goods for 24.8%, the maquila industry for 23.4% and capital goods for 20%.
Foreign-exchange inflows in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI) totalled US$ 215 million, a considerably smaller sum than the US$ 870 million received the previous year.
The flow of family remittances (equivalent to 11 % of GDP) continued to counterbalance the trade gap, however.
The total external public debt amounted to US$ 2.8 billion, which was 6.8% more than in 1998.
Even so, this debt -all of which corresponds to the public sector and almost all of which is composed of medium-term obligations- has been kept at a prudential level.
The debt service amounted to US$ 550 million, and the total external debt/goods and services exports ratio was a little over 90%, lower than the figures recorded in earlier years.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 213 Guatemala In 1999, the Guatemalan economy grew by 3.5%, which represented a slowdown from the previous year's rate (5.1%), while per capita GDP expanded by less than 1%.
This slackening of production activity was partly due to a contraction of domestic demand brought about by the application of a cautious lending policy on the part of the banking system, the impact of Hurricane Mitch, and the solvency problems experienced by some financial and stock-market institutions.
A number of monetary and fiscal policy concerns that arose during the election campaign and the change of Administration also played a part in this situation.
PUBLIC SPENDING increased throughout the year, and a flexible monetary policy was maintained up to the end of August.
These two factors help account for the considerable depreciation of the quetzal against the dollar.
Even so, inflation remained low (4.9%), thanks in part to a slump in consumption and the fact that the prices of some agricultural products were kept in check.
The decline in confidence that had begun in the latter part of 1998 as a consequence of the bankruptcies and solvency difficulties seen financial sector was compounded by bleak projections regarding the country's foreign-exchange inflows and concerns about the management of monetary and fiscal policy.
During the last four months of the year, a more restrictive monetary and fiscal policy was applied.
Banco de Guatemala (the country's central bank) raised interest rates on its open-market operations quite sharply, restricted its sales of foreign exchange and began to engage quite actively in money-desk operations (the banking system established the money desk in February in order to moderate the volatility of the short-term financial market).
The authorities also applied a policy of fiscal austerity that enabled them to cut the projected deficit from 3.2% to 2.8% of GDP.
For the year 2000, the new Administration expected to achieve economic growth of 3.7%, to reduce the fiscal deficit to at least 2% of GDP by means of deep budget cuts that had already been approved by Congress, and to boost the level of reserves by US$ 150 million.
Central Government balance • Current account balance Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 215 At 3.5%, the economic growth rate was lower than had been envisaged.
The inflation target was met easily, however, and the rate of price increases was held to the lowest rate (4.9%) since 1982.
The goal of increasing the tax burden to 10.3% was not met, but by the end of the fiscal year it had risen to 10%.
In addition to changing the direction of monetary and fiscal policy, far-reaching measures were taken in the areas of tariffs and utility rates, authorization was given to sign contracts with import certification firms, and banking legislation was reformed.
In the absence of an agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), efforts to strengthen tax collection and administration were continued and the Preparatory Commission for the Fiscal Covenant was set up.
Fiscal policy continued on its expansionary course for the third year in a row.
As a result, the central government deficit has risen steadily during recent fiscal years and reached 3.804 billion quetzals in 1999, which was equivalent to 2.8% of GDP.
Government spending again rose considerably (20%), mainly as a result of the dynamism of public investment.
While current expenditure was up by 18%, capital expenditure climbed by 24%.
Under the latter heading, both direct investment and transfers to government agencies increased.
This was especially true in the case of those agencies known as "social funds", through which an increasingly large flow of investment -much of which is connected with international financial assistance- is being channelled.
The growth of capital outflows is accounted for both by the reconstruction of the basic infrastructure damaged by Hurricane Mitch and by the priority that the Administration assigned to completing a number of infrastructure projects connected with the peace agreements (particularly in social areas such as education and health, as well as roadway (bridges and highways) projects.
Tax receipts rose at an annual rate of 15 %, thanks to the work of the Office of the Superintendent of Tax Administration (SAT), which began operations in August 1998 and presumably played a part in boosting the tax burden to a two-digit level (10%).
Revenues from the value added tax (VAT) rose by 18%, 13 points above inflation.
The combined totals for income tax and the tax on mercantile and agricultural companies, which is credited to the former, yielded an annual nominal increase of 22%.
Revenues from customs duties also rose, although moderately (8% in nominal terms), despite the drop in imports and the continuing process of tariff reduction.
Finally, tax receipts on petroleum and petroleum products were up by 11 % and accounted for over 10% of the total.
The Preparatory Commission for the Fiscal Covenant was officially established in March 1999 for the purpose of coordinating efforts to reach a social consensus regarding the application of a long-term fiscal policy based on clear and stable rules.
Most of the process was deferred until 2000, the first year in which the current Administration would actually be in office.
The chief aim of monetary policy was to hold down changes in consumer prices to a range of between 5% and 7% in order to maintain the purchasing power of the quetzal, and this goal was achieved.
The authorities also sought to curb the volatility of short-term markets, maintain adequate coordination between fiscal and monetary policies, and strengthen public confidence in the currency and in the national financial system.
The bank reserve rate was lowered four times until it stood at 14.6%, which freed up a considerable volume of liquidity, although a sizeable share of such liquidity was invested by the banking system in treasury bonds in order to shore up the banks' financial position.
The Banco de Guatemala traded actively on the open market, especially from May onward; although these transactions were not large in volume, they were significant because of their almost daily frequency and because of the rise in interest rates that began in mid-August.
The central bank also engaged quite actively in money-desk operations in order to maintain an adequate supply of liquidity for the banking system and, more specifically, to ensure the coverage of reserve positions.
As a result, interest rates on the short-term money market (repo operations) tended to rise during those periods; in fact, they actually were well above the average bank lending rates.
The level of non-performing loans in the banking system climbed from 7.6% of the total portfolio in December 1998 to 10.5% in December 1999.
This was a reflection of the solvency problems that had started to arise the year before in some organizations outside the purview of the financial supervisory system, which ended up affecting a number of stock brokerages and eventually spread to several institutions in the regulated banking system.
Throughout the year, deposit-taking slowed and conversions of investments into foreign currency tended to intensify, thus diminishing secondary money creation on the part of the bank system.
Thus, while monetary issues rose at a rate of 34%, the means of payment did so by only around 8%.
Under these circumstances, the authorities found it necessary to take measures such as granting emergency advances in order to shore up the banks' financial position and calling for reforms in banking laws aimed at strengthening the sector's institutional structure.
In February, Congress passed a law providing for the creation of the Savings Protection Fund (FOPA), and in August passed a banking law reform bill.
Thus, the rate was to be determined by the free movement of supply and demand on the foreign-exchange market, although the possibility of action by the Banco de Guatemala remained open.
The exchange rate underwent a nominal depreciation of 15.9% during the year, which represented a real decline of 12.6% against the dollar.
This was the result of both external and financial factors (the trade imbalance and the reduction, in dollar terms, of the yield on bank deposits, among others) and of unfavourable expectations that undermined confidence in the quetzal and fueled a continuous conversion of financial assets into foreign currencies.
Early in the year, a Partial-Scope Agreement was signed with Cuba providing for tariff preferences on 386 Guatemalan products and 260 Cuban products.
In August, a customs union agreement was signed with El Salvador which is currently being harmonized in preparation for its entry into force on 31 December 2002.
Then, in October, Guatemala and the other Central American countries signed a framework agreement on the establishment of a free trade treaty with Chile.
In addition, along with the other two countries belonging to what is known as the " Northern Triangle" of Central America (El Salvador and Honduras), Guatemala continued to work on negotiating a similar agreement with Mexico.
Import duties on a series of dairy products were raised from 15% to 39% for the express purpose of protecting small-scale dairy producers in the country.
By 1999, the only matters pending were some ancillary aspects of those operations, such as the task of opening up international telephone service to competition —which was done in July— and the piecemeal sales of 13% of the shares in the two power distribution companies that were still owned by the government.
The downturn in the growth of domestic demand from 7.7% to 2.3% was a decisive factor in the slackening of production activity, this segment of demand, in turn, was influenced by the slowdown in gross fixed capital formation and consumption in both the private and the public sectors.
Growth in the export sector slipped from 6% to 4.8%, with exports of services counteracting a large part of the contraction in sales of goods.
The rate of increase for gross fixed public-sector investment fell from 12.1% to 7.8%, while the rate of private investment plunged from 22.3% to 7.4%.
Although government consumption was down considerably (from 10.6% to 4.8%), the loss of momentum was most evident in private consumption (where the growth rate slid from 5.5% to 3%), which accounts for a little over three-fourths of the value of Agricultural output reflected declines in such major products as sugar (-7%) and bananas (-20%).
In the case of sugar, both international prices and production sagged, while banana production was hurt both by labour problems on some plantations and by the fact that it was not until the middle of the year that production began to recover from the damage caused by Hurricane Mitch in late October 1998.
In contrast, the coffee industry flourished, despite lower international prices and the problems many producers had in obtaining financing for the harvesting and marketing of their crops.
Crops intended for domestic consumption also rose, with the bean crop up by 8% and maize by 3% thanks to the expansion of the areas planted and good rainfall.
Vegetable and legume production also rose Growth in the manufacturing sector slowed from 3.6% to 2.6%, as domestic consumption weakened and exports to the Central American market shrank.
In addition, smuggling made inroads in the foodstuffs, textile, garment and footwear industries.
Oil production fell by 11% (from 8.1 to 7.2 million barrels), as drilling waned owing to operational problems and the delay of public tenders for the concession of new prospecting areas.
The descent of the construction industry's growth rate from 10% in 1998 to 6.4% in 1999 was attributable to the slackening pace of private construction (2.2%).
Commerce and transport, storage and communications activities suffered the adverse impact of the slowdown in agriculture and manufacturing, the flatter domestic market and the contraction of foreign trade flows.
Growth in the electricity, gas and water industry accelerated from 5.8% to 8.6%.
Thanks to the fact that several plants went on stream in late 1998 and the rural electrification programme was launched in mid-1999, this was the only industry to post a higher rate in 1999 In 1999, the rate of inflation was 4.9%, down from the 1998 level of 7.5%.
The annual variation in the consumer price index therefore came in under the year-end target range of 5%-7% set by the monetary authorities.
The consumer price index did not reflect the steep depreciation of the exchange rate or the continuing increases in fuel prices observed during the year.
The intervention of the government in June to reduce electricity rates and annul the adjustments that had been made in some telephone rates exerted a positive influence.
The figures for foodstuffs and beverages changed very little during the year, owing to the overproduction of agricultural goods following the initial damage caused by Hurricane Mitch.
In January 1999, a 10% wage hike was approved for public-sector employees, and in February, a 10% adjustment was made in minimum wages for 220 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean agricultural, commercial and industrial workers.
In February 2000, minimum wages were again raised by 10%, and a monthly supplementary allowance of 200 quetzals was approved for public-sector employees.
In March, the productivity bonus for rural and urban workers was also raised.
On the balance of payments, the current account deficit widened once again and the financial account surplus decreased appreciably.
As a result, international monetary reserves shrank, after having climbed for three years in a row.
The current account deficit amounted to US$ 1.081 billion, which was slightly more than the during 1998 (US$ 1.102 billion) and was equivalent to Merchandise exports sagged by 4.2%.
The sharpest drops -in sugar (-39%) and bananas (-30%)- were the result of a combined decrease in both volume and prices.
The steep slide in the average price of coffee was largely offset by a substantial increase in exportable production, which totalled nearly 6 million quintals.
In contrast, cardamom sales jumped by 54% and oil exports by 39%, thanks to attractive international prices for these products.
The growth of sales to the Central American market subsided to 5.5% (versus 9.5% in 1998).
Maquila exports also slowed down, as the value added rose by only 1 % in 1999 after having ascended at an average annual rate of nearly 20% during the previous three years.
The volume of imports also fell (-2.3%), marking a sharp contrast with the figures for previous years, when growth rates had reached over 20%.
Among the three major categories of imports, only capital goods posted an increase (7%), while the other two had negative annual growth rates: -7% for consumer goods and -4% for raw materials and intermediate products.
Imports from the rest of the Central American region, which totalled US$ 485 million, also decreased (-20%).
Net capital inflows returned to their usual levels after having surged in 1998 as a result of the privatizations implemented during that period.
The balance-of-payments financial account was nearly US$ 300 million lower and thus proved insufficient to offset the rise in the current account deficit.
This drained US$125 million from the country's international monetary reserves, which brought them down to US$ 1.242 billion, the equivalent of 3.3 months' worth of imports.
The external public debt was up by 11%, to US$ 2.631 billion, while domestic debt climbed by nearly 25% to 7.807 billion quetzals (around US$ 1.056 billion, at the average exchange rate for the year).
During the same period, the external debt of the non-financial public sector jumped by 43% (from US$ 1.751 billion to US$ 2.504 billion), while the Central Bank slashed its debt by 61 % (from US$ 324 million to US$ 127 million) by making it a policy to refrain from seeking direct financing from abroad.
The service on the public external debt amounted to US$ 237 million, or the equivalent of 7% of exports of goods and services.
Domestic borrowings rose by nearly 25%, as the level of regular fiscal revenues was simply too low to cover the increase in public spending.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 221 Haiti In 19991 the Haitian economy recorded a growth rate of 2.3%, an unsatisfactory performance given the extent of the lags accumulated in recent years.
Macroeconomic indicators were generally favourable, with single-digit inflation for the second consecutive year.
The fiscal deficit was equivalent to 2.5% of GDP, the rate of exchange remained practically unchanged and the balance-of-payments position was in equilibrium.
ONE IMPORTANT factor in this fairly lackluster economic picture was the scarcity of external finncing.
Disbursements of foreign aid were contingent upon the establishment of a new legislative body, and since this condition was not met, projects that relied on the main international sources of financing were delayed.
On the other hand, current transfers from abroad, in particular remittances (from family members and other non-official sources), increased and thus continued to account for a substantial proportion of foreign-exchange inflows.
In the first half of the 1999/2000 fiscal year, a number of signals pointed to a fairly bleak outlook for the national economy.
The legislative elections scheduled for March 2000 were postponed (for the second time) until May.
The increasingly tense political situation and the latent conflict between the executive branch and the main political parties do not bode well for a positive solution in the near future.
Economic policy and structural reform For the third consecutive year (since the 1996/1997 fiscal year), the budget had to be maintained at the same level of expenditure, since a new legislative body with the power to change that level has not yet been established.
The fiscal deficit for 1998/1999 amounted to 2.5% of GDP - a slightly higher percentage than in the preceding year (2.4%)- and was financed almost entirely by the central bank .
Up to the third quarter, fiscal policy yielded results that were in line with the targets established under the Fund-monitored programme which, as a result of institutional problems, replaced the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in 1997.
The upturn in public-sector inflows was largely due to the growth of tariff revenues (18%) and of both direct (35%) and indirect (13%) tax receipts.
In addition, transfers from State-owned enterprises rebounded, almost doubling the amount recorded for the previous fiscal year.
In real terms, however, they were still 40% lower than in 1996.
Thanks to the reforms undertaken by the National Port Authority, this semi-public entity's transfers were four times higher than the year before in nominal terms.
The almost 8% cutback in civil service posts (to a total of 46,000) in 1999 accounts for the 3% reduction in the wage bill in spite of an average 28% pay raise that was awarded starting in March.
The fiscal situation deteriorated, however, with total expenditure for the last quarter of the fiscal year standing 7.5% higher than the target figure, as both capital expenditure (611 million gourdes, or almost double the target) and the current account entry (a large part of which was left to the discretion of the ministries) exceeded their budget appropriations.
It should be noted that public-sector capital expenditure was about 30% higher, in nominal terms, than it had been the year before (11% in real terms), but it should also be borne in mind that additional expenditures related to the damage caused by Hurricane Georges and the financing of the electoral process accounted for 6% of total expenditure.
Borrowing requirements exceeded the fiscal deficit, as external debt payments made by national authorities were 20% higher than in 1998 and were not offset by new capital inflows.
Grants and external concessional loans to the public sector plummeted from 645 million gourdes to 115 million gourdes between 1998 and 1999, and the promise of budgetary aid from the European Union (US$ 21 million) did not materialize because the stipulated political conditions were not met.
The central bank provided 1.09 billion gourdes in credit (1.6% of GDP), or 5% less than the amount agreed upon with IMF.
The resulting credit shortfall of another 1 billion gourdes translated into arrears on domestic obligations.
In the first quarter (October-December 1999) of the 1999/2000 fiscal year, the net credit (819.5 million gourdes) extended to the government by the central bank was already nearing the amount set aside for the entire fiscal year (1.1 billion gourdes).
In view of this state of affairs, it became necessary for the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance and the central bank to sign a cash management protocol, whereby the Ministry undertook to refrain from disbursing funds in excess of its monthly inflows and to keep a close check on its expenditures.
The IMF-compliant policy implemented by the monetary authorities in an effort to curb inflation was clearly reflected in public- and private-sector financing.
However, narrow money (Ml) grew by close to 18%, five points more than nominal GDP.
Rates on deposits were lowered from 14.8% to 6.8% (for gourde deposits) and were almost zero in real terms.
In fact, holdings of these bonds, which were offered at more attractive rates of between 6.8% and 10.3% at the close of the fiscal year, more than doubled.
Deposits in dollars gradually increased to almost 32% of total deposits (versus 29% in 1998), while the placement of dollar-denominated loans, which had accounted for less than one third of total credits in 1998, rose to more than 40% by September 1999.
During the same period, net domestic credit exhibited an upward trend (8%), after having grown by a mere 3% the year before. (c) Foreign-exchange policy The exchange rate for the gourde remained stable (at an average of 16.7 gourdes to the dollar) for nearly the entire fiscal year.
This is quite remarkable, given the fact that foreign-exchange inflows entering the country though the traditional routes for foreign assistance were virtually nil and given the listless performance of exports.
The average monthly adjustment in the rate did not exceed 0.4%, with the central bank intervening in the currency market on a routine basis.
In the course of the fiscal year, purchases and sales of foreign exchange amounted to 46.1 million gourdes and 13.4 million gourdes, respectively, and the central bank was therefore able to build up its net reserves.
The gourde had started to appreciate in March 1998 and continued to do so until the second-to-last month of the fiscal year.
The trend reversed itself in September, however, and the depreciation of the currency during the 226 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean first half of fiscal 1999/2000 had already amounted to 2.4% by February.
This forced the central bank to intervene on several occasions, especially in January 2000; in the course of these operations it sold a total of US$ 10 million, which was far more than the cumulative sum for the whole of the previous year.
Substantial amounts of dollars have poured into the country as a result of drug trafficking, and their effect in stabilizing the local currency should not be underestimated.
In many quarters it was felt that the Columbus Operation, undertaken jointly by the Haitian, United States and Dominican Governments in October 1999 in an effort to combat this traffic, placed a great deal of pressure on the gourde and that this was the cause of its subsequent depreciation.
Within this context, uncertainty over the political situation clearly had a negative effect on the expectations of private economic agents. (d) Structural reforms As part of the structural reform of the public sector, the decision, adopted in May, to privatize the cement company, Ciment d'Haiti, was implemented with the sale of 65% of its capital to a private Haitian-Swiss-Colombian consortium.
As part of the Despite signs of a significant degree of macroeconomic stability, the sluggish growth of GDP and investment (2.3% and 4%, respectively) are cause for concern, since these rates are too low to meet the country's urgent needs.
This is by far the most important industry in the economy, since it accounts for 27% of total value added, and close to 60% of the economically active population live in rural areas.
Furthermore, the progress made to date in agrarian reform has yet to be consolidated.
So far, approximately 2,000 hectares of State-owned land have been redistributed to some 4,000 farmers.
In addition, the notable inroads being made by agricultural imports on the local market since trade was liberalized in 1995 have had an adverse effect on local downsizing of the public-sector payroll (8%) in fiscal 1998/1999, 6,398 civil servants opted for the voluntary or early retirement scheme or some other arrangement.
In the second quarter of the fiscal year, portfolio clean-up operations were started at the Banque Nationale de Credit (BNC), the government's principal banking agency, and staff cuts began in November with the lay-off of approximately two-thirds of all the posts slated for elimination.
Although the privatization of telephone services, electricity utilities, and ports and airports is still pending, the entry into the first of these markets of two private telephone companies associated with United States capital is tantamount to a defacto liberalization of the communications subsector.
The memorandum of agreement between the central bank and the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance regarding the economic and financial policy to be adopted for fiscal 1999/2000 under IMF surveillance has been under review since November 1999 and was still awaiting ratification at the end of the first semester.
However, the implementation in February 2000 of the cash management protocol agreed upon by the central bank and the Ministry seems to be evidence of the authorities' decision to submit to strict central bank supervision on issues relating to public expenditure. agricultural production.
Studies on the subject have found that, rather than leading to any significant decrease in consumer prices, the existence of a monopoly in the import sector has simply resulted in wider profit margins.
Almost all sectors trended downward, except for transport, storage and communications (14.2%), electricity, gas and water (1.9%) and mining (6.9%).
The buoyancy of communications was mainly due to the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 227 investments made by two new cellular telephone companies that entered the country in the course of the fiscal year, each of which was a combination of United States and Haitian capital.
The State-owned company also joined forces with private national investors to launch a new company to compete in this market.
Growth in construction slowed from 9.3% to just 7.8%, and even this level was maintained only as a result of public-sector infrastructure works.
Even though the maquila industry rebounded with a nominal growth rate of 30%, the manufacturing sector grew very little (1.4%); this sector has not met with success in its attempts to compete with imports and has high operating costs as a result of poor infrastructure and the high cost of credit.
In the electricity subsector, gross power generation was virtually flat (1%), while power losses -both technical and non-technical- were on the order of 56%.
These figures underscore the existence of a chronic energy deficit whose adverse impact on commercial and industrial activity, in particular, was reflected in a 3.5% decrease in total consumption.
The inflation rate at the close of the fiscal year (9.9%) was higher than forecast, but the average annual rate (8.1%) was well below the previous year's (12.7%).
Selective salary raises (28% on average) were given to civil servants in March 1999.
The minimum wage, on the other hand, remained at 36 gourdes (as it has since 1995), which translated into a 7.5% decline in real terms.
The working population of around 2.7 million persons is concentrated in the agricultural sector and, according to the most recent assessments, the unemployment rate is estimated at close to 55%.
In an economy that has come to a virtual standstill and has a very limited supply of jobs in the formal sector -where less than 10% of the economically active population is employedthe only activities that appeared to be absorbing increasing numbers of workers are in the informal sector.
Although the exports of the maquila subsector surged, its role in terms of job creation seems to have declined, especially in the textiles industry.
In the first few months of 2000, the central bank revised its balance-of-payments statistics and made substantial adjustments in the figures for 1998 and 1999.
For 1998, it noted an external dissaving (that is, a net outflow of financing) of US$ 43 million and, for 1999, one of US$ 2 million.
Current transfers (US$ 597 million and US$ 672 million), which include both official grants and remittances and errors and omissions, were the items in which the largest adjustments were made.
The merchandise trade deficit for 1999 amounted to close to US$ 400 million as the result of an 18% increase in exports and a 14% upswing in imports.
The maquila industry turned in the strongest performance (29%), while exports of coffee and cocoa shrank by nearly 17% and 41%, respectively.
The food import bill went up by 21 % and accounted for approximately one third of Haiti's total imports.
The increase in the merchandise trade deficit (11 %) was more than offset by the rise in unrequited external transfers On the other hand, imports of petroleum products, which represented 7% of Haiti's imports, were lower than the year before.
Nevertheless, the price rises that began to be seen on the international market from the third quarter of 1999 onward had a significant effect on the level of outlays under this heading; in fact, whereas imports of petroleum products were 23% higher than in the preceding quarter when measured by volume, the increase in value terms was almost 63%.
The deterioration in the terms of trade (-4.7%) was mitigated by lower prices on the international market for various food products (wheat, oils) and the very modest increase in the price of rice (0.7%).
The 16% expansion in reserve assets (US$ 33.6 million) contrasted with a year-on-year contraction in the cumulative total for net reserves of almost 40% owing to a reduction in IMF funding.
The net external debt (US$ 1.166 billion) was scarcely 6% higher than the year before.
New disbursements amounted to US$ 105 million, the greater part (60%) being fresh funding granted by the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) in fulfilment of commitments made prior to the appearance of the country's legislative void.
To date, IDB has approved loans and projects amounting to approximately US$ 264 million which are now awaiting ratification and approval by a new legislative body.
Almost US$ 55 million were earmarked for foreign debt servicing, a much higher figure than in 1998 (US$ 35 million).
This sum included increases for both multilateral and bilateral debt servicing (approximately 65% and 20%, respectively).
General Trends Economic activity in Honduras fell by 1.9% as a consequence of Hurricane Mitch, which hit the country in October 1998.
The decline in the economic situation, which was reflected in a 4.6% drop in per capita GDP, would have been even worse had it not been for the opportune arrival of international aid in the form of significant donations, concessional credits and the deferral of service payments on the country's foreign debt.
Accordingly, thanks to the reduction in the corresponding expenditure on interest and a strong increase in transfers from abroad, national income rose by 1.3%, while consumption also increased moderately.
The export sector performed poorly and imports rose, leading to a significant increase in the deficit on the balance-of-payments current account.
The fiscal deficit also expanded due to the increased expenditure required for the necessary reconstruction work.
On the other hand, a tight monetary policy helped to keep inflation under control and to ensure that the depreciation of the exchange rate was fairly modest.
AGRICULTURE SUFFERED a steep decline due to the fall in production of both exportable goods and crops intended for domestic consumption.
Donations of food from abroad made in order to counter this situation succeeded in preventing shortages.
Other production sectors experienced a general slowdown, particularly basic services such as electric power and transport, commerce and manufacturing.
Given the magnitude of the disaster, the country performed relatively well in terms of macroeconomic stability.
The speed with which international aid reached the country was a decisive factor in this regard .
The reconstruction programme, whose priority goals were to reactivate agricultural production and rehabilitate damaged infrastructure, was launched in late 1998.
Thus , in 1999, m a c r o e c o n o m i c management focused on preserving stability; however, given the significant expansion of public capital expenditure and the stagnation of income, the fiscal deficit widened nonetheless.
Although the deficit on trade in goods and services more than doubled, due to falling exports and rising imports, the deficit on the balance-of-payments current account rose by just 3.3% of GDP; international reserves were up, thanks to inflows of external credits for reconstruction and a significant amount of foreign direct investment.
For obvious reasons, the natural disaster made it necessary to postpone economic reforms; even so, some progress was made, above all in terms of strengthening financial institutions by improving bank supervision and creating a Deposit Insurance Fund .
For 2000, GDP growth is projected at between 4% and 5% and inflation at between 9% and 11%; the fiscal deficit is expected to be twice as large as it was in 1999 as a result of reconstruction expenditures. 2.
Economic policy and structural reforms The aim of the economic programme designed for 1999-2001 is to achieve a rapid recovery within a framework of macroeconomic stability.
The government plans to accomplish this goal through a large-scale reconstruction and rehabilitation effort, the restoration of agricultural production and the encouragement of private-sector activity, as well as by applying policies that favour increased public-sector saving.
To support this economic programme, on 26 March 1999 the government signed a new SRAE agreement with IMF.
This decline, along with a decrease in the duty collected on foreign trade operations, was partly offset by an increase (14.7%) in revenues from the general sales tax as a result of the fact that the rate was raised from 7% to 12% in 1998.
The increase in central government spending, meanwhile, was mainly attributable to the sharp rise in capital expenditure (28%) that was made to finance emergency and reconstruction work after the natural disaster, as mentioned earlier.
The fiscal deficit was financed entirely with external credit and international transfers, since the country's restrictive monetary policy ensured that domestic funding for the public sector was negative.
Thanks to agreements signed with Paris Club creditors, interest payments fell from 2.31 billion lempiras in 1998 to 1.65 billion lempiras in 1999, while foreign debt amortizations were down from 1.6 billion to 1.1 billion lempiras.
The international aid that flowed into the country in response to the disaster caused by Hurricane Mitch was reflected in the figures on inbound external credit, which climbed from 2.35 billion lempiras in 1998 to 5 billion in 1999 and on international transfers received by the central government, which jumped from 400 million to 1.41 billion lempiras.
They also took measures to strengthen the institutions of the financial system.
The steady rise in the balance of international reserves resulted in a cumulative increase amounting to US$ 300 million in 1999, not counting the US$ 175 million in exceptional financing that was received.
This outcome was largely a reflection of a further tightening of the authorities' restrictive policy stance, which led to a reduction in net Central Bank credit to the public sector as a whole.
The Central Bank used open market operations as its main monetary policy instrument.
Legal reserve requirements did not change during the year, but the sum of monetary absorption certificates (CAMs) placed on the market by the Central Bank rose by 18.2%.
The interest rate on central government securities and on the CAMs that were sold in public auction trended downward throughout the year.
The average yield on 180-day securities fell from 22% to 13.9%, in line with the decline in inflation.
The figures for the various monetary aggregates show that broad money (M3) rose by 22.3% in nominal terms, while narrow money (Ml) climbed by 21.8% and foreign-currency deposits by 26.1%, which meant that they came to represent 29.3% of local-currency liquidity 234 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean a Preliminary figures. b Refers to exchange rate for imports.
Real effective exchange rate b During the year some firms suspended payments and a commercial bank underwent forced liquidation.
This scheme, which works through the public foreign-exchange allocation system, allowed the nominal exchange rate to rise gradually, resulting in a mean depreciation of 6%, while the real exchange rate appreciated by 4.4%.
The government continued to phase in reductions in customs duties as it worked towards its target of lowering the mean tariff on consumer goods from 18% to 15% in the period between early 1999 and 2000.
Trade negotiations between Chile and the Central American countries as a group were concluded, and these countries moved on to the stage of bilateral definitions of terms.
Talks with Mexico were completed in 2000; Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador signed a free trade agreement with Mexico with a view to a possible future association with the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). (d) Public debt policy The external debt rose by 7.4%, from US$ 4.4 billion to US$ 4.73 billion.
The central government's external liabilities increased by 12%, from US$ 2.32 billion to US$ 2.6 billion.
The reorganization of part of the central government's foreign debt and negotiations with Paris Club creditors, which were successfully concluded on 13 April, lowered debt amortization payments by 10.5% and the interest payments by 26%.
Negotiations with the Paris Club also yielded balance-of-payments support in the form of a debt relief package amounting to US$ 440 million in nominal terms, whose application will run through March 2002.
In addition, an agreement on exceptional treatment was reached which provides for an improvement in the terms agreed upon in previous negotiations.
During that meeting, the international community defined the conditions that would govern cooperation with Central American countries affected by Hurricane Mitch.
The central government's domestic debt amounted to 3.28 billion lempiras in 1999.
These reforms mainly involve privatization, modernization, and improvements in public-sector efficiency, together with measures designed to strengthen the financial system.
The essential goals of the privatization programme are to complete the transfer of control of the Honduran telecommunications company, Hondutel, to a strategic partner, to hand over the electric power As expected, the full consequences of Hurricane Mitch's passage through the country in 1998 were felt in 1999.
Although activity fell by 1.9%, the economy was expected to recover in 2000.
Domestic demand also weakened, growing by just 2.7%; a sharp upturn (4.7%) was seen, however, in gross domestic investment.
This surge was the result of the significant increase in public investment (16%) occasioned by reconstruction work, since private investment was virtually flat (0.8%) after having climbed sharply in previous years.
Private consumption edged up by just 0.8%, indicating a 2.5% drop in per capita consumption, while public-sector consumption climbed by 10.9%.
In response to reconstruction needs and local shortages, imports increased by 6.7%.
The hurricane dealt the agricultural sector the worst blow of all, and this sector's total output consequently plunged by 8.7%, leading to a sharp drop in exports (-9.4%).
The plantain crop sustained the most damage, and as a result its production index plummeted by 77%, followed by the banana (-72%), rice (-53%), beans (-41%) and coffee (-11%) crops.
The livestock industry's level of activity slumped by 2.8% and that of the fisheries subsector by 1.3%; this last decrease was distribution grid to the private sector and to sell management and maintenance concessions for the country's airports and public works projects.
The sale of Hondutel was originally scheduled for December 1999, but there were a number of delays, and the time horizon for the completion of the transaction was consequently extended to the first half of 2000.
Delays also arose in the privatization of the electric power distribution grid and, as a result, in October only the billing and meter-reading portions of the grid's operation were transferred to a private firm.
Tenders for the concessions for the country's four international airports were also delayed, but were expected to be completed in the first quarter of 2000 nonetheless. basically due to a reduction in shrimp cultivation (-4.2%), since increases were registered in both lobster production (24%) and the fish catch (1.2%).
With upswings of 10.4% and 7%, respectively, both construction and mining helped to offset the decline in agricultural activity,.
Manufacturing and basic services grew moderately, while other services, among them commerce and banking, slipped by 0.5%.
Manufacturing output was up by 2.6%, with exceptionally strong increases being posted for textile production (27.2%), cement (18%) and asbestos-cement sheets (10.9%).
Activity in the maquila industry increased by 25%, raising its value added to the equivalent of 12% of GDP.
In the construction subsector, the amount of area under construction expanded by 2.3% as the result of a 5.5% increase in residential building (its main component), along with upswings in commercial building and other categories, which rose by 2.1% and 17.7%, respectively.
Electric power output fell by 1 % and consumption by 13%, while imported electrical energy rose by 10%.
Consumption was down across the board (commercial, industrial, residential, public offices and public lighting categories).
Distribution losses, which remain sizeable, jumped by 63%. 236 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Inflation slowed from 15.6% in 1998 to 10.9% in 1999, thanks to the moderate rate of devaluation, the food donations received to cover domestic shortages and the authorities' tight monetary policy.
The annualized rate of inflation was 16.7% in January and then slipped to 9.3% in July, before rising slightly.
The food price index fell faster than the general index, with an increase of just 4.8% for the entire year, whereas wholesale prices rose by 11.3%.
Agricultural prices were up by 16.2% and the prices of construction materials by 13.7%.
The prices of imported goods climbed by 9.1% while those of domestic goods increased by 12.2%.
Since this was less than the average rate of inflation for the year (11.6%), there was a 1% decrease in real terms.
Among public-sector employees, physicians received a 30% nominal increase and teachers one of 20%.
However, the national underemployment rate reached 22.2% (28.1% in rural areas, 15.8% in urban areas, 14.3% in the Central District and 7.5% in San Pedro Sula).
The maquila sector created over 14,000 jobs during the year, bringing the total for this industry to over 115,000.
Although the deficit on trade in goods and services increased sharply (from USS 530 million to USS 900 million), abundant inflows of international transfers (USS 725 million) forestalled a larger current account deficit.
This included almost USS 220 million in loans to the pubic sector -mostly credits for reconstruction- and inflows of USS 230 million in foreign direct investment.
Capital inflows financed the USS 175.4 million current account deficit and also contributed to the USS 300 million increase in international reserves.
Exceptional financing (USS 175 million) also boosted the level of reserve assets.
Exports of goods slipped to USS 1.85 billion (from USS 2.1 billion in 1998) as a result of downturns in a number of products: 80% in the case of bananas, 40% for coffee, 23% for wood, 42% for meat and 48% for sugar.
Products whose export value rose included tobacco and zinc, among traditional exports, and lobsters, melons, pineapples, and soaps and detergents, among non-traditional exports.
The value added accounted for by maquila exports jumped from slightly less than USS 440 million to over USS 540 million; the value of traditional exports plunged by 46%, but that of non-traditional exports hardly fell at all (-0.9%).
Exports to Central America, which were up by 5.2% in terms of value, represented 13% of total foreign sales.
Imports of goods rose from USS 2.34 billion to USS 2.56 billion.
Those from Central America increased by 3.9%, while imports from the rest of the world climbed by 10.2%.
The average increase for imported consumer goods, raw materials and capital goods was 8.1%; this figure does not include fuels, however, which rose almost 20% due to higher oil prices.
The export price index fell by 10%, while the import price index edged up by 1.1 %, leading to a 10.6% decline in the terms of trade.
Even so, this result exceeded the rate projected at the beginning of the year, owing to the fact that international conditions improved in the second semester.
The export sector recorded a major expansion, thanks to the sustained buoyancy of the United States economy, while higher oil prices helped to bolster public finances.
The growth rate of domestic demand weakened, but real income rose slightly and the rate of employment increased.
Financial markets stabilized after the disturbances of 1998, which carried over into early 1999; inflation trended downward and the deficit on the balance-of-payments current account narrowed somewhat.
MEXICAN MERCHANDISE expor ts , and particularly those of the maquila industry (which now account for 47% of the total), received a powerful boost from the upturn in the United States economy during the last two quarters of the year.
Mexico's trade balance has improved considerably under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and its external deficit consequently narrowed slightly, after having more than doubled in 1998.
Large amounts of foreign capital continued to flow into the country, especially in the form of foreign direct investment (FDI), and, as a result, international reserves continued to climb until they reached unprecedented levels.
The relative abundance of foreign exchange, together with a tight monetary policy and the floating exchange rate system adopted in 1995, helped to steady the exchange rate from the second quarter on; in fact, during the rest of the year, the peso actually appreciated significantly in both nominal and real terms.
Fiscal deficit targets were also met, thanks to careful management of public finances and the boost given to tax receipts by steep oil price hikes in the second half of the year.
The balance on the federal government's gross external debt remained unchanged, but gross domestic debt expanded considerably (33%), largely because of an increase in the amount of government securities in circulation (with an average maturity of 561 days), which came to the equivalent of US$ 53,312,000,000 at the end of 1999.
The growth rate of consumption and investment expenditure slipped in 1999, although it picked up again slightly in the second semester.
The rate of fixed capital formation was almost halved, since private investment increased at a sedate pace compared with the rapid expansion of the previous three-year period.
Public investment retreated for the second year running, coming in at just 2% of gross domestic product (GDP).
The pace of both government and household consumption also faltered somewhat, although less markedly.
Real deposit-taking slipped back and real financing to the private sector decreased for the fifth consecutive year; this had a particularly strong impact on small and medium-sized businesses, since they are not able to resort to international borrowing, as large export companies can.
As a result, non-bank sources of financing continued to expand, especially supplier credit and reinvestment of earnings.
After a sharp rise in the first quarter, nominal deposit rates tended to level off at around 20% for the rest of the year, for a real average rate of 10% per annum.
Lending rates remained quite high, as a reflection of both the scarcity of bank credit and wide interest-rate spreads.
Seeking to avert an economic crisis similar to those that have occurred in the run-up to the last four presidential elections, the government borrowed extensively from international financial agencies at the end of 1999 in order to shore up macroeconomic stability (see box 1).
GDP was expected to grow by 4.5% in 2000, while inflation was to come in at below 10%.
The public-sector deficit for the year was forecast at 1 % of GDP and the current account deficit at 3.1 %.
The main economic risks facing the country arose from the uncertain international environment; a sharp slowdown in the United States economy, a slump in oil prices or a new bout of financial volatility would all hurt economic growth.
Furthermore, towards the middle of the year, the country's financial variables were clearly showing the effects of the uncertainty generated by the electoral process.
All things considered, Mexico's economic performance in 1999 consolidated the sweeping transformation it has undergone over the last five years.
The macroeconomic framework has improved considerably and, underthe leadership of a vibrant export sector, the economy is now among the most open to international trade and investment.
This sector is, however, limited to a small group of companies which interact very little with the rest of the domestic apparatus and which generate a vast demand for imports.
The export boom has also ushered in greater segmentation in terms of the productivity of the industrial structure.
Competitive companies, which are typically large and linked to transnational firms, coexist with thousands of small establishments that have little or no access to technological development and bank financing.
As demonstrated by the indicators shown below, the economy is more stable now than it was six years ago.
This situation is associated with the continuity of economic policy, based mainly on a tight monetary policy, the floating exchange rate and public accounts that are virtually in balance, although they continue to depend heavily on oil revenues.
J Interest rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the exchange rate.
As in the previous four years, in 1999 economic policy was directed towards reducing inflation, as well as towards the use of fiscal and monetary austerity measures to manage the growth ceiling imposed by the external-sector deficit.
These measures remained unaltered over the year, despite the greater economic flexibility associated with the rise in international oil prices.
In fact, the upswing in oil revenues shored up public saving, which made it possible not only to offset the costs of social security reform, debtor support programmes and the financial overhaul, but also to increase resource transfers to states and municipalities.
The federal government and the Banco de México signed a letter of intent with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) regarding credits from international financial agencies to be used to pre-empt potential financial shocks.
As part of this agreement, the government made a commitment to deepen the structural reforms already under way.
Expenditure was kept at a moderate level in order to limit borrowing requirements, and the authorities took steps to boost tax revenues.
Oil revenues, which accounted for 31 % of total budgeted income, increased by 5.2% over the year, as the effects of the upswing in oil prices began to be felt from the second semester on.
Tax receipts represented 11.2% of GDP, up Overall expenditure trended upward (4.2%).
Since primary expenditure rose only slightly, this increase was attributable to the 26.4% rise in the financial cost of debt servicing, which climbed to 16.3% of budgetary expenditure, compared to 13% in 1998.
This greater cost was due to high interest rates and transfers of resources to the Bank Savings Protection Institute (IPAB).
Overall, 85% of financial expenses corresponded to payments of public-debt interest and commissions and the remainder was accounted for by debtor support programmes and the financial restructuring of the banking sector.
An Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 243 operational breakdown shows that 62% of expenditure was allocated to social development.1 The objective of fiscal policy in 2000 was, once again, to meet the public-deficit target of 1.1% of GDP.
The high level of oil prices2 gave public finances some manoeuvring room at a time when the non-recurrent income from privatizations (airports, the petrochemical industry) turned out to be lower than originally expected. (b) Monetary and financial policies As during the previous year, the authorities continued to implement a tight monetary policy in 1999.
The monetary programme of Banco de México (the central bank) was aimed at maintaining net foreign assets at their 1998 level or above and established quarterly limits on the variation in the monetary base.
By equating the monetary base with the sum of net international assets and net domestic credit, a ceiling was automatically set on the Banco de México's net domestic credit.
The increase in liquidity, however, was greater than expected for the year overall, since the pace of economic activity outstripped the estimates used in designing the monetary programme.
Broad money expanded by 14.3% in real terms, which was also partly due to the effects of public wariness surrounding the Y2K phenomenon.
At the beginning of the year, the continuing volatility of the international financial situation, exacerbated by the devaluation of the Brazilian real, led the authorities to tighten up monetary policy.
Consequently, in mid-January the interest rate on 28-day treasury certificates (Cetes) rose to 33%.
From April onward, these rates stabilized around 20%, then dipped to 18% in October, in keeping with the decrease in inflation and expectations of its continued decline.
Even so, real rates remained high, at an average of around 10% per annum.
The circulation of government paper increased considerably, although holdings by foreign investors fell to less than 4% of the total on the government bond market (as against 6.5% at end-1998).
Financial saving (M4, less notes and coins) expanded by 6.1 % in real terms, thanks to a considerable increase in saving by residents (7.2%), since saving by non-residents slid by 19.1%.
The most active branches were holdings of government securities by residents, pension funds and deposits in development banks.
Commercial bank deposits declined by 4.5% in real terms and credit to the non-financial private sector retreated by a real rate of 9%.
Non-bank financing mechanisms continued to operate, such as suppliers' credit and the build-up of arrears.
Thus, most of the production apparatus continued to lack access to credit.
In contrast, a core group of dynamic enterprises (mainly exporters) received financing from overseas commercial banks, official banks created to promote foreign trade (Eximbank), suppliers and -in the case of subsidiaries of transnational corporations- parent companies.
Amortization payments for the year 2000 amounted to commercial banks, 43.2% to suppliers connected with external trade activity and the rest to the capital market.
Financial authorities established new rules regarding capitalization and the rating of loan portfolios as part of their continued drive to clean up the finances of the banking sector.
In September 1999 the bank arrears index (non-performing loans as a percentage of the total credit portfolio) stood at 22.7%, up from 21.1% in December 1998; commercial and development banks recorded indexes of 32.5% and 3%, respectively (up from 30.6% and 2% in 1998), and this situation was a factor in the persistent sluggishness of financing.
IPAB began operations in September, and credit institutions began to exchange their holdings of promissory notes issued by the defunct deposit insurance fund, Fobaproa, for IPAB notes.
At the end of 1999, the new Institute's liabilities stood at 722.5 billion pesos, the equivalent of 16% of that year's GDP.
The Institute hopes to raise 20 billion pesos from the sale of portfolio assets and another 4.5 billion from bank contributions to the system.
Boosted by the country's macroeconomic performance and the booming United States stock market, the Index of Prices and Quotations (IPYC) on the Mexican Stock Exchange climbed by 80% in 1999, after having fallen by 25% in 1998.
This represented a 60% gain in real terms or one of 87% in dollar terms, due to the 1 The term "social development" as used here refers to education, health care, social security, employment, social welfare and supplies, and regional and urban development.
The other two sectors of expenditure, according to this operational breakdown, are production activities and government management. 2 The government's original forecast for 2000 was US$16 per barrel on average, but by mid-year analysts were placing the year's average price at USS 20 per barrel. 244 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean appreciation of the peso.
IPYC recorded a decline of 7% between December 1999 and the beginning of June (c) Foreign-exchange policy and markets The currency float enabled the exchange rate to react swiftly to the increase in international volatility in the second semester of 1998 and to the disturbances caused by the devaluation of the B razilian real in January 1999.
In fact, during the early weeks of the year, the nominal exchange rate moved sharply upward, although by the end of the first quarter it had returned to the level recorded at the end of August 1998, where -with the exception of occasional wide swings- it stayed for the rest of the year.
As a result, the peso appreciated by 8.3% in real terms against the dollar over the year as a whole.
In 1999, the Banco de México raised US$ through the use of options; this mechanism has been in operation for three years and enables the Banco de México to build up its reserves within the framework of the currency float.
The ample supply of external resources -mainly FDI, equity investment, and public and private international debt issues- helped to strengthen the currency.
The nominal exchange rate remained stable during the early months of 2000 thanks, in particular, to the continuity of capital flows (mainly of FDI), resulting in a steady real appreciation of the peso until the end of May.
In June, however, the proximity of the July elections sparked an episode of volatility which increased the value of the dollar by 6%.
In addition, foreign investors' government bond holdings decreased by US$ 100 million in April and by a further US$ 712 million in May.
At the beginning of June 2000, total The pace of economic activity slowed as a consequence of the international financial turbulence that erupted in the second half of 1998, which was exacerbated by the Brazilian crisis of January 1999.
Thanks to an upswing that began in the second quarter, however, GDP growth for the year came to 3.7%.
The foreign investment in government paper stood at US$ (d) Reforms In December 1998 Congress passed part of a financial reform bill submitted by the Executive.
This legislation lifted restrictions on foreign investment in the financial system and authorized the creation of IPAB to take over the liabilities of Fobaproa and administer its assets.
Congress also approved the inclusion of an item in the federal government budget, which must be re-authorized each year, to pay the interest on Fobaproa's debt.
Decisions remained pending on: (i) the management of foreign-exchange policy by the Banco de México; (ii) changes in the legal status of the National Banking and Securities Commission (CNBV) and its role in regulating and supervising the financial system; and (iii) consolidation of Fobaproa's debt with the public debt of the federal government.
In April 2000 Congress passed legal provisions concerning bankruptcy and credit acquisition; these measures are expected to help reactivate bank financing by making the borrower-creditor relationship more transparent.
Under the new Act of Mercantile Concourse (which replaces the bankruptcy code passed in 1942), the cost of bankruptcy proceedings will be reduced, since the process is shortened from six years to 12 months and debts can be redocumented in inflation-indexed investment units (UDIs) in order to protect the real value of credits.
The new Omnibus Credit Guarantee Act allows borrowers to use the assets for which they are seeking the loan as collateral, as well as merchandise they produce and all sorts of immovable assets.
It also creates a legal mechanism to ensure foreclosure on collateral in the event of default. engines of growth were buoyant external demand and an upturn in wages that set the stage for a 4.3% increase in private consumption.
Private capital formation picked up gradually and by the end of the year turned in an increase of 5.8%, following two-digit growth rates for the previous three-year period.
The growth rate of investment in machinery and equipment slowed from 16.8% to 7.1%, Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean « 1999-2000 245 with imported goods faring better than domestically produced ones, as investment in this latter category declined.
Several states experienced heavy rainfall that caused flooding and crop losses, and the government allocated producers and help the production units that had sustained damage to implement investment and rehabilitation projects.
The output of staple grains (maize, sorghum, beans, rice and wheat) and of the main oilseeds fell considerably in the 1998/1999 crop year, but the next harvest was expected to more than make up the shortfall.
The best performers were export-related segments (mainly metal products, machinery and equipment, whose output increased by almost 6%), as well as the maquila export industry, which expanded by 14.9%.
With the exception of wood products and basic metal manufactures, however, growth was seen in all manufacturing activities.
For example, the output of the automotive industry reached 1.54 million vehicles (5.3% more than in 1998); exports increased by 11.6% and accounted for 71% of total output.
Domestic sales, which fell during the early part of the year, gradually picked up and posted an increase of 5.9% for the year overall.
At 4.5%, the construction sector's growth rate topped the preceding year's, thanks to the boost received from private building projects.
In contrast, mining output retreated, largely because of low prices on international markets.
Basic services turned in the highest growth rate, at 8.2%, as the consequence of a very buoyant performance by transport, storage and communications (especially telephone and mobile telephony services).
The electricity, gas and water sector also turned in better results than the previous year.
The rest of the services sector suffered from the effects of slack domestic demand, and the growth rates of its various components declined.
Taken together, these factors made for estimates of 5% GDP growth for the year as a whole.
After the high rate of 1998 (18.6%), inflation clearly trended downward in 1999, easing to 12.3% measured from December to December, which was even better than the target figure of 13%.
Prices rose during the first two months of the year as the peso depreciated in the wake of the Brazilian real's devaluation.
The minimum wage was raised by 14% in December 1998 and remained unaltered throughout 1999; in real terms, it therefore fell by 3.5% during the year.
In contrast, the average wage in manufacturing rose by 1.1%, and readjustments obtained through contractual negotiations are also thought to have entailed a significant increase in real terms.
The existing wage differentials reflect varying skill levels and illustrate the diverging trends existing between real wages in competitive sectors, such as manufacturing, and in less developed sectors, such as the majority of the informal sector.
The number of workers permanently affiliated with the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) reached almost 13 million in December, which was 6.1% more than in December 1998.
The average rate of open unemployment came in at 2.5%, which was the lowest figure in 14 years, and it held to its downward path, reaching 2.2% in December.
The most dynamic sector in terms of job creation was the maquila industry, where new jobs increased by 14%, bringing the total number of persons employed in the sector to an estimated 1.2 million in 1999.
Unlike other years, one of the most noteworthy features of its performance was the reduction in the deficit on the balance-of-payments current account, in combination with a moderate expansion of the economy and a strong increase in external trade.
This was partly due to the expansion of non-oil exports, although oil exports also posted a considerable upturn.
This result was largely due to the reduction in the total trade deficit (from USS 8.5 billion to less than USS 7 billion), since the income balance remained at a virtual standstill at around USS 13.3 billion and the balance on the transfers account increased fractionally to a total of USS 6.3 billion.
The slower rate of economic growth, the buoyancy of external demand and the upturn in oil prices were largely responsible for the trend in the merchandise trade deficit, which went from almost USS 8 billion to less than USS 5.4 billion.
Total merchandise trade amounted to USS 278 billion (of which 49% were exports), a sum close to 60% of GDP.
Despite the reduction of 14% in export volume that had been agreed upon with other producers, the value of oil sales jumped by 39% following a 38% decrease in 1998.
This upswing was a key factor in narrowing the trade gap since, unlike other exports with a high import content, an expansion of oil exports does not automatically entail increased imports.
Even without taking oil into account, external merchandise sales grew apace (15.1%), and this was particularly true of manufactures (15.4%), which represented 90% of the total.
The maquila industry accounted for 47% of the goods that were exported.
The expansion of imports slowed slightly in 1999, although -at 13.3%- it was still considerable.
Capital goods turned in the best performance (18.5%), but intermediate goods maintained their preponderance (77%) as a result of the economy's strong links with the international market.
The resulting trade deficit of over USS 10 billion in this sector for 1999 was somewhat higher than the 1998 figure.
This provides some idea of how dependent the domestic production apparatus is on imports, and this reliance is even more clearly illustrated by the figures on trade in non-maquila manufactured goods, where the deficit widened from USS 5 billion in 1995 to over USS 23 billion in 1999.
Negotiations on a free trade agreement between Mexico and the European Union were concluded late in the year.
This agreement was to come into effect in July 2000 and is expected to provide a platform for the diversification of trade and investment, which are, for the time being, very closely linked to the United States.
This country purchases 88% of Mexico's exports and is the source of 74% of its imports and two thirds of FDI.
Mexico continues to be the United States' third-largest goods supplier, after Canada and Japan, with a market share of 10.7% (up from 10.4% in 1998).
In the first semester of 2000 negotiations to establish a free trade agreement with the Central American northern triangle countries (El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras) were also successfully concluded.
The agreement was to be signed at the end of June and is slated to enter into force on 1 January 2001, following ratification by the respective Congresses.
At the close of the first quarter of 2000, the current account showed a deficit of USS 4.203 billion (compared to USS 4.43 billion at the same point in 1999), and inflows of FDI were projected to reach at least USS 10 billion for the year as a whole.
Exports and imports had matching growth rates (24%) during the first four months of 2000, and a trade gap of USS 8.5 billion was likely for the year, while the current account deficit was set to come in at around USS 17 billion (3.5% of GDP).
The balance of gross external public debt remained practically unaltered in 1999, at just over USS 92 billion.
Thus, the net external debt/GDP ratio, at 20%, was the lowest since 1993, and short-term debt represented less than 5% of total payments. 4 Of this sum, 38% corresponded to new investment, 25% to reinvestment of earnings, 24% to imports of machinery and equipment by the maquila industry and 13% to the increase in liabilities held by parent companies.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 247 As part of its programme for restructuring the external debt, the government bought US$ 1.035 billion in Brady bonds on the market and financed the purchase by issuing USS 825 billion in new debt.
The consequent reduction in the external debt balance and recovery of collateral amounted to USS 410 million.
Government issues on international markets were close to USS 6.2 billion, of which almost US$ 5.2 billion corresponded to the federal government and the rest to enterprises such as Petróleos Mexicanos and Nacional Financiera.
In general, interest rates were lower than in 1998 and maturities were higher (8.5 years versus 7.7).
Issues of federal government debt instruments reached over USS 4 billion in the first semester of 2000.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 249 Nicaragua Nicaragua's rate of economic growth increased from 4.1% to 6.9% in 1999, despite the damage inflicted by Hurricane Mitch in late October 1998, and per capita income rose by 4.2%.
With external demand weakening and lower international prices for the country's main export products, the expansion was driven by buoyant domestic demand, which in turn was fueled by an increase in investment and consumption in both the public and the private sectors.
Significantly higher investment was largely attributable to increased public expenditure on reclamation and reconstruction work and social projects.
T H E COUNTRY'S SOLID economic performance would not have been possible without the hefty inflow of external resources (about US$ 1 billion) that provided the means, to a great extent, to preserve macroeconomic stability and helped to finance the reconstruction programme and to cover Nicaragua's external debt commitments.
As a result of several factors -buoyant economic activity, the steps taken to limit the expansion of the fiscal deficit and a cautious credit policy- the annual inflation rate (7.2%) slowed down and the rate of open unemployment fell to 10.7%.
In order to reduce inflation, the annual rate of devaluation for the nominal exchange rate which is used to determine the size of the pre-announced, daily mini-devaluations was cut from 12% to 9% in July and then to 6% in November.
There was a considerable rise in real demand for money during the year.
At the same time, deposits in the banking system continued to increase, and credit to the private sector expanded significantly.
Family remittances and private capital flows rose sharply, which bolstered the process of remonetization and the increase in monetary aggregates, especially foreign-currency deposits.
Domestic demand grew at a faster rate than GDP, and this generated a sizeable increase in imports, thus widening the trade gap and the current account deficit on the balance of payments.
Even so, with the help of large grants and donations from abroad, together with foreign investment, financing from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and an increase in arrears on current payments, the country managed to cover almost all of its unsustainably high current account deficit (47% of GDP) and to consolidate its net international reserves.
Economic policy and structural reform Given the magnitude of the damage caused by Hurricane Mitch, economic policy was focused on the emergency reclamation and reconstruction programme.
Fiscal and monetary measures were directed at curbing the expansion of domestic demand, fending off price increases and preventing any further debilitation of the country's external position.
The Consultative Group for the Reconstruction and Transformation of Central America, which met from 25 to 28 May 1999 in Stockholm, pledged US$ 2.5 billion in financial aid to Nicaragua over the next four years.
This financial assistance is contingent upon government efforts to rebuild and transform the country and reduce existing levels of ecological and social vulnerability; emphasis has also been placed on transparency, governance and the participation of civil society.
The results of economic policy were generally in line with the targets and performance criteria agreed upon with IMF under the enhanced structural adjustment facility for 1998-2000.
Accordingly, the government is now required to meet a series of conditions, which include the design of a strategy to alleviate poverty and the adoption of measures aimed at improving governance and transparency in its financial transactions.
In addition, the pension and health-care accounts of the Nicaraguan Social Security Institute (INSS) were separated in order to put the social security system on a sounder financial footing and introduce a private system of pension fund management.
Although there were some delays, the process of downsizing the public sector's participation in production and services activities continued.
The oil distribution company Petróleos de Nicaragua (Petronic) was successfully transferred to an international company, and restructuring of the electricity company Empresa Nicaragüense de Electricidad (Enel) began, but the privatization of the State telephone company, Empresa Nicaragüense de Telecomunicaciones (Enitel), suffered a new setback.
As for the reform of the financial system, 51% of the stock in the Banco Nicaragüense de Industria y Comercio (Banic) was sold; prudential standards and banking supervision were tightened; and the legal framework of the banking system was strengthened.
As a result of the need to implement a broad-ranging public investment programme, the total public-sector deficit swelled from 5.9% of GDP in 1998 to 12.9% in 1999.
The increase in expenditure was financed with external resources received in the form of grants (equivalent to 8.5% of GDP) and concessional loans.
Seeking to raise additional public funds, the Administration raised excise tax rates on goods produced by State-run industrial activities, hiked public utility rates and lifted price controls on petroleum products.
At the same time, however, it lowered the top marginal income tax rate from 30% to 25%.
As a percentage of GDP, the tax burden was reduced from 30.1% to 29.5% by the tariff reduction process.
Due to a major increase in grants and donations, however, the total income of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) climbed from 39% of GDP in 1998 to 42.7% in 1999.
This increase was the result of higher capital expenditure, which came to represent just under half of total spending, since current expenditure decreased as a percentage of GDP, largely because of a sharp reduction in interest payments on domestic and external debt.
The NFPS saving rate was similar to the 1998 figure (8.4% of GDP), while primary saving as shown on the current account (11.6% of GDP) was two percentage points lower than the previous year.
Monetary policy measures tended to promote the expansion of the monetary base (66.7%), since they included the reduction of the legal reserve requirement from 17% to 16.25% (in response to a stronger demand for credit) and the net redemption of central bank debt instruments.
Another factor leading to monetary expansion was the central bank's quasi-fiscal losses, which were due to the financial cost of its negotiable investment certificates (Cenis).
The pressure on the monetary base was counteracted by the transfer of NFPS resources to the central bank, and the latter's net domestic assets consequently shrank.
Together with the more robust demand for money, this helped build up international reserves.
Total liquidity grew by 20.7%, thus continuing the economy's sustained process of remonetization.
The high percentage of dollarization evidenced in monetary aggregates has made it possible to prevent this expansion from having an inflationary impact.
At the end of 1999, the balance on dollar deposits accounted for 65% of the total money supply.
Bank credit to the private sector increased by 39.9%, with commerce receiving 42.1% of the total, agriculture 24.9% and manufacturing 12.6%.
This agreement was to be added to the free trade treaty between Nicaragua and Mexico that has been in place since July 1998.
Together with the other Central American countries, Nicaragua also signed a free trade agreement with the Dominican Republic, which was due to enter into force in 1999 but was postponed because the two parties had not yet completed their ratification formalities.
Under the provisions of this law, which rates tourism as an activity that redounds to the national interest, attractive tax incentives are offered to Nicaraguan or foreign natural or legal persons who contribute to the development of the sector.
The Nicaraguan economy enjoyed a strong upturn in 1999, despite the damage inflicted by Hurricane Mitch at the end of October 1998, the weakening prices of Nicaragua's main export products and the hefty increase seen in oil prices.
In fact, at 6.9%, the rate of economic growth was the highest of the 1990s.
This result was largely due to the significant expansion in public and private domestic demand (13%) seen in the categories of both investment (39.8%) and consumption (6.3%).
The factors that buoyed economic growth included the public expenditure on reconstruction and social development projects, higher foreign direct investment (FDI), credit growth, a decrease in unemployment, higher nominal wages and increased family remittances from Nicaraguans living abroad, which, given the lower domestic inflation rate and the slower rate of devaluation, helped to raise domestic purchasing power.
Tourism generated US$ 125 million in 1999 and thus became the country's second largest source of foreign exchange.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 255 Secondary activities turned in the most buoyant performance, growing 14% and accounting for 54% of the increase in GDP.
This was mainly a reflection of a boom in construction (53.4%) and the higher output of the mining sector (28.9%), which, even so, grew at a slower rate than the previous year.
Manufacturing output increased by only 3.3% and largely reflected the increase in the production of beverages, chemicals, paper and paper products, and some oil and non-metal mineral products (especially cement).
Several companies, mostly small and medium-sized enterprises, were obliged to cut back on production or shut down altogether, which caused a loss of added value in some major branches of the sector, such as foodstuffs, cigarettes, detergents, soaps, packaging, textiles and leather products.
The main culprits in this respect were the high cost of bank financing, the heavy tax burden, higher fuel prices and public utility rates, and the reduction in the tariff ceiling on finished goods.
The output of the mining sector continued to expand rapidly (28.9%) thanks to the production of non-metal minerals, which was boosted by a stronger demand for construction materials.
This largely offset the effects of the decision to scale back gold and silver mining operations in response to falling international prices.
Despite the low international prices of most agricultural products and the production problems caused by Hurricane Mitch, the growth rate of the primary sector (4.8%) was 1.3 percentage points above the previous year's figure.
This result was due almost entirely to the increase in output of crop-farming activities (7.8%), however, since the livestock sector showed almost no growth and the value added of the fishery sector fell by 7.6%.
With the exception of coffee, which reaped the benefits of a plantation renewal programme implemented in the early 1990s, output of export products declined significantly in the 1998/1999 crop year.
Expectations for the 1999/2000 season were for a record coffee harvest (1.7 million quintals) and an increase in the production of peanuts, sesame and sugar cane.
Slower growth was forecast for the production of staple grains, however, owing to the losses caused by the late start of the rainy season and the damage done by plant diseases and rodents.
The destruction caused by Hurricane Mitch and the continuing lack of financial resources to help overcome technological limitations were important factors in the stagnation of the livestock sector.
Increased exports of meat on the hoof and higher milk and poultry production offset only a small part of the considerable downswing in cattle slaughtering and the resulting decrease in meat production.
The decline in the value added by fishery activities was mainly attributable to the damage done by Hurricane Mitch, which destroyed production infrastructure and the habitat of some marine species, thus resulting in a smaller catch and poorer harvests of farmed shrimp.
Commerce alone, which grew by 6.3%, contributed 16.1 % to the overall growth of the economy.
Significant upturns in value added were also recorded in transport and communications, financial services and housing.
The year-on-year inflation rate, at 7.2%, was below the target of 10% established at the beginning of the year and was significantly lower than cumulative inflation in 1998 (18.5%).
The moderation of price increases is attributable, to a great extent, to a slower rate of devaluation, the steps taken to regulate primary liquidity, ongoing tariff reductions, and the solid performance of those agricultural goods that are included in the basket of staple goods.
Prices of foodstuffs and beverages decreased, which partly offset the rises recorded in other sectors as a result of increases in the prices of fuels and construction materials, as well as public utility rate hikes.
The buoyancy of the economy and the slowdown in inflation were influential in the growth of the real average wage nationwide (4.3%).
Minimum wages, which had been unchanged since November 1997, were reviewed and updated in August by the National Minimum Wage Commission, whose decisions also applied, for the first time ever, to the Las Mercedes export processing zone.
The high rate of economic growth brought unemployment down from underemployment (12.3%), however, measured as equivalent open unemployment, climbed by almost one full percentage point.
Once again, the merchandise trade deficit increased significantly (40.6%), as exports fell by 5.1 while imports continued to grow strongly, at 21.6%.
As a 256 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean percentage of GDP, the trade gap increased from 38.1% to 50.2%.
This resulted in a higher deficit on current account, which reached US$ 1.072 billion and was equivalent to 47% of GDP, despite the increase in unrequited private transfers from abroad (which rose from US$ 200 million to US$ 300 million) and the fact that the deficit on the services and income accounts remained virtually constant.
The considerable growth registered on the capital and financial accounts, including the higher level of financing obtained under the IMF structural adjustment programme and the increase in arrears on current payments, covered almost all of the sizeable deficit on current account.
The decrease was due to a steep reduction in traditional exports (9%), which included downturns in the value of shrimp (10%) and gold (6.2%).
The causes of this poor performance were the after-effects of Hurricane Mitch and shrinking world demand, which drove down international prices.
The reconstruction agenda was largely responsible for this increase, along with continuing tariff reductions, low international prices, higher investment and sustained levels of consumption.
The most notable increases were recorded in the areas of capital and intermediate goods, which constitute the basis of the economic reactivation.
Average oil prices were over US$ 25 per barrel, which was around 45% higher than in 1998.
The tariff rollback programme went ahead according to the schedule set out in 1997, with a ceiling of 10%, a floor rate of 0% and an effective average tariff of 7%.
In addition, Nicaragua adopted the safeguard clause included in the Central American tariff and customs regime, which is intended to facilitate further progress in the regional economic integration process.
Protective measures were taken with regard to some products, such as rice, yellow maize, sorghum, carbonated beverages and beer, as part of a tax scheme designed to match the effect of the incentives granted in the other countries in the area.
As the result of a border dispute, the National Assembly passed a law under which a 35% duty was levied on goods and services imported from Honduras and Colombia.
Of that total, bilateral creditors accounted for 62.6%, multilateral agencies for 33.3% and commercial banks for 3.7%.
External debt service payments falling due amounted to US$ 262.4 million, of which US$ 168.2 million was actually paid (US$ 94.1 million in amortization and US$ 74.1 million in interest payments).
In 1999, US$ 44 million less was paid than in 1998 as a result of the deferment of US$ 46.1 million granted by the Paris Club and Spanish commercial banks, together with the forgiveness of US$ 94.6 million in debt owed to various bilateral creditors.
To cover its external borrowing requirements, the government adopted a policy directed at obtaining loans on very soft terms, with maturities of up to 40 years, 10-year grace periods and a maximum annual rate of 3%.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 257 Panama The pace of growth in the Panamanian economy slowed to 3.2% in 1999, following rates of over 4% in the two preceding years.
Growth figures were undermined for the second year running by a downturn in external demand, especially from the rest of Latin America, which led to a steep drop in the level of re-exports from the Colon Free Zone.
The formerly vigorous expansion of domestic demand slowed somewhat, partly as a result of the elections and change in Administration, which led to restrictions on public spending and generated a brief period of uncertainty.
The economy maintained its traditional low level of inflation and the fiscal deficit was reduced, but a large deficit persisted on the current account of the balance of payments.
An event of great significance for the country' s modernization drive occurred in December when the United States completed the process of handing over the assets and facilities of the Panama Canal to the Panamanian Government.
R E -EXPORTS from the Colón Free Zone, one of the highest value-added activities in the Panamanian economy, fell sharply in the wake of reduced purchases by three of its main customers (Columbia, Ecuador and Venezuela) which were going through economic difficulties.
This also weakened the external operations of the international banking centre, although an increase in domestic banking activity was able to take up the slack.
Among other international services, those provided by the Panama Canal grew very little, while the operations of the container transshipment system the largest in Latin America continued to expand steadily.
Capital formation, which had increased considerably in 1998 (15.8%), slowed somewhat in 1999 as major private- and public-sector investment projects in such areas as the highway network, communications and social infrastructure came to an end.
Private-sector consumption was sustained by inertial job creation and by higher real incomes and personal consumer credit, but it also grew much more slowly than in previous years.
Apart from the fisheries subsector, agricultural output expanded significantly, partly because banana production recovered from its steep drop in 1998 and partly because of a recovery in basic grain output, especially rice.
In contrast, fisheries activity dropped off sharply as a result of a smaller fish catch and a reduced shrimp harvest, the latter the result of a viral disease.
Hydroelectric power generation was up sharply following the previous year's drought, and modern telecommunications services also continued to expand.
Growth in the construction industry doubled its pace thanks to highway and infrastructure work, with several projects reaching conclusion during the year.
In addition, progress was made in a number of private-sector building projects having to do with the port system, as well as in hotel and commercial construction.
On the other hand, a variety of local and foreign investment projects aimed at the productive development of Canal Zone facilities and areas point to a strengthening of the country's role as a provider of modern international services.
For the year 2000, gross domestic product (GDP) was expected to grow by between 3.6% and 4.1%, on the back of ongoing private-sector investments and a revival of demand among the Latin American economies.
The new government's economic programme calls for a continuation of the effort to eliminate the fiscal deficit, pare down the external debt and press ahead with the selective privatization process. 2.
Economic policy and structural reform In a year marked by elections and a change of government, economic policy concentrated on reducing the deficit of the non-financial public sector (NFPS), which had expanded to 3% of GDP in 1998 as a result of higher investment spending.
This led to a suspension of disbursements under the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility (ESAF) arrangement agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in late 1997.
The strategy for restructuring the external debt was maintained, and a selective, temporary tariff increase was levied on imports of sensitive agricultural products.
In early 2000, the new Administration made public the basic guidelines it would use in determining its future economic policy priorities.
The NFPS deficit narrowed from 3% to 1.2% of GDP in 1999, while the central government's deficit decreased from 5.4% to 2.5%.
The slowdown in public spending was more pronounced in the final quarter, which facilitated progress towards the goal of reducing the public sector's financial imbalance.
Other contributing factors included higher tax revenues and receipts from the Social Security Fund and a robust performance on the part of decentralized bodies.
Tax receipts swelled by 9.7%, thanks to administrative efforts to improve compliance.
Income tax revenues increased by 27.5%, particularly in the "juridical income" category, which reflected the tax payments made by recently privatized electrical power and telecom companies.
Current income was boosted by additional contributions from the Panama Canal Authority and by interest earnings from the Development Trust Fund, which was set up with the proceeds from the privatization of State-owned enterprises in earlier years.
Despite higher interest payments on the external debt (17.3%), total current outlays were lower than in 1998 as a result of the reduction of government operating expenses and the lower level of transfers from the central government to the Social Security Fund.
Capital expenditure was also lowered (-5.7%) in line with plans set out at the start of the year, after it had climbed to 6.2% of GDP in 1998.
The central government deficit was partly financed with external resources, including a US$ 500 million bond issue on capital markets, and partly through the issues of government securities on the local market.
The positive balance maintained by the public sector at the National Bank of Panama increased during the year.
The Development Trust Fund grew to a total of USS 1,317,700,000 as a result of the divestment of assets recovered in the Canal Zone and the sale of a 50% stake in the national electric power company.
These resources are held as time deposits and bonds in local and foreign banks and yield 5.25% per year.
The total gross public debt amounted to USS 7.543 billion as of 31 December (equivalent to 78.5% of GDP), of which USS 5.412 billion, or 56.3% of GDP, corresponded to external debt and USS 2.131 billion (22.2% of GDP) to domestic payment obligations.
External liabilities amounted to 4.5% more than they had in 1998 due to borrowing and the issuance of USS 500 million in global bonds. (b) Credit policy and the international banking centre The economic difficulties being faced by the South American countries had a significant negative impact on the operations of Panama's international banking centre.
Deposits received from abroad declined (-4%), as did external lending by the financial centre (-16.5%).
In contrast, both deposits and lending in the domestic market climbed (by 7% and 13.6%, respectively).
Personal consumer credit expanded by 36% during the year, following a 40% increase in 1998.
There was also considerable growth in mortgage financing (14.5%), while lending to the commercial sector increased by Higher international interest rates appear to have had no effect on the Panamanian market, given the relative abundance of loanable funds.
The interest rate on three-month deposits, for example, edged down to 6.52%; rates on short-term lending to the commercial sector held steady (9.93%), while interest rates on loans to industry decreased slightly and those applying to personal loans registered a marginal increase.
The new Administration extended the preferential mortgage lending policy for a further five years in a step aimed at encouraging the construction of middle- and low-income housing.
The abundant supply of loanable funds generated active competition among commercial banks that were vying to channel funds into this sector.
The mortgage interest rate, at an average of 9.75%, was slightly lower than the year before.
The financial system continued its gradual process of bringing bank capital into line with the capital adequacy standards established in the Basle Accord, while the application of new bank liquidity standards and rules on related-party lending were the subject of ongoing debate.
Issues relating to exposure and interest rates in the Panamanian market are also currently under study. (c) Trade policy Upon assuming office, the new Administration temporarily raised import tariffs on certain agricultural classified as "sensitive products".
The tariff hikes, which came into effect at the beginning of 2000 and were within the limits permitted by the World Trade Organization (WTO), were intended to help local producers prepare themselves to face foreign competition.
The tariff lines covered by this measure include products such as ham, salt, cabbage, carrots, celery, oils and margarine.
Debate continued on the possible sale of the 49% stake that the State had retained in the telecommunications company Cable & Wireless, along with the equity it still holds in electrical power generation and distribution activities.
Exports of international services lost momentum due to sluggish demand from the South American economies.
The growth of consumption was fueled by factors such as increased employment and higher real wages; severance payments for staff employed in the military bases; and personal consumer credit growth, although the latter showed signs of moderating.
In the area of investment expenditure, major public- and private-sector investment projects, many of which involved the construction of infrastructure works, were completed, while other port and commercial development projects proceeded.
The pace of growth in the services sector, which accounts for nearly 60% of total GDP, slackened in 1999, partly because of a considerable slowdown in activity in the Colón Free Zone (-14.5%).
As mentioned earlier, the financial difficulties being faced by Panama's main Latin American customers (Columbia, Ecuador and Venezuela), led to weaker demand in the Zone, and this undermined both imports and re-exports and hurt commercial activities, which shrank by about 3.4%.
Transport and communications, on the other hand, grew by a substantial 10.8% during the year, for although Panama Canal operations —which are among the most important in this sector— grew relatively moderately (1 %), the new national port system continued to expand its consolidation, transshipment and merchandise redistribution services.
The total volume of cargo handled amounted to 19.3 million tons, representing a 45% increase over the previous year's figure.
Rapid growth continued in the communications sector, thanks to the spread of mobile telephony and ancillary activities.
Driven by bank lending operations in the domestic market, financial intermediation services also rose sharply (10.4%).
Growth in tourism-related activities was more modest, however, owing to the poor performance of the Colón Free Zone.
Fisheries output fell by 29.3% as aresult of a smaller fish catch and lower production in shrimp farms (-46.5%) due an outbreak of white spot syndrome (WSS).
Manufacturing output slipped by 4.6% as a result of the problems faced in the food, garment and chemical sectors; increases in other activities, such as oil refining and the manufacture of construction materials, were unable to reverse this downward trend.
In contrast, the agricultural sector (excluding fisheries) managed to post a substantial upturn (6.9%) thanks to a 28.8% recovery in the production and export of bananas (the country's main agricultural product), which had been undermined by a long strike and adverse weather conditions in 1998.
Cereal crops also performed better, with increases of 9% in rice output, 4.2% in sorghum and 5% in beans.
Output in the construction industry rose by 12% —nearly twice the 1998 rate— thanks to commercial, hotel and housing projects undertaken by the private sector, together with the continuation and conclusion of public infrastructure works dealing with social health services and the urban highway network, along with work on the Pan-American Highway.
The construction industry also received a strong boost as a result of the government's decision to maintain support for the country's middle- and low-income housing construction programme by subsidizing mortgage interest rates.
The electricity, gas and water subsector surged by 20.6%, following its 4.7% decline in 1998.
A substantial expansion of hydroelectric power generation following the previous year's severe drought, and a corresponding reduction in thermal generation, led to a considerably higher level of value-added in electric power output.
Commercial energy use (by far the largest segment) increased by 8.7%, while residential and industrial consumption grew by 4.2% and 7%, respectively.
Inflation, measured on a December-to-December basis, amounted to 1.5% in 1999, almost identical to the previous year's rate of 1.4%.
Food products and beverages, which carry the greatest weight in the index, increased by 1.6%, as did rents, fuels and electric power.
By comparison, price increases were far above average for medical care and other health services (4.3%), transport and communications (3.1%) and recreation, Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 263 entertainment and cultural or educational services (2.4%).
Furniture and electrical accessory prices fell (-2.6%), as did those of clothing and footwear (-0.6%).
Wholesale prices rose more consumer prices did: 2.7% on average for the year and 6.8% on a December-December basis.
This was largely due to a 6% rise in import prices including oil, where higher international prices were partly passed on to consumers.
According to the country's household survey, the number of jobs increased by 2.8% between August 1998 and the same month a year later, with the largest increase occurring in the metropolitan region (3.2%).
As a result, the unemployment rate for that region fell from 16% to 13.8% during the review period, although job creation is thought to have lost momentum in the second half of the year owing to the economic slowdown and the change in Administration.
Wages also rose significantly: 4.3% in nominal terms in wholesale commerce, and 9.2% in retail trade.
Other services, covering a variety of tertiary activities, rose by an average of 10.5%.
Given Panama's traditionally low inflation rate, these wage hikes implied significant increases in purchasing power.
For the second year running, the current account of the balance of payments registered a sizeable deficit compared to those seen in earlier years.
The deficit for above the 1998 figure and equivalent to 14% of GDP.
In the Panamanian economy, which uses a dollar-based monetary system, a widening of the current account deficit is the necessary counterpart to larger foreign capital inflows foreign direct investment (FDI) and loans from abroad as the automatic mechanism generating higher consumption and investment expenditure comes into play.
Merchandise trade registered a deficit of US$ 1,397,800,000, slightly above the previous year's figure.
In contrast, the balance on services trade, which has traditionally been positive, rose by 11.5% to US$ 585 million.
Movements on the income account, which are largely determined by interest earnings and payments in the banking system, posted a net negative balance of US$ 684 million, partly as a result of a decline in interest receipts from abroad, which in turn reflected the slowdown in international banking operations.
The value of re-exports from the Colón Free Zone fell to US$ 4.853 billion, down by 18.7% from the previous year's figure, while imports were 23.8% lower at US$ 4.052 billion.
These figures reflect the lower prices paid for products obtained from Asian countries due to the currency devaluations that occurred during the year as well as weaker regional demand.
Nonetheless, adjusted Free Zone operations posted a surplus of US$ Exports of national origin were more or less flat, at US$ 707 million, or just 0.2% above the 1998 figure.
There were steep declines in major products such as shrimp (both fresh and frozen), fishmeal, coffee, sugar and a variety of tropical fruits.
Banana sales increased, following three years of sharp decreases, as did sales of leather products, cattle hides and petroleum products Although the c.i.f. value of imports entering the local market grew by 2.9% to US$ 3.516 billion, the pattern among the different import categories was very uneven.
External purchases of food and beverages, mineral products and chemicals were significantly higher, while imports of agricultural products, plastic materials and rubber, textiles and manufactures all suffered considerable drops.
Capital goods imports fell by 5.8%, mainly because of reduced communications and transport equipment purchases.
In contrast, crude oil purchases soared by 63.6%, partly as a result of higher international prices but also partly because of an expansion of refining activity.
Foreign investment registered a positive balance of just US$ 22 million in 1999, after having reached figures in excess of US$ 1 billion during the previous two years because of the privatization of State-owned telecommunications and electric power companies.
This amount includes US$ 149 million of additional investment in a variety of firms, US$ 328.6 million in reinvested profits, and an accounting item of - US$ 457.5 million due to the transfer of Panama Canal assets.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 265 Paraguay A 0.5% growth rate for gross domestic product (GDP) in 1999 was too slight to prevent a fall in per capita GDP for the fourth year running.
Consequently, the Paraguayan economy ended the 1990s with an average growth rate of just over 2%, one percentage point less than in the T H E MAIN SOURCE of what little growth there was in 1999 was the upswing seen in the agricultural sector, following its stagnation the previous year.
A record increase in soybean production, along with good harvests of other agricultural products, compensated for the reduction in the cotton harvest.
To a lesser extent, the production of some basic services, such as electricity, transport and telecommunications, helped to sustain a positive growth rate.
These two variables offset a downswing (9%) in commerce, which was mainly affected by a drop in informal trade1 and in cotton sales.
Informal trade was hurt by restrictions imposed by Brazil on the entry of products re-exported from Paraguay and by the decrease in Brazilian buying power caused by the devaluation of the real.
Slacker business activity reduced the government's tax revenues and this, in combination with the increase in government expenditure, pushed the deficit up to 3.5% of GDP.
However, the current account deficit remained unchanged from the previous year, since a drop in imports similar in magnitude to the downturn in exports averted any further widening of the trade deficit.
An abundant flow of capital from international sales of Treasury bonds backed by the Government of the Chinese Province of Taiwan and from foreign direct investment (FDI) provided more than enough funds to cover the current account deficit and, from the second semester of 1999 onward, facilitated the management of economic policy aimed at reactivating the economy.
GDP growth notwithstanding, both total open and urban unemployment increased as a result of the slump in labour-intensive sectors such as commerce and cotton production.
However, improved availability of other agricultural products for domestic consumption helped to reduce inflation to 5.4% Domestic and external factors made for a more favourable outlook for the year 2000.
The agricultural sector was expected to continue on its upward path, and an upturn in the demand for Paraguayan exports by Mercosur partners was considered to be likely as their economies recover.
International prices for Paraguay's main export products -soybeans and cotton- should follow suit.
The exchange rate was expected to stabilize after an increase in the first quarter.
The 5.5% cumulative inflation rate for the first six months of the year was a reflection of adjustments in fuel prices, an increase in the minimum wage and seasonal upswings in some products. 1 Informal trade consists of imports of products which are then sold tax-free on Paraguayan soil to tourists who are in fact merchants.
These traders, most of whom come from Brazil, then re-export these products to their country of origin. 266 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean • Central Government balance • Current account balance Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 267 2.
Economic Policy In the first half of 1999, monetary, foreign-exchange and fiscal policy all continued to reflect the austerity approach of the preceding year.
The aim of monetary and foreign exchange policy was to hold the exchange rate steady in the face of the ongoing speculative attacks on the guaraní that had begun the year before.
Initially, the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP) intervened by selling foreign exchange through money-desk operations; later, it also resorted to open-market operations to defend the guaraní, since the level of international reserves was such that it was unable to continue using the money desk as actively as before.
Faced with this critical situation, the monetary authorities sought external capital to fend off a balance-of-payments crisis.
Fenced in by a lack of financing, the prospect of scant tax revenues in the wake of slack business activity and budgetary rigidities, the Ministry of Finance also adopted an austerity policy during the first semester.
The need for financing was met early in the second semester by an issue of Treasury bonds underwritten by the Government of the Chinese Province of Taiwan that was floated on the international market.
Equivalent to 5% of GDP, these funds afforded some relief for both monetary and fiscal policy.
This injection of foreign exchange lessened the threat of a depreciation of the currency and enabled the monetary authorities to reduce the rates on open-market issues.
Fiscal policy-makers were then able to reactivate deferred capital investments and the new Administration that took officein the second quarter was able to implement a more expansionary policy to boost the country's flagging economy.
There was little time for these reactivation policies to yield noticeable results during 1999, but it was expected that they would have a greater effect during 2000.
The central government's deficit soared to its peak level of the 1990s (3.5% of GDP),2 driven by a significant increase in capital expenditure aimed at energizing the recovery of the Paraguay's sagging economy.
This increase was funded by external financing equivalent to 6% of GDP, most of which was obtained from bond sales on the international market and official international loans during the second semester of 1999.
In addition, the inflow of foreign capital boosted public-sector deposits with the central bank.
The slowdown in domestic and external commerce cut into tax receipts, particularly from the valued added tax (VAT), and tariff revenues, which fell by 30% of GDP.
The shortfall in tax receipts was offset, however, by an increase in non-tax revenues, including royalty payments from the binational Itaipú and Yacyretá dams.
A 16% increase in public spending (measured as a percentage of GDP) was chiefly the result of higher capital expenditure (investments of physical capital directly financed by external resources) and an increase in current transfers (mainly pension payments).
The rest of the items of current expenditure increased slightly, but payments for personal services continued to represent the bulk of expenditure (40%), rising 4.5% in terms of GDP.
The non-financial public sector (NFPS) also ended the year with a hefty deficit (3.2% of GDP), even though State enterprises saw an improvement equivalent to two percentage points of GDP.
Both decentralized agencies and State-run companies nearly doubled their capital expenditure in comparison to the previous year.
A similar performance was expected for 2000 based on, once again, external finance.
The government sought to maintain its existing levels of capital investment, transfers to the agricultural sector, and expenditure on health care and education.
Transfers to the pension system, which was running a deficit, were also to continue.
On a cash basis, the central government deficit is equivalent to 2.3% of GDP.
From 1994 on, national total for urban areas. e Percentages of the economically active population.
During the second semester, however, monetary policy was redefined to encourage the reactivation of the economy by attracting significant levels of capital inflows to ease the pressure on reserves.
During the first seven months of the year, the exchange rate was driven up by 14%.
A series of factors trailing back to 1998 were to blame, including the deterioration of the external sector and the demand for foreign exchange deriving from the devaluation of the Brazilian real, together with the political uncertainty generated by the sudden change of government in the second quarter of 1999 and the poor outlook for the country's production sectors.
The BCP came to the defence of the guaraní by selling foreign exchange through the money desk.
As a result, international reserves fell to US$ 650 million in June, for a loss of US$ 220 million since the end of 1998.
In response to this situation, the BCP issued Treasury bills (known as "monetary regulation notes", or LRMs) at rates of around 27%, which was slightly higher than the average 1998 rate for these instruments.
The authorities sought external financing to cope with this critical situation, and the Government of the Chinese Province of Taiwan agreed to underwrite a US$ 400 million international issue of Paraguayan Treasury bonds.
These securities were floated early in the second semester, easing pressure on the country's depleted international reserves.
In fact, the nominal exchange rate steadied so much that it did not vary more than 0.2% between August and December.
Granted this respite, the new Administration turned its attention to implementing economic policies that would jump-start the stagnated economy.
In fact, LRM issues dropped by one third and their average interest rates dipped to around 14%, eleven points below the average issue rates in 1998.
Money-desk operations in the second semester resulted in net purchases of foreign exchange.
The overall effect of these two different phases of monetary and foreign exchange-policy was expansionary.
Open-market interventions closed with an average balance of issues equivalent to three quarters of the previous year's and an average rate five percentage points below that of 1998, while the guaranti-denominated international assets of the BCP increased by 33% with respect to 1998.
Although net domestic credit shrank, expansionary variables more than compensated for the drop.
Net credit to the public sector decreased as the government obtained more than enough external financing to cover the fiscal deficit.
Deposits in the BCP rose, and no further loans were made to floundering banks, as had been done in previous years.
Following the steps taken up to 1998 to put banks on a sound financial footing, foreign banks increased their participation in the overall portfolio.
In nominal terms, average lending rates dropped slightly, while borrowing rates increased by two percentage points, thus narrowing the spread.
The nominal exchange rate climbed by 14%, eleven percentage points less than the 1998 rate of depreciation.
These results led to a 34% expansion in the monetary base, which can be accounted for by the steep increase in reserves.
Local-currency deposits were slightly higher than in 1998 and, once again, there was a marked preference for foreign-exchange deposits.
A small increase in sight deposits boosted Ml by 9%, two percentage points more than the year before.
Following a contraction in 1998, savings and term deposits, together with other local-currency deposits, pushed up M2 by 11%.
However, an Executive Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 271 Reform Office was created which was given ministerial status together with responsibility for implementing a broad agenda of reforms.
In May 2000, the Senate passed a law to reform State-owned companies, including three in the areas of telecommunications, water supply and railways.
Slight growth in the production of goods (2%) counterbalanced the decline in total services production (-0.9%), yielding a meagre growth rate of 0.5%.
Agriculture led the goods-producing sectors with a 4% increase, mainly owing to a further upturn in soybean production (10%), thanks to the expansion of the area under cultivation and better yields.
Increases were also seen in the output of maize, wheat, cassava, sugar cane, groundnuts, beans and sunflowers as a result of more extensive areas of cultivation and/or improved yields.
The combination of good harvests offset a 9% decrease in cotton production, which had already stagnated at the end of the 1997/1998 crop year.
The drop in production was largely due to a reduction in the area under cultivation, despite improved weather and phytosanitary conditions.
The rest of the country's goods-producing activities, accounting for one fifth of total output, recorded a slight upswing.
Zero growth was registered in the manufacturing sector, which is mainly composed of food processing plants and fuel refineries, but construction rose 2.5% thanks to a series of roadwork projects in 1999 which carried over into 2000.
In the services sector, commerce and finance (accounting for 22% of GDP in 1999) took the heaviest fall (9%) for the second year running.
This was accounted for by the decline in commercial activity, which, in turn, was directly related to the downturn in the marketing and distribution of cotton.
In addition, activity in this sector was dampened by the drastic reduction in cross-border, or so-called "triangular", trade (see the section on the external sector) caused by the sluggishness of the Brazilian economy and the devaluation of the real.
Tugged down by the severe contraction of foreign demand (-27%), which had been slipping ever since 1996, total demand fell by 8%.
Overall demand was also affected by a decrease in private investment (4%), itself stricken by persistently high credit costs, by an unsettled political situation for most of the year, and by a slump in private consumption (4.5%) for the second year running, which demonstrated the weak purchasing power of the population.
The only component of total demand that grew was government expenditure, which rose almost 4%.
Listless GDP growth resulted in a 2% fall in per capita GDP, which has failed to make any recovery since (b) Prices and wages Following a brief upsurge of inflation in 1998 owing to both domestic and external factors, inflation returned to its downward path in 1999, reaching its lowest level in the last two decades (5.4%).
This trend was strengthened by the devaluation in Brazil, which is the source of most of Paraguay's imports, the freezing of the official minimum wage, maintenance of public utility rates at their existing levels and the languid pace of economic activity during the year.
These factors offset the inflationary pressure exerted by the rise in the international prices of petroleum and petroleum products.
Food products, which make up almost 40% of the consumer price index (CPI), edged up by only 3.7%.
The prices of non-tradables went up more sharply (7% on average), but less than in 1998.
Prices of transport, education and housing climbed more slowly (by 13%, 11 % and 6%, respectively).
The producer price index matched the pace oftheCPI (5.3%), since the producer shopping basket consists mainly of tradable products.
Workers employed in construction and commerce were affected the most, since their average wages showed no change in nominal terms.
The transport and industry sectors posted nominal salary increases of only 2%.
Workers in basic services obtained a nominal increase of almost 4%, but this was still below the rate of inflation.
Despite the slight increase in economic activity, the level of open unemployment in 1999 was higher than the figure resulting from the previous year's survey, rising from 5.4% to 6.8% in the country as a whole and from 6.6% to 9.4% in the country's urban areas.
The persistence of the current account deficit is attributable to the fact that the trade balance for goods and services did not undergo any great changes.
These balances conceal significant decreases, however, since both total exports and total imports plunged by almost 30%, reducing total merchandise trade to its lowest level since 1992.
Unregistered and re-export3 trade, which together account for over half of the country's merchandise trade, suffered greater setbacks than registered trade.
The 30% drop in the total value of exports was a reflection of low international soybean and cotton prices, which are the country's main registered export products.
The value of registered exports to Brazil declined by one third as a result of the devaluation of the real.
In turn, registered exports to Argentina plummeted to a third of their 1998 value owing to a downturn in the demand for Paraguayan soybeans caused by increased domestic production in Argentina.
The rest of the country's exports, accounting for 73% of the total, slid by one third to their lowest level since 1992 owing to stricter customs controls on triangular re-export trade in the tri-border area and the weakening of Brazilian purchasing power.
The 30% contraction in registered imports was a consequence of reduced domestic demand.
Consumer goods slid furthest, with a 43% drop, followed by intermediate and capital goods, which fell by one fifth.
Unregistered imports -equivalent to 36% of the total and mostly destined for re-export- lost 27% of their value during the year.
The capital account closed with a hefty surplus of US$ 600 million, equivalent to 8% of GDP.
This can be attributed to the inflow of US$ 400 million from the placement of bonds underwritten by the Government of the Chinese Province of Taiwan and to fresh inflows of FDI.
These investments were directed mainly towards the telecommunications sector and the financial system.
Total external debt increased by one third, mainly as a result of the above-mentioned international bond issues.
The balance as of December was equivalent to around 25% of GDP.
Almost all of this debt corresponds to the public sector, with three fourths being held by the central government and one fifth by State-owned companies.
The country' s creditors were equally divided between international financial agencies and foreign governments. 3 The merchandise trade figures in the balance of payments include an estimate of non-registered imports and exports.
In addition, exports include products which are brought into Paraguay for re-export to neighbouring countries.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 273 The course taken by the Peruvian economy in 1999 was largely determined by the repercussions of the external shocks that had buffeted the country the year before.
Output returned to a moderate 3.8% growth path,1 and there was also success on the inflation front, where a new record low of 3.7% was set.
Economic recovery was largely confined to the primary sector, however, while the rest of the economy continued to flounder in the aftermath of the previous year's recession.
The tight credit conditions that hadled to an outflow of short-term foreign capital starting in late 1998 were compounded by financial difficulties in a number of sectors and the persistence of negative expectations for much of the year.
The result was a contraction of domestic demand (-3%), which led to a drop in employment (- 6%) and a crisis situation in the financial sector.
The privatization process ran out of steam, and less than half of the programme originally envisaged for 1999 could actually be carried out.
Despite this narrowing of the current account deficit, however, the reversal of short-term capital flows still led to a further reduction in international reserves. flexible in an attempt to mitigate the effects of these events.
Public expenditure was not cut back to match the reduction in tax revenues, and the fiscal deficit therefore widened to 2.6% of gross domestic product (GDP).
Part of the external shock was absorbed by a devaluation of the local currency, while monetary policy was aimed at restoring the banking system's liquidity.
This was complemented by an assistance programme to facilitate the restructuring of the financial sector.
Domestic economic prospects began to take a tum for the better in the fourth quarter of 1999, and GDP grew strongly during the first three months of 2000 (8.6%).
In the first half of the year 2000, however, financial and foreign-exchange markets suffered from the uncertainty surrounding the presidential election, despite a revival of the privatization and concessions programmes.
Even so, national projections for 2000 pointed to growth of 5% and an inflation rate of between 3.5% and 4%.
The fiscal deficit was projected at 1.9% of GDP, with a 3.8% current account deficit.
These figures were not available at the time this chapter was written.
In 1999, the difficulties carried over from the previous year, when GDP had been flat following a long-lasting expansion, undermined the country' s ability to service its private-sector domestic debt.
This was compounded by the uncertainty prevailing on the external front following the withdrawal of foreign capital, and the combination of these two factors gave a recessionary bias to domestic demand.
In an effort to contain the effects of this slowdown, macroeconomic policy in 1999 was set on a moderately expansionary course.
Unlike what had happened in 1998, public expenditure programmes were not adjusted in line with the decrease in tax receipts resulting from weaker domestic demand.
Current income declined by 4% in nominal terms to the equivalent of 12.8% of GDP (14% in 1998), with the reduction stemming mainly from lower income tax receipts.
The recession prevailing in the domestic market, together with the adjustment required as a result of the reimbursement of the previous fiscal year's tax surcharge, led to sharply lower revenues (-0.6% of GDP) in this category.
The upturn of activity in the primary sector did not contribute additional revenue to public finances, since in some cases growth represented a recovery from 1998 (agriculture and fishing) against a backdrop of low prices and profit levels while, in others, profits were reinvested and hence not taxable (mining).
Indirect revenues were also affected, although to a lesser extent, with receipts from import duties and the general sales tax falling by 0.1% and 0.3% of GDP, respectively.
To ward off a steeper drop in revenues, the scheduled discontinuation of the special solidarity tax (5% of the payroll) was not implemented, and excise taxes on fuels and tobacco were raised.
Expenditure grew by 8% in nominal terms to 15.8% of GDP, versus 15.2% in 1998; current outlays expanded by 9.5%, driven by higher payroll expenses (11.5%) and a 16% increase in public-sector debt service (almost entirely external), which was inflated by the effects of the devaluation.
Reconstruction work and assistance in areas damaged by El Niño pushed public-sector investment expenditure up from 2.6% to 2.8% of GDP.
Most of the central government deficit was financed domestically (2.2% of GDP) by drawing on the large current deposits held in the financial system by the public sector, which represented the proceeds from earlier privatizations.
For the first time in recent years, in the fourth quarter of 1998 and again in the first quarter of 1999, the monetary authorities had to sell reserves to cover the demand for dollars in the foreign-exchange market.
The negative impact of these sales on liquidity in soles was offset by open-market operations (to reduce the level of outstanding certificates of deposit).
With the transfer of part of the vast public deposits held by State-owned banks to their counterparts in the private sector, and a change in their denomination from dollars to soles to finance the fiscal deficit, the management of public-sector accounts also eased demand pressure on the currency and helped to improve bank liquidity.
The greater dollar liquidity that prevailed throughout the remainder of 1999 was insufficient to revive foreign-exchange lending activity, however.
New lending declined as a more cautious stance was adopted by banks and borrowers alike, who perceived the uncertainty of the prevailing circumstances and faced the additional financial costs resulting from higher interest rates and devaluation.
The foreign-exchange market was buffeted by two waves of devaluations in 1999, one associated with the economic crisis in Brazil and the currency-market problems in Ecuador, and the second, on a smaller scale, stemming from the Ecuadorian moratorium and the general nervousness prevailing on regional markets in the third quarter of the year.
The situation returned to normal towards the end of the year, and the pace of devaluation, which had reached 20% in the first quarter, slowed to 11 % in December.
The annual average rate of devaluation came in at 15% in nominal terms and 8.7% in real terms, thereby reversing a large part of the currency's cumulative appreciation since 1990.
Average lending rates remained high during the first five months of the year (36.5% on local currency, 17% on dollars), before falling gradually as expectations improved (32% and 15%, respectively, in December).
As an annual average, local-currency lending rates were 2.4 percentage points higher than in 1998 and foreign-exchange lending rates were 0.5 points higher.
Quasi-money denominated in the local currency remained at approximately 3.4% of GDP, while the ratio for narrow liquidity (Ml/GDP) edged up slightly to 3.9%.
This modest monetary expansion was based on growth in net external assets, as domestic credit remained flat at around 10.4% of GDP. (c) Financial markets The course taken by the economy during the year was heavily influenced by the sluggishness of private-sector credit.
Private lending had expanded strongly in previous periods on the back of external credit lines, but devaluation and the recession that began in 1998 seriously impaired the country's capacity to service those loans.
Apart from the elements of monetary policy mentioned above, this policy package had two main components: one aimed at helping to restructure business-sector debt (in particular by introducing a more flexible approach to the payment of tax arrears); and the other intended to strengthen the asset position of the banking system.
An initial programme was implemented between December 1998 and June 1999 involving temporary swaps of loan portfolios for non-negotiable Treasury bonds; this was followed between June and December 1999 by another programme that offered the possibility of transferring higher-risk loans.
In addition, public-sector deposits were shifted in an attempt to stabilize the asset position of financial firms going through restructuring processes.
The value of the assets that were transferred amounted to less than 2% of GDP.
Thanks to these measures, the non-performing loan rate dropped to 5.9% in December, but the financial crisis still made some consolidation necessary in the sector.
Several banks had to take part in mergers or submit to takeovers, one small local bank was liquidated, and three institutions of minor importance were also dissolved. (d) Structural reforms The Omnibus Financial and Insurance Systems Act was amended in May 1999 in order to upgrade the authorities' intervention capacity.
With a view to enhancing transparency in the management of monetary and financial policy, the authorities decided to publicly announce the monetary programme of the Central Reserve Bank of Peru at the start of each year and then to report on subsequent adjustments and degrees of fulfilment on a quarterly basis.
The most outstanding event to occur in connection with public finances was the passage of the Fiscal Prudence and Transparency Act in December.
This legislation sets annual limits on the fiscal deficit and on the growth of public-sector borrowing (1% of GDP in each case, except under exceptional circumstances), together with additional restrictions in election years.
The growth of primary expenditure is to be limited to 2% per year in real terms, which ought to generate fiscal surpluses over the medium term.
The legislation also sets up a fiscal stabilization fund, to be financed out of surpluses generated from current public-sector revenues, plus 75% of the net inflows from privatizations and 50% of the proceeds from concessions.
This fund, which will be capped at 3% of GDP, will be used to smooth out short-term variations in public-sector income.
To give greater transparency to fiscal policy, the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance will also be required to publish a three-year macroeconomic plan, together with a biannual report on the plan's performance.
The privatization programme faced both economic difficulties and problems of a political or regulatory nature during the year, and only US$ 300 million was raised from the divestment of State assets instead of the US$ 800 million originally anticipated.
Most of this revenue came from the sale of the remaining shares in previously privatized power and telecommunications firms, together with the sale of a mining company.
The concessions programme was limited to the auction of reinforcement work in the southern electric power grid, the national railway system and the ports of Matarani and Ilo.
The privatization programme for 2000 envisaged receipts amounting to US$ 650 million.
After several delays, the first quarter of the year saw a resumption of the bidding process for the Camisea natural gas field (involving a potential investment of over USS 2 billion), for which the production, transport and distribution segments were divided up and stronger market guarantees were provided.
The upturn in economic activity in 1999 was mainly driven by buoyant exports, which grew by 7.5% in volume terms, particularly in the category of commodities and their derivatives.
The retreat of domestic demand (- 3%), on the other hand, generated a recessionary climate for firms serving the domestic market.
Gross private investment slid by 16%, while private-sector consumption was flat, with fiscal expenditure propping up public-sector demand in both 280 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean the consumption and investment categories (3.2% and 7.2%, respectively).
This two-year slowdown interrupted an expansionary process that had boosted the growth of aggregate demand to an average annual rate of 6.8% between 1991 and 1997.
Unlike the previous year, however, the effects of the recession on domestic and external sources of supply were not identical: whereas domestic output grew by 3.8% basically thanks to primary-sector activities imports plummeted (-17%).
Domestic saving held steady at around 18% of GDP, but its composition changed.
The sluggishness of private-sector consumption pushed the private-sector saving ratio up by two points, whereas public-sector saving fell from 3.6% to 1.7% of GDP.
Given the retreat of short-term capital, external saving declined by nearly three percentage points, to the equivalent of 3.6% of GDP.
Total GDP growth of 3.8% was mainly the result of supply-side factors.
The production of commodities was boosted as investment projects in the mining sector came on line and as the agricultural and fisheries sectors began to recover from the damage caused by El Niño.
Expansion in the primary sector had a knock-on effect on activity indicators in processing industries.
Thanks to favourable weather conditions, an increase in the areas under cultivation and the statistical effect of the modest comparison base provided by the previous year's figures, agricultural output displayed growth of 15% for 1999 as a whole, although the pace began to slacken from August onward.
Prices of agricultural and fisheries products remained depressed, however, which undermined the sector's profitability.
A support programme for the fanning sector was implemented during the year, as many enterprises that had been affected by El Niño found themselves unable to finance plantings.
Even so, two-digit growth rates were recorded in the production of foodstuffs (potatoes, rice) and in output destined for industry or export (cotton, coffee); this buoyancy also extended to certain parts of the livestock industry, such as sheep- and poultry-raising activities.
Output from high-seas fisheries almost doubled, thereby easily recovering from the previous year's steep decline.
Fishery activities also benefited from a support programme to help restructure the sector, which had invested heavily between 1992 and 1997 only to fall into difficulties as a result of the immediate effects of El Niño and over-fishing.
In the mining sector, gold production posted further growth (36%); copper rebounded by 11%, following its 5% drop in 1998, and a major investment project was begun in the final quarter of the year (Altamina).
Other non-ferrous metals also registered improved results, although production increases were more modest.
In contrast, iron production activities collapsed as output plummeted by 20%; the performance of the hydrocarbons segment was mediocre.
In construction, which had formerly been a highly dynamic activity and a major job provider, the recessionary trend already visible in 1998 deepened, and production declined by 12%.
The underlying causes of this setback were pessimistic expectations that lowered the demand for commercial building, greater caution on the part of households, and a scarcity of credit.
The public-works segment, on the other hand, benefited from sustained State investment, particularly in irrigation and highway projects.
The investment slowdown also affected a number of branches of industry producing machinery or inputs for the construction industry, but indicators for agribusiness and other processing activities posted strong results, thereby making a 7.6% increase in average sectoral output possible.
This achievement was mainly due to a decline in food prices which account for 58% of the index with more abundant supply forcing wholesale and retail prices down by 8% and 1%, respectively.
The relative stagnation of domestic consumption probably also played a part in restraining inflation, but it was clearly not the decisive factor, since the prices of non-tradable goods rose much more than the average Devaluation of the local currency, together with higher fuel prices, forced up production costs by 13.5% (including transport and communications).
The wholesale prices of imported products rose faster than those of national origin (10.7% versus 4.1%), and the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 281 annual variation in the wholesale price index amounted to 5.5% in December (versus 6.5% in 1998).
The lacklustre performance of certain segments of the domestic market led to a reversal of the recovery seen in formal employment since 1994.
Employment among firms hiring more than five workers shrank by 5.8%, and the unemployment rate edged up to 8.2% in a context of widespread underemployment.
On average, the real minimum wage fell by 3% during the year, while the purchasing power of wages grew by 7%.
The current account gap narrowed to 3.6% of GDP, thanks to the restoration of the balance on merchandise trade, which came in at -1.1% of GDP (- 3.9% in 1998).
A large part of this improvement has to be attributed to the collapse of imports (-18%), however, since export values rose only slightly (6.6%) as a result of negative international price trends, despite a robust expansion in volume.
The terms of trade deteriorated further (-7.1%) in 1999, following their steep fall of the previous year (-13%).
Traditional exports grew by 12% in volume, with the level of fishery exports largely recovering from the sharp downswing of 1998, although international prices remained very depressed (US$ 361 per ton for fishmeal versus US$ 588 in 1998).
Mineral and ore sales also expanded, but non-traditional exports declined by 5% as a result, in particular, of a sharp drop in the machine tool and steel metallurgy categories (-20%).
The decline in imports that had begun in 1998 accelerated to 18% as a consequence of weaker domestic demand and devaluation; the categories most affected were consumer durables (-32%) and capital goods (-17%).
The surplus on the financial account retreated by 60% from the previous year's figure, and by 80% compared to the high levels attained in 1997.
This turnaround is attributable to short-term capital outflows (US$ 1.8 billion) linked to the amortization of interbank credit lines, which began to be obtained in 1998 and were particularly large in early 1999.
The balance remained positive thanks to a sustained increase in foreign direct investment (FDI), which totalled US$ 1.85 billion and was destined mainly for the mining and telecoms sectors, along with the recapitalization of one of the country's banks.
The overall balance of payments was negative, however, and net international reserves shed a further US$ 775 million.
The external debt shrank by 5% in the wake of a reduction in short-term liabilities, and public-sector debt service amounted to US$ 1.8 billion.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 283 Dominican republic For the fourth consecutive year, the Dominican Republic experienced robust economic growth (8.3%).
In fact, its growth rate was a record high for the decade and one of the highest in the entire region.
Shored up by abundant inflows of foreign investment and external credit, higher remittances from family members living abroad and higher levels of employment and real income, domestic demand remained buoyant and exports of goods and services continued to expand.
Agricultural production recovered fully from the damage caused by Hurricane Georges in September 1998.
The macroeconomic climate was relatively stable, there was a small fiscal deficit, the December-December variation in the exchange rate was lower than the economy' s declining rate of inflation, and interest rates decreased slightly.
E C O N O M I C POLICY was designed to prevent the economy from overheating and, above all, to forestall any expansion in imports that might increase the deficit on the balance-of-payments current account.
The authorities therefore decided to concentrate on controlling the money supply, and this, together with the relatively stable exchange rate -facilitated by larger flows of foreign exchange into the country and the country's success in rescheduling its external debt in the wake of Hurricane Georges- held the rate of inflation to 5%.
Fiscal accounts were affected by the rise in petroleum prices, however, since this cut into the Economic policy was directed towards maintaining price stability by controlling aggregate demand in the face of revenues obtained from the oil price differential, and the authorities were therefore obliged to raise the commission on foreign-exchange transactions in order to meet their debt servicing obligations.
The balance of payments again showed a surplus, and the largest inflow of foreign direct investment (FDI) in the entire decade (US$ 1.435 billion) boosted international reserves.
This was more than sufficient to offset a deficit on current account equivalent to 2.9% of GDP.
Merchandise exports continued to grow thanks to the performance of the country's customs-free areas, albeit at a lower rate than the previous year. hefty capital inflows.
In 1999, central government fiscal accounts yielded a deficit for the second time in the decade (the first time being in 1994).
The 1999 deficit, equivalent to 0.4% of GDP (lower than the 0.6% deficit posted in 1994), was attributable to an increase in total expenditure from contraction in the tax burden equivalent to 0.6 percentage points of GDP.
Total inflows expanded by 6% in real terms -a slightly slower rate than the year before- owing to an increase in current revenues as well as in capital income and grants.
Tax revenues rose by 4.1% but would have climbed more had it not been for the decline in fuel tax receipts, whose contribution to total revenues shrank from 17% to 10%.
Despite the 1996 reforms, this tax remained vulnerable to fluctuations in international fuel prices, and in 1999 this led the government to fall into arrears on its external debt payments.
In order to recoup the loss of fiscal revenue, domestic fuel prices were raised in October as a means of passing the tax burden on to the consumer.
In October, the commission on foreign exchange transactions was raised from 1.75% to 5%, a measure that generated an estimated US$ 44 million in revenue.
Total central government expenditure increased by 13% in real terms, compared with 9% the previous year, due to the combination of a steep increase in capital expenditure and higher current disbursements.
The latter jumped by 24% as a result of outlays for construction work and agricultural development.
More specifically, this sharp increase was accounted for by road works, social infrastructure projects and housing construction programmes to assist people whose homes had been destroyed by Hurricane Georges.
In addition, capital contributions were made to local governments and public infrastructure institutes.
Current expenditure was up by 9.3% in real terms (close to the rate recorded the preceding year).
This was partly attributable to a 65% salary hike for medical staff in State-run institutions that was awarded in two stages: 35% in August 1999 and the other 30% in 2000.
Current transfers rose by 14% even though the positive effects of the capitalization of public-sector companies have not yet been reflected in government accounts.
This is partly a consequence of the fiscal burden represented by outlays for severance pay and pensions.
Monetary policy was directed towards moderating aggregate expenditure in order to maintain price and exchange-rate stability.
As a result of this policy, the monetary base and the narrowly defined money supply grew by 12% and 22% respectively, whereas broad money expanded by 29% owing to an increase in dollar deposits.
At the beginning of the year, the monetary authorities introduced a series of preventive measures aimed at averting the dissipation of real balances, whose rate of increase had intensified in the last few months of 1998, on the goods or foreign-exchange markets.
Limits were placed on the net amount of credit that the reserve bank could extend to the government and on the expansion of commercial banks' portfolios of business loans.
In addition, a 45-day deferral was authorized on the early redemption of one-year central bank pass-through certificates held by commercial banks.
Lastly, 20% of the excess reserves held by commercial banks, estimated at 348 million pesos, were frozen in a central bank account paying an annual interest rate of 8% for an interim period of 90 days.
As a result of these measures, the narrow money supply contracted by an average of 1.1% between February and April.
This paved the way for an initial decline in real liquid assets (-4.7% from January to March), which thereafter held steady in accordance with the objectives proposed by the monetary authorities.
The freeze on the commercial banks' excess reserves was lifted in May.
At the same time, these institutions were allowed to redeem their investments in central bank pass-through certificates.
Towards the end of the year, foreign investment flows boosted net international assets, which consequently acted as a factor working to expand the monetary base.
The rise in international fuel prices reduced fuel tax receipts, thereby impairing the country's capacity to repay its foreign debt, since revenues from this tax are earmarked for debt payments.
In addition, the authorities raised the commission on foreign-exchange transactions to help compensate for the loss of tax revenue caused by the rise in oil prices and thus offset its impact on the country's capacity to meet its foreign debt repayment schedule.
A temporary restriction was placed on commercial bank loan portfolios in late November as a preventive measure to deal with seasonal liquidity pressures.
In view of the 77% surge in dollar deposits, regulations were set up to limit the exposure of financial institutions holding external debts, and commercial banks were given the option of maintaining their foreign-currency deposits either in foreign banks or as interest-bearing deposits with the central bank.
In May, nominal interest rates in the commercial banking system started to fall.
However, monetary measures taken at the end of the year, combined with the decline in inflation, pushed real interest rates up from 16% to 19%.
In Une with interest rate trends, commercial bank loans to the private sector climbed by 19% in real terms, a rate very similar to the figure for 1998.
Loans were mainly extended to commerce (36%), construction (6%) and manufacturing (13%).
Credit to the pubUc sector was up by 35% as a result of the government deficit, payroll obligations and generator maintenance costs. (c) Foreign-exchange and trade policy The government's foreign-exchange policy was aimed at maintaining the crawUng peg system adopted in the second half of 1998.
A sUght depreciation of the official exchange rate was seen during the year (a December-to-December rate of 3%); the currency's strength was buoyed by the official capital that flowed into the country following Hurricane Georges and by the deferral of foreign debt payments.
Export Reactivation and Promotion Act No. 84-99 was passed, which provides, among other things, for a scheme of customs drawbacks and a system for temporary customs clearance for inward-processing trade.
Application of this law is, however, subject to regulations that are yet to be approved.
Implementation of the free trade agreements signed in 1998 with the Caribbean Community (Caricom) and Central America remained on hold while the relevant instruments were being negotiated.
In March 2000, the 288 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (12-month variation, %) Real effective exchange b a Preliminary figures. b Refers to exchange rate for imports. negotiations on the first protocol for the implementation of the Caricom agreement were concluded.
Under this protocol, 8,000 products will be duty-free; 50 other products appear on a list of excluded items.
The two parties also agreed on specific criteria of origin for over 5,000 products. (d) Structural reforms The capitalization of the State-owned electrical power utility, Corporación Dominicana de Electricidad (CDE), was completed midway through the year.
This transaction involved the transfer of energy distribution and some generating plants to private companies and took the form of an auction whereby the highest bidder received a 50% stake in the company and management control.
Energy transmission remained under State control, together with the system's hydroelectric plants and responsibility for contracts involving the use of private generators.
In addition, a 30-year lease on the support facilities for the 10 sugar refineries belonging to the State Sugar Council (CEA) was signed.
Under this arrangement, the State will recover the value of its capitalized assets at the end of the period, while during the term of the lease, the concession-holders will invest in the modernization of these plants.
Bolstered by exports of goods and services (14.5%) and domestic demand, aggregate demand continued to expand at a robust rate (10.1%).
The growth of domestic demand slowed to 7.7%, however, down from 13.2% the previous year, as a result of smaller increases in private consumption (3.2%) and gross fixed investment (16.8%).
Private investment, on the other hand, advanced energetically, thereby fulfilling economic growth expectations and boosting construction, in particular of infrastructure projects for the tourism industry.
Although private consumption benefited from an expansion in employment, real wages and foreign Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 289 remittances, its buoyancy was checked by domestic spending controls designed to prevent the economy from overheating.
Government consumption, on the other hand, continued to climb fairly sharply due to an increase in the central government's and other public agencies' payrolls.
Manufacturing rose by 9.6%, basic services were up 10.8% and commerce expanded by 9.5%.
The agricultural sector rallied (7%) in the wake of its poor performance in 1998 (1%), thanks to an upsurge in production during the last quarter of the year, after the sector had posted negative growth rates for the period January-September.
This rebound was fueled by the strong performance of domestic food crops (22%).
This, in turn, was made possible by higher yields, as the production of export crops plummeted by 31%, mainly as a result of lower prices on the international market.
Spurred by strengthening domestic demand, an expansion in production capacity, the booming construction sector and -thanks to the buoyancy of the United States economy- an increase in external demand, the manufacturing sector grew at much the same rate (6.7%) as the year before.
Exports from the customs-free areas increased by 5%, which was much lower than the 14% rate recorded the preceding year.
Nevertheless, value added fell by 2.5%, owing mainly to cuts in the number of firms and employees working in the textile industry.
This downsizing was part of the restructuring effort undertaken in order to cope with the unequal conditions of access to the United States market resulting from the failure to pass parity legislation for the textile industry.
The United States Congress ultimately did approve the textile parity bill in May 2000, however.
Growth in the construction industry (18%) was stimulated by foreign direct investment in the tourism sector, the dynamism of the economy and the channelling of credit towards this sector, which posted a 50% real growth rate over the 1998 figure.
The output of the electricity, gas and water sector climbed by 8%.
A contributing factor in this respect was the increased generation of electrical power, mainly by hydroelectric and gas-fired plants.
Growth in transport and telecommunications (11%) was similar to the previous year's rate and was attributable to the performance of the telephone subsector (16%), and, above all, the expansion in cellular telephone services.
The tourism sector bounced back (10%) from the slump that occurred after the passage of Hurricane Georges.
The cumulative rate of inflation was 5.1 %, or about three percentage points lower than in 1998.
The price index showed slight fluctuations in both directions throughout the year, despite an inflationary spike in October that was promptly brought under control by the authorities.
In October, the introduction of an increase in the commission on foreign-exchange transactions so that the government could honour its foreign debt obligations combined with domestic fuel price hikes to boost the monthly inflation rate to 3.51 %.
In the end, however, the enforcement of stringent monetary measures in the last two months of the year brought the rate of inflation back down to a figure even lower than the target set by the authorities.
Nominal wages were raised by 20% in June 1999, and this, together with a decline in the rate of inflation, resulted in a 13% increase in real terms.
The salaries of health-sector professionals were raised by 65% between the increase entering into effect upon the legislation's entry into force and the remaining 30% taking effect in The overall unemployment rate stood at 13.8%, compared with 14.4% in 1998.
The most dynamic sectors of the economy in terms of job creation were farming and livestock (6%), construction (6%) and transport and telecommunications (9%).
The government payroll expanded as a result of the creation of 4,825 new jobs.
The overall balance of payments position (US$ 171 million) reflected the level of foreign direct investment, which was more than enough to offset the current account deficit of US$ 513 million, or 3% of GDP.
The authorities were therefore able to build up international reserves -which in net terms came to US$ 547 million- and thus to maintain a relatively stable exchange rate.
The upswing in total exports was accounted for by the expansion of exports from the customs-free areas (5.6%), since domestic exports contracted (-1.8%).
Within the latter category, traditional exports plunged by 28%, while non-traditional exports soared by 38%.
Although exports from customs-free areas did rise, they nonetheless lost some momentum as a result of closures in the textile sector and job losses.
The increase in imports was more moderate than it had been the previous year (15% in 1998 versus 8% in 1999) due to a variety of factors.
Growth was fueled by the increased imports needed to satisfy private consumer demand (11%) and to provide the imported machinery and equipment needed by a burgeoning economy; the rise in fuel prices, which pushed up the cost of imports of petroleum and petroleum products by 30%; and the higher commission on foreign-exchange transactions.
The balance on non-factor services yielded a surplus of USS 1.529 billion thanks to the buoyancy of tourism and telecommunications.
The growth rate for unrequited private transfers plummeted from 47% in 1998 to -3% in 1999 as official grants and reinsurance payments slid back from their exceptionally high post-hurricane levels.
Family remittances, which climbed by 15%, continued to act as an important source of foreign exchange and a mainstay of the country's balance-of-payments position.
The surplus on the financial account, which more than offset the current account deficit, was based on a steep year-on-year increase in foreign direct investment (105%) due to the capitalization of the State-run electrical power utility, Corporación Dominicana de Electricidad (CDE) (47% of the total), investments in tourism (22%) and the buoyancy of the telecommunications sector (16%).
The official external debt closed out the year at USS 3.582 billion, the equivalent of 44% of exports of goods and services or 20% of GDP.
Interest amounted to USS 125 million, or 1.5% of exports of goods and services.
External debt servicing was lower than the year before, as the net flow of debt payments took a turn for the better thanks to the deferral granted by the Paris Club and by Venezuela following Hurricane Georges.
Buoyed by foreign investment inflows on the order of USS 1 billion, a current account deficit of close to 3% of GDP is projected for the year 2000 together with an overall surplus of over USS 120 million.
A 14% improvement in export figures is possible in view of the passage of the textile tariff parity bill.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 291 Uruguay Gross domestic product (GDP) fell by over 3% in 1999 owing to declines in both domestic and external demand and a prolonged drought that cut back agricultural supply.
The reversal in the terms of trade caused national income to shrink by 5% after having posted a 7% growth rate in 1998.
The procyclical nature of the tax regime was one of the factors underlying the expansion of the non-financial public-sector (NFPS) deficit to 3.6% of GDP, while the external current account deficit widened to almost 3% of GDP.
This widespread downturn raised unemployment to over 11 % and this, in combination with imported deflation and a slowdown in monetary expansion, held domestic price increases to just 4%, the lowest figure in the last 50 years.
EXTERNAL CIRCUMSTANCES having an impact on Uruguay took a sharp turn for the worse at the beginning of 1999.
In particular, the sudden devaluation of the Brazilian real (on the order of 30% in real terms) triggered a process which severely affected Uruguay's bilateral trade capacity and then, in quick succession, slashed demand by its two main trading partners and dampened the expectations of domestic and external economic agents.
The prices of major raw material exports (such as meat, wool and rice) fell while oil prices rose sharply and interest rates trended upward.
The change in expectations that came in the wake of the Brazilian devaluation was compounded by the uncertainty associated with any general election year.
The private sector responded with a major adjustment (on the order of 2% of GDP), with saving in 1999 being one percentage point higher than investment, whereas in 1998 investment had been more than one GDP percentage point higher than saving.
Given this combination of depressive factors, the government sought to ride out the unfavourable period with a countercyclical policy, taking advantage of its comfortable fiscal situation and relatively easy access to credit, thanks to its sovereign debt's investment-grade credit rating.
The behaviour of the public and private sectors was therefore quite different from what it had been in preceding years: while in 1996-1998 the private sector's domestic demand had expanded more than the public sector's had, in 1999 public spending grew by 5.5% while private expenditure fell by 4%.
During the first few months of 2000, the economy's performance was mixed.
The peso continued to appreciate against the euro, against a background of high oil prices and an upward trend in international interest rates, but the international prices of major raw material exports began to recover at the same time as Uruguay's two largest neighbours began to show signs of revival.
The private-sector adjustment would have been completed at that point, but the new Administration that took office in March set about cutting spending.
The authorities projected 2%-2.5% GDP growth in this more favourable domestic and external environment, but private analysts' projections were more conservative.
Industrial output figures suggested that the higher level of activity stemmed primarily from export growth rather than from a recovery in domestic demand.
Economic policy The financial programme agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) early in the year envisaged a major slowdown in economic activity, after three years of sustained growth, in view of the deterioration of external conditions in the second half of 1998.
The financial programme was based on projections of listless economic activity, a widening of the public-sector deficit from 0.9% to 1.8% of GDP, a slight increase in the trade gap and a US$ 200 million loss of international reserves.
With a projected slowdown in the rate of devaluation, inflation was expected to continue on its downward path, reaching an annual rate somewhere in the range of 4%-6%.
Given the abrupt change in prices relative to Brazil, devaluation was set to continue at the same pace as the previous year (7.5% annually).
It was expected, however, that imported deflation and weak domestic demand would help the economy to reach the original inflation target.
Domestic factors had a negative impact on economic development during the year.
Firstly, the elections held at the end of the year greatly increased uncertainty about the continuation of the economic policy that had been in place for the preceding two years.
There was particular concern about the exchange-rate regime, given the peso's strong appreciation against the currency of its main Mercosur trading partner and the considerable decrease in exports to Mercosur in general.
A persistent drought created very unfavourable conditions for the agricultural sector, which saw income fall steeply and production costs increase.
Midway through the year, as the external situation (especially at the regional level) continued to deteriorate, the fiscal target was changed to a deficit of 2% of GDP, in the expectation of a similar drop in the level of activity.
The government relaxed its fiscal programme in order to avoid exacerbating recessionary pressures.
The sliding exchange-rate band was maintained, however; for a good part of the year the dollar floated within the band and on several occasions the central bank sold dollars at the band's ceiling exchange rate.
The main priority of the Administration that took office in March 2000 was to bring the fiscal deficit back into line with stabilization targets in the medium term, and steps were therefore taken to curb expenditure.
It was hoped that these measures, together with the higher tax receipts expected from the recovery of economic activity, would reduce the NFPS deficit to 1.8% of GDP, which would be financed by borrowing.
The government also announced that the existing exchange-rate policy and rate of devaluation were to be maintained for the 2000 financial year.
These measures were aimed at keeping the annual inflation rate in the 4%-6% range.
Tax revenues, which are closely related to the business cycle, fell by 5% in real terms in 1999.
Breaking with their previous practice, the authorities did not aim fiscal policy at adjusting expenditure to income.
Instead, taking a countercyclical approach in the face of a tough private-sector adjustment, the government continued with its programme of public investment in construction and took steps to support the agricultural sector as it sought to deal with the difficulties it was experiencing.
As a result, at -3.6% of GDP, the NFPS deficit was well over the projected figure.
The expansion of this deficit was chiefly attributable to the central government's fiscal performance.
In fact, while the deficit of the central government and the social security system climbed from 1.7% of GDP in 1998 to 4.6% in 1999, State-owned enterprises recorded a surplus (1.2% of GDP) similar to the previous year's despite higher costs due to the increase in oil prices and reduced use of hydroelectric energy because of the severe drought.
The increase in government expenditure was also widespread, with the exception of payrolls, which dropped almost 1% in real terms.
Social security expenditure went up the most (almost 9% in real terms), as outlays on both pension payments and unemployment benefits rose; expenditure in the form of debt interest also rose (due to the increase in both the amount owed and the international rate) and investment expanded by more than 2% in real terms.
During the preceding three-year period, following the Mexican currency crisis, the price of the dollar had consistently remained at the floor of the band, only occasionally floating upward somewhat due to temporary excesses of liquidity or for short-lived crunches triggered by external events.
At this point in time, however, the expectations of economic agents changed significantly as a result of the considerable real devaluation of the Brazilian currency and election-related uncertainty about future economic policy. 296 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Consumer prices (nationwide) (12-month variation, %) Exports, f.o.b.
Real exchange rate c Money (M1) Deposit rate Lending rate (non-preferential) a Preliminary figures. b Based on figures that have not been seasonally adjusted, at constant domestic prices. c Refers to exchange rate for imports.
The price of the dollar began to float upward as soon as the real was devalued, and in the days immediately following the devaluation the central bank had to sell foreign exchange at the top of the band.
The exchange rate settled back down to the floor of the flotation band at the end of the year, after the government party won the elections and the continuity of the general framework of economic policy was thus assured.
This also coincided with a seasonal increase in the demand for money at year's end.
Accordingly, although fluctuations in the peso lasted longer than in previous years, in 1999 the exchange rate rose by 7.4%, in line with expectations.
Although central bank foreign-exchange sales topped US$ 400 million, international reserves actually increased, albeit only slightly.
Credit to the central government grew by almost two percentage points of GDP, though this was more than counterbalanced by increased deposits in the banking system.
The main monetary aggregates showed moderate variations, with Ml recording a slight downturn and M2 a slight rise, of -0.6% and 0.3% in real terms, respectively.
As a result of the restrictive measures adopted the previous year, together with mounting uncertainty, the retreat of private spending and the change in banking companies' policies, which shifted credit towards the public sector, credit to the private sector registered a nominal increase of only 4% in 1999 and in real terms stood still.
Although the fallback in credit took place across the board, the slide in consumer credit was particularly marked: after expanding 34% in 1998, it crept up nominally by just 5% in 1999.
Interest rates on foreign-currency deposits did not vary to any significant degree.
Rates on peso deposits fluctuated, but in general trended downward, particularly after the election results.
Offshore private banking activity expanded only slightly, consolidating a downward trend in the face of strengthening regional financial centres.
The Assets Securitization Act, passed during the year, allowed the issue of financial assets collateralized by existing issues. (d) Trade policy The devaluation of the Brazilian real undercut the progress of Mercosur during 1999, following several years during which intraregional trade had strengthened substantially, as member countries spontaneously coordinated macroeconomic policies and pursued liberalization policies on a reciprocal basis.
But in 1999, difficult negotiations on sensitive sectors and products compounded the effect of a rapid reduction of trade flows within the regional grouping.
The process of adjusting regional trade to the new relative price situation was also hampered by the absence of supranational mechanisms or agencies -such as those used by the European Union, for example- to settle disputes.
Negotiations took on a sectoral slant in some cases, and on numerous occasions it became necessary to resort to talks at the presidential level.
This points up the lack of any institutional structure that would allow Mercosur to deal with events such as those which began to unfold in January 1999.
After growing at over 6.5% annually, final demand shrank by almost 4% in 1999.
Both domestic and external demand fell markedly (by 2.6% and 7.3%, respectively).
Although the reduction in demand was triggered by external factors, domestic demand played a somewhat more influential role in the contraction of total demand (equivalent to three points of GDP) than the drop in exports did.
On the supply side, while output was down by 3.2%, the decrease in imports was equivalent to 2.5% of output.
Total gross investment slumped by almost 11% owing to the steep drop in private investment.
Purchases of machinery and equipment plummeted by 20%, while construction stagnated after growing almost 12% the previous year.
Consumption shrank by 1%, with a decline of almost 2% in private consumption, which had grown at a rate of 6% over the previous three-year period.
This was attributable to the increase in unemployment, worsening expectations and the sudden slowdown in consumer credit after several years of expansion in household borrowing at high real rates.
Consequently, private spending shrank by 2% after the previous year's 7% increase, while public spending grew by 4.5%, with a significant upturn (9%) in public investment.
The steep fall in exports was due almost exclusively to reduced purchases by Argentina and Brazil, which together account for over half of Uruguay's total exports.
The downward trend in demand was reflected in declines in almost all sectors of production, with the only exceptions being construction, transport and communications.
The drop was particularly severe in manufacturing (down 8.4%), agriculture (down 8.2%) and commerce, restaurants and hotels (down 3.4%).
Manufacturing exports fell almost 10% due to a range of factors that included the drop in international wool prices, the crisis in Asian markets and the reduction in regional demand, which significantly affected the production of textiles, clothing, leather, various foodstuffs, motor vehicles and chemicals.
Slack domestic demand was also reflected in the shrinkage of many branches of the manufacturing sector.
The agricultural sector performed well during the first semester, but the persistent drought slashed production during the second.
Commerce, restaurants and hotels reflected the general retreat of domestic demand and the weakening of inbound tourism.
On the other hand, particularly as a result of public investment, construction continued to grow (3.2%), while communications kept up its rapid pace of activity.
Thin demand, the appreciation of the currency against the real and the euro, and the government's decision to finance the fiscal deficit through borrowing held retail price increases to just 4% in 1999, the smallest increase in 50 years.
The slump in the prices of tradables had a greater effect on the wholesale price index, which slipped by a slight amount.
As in previous years, the prices of non-tradable goods and services, in particular health care and education, climbed more rapidly than tradables.
Measures adopted the previous year had spread out wage adjustments in view of the gradual drop in inflation.
Even so, the buying power of wages increased again (1.5%) in 1999, thanks mainly to a public-sector wage hike of 3% in real terms, since the increase in the private sector was less than 1%.
Given the consideration drop in national income, the adjustment of the wage bill took the form of a decrease of over 2% in employment.
As the participation rate fell by 1%, unemployment rose by only one percentage point over the previous year's figure, to 11.3% of the economically active population.
Job losses were fairly widespread across all sectors, with the exception of construction. (c) The externa] sector Given the change in external conditions, the current account deficit on the balance of payments expanded from just over 2% of GDP in 1998 to almost 3% in 1999.
Continued capital inflows were more than sufficient to finance the wider external deficit, however.
A third of total revenue, which amounted to over US$ 600 million, came from non-registered movements (errors and omissions) that were partly a reflection of income from difficult-to-measure service exports (software, export processing zones) and partly attributable to direct investment in the form of the acquisition of existing companies.
The merchandise trade deficit increased, while the surplus on services trade slipped back.
The widening of the trade gap was almost entirely attributable to the decline in exports to Uruguay's two large neighbours.
In fact, total exports fell by US$ 524 million (19%) and exports to Mercosur dropped by US$ 511 million, with a 40% reduction in sales to Brazil and a 28% decrease in sales to Argentina.
Exports to Mercosur accounted for 45% of total external merchandise sales in 1999.
The descent of merchandise exports can be attributed both to a 2% drop in prices and a 7.6% decrease in the volumes exported.
Beef, rice and wool prices, three of the country's major export products, all tumbled.
Tourism income slumped as a result of the recession in Argentina and the loss of competitiveness stemming from the change in prices relative to Brazil.
Together with increased travel outside the country, these factors reduced the balance on the services account.
Although merchandise imports also fell, they did so by a smaller amount (-12%).
The steepest decrease was in capital goods (-25%), followed by consumer goods and non-oil intermediate goods (-14%).
The oil account swelled by a substantial 60% due to soaring international prices.
As mentioned earlier, capital inflows were more than enough to finance the larger current account deficit.
During 1999 the public sector launched a single international issue, in May, of US$ 250 million in 10-year bonds, at a spread of 212.5 basis points over United States Treasuries.
Towards the end of the year, the government also swapped US$ 95 million in Brady bonds for US$ 85 million of bonds maturing in 2021, with a spread of 195 basis points.
This operation also released US$ 25 million in zero-coupon bonds that had been used as collateral.
A good part of the public sector's borrowing requirements were covered by placements on the domestic market.
Finally, although the central bank continued to build up reserves, since a portion of these assets corresponded to debt held by the local financial system, the international reserves taken into account in the IMF agreement decreased by US$ 161 million.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 299 Venezuela In 1999, the Venezuelan economy experienced an unusual combinationof severe economic recession (indeed, the worst in a decade) and a significant upturn in the prices of its oil exports.
The decline of over 7% in output was primarily attributable to production cuts that Venezuela applied in conjunction with other major oil-exporting countries in order to reverse the downward trend of prices.
This decrease was brought about by monetary policy within the context of a protracted process of political and institutional change whose outcome appeared to be uncertain.
T H E POLICY of limiting oil production pushed prices up, and the approximate prices of Venezuela's hydrocarbons exports jumped from USS 9 to USS 23 per barrel in 1999.
This increase enabled the central government to hold its budget deficit to less than 3% of gross domestic product (GDP).
The Central Bank of Venezuela (BCV) was also able to maintain its policy based on a gradually sliding exchange-rate band.
The bolivar thus depreciated by 15% against the dollar over the year, which, together with a fall in demand, made it possible to keep inflation on its downward path: the annual rate was 20%, the best result in a decade.
Higher oil revenues and slack demand for imports also generated a hefty trade surplus, as well as a surplus equivalent to over 5% of GDP on the current account of the balance of payments.
This compensated for the capital outflows triggered by poor economic prospects early in the year and boosted reserves, including those of the recently created Macroeconomic Stabilizatio Fund (MSF) and the Debt-Rescue Fund.
In December 1999, several parts of the country were inundated by torrential rains that caused heavy losses of human life and destroyed physical and production infrastructure.
ECLAC has estimated the material damage to be around USS 3.24 billion, or the equivalent of 3.3% of GDP, although in the State of Vargas, where the heaviest losses were suffered, the cost of the damage exceeded the value of output.
The Administration hoped to achieve a rate of 15% by the end of 2000.
Fiscal policy was driven by the need for financing, in line with the 1999-2000 Transitional Economic Programme.
Both policies were given a boost by the upturn in oil prices in the second quarter as a result of production cuts agreed upon by Venezuela and other oil-exporting countries.
These cuts ran counter to the economic reactivation, however, even though monetary policy-makers lowered interest rates in an attempt to boost the economy.
In pursuit of the same objective, a programme of State intervention known as Bolivar 2000 was also planned.
Private demand remained slack during the transitional period in which the new Administration was taking office in February 1999, however, and throughout the constituent process which lasted until December and which gave rise to an unsuccessful call for general elections in May 2000.
In response, the President announced a series of sectoral rehabilitation plans beginning in February 2000; these programmes included the Vargas State recovery plan; a production scheme for agriculture, tourism, industry and commerce; an aluminium sector plan, an infrastructure plan; and a plan for the oil industry.
Congress did not approve the proposed 1999 budget, making it necessary to roll over the 1998 budget.
The new Administration's efforts were therefore focused on limiting the size of the deficit and ensuring that there was some means of financing it.
Measures were adopted to cut public spending by 10%, and authorization was obtained from Congress to strengthen tax collections.
This initiative included a temporary bank debit tax which was to last for one year, a broadening of the tax on luxury goods and wholesale products -which thus became a genuine value added taxand income tax reform.
The effects of these measures were counteracted by the economic recession's negative impact on tax receipts, however.
As a result, the central government's non-oil revenues fell in real terms, although they held almost steady as a percentage of GDP (above 10%).
In contrast, there was an upturn in tax receipts from the petroleum industry following the rise in hydrocarbon prices that began in March.
The mean price of the mix of petroleum products exported by Venezuela rose to over US$ 16 per barrel during the year, well above the US$ 9 initially envisaged in the budget and the low US$ 11 yearly average obtained in 1998.
At 6.4% of GDP, tax receipts from oil were slightly higher than in 1998.
The component of expenditure that was hit the hardest by the government's spending cuts was capital expenditure, which fell to less than 3% of GDP, in keeping with the pattern prevailing during most of the decade.
Thus, the slight increase in current expenditure was not enough to prevent total central government expenditure from shrinking by one percentage point of GDP, coming in once again below 20%.
All this combined to hold the fiscal deficit down to 2.8 % of GDP, which was lower than the 1998 figure of 4%.
A portion of oil revenue was allocated to the MSF, in keeping with the new rules adopted for the Fund, and this raised borrowing requirements by the same amount.
The funds to make up for this shortfall were obtained on the domestic market, mainly through the issue of Treasury bills and public debt instruments, since stringent borrowing conditions on external markets made them an unfeasible source of financing.
The central government made net amortization payments on its external debt equivalent to 1 % of GDP.
It was not until March 2000 that the government was able to issue bonds on the international market (amounting to 500 million euros) for the first time since 1998.
The rise in oil prices led to a notable upturn in the operating results of the State company Petróleos de Venezuela (PDVSA), and total income for the non-financial public sector (NFPS) climbed from the equivalent of 21% of GDP in 1998 to almost 28% in 1999.
Capital expenditure slipped for the third year running, reaching its lowest level of the decade, and fixed investment followed suit (it came to just a little over 5% of GDP).
The government was thus able to reduce the overall public-sector fiscal deficit, which ended up at 1.2% of GDP.
J Interest rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the exchange rate. instruments on the external market, but they amounted to less than the net amortization payments made by the central government, so the financing of the overall deficit had to be borne by the domestic market.
The balance of the external public debt thus fell from 24.5% (b) Monetary and foreign-exchange policy The BCV intervened in the foreign-exchange market in order to ensure that inflation remained on its downward path.
This intervention was within the parameters of foreign-exchange policy, which was directed at keeping the exchange rate for the dollar within a range of 7.5% on either side of a parity rate that was devalued each month by 1.28%.
This increased the price of the dollar in the course of the year from 564 to 648 bolívares, the average of which implied an appreciation in real terms of 10% with respect to the previous year; the real exchange rate thus accumulated an appreciation of more than 50% over the decade.
Intervention in the money market was directed at reducing the high lending rates seen at the beginning of the year and was undertaken in response to the banking sector's deteriorating performance in the face of falling demand for money in the prevailing recessionary climate.
In this regard, the BCV reduced its official discount rate on two occasions, lowering it from 60% in April to 38% in July, and increased the interest-bearing portion of the banking reserve requirement.
In addition, the monetary authorities continued to resort to open-market operations to regulate the money supply.
These transactions took the form of sales of monetary stabilization bonds (TEMs).
Issues of these instruments during the year, which were carried out taking into consideration how the issues of government paper on the domestic market influenced domestic interest rates, were lower in value than amortization payments.
As aresult, the balance of TEMs in circulation decreased by 40% and their average yield fell from 37% These operations had the effect of boosting liquidity, as did the monetization of a 17% increase in BCV international reserves denominated in bolívares.
Both factors were instrumental in the 32% increase recorded in the monetary base.
However, given slacker lending activity and the resulting reduction in the money multiplier, the monetary base expanded by only 23% and M2 increased even less, by 20%, which was similar to the rate of inflation.
Interest rates fell steadily, particularly during the first quarter, under the influence of monetary policy, declining from 40% and 33% on loans and deposits, respectively, to around 27% and 14% by year's end.
Thus, in March, money yields turned negative again in real terms, after a scant eight months of positive figures.
An attempt was also made to boost private investment in various sectors by such means as the Electricity Act, the Gaseous Hydrocarbons Act, the Mining Act (a law intended to promote and protect national and foreign investment), the Concessions Act and the Tenders Act.
Initially, this fund was to be financed by the windfall oil revenues generated when the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 305 price of the dollar exceeded the sliding average of the preceding five-year period.
This rule was amended in May 1999, with the resulting change remaining in effect until 2004.
This Fund is to be allocated 30% of all tax receipts from oil revenues in excess of the budgeted amount whenever annual debt servicing surpasses 20% of recurrent income.
The Executive may disburse the resources accumulated in the MSF subject to consultation with Congress.
These modifications changed the basic stabilizing role for which the MSF was originally designed.
At the end of the first quarter of 2000 -the deadline for 1999 contributions- the MSF stood at US$ 1.706 billion (US$ 2.015 billion at the beginning of May) and the Debt Rescue Fund had climbed to US$ 580 million.
The recession that had begun in 1998 intensified in 1999, and practically all the components of total demand shrank, with the exception of public consumption expenditure (which grew by a little more than 1%, mainly during the second half of the year).
Investment decreased by one fourth, for which public and private investment were almost equally responsible.
This brought the investment/GDP ratio to its lowest level of the decade, at barely 12.5%.
The reduction in public investment was attributable to the difficulties encountered by the public sector in raising financing and, particularly, its rescheduling of plans to expand the oil industry; private investment was curtailed by the climate of uncertainty and political transition, as well as the high price of money and slack demand.
Private domestic consumption also fell sharply, by close to 5%, making it the second most important cause of the economic slump in absolute terms.
The main culprit was the 11% reduction in goods and services exports, which was itself a reflection of cuts in production and in exports of hydrocarbons.
Aggregate demand shrank by almost 10%, causing imports of goods and services to plummet by 20% and domestic production to fall by 7.2%.
As a result, in 1999 the Venezuelan economy suffered its worst recession of the decade.
The downturn in activity was reflected in all sectors of production except for a very few (e.g., the electricity, gas and water sectors; transport, storage and communications; and government services).
The output of the mining sector, which includes hydrocarbons (the production of which edged down from 3.45 million barrels per day in 1998 to 3.16 million barrels in 1999), shrank by 9%; agriculture fell back by 2%; commerce and hotels by 13%; the financial sector by 6%; and construction by 20%.
The manufacturing sector turned in a result similar to that of total output, as the production of almost all its main sectors decreased.
The reduction in demand was sorely felt in the manufacture of motor vehicles which, with 12,000 units, came to barely a tenth of the level recorded a year earlier.
The consumer price index (CPI) increased by 20% during 1999, which was substantially lower than the previous year's rate of just under 30% and the lowest for the decade.
In September, the monthly rate fell below 1 % for the first time since the deflationary episode of March 1988 and the discontinuation of price controls in 1989.
In February 2000 inflation fell to 0.4% and in May the year-on-year rate stood at less than 17%.
The fact that inflation slowed at a time when total supply was shrinking at a rapid rate is indicative of the extent to which slack aggregate demand influenced prices.
The increase in consumer prices was similar in magnitude to the increase in the money supply (M2).
A number of other indicators also illustrated the fundamental role played by the controlled slide of the exchange rate, despite the drastic reduction in the volume of imports.
Both the wholesale price index (WPI) and the producer price index (PPI), which do not take the important sector of non-tradable services into account, rose less than the CPI (13.6% and 9.7%, respectively).
The WPI climbed by 15.8% for domestic goods, but by only 6.4% for imported goods.
A 306 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean breakdown of the CPI shows that, with price rises of 25%, the services sector was primarily responsible for the increase.
In contrast, prices in agricultural sector, where the contraction of supply was the mildest, increased by less than 7%.
In general, the prices of non-tradables rose by 9 percentage points more than tradables did.
The annual inflation rate served as a point of reference for a public-sector wage hike in May.
This increase, which consequently matched the inflation rate, was also extended to private-sector employees under agreements reached among the government, employers and trades unions.
For the year as a whole, however, the preliminary results of household surveys indicated that the approximate increase in average income as measured against the previous year was 7% in the public sector and 9% in the private sector.
Consequently, the purchasing power of wages fell by over 8% on average for all wage earners.
A further hike of 20% was announced in 2000 for the public sector, and an increase was also to be made in the minimum wage, which had been raised from The drop in real income was compounded by an increase in unemployment as a result of the economic recession.
The number of employed persons decreased over the year, bottoming out during the third quarter.
At year's end, there were 18,000 fewer jobs than a year earlier, and during that time the number of persons seeking work had increased by over 225,000.
At the same time, employment conditions worsened, and this was reflected in the greater proportion of people employed in the informal sector of the economy (around 52%).
The combination of higher oil prices and domestic recession turned the deficit on the current account of the balance of payments into a surplus of US$ 5.358 billion, equivalent to over 5% of GDP.
This was enough to compensate for the negative balance on the financial account and produce an overall surplus of over US $ 1 billion.
The surplus on current account was attributable to the large positive balance on merchandise trade, which was well over US$ 9 billion.
The higher level of exports reflected a 36% increase in the value of oil sales, thanks to the ascent of oil prices that began in the second quarter of 1999.
This was more than enough to compensate for the reduction in shipments, which fell from an average of 3.1 million barrels per day to 2.8 million between 1998 and 1999, since the average price rose by 45% over the same period of time.
In contrast, non-oil exports fell for the second year running, this time by some US$ 500 million.
This was in response both to the weakness of demand on the part of Latin American trading partners, especially Colombia, and to the lower prices of raw materials.
After several years of real appreciation of the bolivar, non-oil exports stood at just over US$ 3.7 billion, the lowest level since 1993, and their share in total sales was barely 18%.
The value of total imports also plummeted (-21%) as a consequence of shrinking demand and, to some extent, lower prices for imported products.
The decrease was much sharper in imports of capital goods and raw materials.
The value of consumer goods rose, despite the reduction in volume, particularly in the case of non-durables.
Services imports followed a similar downward trend, especially under the headings of shipping services, which are closely linked to purchases of goods, and travel abroad.
The descent of payments, which include remittances of profits and dividends on direct investment and debt interest, was particularly steep.
The deficit of almost US$ 3 billion on the financial account was mainly the result of the sharp downturn in direct and portfolio investment and the outflow of private capital.
The former was principally a reflection of the absence of privatization activity and the fact that no debt issues were floated on international financial markets, while the latter was a direct consequence of the weaker demand for money that was seen because of the precarious state of the economy and of public finances in the early months of the year.
The overall payments surplus enabled the BCV to increase its international reserves to US $ 15.164 billion, the equivalent of 15 months worth of merchandise imports, by the end of 1999.
The reserves accumulated in the MSF should be added to this figure.
Overview The economic performance of the countries belonging to the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) varied considerably in 1999, although growth was generally positive, ranging from 0.4% in Dominica to 8.2% in Grenada.
In Montserrat, however, gross domestic product (GDP) declined by an estimated 1.5% as the country continued its struggle to overcome the effects of the 1997 volcanic eruption.
In five of the countries GDP grew faster than in 1998, probably reflecting the cumulative effects of government policy and the product mix in the countries concerned.
Value added in the goods-producing sectors tended to decline, while services remained buoyant. countries worsened, with expenditure characteristically outstripping revenue.
All the countries recorded overall fiscal deficits, although half of them managed to achieve surpluses on current account.
Price rises were kept under control either through policy or because of the quality and direction of the countries' trading patterns.
Vincent and the Grenadines. 310 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean (a) Fiscal management Central government current accounts were mixed in 1999, reflecting both economic performance and fiscal management.
A number of countries took steps to improve their tax-collection systems to make up for the lower customs revenues resulting from trade liberalization.
In Anguilla, the current fiscal surplus narrowed to EC$ 5.7 million or 2% of GDP, versus EC$ 13.1 million (5% of GDP) in 1998, as revenues fell and expenditure increased.
Inclement weather late in the year was partly responsible for the lower tax receipts, while capital expenditure retreated by 26.5%, as there was less current saving available to finance it.
Of total capital expenditure, 68.4% was financed out of the current fiscal surplus and deposits held at commercial banks.
Current income grew by 1.4%, with tax receipts up by 3.3%, but the increase was outweighed by current expenditure.
Capital spending contracted by 3.3%, despite the development of several major projects, mainly in infrastructure; and the overall deficit rose by 15.2% to EC$ 78.2 million, equivalent to 4.4% of GDP.
Dominica recorded a current deficit of EC$ 6.0 million in 1999, having achieved a surplus of EC$ 8.8 million the year before.
Revenues were down by 2.2%, as tax receipts declined; there were also substantially higher outlays, with capital spending rising to EC$ 82.7 million (11.7% of GDP) as the Government made payments for land acquired to construct an international airport.
The overall fiscal deficit rose to EC$ 74.0 million, equivalent to 10.5% of GDP.
Grenada achieved a current surplus of EC$ 48.6 million, or 4.7% of GDP.
This was significantly better than the previous year's surplus of EC$ 9.2 million (1% of GDP), thanks to a major improvement in tax efficiency that made it possible to raise current income by 18.1% to EC$ 271.7 million.
This revenue improvement was supported by a modest increase in current expenditure.
Capital spending grew by 8.8% to EC$ 106.4 million, of which over 92% related to outlays on major public-sector projects.
Expenditure was financed by foreign loans and grants, plus local financing, and the overall fiscal deficit came in at EC$ 23.0 million, equivalent to 2.2% of GDP.
The current fiscal deficit in Montserrat was trimmed to EC$ 31.1 million in 1999 (1.7% of GDP) from EC$ 34.7 million or 1.9% of GDP in 1998, as current income increased and expenditure fell off slightly.
More efficient tax administration boosted revenue by 19.7%, while capital expenditure retreated by 22% to ECS 13.8 million (0.9% of GDP), partly as the result of a lower rate of execution of the public-sector investment programme.
The overall fiscal result before grants was a deficit of EC$ 11.9 million, but with grants included there was a surplus EC$ 11.5 million.
Current expenditure rose by 12.8% while income grew by 5.4%, with improved tax collection raising receipts by 4.7% to EC$ 183.6 million.
Capital expenditure dropped back to EC$ 34.6 million on completion of a number of projects, and the overall fiscal deficit ended at EC$ 45.8 million.
Current expenditure rose by 9.7% to EC$ 354.6 million, with staff remuneration, including wage increases, growing by 1.7%.
Vincent and the Grenadines also recorded a smaller current fiscal surplus than in the previous year -EC$ 33.8 million versus EC$ 39.4 million in 1998, or 4.6% of GDP.
Total current income increased by 4.9% as a result of better tax administration, while capital spending dropped to EC$ 61.8 million from EC$ 103.3 million in 1998, as a number of public-sector projects reached completion.
The overall fiscal deficit narrowed to EC$ 13.6 million from EC$ 25.0 million a year earlier.
This growth reflected increased lending to the private sector (up by 29.2%), and a decline in net central government deposits.
Liquidity in the commercial banking system tightened during the year, but interest rates remained broadly stable.
Rates on savings deposits ranged from 4.0% to 5.0%, while those on 12-month time deposits varied between 2.0% and 5.8%.
The prime lending rate fluctuated between 11.5% and 12%, with other lending rates varying between 13.5% The total monetary liabilities of the banking system (M2) in Antigua and Barbuda grew by 10.5% to ECS 1,311.7 million, reflecting developments in both the narrow money supply (Ml) and quasi-money.
Domestic credit expanded by 12.3% to ECS 1,408.4 million, mainly because of an addition to the stock of private-sector debt.
Net credit channelled to central government grew by 16.4% to ECS 277.4 million, associated with increased lending by the commercial banks, while the net foreign assets of the banking system grew by 12% to ECS 54.9 million.
The ratio of loans and advances to total deposits eased from 100.1 % at the end of 1998 to 89.1%, and the cash reserve ratio fell to 6.8%.
Commercial banks accumulated net foreign assets amounting to EC$ 40.2 million and remained relatively liquid.
Monetary liabilities and domestic credit both expanded while interest rates were stable throughout the year.
Total monetary liabilities (M2) grew by 10.4% to ECS 468.3 million, with narrow money supply and quasi-money both increasing.
Domestic credit grew by 4.6% to ECS 420.4 million, as a result of higher lending to both the public and private sectors.
Central government continued to rely on the banking system for funding, with outstanding credit growing by 6.2% to ECS 105.2 million.
Lending to the private sector increased by 2.4% to ECS 419.8 million.
Net foreign assets held by the banking system rose to ECS 125.4 million at the end of December 1999, mainly as a result of commercial-sector activity.
Credit, monetary liabilities and net foreign assets all expanded in Grenada in 1999.
Monetary liabilities (M2) grew by 13.9% to ECS 854.6 million, as a result of a 9.8% increase in narrow money supply (Ml) and 15% growth in quasi-money.
Private-sector foreign-currency deposits rose sharply, while private-sector savings and time deposits grew by 12.6% and 15.4% respectively. 312 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean Domestic credit extended by the banking system expanded by 7.7% to EC$ 762.4 million, with lending to the private sector increasing by 12.2% to EC$ 767.9 million.
Net foreign assets of the banking system grew by 51.7% to EC$ 133.8 million.
Interest rates remained broadly stable throughout the year, with prime lending rates ranging from 9.5% to 10.5%, while other rates went as high as 16.0%.
In Montserrat total monetary liabilities (M2) shrank by 5.2% to stand at EC$ 111.3 million by end-1999, largely as a result of a 16% contraction in the narrow money supply (Ml).
Net domestic credit contracted by EC$ 1.6 million in 1999 compared to EC$ 1.4 million a year earlier, as result of reduced lending to the private sector and larger deposits held by non-bank financial institutions, non-financial public-sector enterprises and central government.
Construction was the only productive sector to increase its level of borrowing.
The ratio of loans and advances to deposits fell to 19.0%, down by 3.7 percentage points from its 1998 level; the ratio of total liquid assets to total deposits contracted, and the cash reserve ratio fell to 15.7% because of a decrease in net cash reserves (EC$ 44.1 million) and a fall in total deposits (EC$ 15.4 million).
This was also reflected in the behaviour of narrow money (Ml) and quasi-money.
While loans outstanding to the private sector expanded by 8.3%, lending to non-bank financial institutions grew by 73.0%; given that the deposits of these institutions more than doubled, the result was an increase in their net deposits position.
The net foreign assets of the banking system fell by 43.3% to EC$ 99.5 million by the end of 1999, following the 25.4% recorded the previous year, as the commercial banks moved from a net asset position in 1998 to net liabilities by the end of 1999.
Liquidity in the commercial banking system tightened, with the ratio of loans and advances to deposits rising to 91.2% by the end of 1999 compared to 87.5% a year earlier.
Commercial bank interest rates remained broadly unchanged, rates on savings deposits varying between 4.0% and 6.0%, while those on three-, six- and twelve-month time deposits ranged from 1.5% to 7.0%.
Lucia, total monetary liabilities of the banking system (M2) expanded by 9.7% to EC$ 1,093.3 million, with both Ml and quasi-money growing mainly as a result of an increase in private-sector deposits.
The strength of bank lending to tourism, transport, and professional and other services was indicative of the buoyant nature of these activities during the period.
The foreign assets of the banking system declined by 12.1 % to stand at EC$ 81.4 million at the end of 1999, compared to EC$ 92.6 million a year earlier; the net foreign assets position of the commercial banks deteriorated by 23.6%.
Liquidity in the commercial banking system remained tight, with the ratio of loans to deposits edging up to 96.4% from 95.2% a year earlier.
Interest rates were stable in 1999: the prime lending rate ranged from 9.5% to 10.5%, while the maximum rate on savings deposits held steady at 6.0% and rates on three-, six- and 12-month time deposits were unchanged The broad money supply (M2) in St.
Domestic credit expanded by 12.1%, following growth of 1.5% in 1998, with net lending to central government rising by 18.6% as a result of increased central bank advances and larger commercial bank treasury bill holdings.
Lending to the private sector increased by 12.2%, following growth of 8.8% in 1998, with borrowing for house purchase accounting for most of this.
Net foreign assets held by the banking system rose by 20% to EC$ 215.4 million at the end of 1999, thanks to inflows associated with foreign direct investment (FDI) and larger deposits held by offshore businesses.
Economic performance Value added by tourism in Antigua and Barbuda, as measured by the hotel and restaurant sector, increased by 2.7% in 1999, following a 2.2% contraction the year before; the contribution of tourism to GDP remained constant at 13.5%, however.
Of total arrivals, 71,313 (34.3%) came from the United Kingdom, representing a 6.1 % increase in that country's share of total visitors.
The higher number of arrivals from the United Kingdom, which was the result of improved air access and successful marketing, was offset by fewer stay-over visitors from the United States (1.6%), Canada (20.5%) and elsewhere in the Caribbean (6.5%).
Construction was again vibrant in 1999, with value added rising by 8.0% and the sector contributing 13.2% to total output.
The former was directly related to the relatively high rate of execution of public-sector investment projects, in which a number of public facilities were built or renovated.
There was also considerable private-sector construction activity, including residential housing, commercial buildings and office complexes.
Although value added by the country's small agricultural sector increased by 3.2%, its contribution to GDP dropped to 3.5% versus the previous year's 4.2%.
The relatively slow growth in value added was partly due to the impact of Hurricanes Jose and Lenny in the fourth quarter of 1999.
Onion was the most widely planted crop with 73.3 acres under cultivation.
The transport sector expanded by 3.8%, having grown by just 0.9% in 1998, with higher value added in air transport contributing significantly to this result.
In the services sector, value added in wholesale and retail trade was unchanged at 4.5%, while banking and insurance grew by 7.4% and communications by 7.6%.
Value added by government services, the largest contributor to GDP with a share of 15.9%, grew by 3.5%.
This sector's robust performance resulted in its contribution to GDP rising to 16.2%, compared to 14.5% in 1998.
Construction activity in the private sector centred on hotels and commercial building, while in the public sector the focus was on roads and other categories of infrastructure.
Tourism growth accelerated in 1999, despite the impact of Hurricane Lenny which struck the island in November 1999.
Real value added in the sector increased by 6.6% compared to 1.6% in 1998, with the sector's contribution to GDP falling slightly to 32.0%, from 32.5% the year before.
The overall performance of the sector was boosted by a 6.6% increase in tourist stay-over arrivals, which totalled 46,782.
The number of excursionists declined by 14.3%, contributing to an overall decline of 6.2% in the total number of visitors.
The major tourist market continued to be the United States, though arrivals from that country declined by 1.3% in 1999, whereas stay-over visitors from the Caribbean increased by 25.2%.
The relative importance of the Italian tourist market continued to make itself felt, with the number of visitors from Italy rising by 33,9%.
Having increased by 7.2% in 1998, real value added by the sector shrank by 11.0% in 1999 in the wake of Hurricane Lenny; the output of crops, livestock and fish were all down from the previous year's levels.
Activity among other services remained buoyant, with value added increasing in all segments except transport, which declined by 3.7%.
Manufacturing output grew by 59.9% as the fabrication of concrete blocks for construction started operations.
In Dominica, value added in the construction sector increased by 2.8% in 1999, following three years of decline, while the sector's share of GDP edged up to 7.9%.
Recovery in the sector was largely due to higher government capital expenditure on schools, housing, sea defences, road works and health facilities.
Tourism, as indicated by value added in the hotel and restaurant sector, grew more slowly in 1999 (1.2%) than in 1998 (2.5%), accounting for 2.6% of GDP.
The number of stay-over arrivals increased by 12.2% to 73,506, as the promotion of local cultural events attracted visitors to the island.
Caribbean visitors dominated the tourist market, accounting for 58% of all stay-overs.
The number of excursionists more than doubled to 3,904, but cruise ship passenger arrivals fell back by 17.4% because the main cruise line temporarily suspended calls.
Total visitor arrivals declined by 10.3% The manufacturing sector contributed less to GDP in 1999 than in 1998, with the proportion declining from 8.2% to 6.9%; sectoral value added contracted by 15%.
The major influence on results in the agriculture sector was banana production, which decreased by 3.0% in 1999 to a total of 27,784 tonnes, in the wake of bad weather and as marginal producers continued to leave the industry.
Agricultural output in Grenada grew by 10%, following progressively slower growth rates from 1996 to 1998, and the sector's contribution to GDP edged up slightly from 8.7% to 8.9% in 1999.
Agricultural performance during the year largely reflected increased production among the traditional export crops: nutmeg, mace and bananas.
Nutmeg and mace output grew by 44% and 82.2% to 3,018 and 277 tonnes, respectively, in response to increased demand and higher prices for these crops both at home and internationally.
Banana production expanded from 94 tonnes in 1998 to 584 in 1999, following the resumption of exports to the United Kingdom in the fourth quarter of 1998 as a result of the Banana Rehabilitation Plan.
Cocoa production continued to decline in 1999, with output falling by 31.4% owing to reductions in acreage planted and in the number of farmers cultivating this crop.
Manufacturing growth, while remaining buoyant, slowed in 1999 to 12.1 % from the previous year's rate of 14.1%.
The sector's contribution to GDP rose from 7.9% to 8.1% in 1999, mainly as a result of increased production in the food and drink segments.
Construction activity also remained buoyant in 1999, but weakened somewhat on completion, or near completion of major capital projects in both the public and private sector.
Sectoral growth amounted to 8.0% in 1999, compared to the previous year's figure of 16.9%.
Commercial bank lending for house building and renovation increased by 15.9% during the year.
Tourist activity was broadly stable in 1999, accounting for 7.5% of GDP -the same as the year before.
The latter is explained by a 7.7% decline in the number of passenger arrivals on cruise ships, as one of the major cruise line stopped visiting the island.
Stay-over arrivals rose by 8.1 % to 125,211, boosted by a larger number of arrivals from the United States and Canada.
The number of visitors from the United Kingdom increased by 12.5% to 26,234, while arrivals from other European countries fell back by 42.8%.
In the tertiary sector, government services increased by 5.2% while banking and insurance declined.
In Montserrat, construction activity has been the economy's driving force since the volcanic eruption of 1997, and accounted for 26.6% of total GDP in 1999.
The pace of activity slowed in 1999, however, as several major public-sector projects neared completion.
Government services, the second largest sector of the economy in terms of output, shrank to 25 % of GDP in 1999 from 31.9% a year earlier, with capital expenditure scaling down as projects were completed.
Tourism grew by 66.7% during the year, versus 45% in 1998, with preliminary data showing that the total number of stay-over visitors increased by 27.0% to 9,785.
Visitors from elsewhere in the Caribbean accounted for 53.5% of the year's total, compared to 60.4% in 1998.
Negative travel advice linked to the perceived instability of the volcano has continued to undermine growth in this sector.
Sectoral growth during the year was driven by a 29.3% expansion in vegetable production.
All segments of the service sector in Montserrat registered positive growth in 1999.
In the non-sugar agricultural segment, the production of vegetables and root crops grew by 13%, following the previous year's 5% decrease.
As a result, overall value added in the sub-sector rose by 7.7% for the year, having Manufacturing activity strengthened in 1999, with value added expanding by 8.0% in real terms following a decline of 0.9% in 1998.
This reflected a substantial increase in the production of electronic components for export to the United States.
Sugar refining shrank by 316 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean 27.8% to 17,319 tonnes, as a result of the reduced output of sugar cane.
Value added in the hotel and restaurant sector fell by 12.6%, as the number of stay-over and yacht-passenger arrivals dwindled following the closure of a major hotel and damage to the cruise ship mooring facility.
Stay-over visitors from the United States, the United Kingdom and the Caribbean declined by 13.0%, 2.8% and 9.9%, in that order, while the smaller number of cruise ship calls led to an 11.0% drop in arrivals, following growth of 17.7% and 48.6% in 1997 and 1998, respectively.
Value added in the construction sector grew by 6.8%, having expanded by 7.0% in 1998.
Sectoral growth was boosted as work gathered pace on the construction of two major hotels in the private sector at an estimated cost of ECS 432.0 million.
In the public sector, construction activity involved the building of low and middle-income housing, together with education and health facilities and road refurbishment.
Value added in government services, the largest contributor to GDP with a 15.6% share, increased by 1.1 % in 1999, having grown by 4.7% the year before.
The sector's contribution to total GDP edged up to 8.3% from 8.1% a year earlier.
A major part of construction activity involved public-sector expenditure on roads, bridges, commercial development and a free-zone goods distribution complex.
Total tourist arrivals declined by 0.8%, as a result of fewer cruise ship calls.
This was offset to some extent by a 4.6% increase in the number of stay-overs from France, the United Kingdom and the United States, while the number of cruise ship visitors fell by 5.6% to 351,233, following the previous year's 19.9% increase.
Agricultural output declined, mainly as a result of a smaller banana crop, estimated at a total of 65,196 tonnes for the year - 11% down from the 1998 figure.
Agricultural value added in St Vincent and the Grenadines shrank by 5.7% in real terms, following growth of 8.3% in 1998.
The main reasons for this included the drop in banana production and a reduced fish catch.
Banana output declined by 6.3% to 37,386 tonnes, which accounted for 28.6% of total banana production in OECS countries.
Construction contracted in 1999, with value added declining by 4.1% following the conclusion of several large public-sector projects in 1998 and early 1999.
These projects were part of a government policy to improve air and road transport, along with health and education facilities.
Manufacturing continued to decline in 1999, with value added falling by 1.6%.
The indications are that tourism grew by 9.1% in 1999 as larger numbers of stay-over, cruise and yacht Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 317 visitors came to the island.
Arrivals from the United Kingdom and Canada rose on the order of 3.6% and 1.3%, respectively, while the numbers of visitors from the Caribbean and the United States were broadly unchanged.
The number of excursionists declined by (b) Inflation, wages and employment Inflation was kept under control through policy and through the quality and direction of OECS countries' trade.
In many cases price increases in 1999 were smaller than in the previous year.
Wage hikes in 1999 were generally similar throughout OECS, with increases in the private sector ranging from 3% to 10%.
In Antigua and Barbuda, public-sector wages rose by 5%, versus 4.4% in the private sector.
Unemployment is estimated to have risen, although the number of job seekers registered with the labour department fell during the year.
Kitts and Nevis and St.Vincent and the Grenadines; while there were smaller increases in St.
Private-sector unemployment is estimated to have fallen in Dominica, while rising in Anguilla and in St.
There is no consumer price index in Antigua and Barbuda, although an indirect estimate of inflation can be obtained from the GDP deflator, which rose by 1.9% in 1999.
Kitts and Nevis, and by an estimated 2.5% in Anguilla. (c) Trade and Payments The basic similarity of the production and consumption structures in all OECS countries is echoed in their balance-of-payments figures.
Current account balances were generally negative, with deficits in goods and services revealing the countries' dependence on trade with the rest of the world, in which they export a narrow range of goods and services and import most of what they consume.
In Anguilla the overall balance of payments stayed in surplus, at EC$ 5.0 million or 1.8% of GDP, although the current account deficit widened considerably to EC$ 128.8 million versus EC$ 51.4 million in 1998.
The goods, transport and income accounts posted deficits amounting to EC$ 211.4 million, EC$ 49.6 million and EC$ 11.2 million, respectively.
The balance on the travel account improved slightly to EC$ 145.1 million, associated with visitor arrivals.
The surplus on the capital and financial account grew to an estimated EC$ 133.8 million (47% of GDP) in boosted by a substantial increase in foreign direct investment (FDI).
The overall external surplus in Antigua and Barbuda strengthened from EC$ 23.4 million in 1998 to EC$ 28 million (1.6% of GDP) in 1999, although the current account deficit widened from EC$ 192.4 million to EC$ 264.9 million, largely as a result of import growth of 8.8%.
The travel account posted a slightly larger surplus than in 1998, as a result of tourist industry growth, with higher number of visitor arrivals by both air and sea.
Net current transfers increased by 5.8% to EC$ 73.3 million and were generally destined for the private sector.
Net inflows on the capital and financial account rose to EC$ 292.8 million in 1999 from EC$ 215.9 million the year before, with long-term lending to the public sector expanding.
In Dominica, the overall balance-of-payments surplus grew from EC$ 10.2 million in 1998 to EC$ 29.3 million in 1999, as a result of movements on both current and capital accounts.
The current account deficit widened to EC$ 89.8 million in 1999 (12.7% of GDP) from the previous year's EC$ 77.8 million, largely as a result of weaker merchandise trade.
Net inflows from services trade increased by 6.7% to EC$ 70.1 million, equivalent to 10.0% of GDP, while a 6.3% increase in the number of visitors generated income estimated at EC$ 109.7 million.
The capital and financial account surplus grew from EC$ 88.0 million to EC$ 122.9 million in 1999, thanks almost entirely to central government bond issues during the year.
Net inflows on the financial account rose by 71.2% from EC$ 50.4 million to EC$ 86.3 million, reflecting foreign investment in bonds issued by the Government of Dominica amounting to approximately EC$ 110.9 million.
The current account deficit in Grenada grew to an estimated EC$ 288.3 million in 1999 from EC$ 244.2 million the year before, with the visible trade gap widening by 8.5% to EC$ 401.5 million.
The value of merchandise imports increased by 10.8% to EC$ 547.4 million, while merchandise exports grew by 18.7% on 318 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean the back of higher nutmeg and mace prices.
The value of cocoa exports declined by 36.7% as a result of lower volumes exported.
Although the surplus on services trade increased to EC$ 126.9 million, following the previous year's downturn (EC$ 117.3 million), it has still not regained its 1995-1997 levels.
Income from travel explains much of the improvement, although net inflows associated with government services also increased substantially to turn an EC$ 18.9 million deficit in 1998 into a surplus of EC$ 2.1 million year later.
The capital and financial account surplus grew by 17% to EC$ 299.2 million in 1999, thanks to a significant increase in net inflows in the "other investment" category, where the surplus more than doubled fromEC$41.2 million to EC$ 100.1 million, in the wake of private-sector borrowing.
Long-term credit to the public-sector was also substantially higher, rising from EC$ 10.5 million in 1998 to EC$ 25.5 million in Movements on the current and capital accounts combined to record an overall balance-of-payments surplus of EC$ 10.9 million.
In Montserrat, the current-account deficit narrowed by 13.8% to EC$ 43.7 million (equivalent to 40.3% of GDP), thanks mainly to better results on the merchandise trade, transport and travel accounts.
Net inflows on the capital and financial account shrank by 83.1% to EC$ 14.6 million, or 13.6% of GDP, following positive growth in 1998.
On the capital account, net transfers increased to EC$ 13.3 million, on the back of capital grants from the British government, while the net surplus on the financial account shrank to EC$ 1.3 million, versus EC$ 77.4 million in 1998.
The country's net external position deteriorated, as the previous year's balance-of-payments surplus of EC$ 36.4 million became a deficit of EC$ 29.0 million in St.
Kitts and Nevis saw its current account deficit widen to EC$ 211.4 million in 1999 from the previous year's figure of EC$ 113.2 million, partly as a result of larger shortfalls both in goods and services trade and on the income account.
Despite remaining positive overall, net trade in services weakened as the travel account retreated by 12.8% from its 1998 surplus of EC$ 189.4 million.
Net inflows on the income account grew by 20.4% to EC$ 84.2 million (10.2% of GDP), reflecting higher investment by commercial banks and insurance companies.
Net current transfers were concentrated in non-government sectors and fell back to EC$ 50.0 million from their 1998 level of EC$ 82.3 million.
Net inflows on the capital and financial account increased by 61.6% to EC$ 218.7 million in 1999, mostly related to FDI inflows.
The outcome of all these movements was an overall balance-of-payments surplus of EC$ 7.3 million.
Lucia recorded an overall surplus of EC$ 10.6 million, significantly down from the EC$ 25.7 million of 1998 as a result of developments on both the current and capital accounts.
Within this account, the merchandise trade gap widened by 8.7% to EC$ 683.1 million, with goods exports falling by 5.2% to EC$ 159.1 million, caused partly by a 4.9% drop in banana export earnings.
Net current transfers shrank to EC$ 44.6 million, owing to significantly smaller transfers to the private sector, while inflows to the government sector grew.
The surplus on the capital and financial account increased to EC$ 222.3 million in 1999, compared to EC$ 206.7 million in 1998, mainly reflecting movements on the financial account, where the surplus grew from EC$ 147.0 million to EC$ 181.9 million.
Vincent and the Grenadines achieved an overall balance-of-payments surplus of EC$ 10.4 million in 1999, although the merchandise trade gap widened to EC$ 343.9 million, or 38.6% of GDP, with export receipts shrinking by 7.1 % to EC$ 133.4 million, as banana earnings fell in the wake of unfavourable prices.
Net outflows on the income account weakened to 4.0% of GDP in 1999, as a result of lower levels of repatriation of investment income.
The surplus on the capital and financial account slipped from EC$ 213.0 million in 1998 to EC$ 202.3 million in 1999, owing to a decline in both direct investment and inflows related to public-sector projects.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 319 Bahamas Preliminary figures show that the Bahamian economy achieved positive growth in 1999, at a rate reflecting the country's restored and augmented tourism capacity plus expansions in construction and financial services.
Inflation, which is largely determined by external cost conditions, was held to an extremely mild rate of 1.3%.
In this situation, stable money and credit trends allowed for some relaxation of monetary policy, making it possible for fiscal expenditure to be geared towards achieving social targets.
Provisional estimates of the balance of payments for 1999 point to a significantly smaller current account deficit ($ 667.2 million), despite a wider trade gap resulting from higher non-oil imports. 1.
Economic policy Government policies were aimed at improving social, health and public-safety.
On 1 July 1999 the Government devolved its three hospitals to the Public Hospitals Authority in a move to improve efficiency, and it reaffirmed its commitment to provide affordable lowand middle-income housing through the government-guaranteed mortgage loan programme and the sale of building lots.
It also approved the Physical Landscape Act aimed at conserving and protecting the landscape; this created a list of protected trees and provided tighter regulations on cutting down or excavating virgin forest for development.
Government budgetary allocations reflected priority policy areas, with health care, education, the criminal justice system, social services, youth and the environment all figuring prominently.
Contingent liabilities grew by $ 21.4 million to S 354.3 million, mainly as a result of a government bond issue in March 1999 to fund the construction of a bridge, together with external borrowing.
Of this, however, outstanding public-sector debt in foreign currency (which includes borrowing accounted for as domestic debt) fell by 1.1% to $ 374.9 million during calendar 1999.
Debt service in foreign currency declined by 2.5% to $ 69.5 million, consisting of S 45.5 million in principal and $ 24.0 million in interest charges.
The Central Bank of Bahamas eased monetary policy in late June 1999, lowering the discount rate by 75 basis points to 5.75% and increasing liquidity.
As a result, narrow money (Ml) expanded by 27.1% during the year, compared to about 15% in 1998, and banks lowered their prime rates from 6.75% to 6% as of 1 July, for the first time since April 1994.
Although deposit and lending rates were both lower, the spread between the two widened from 6.76 to 7.34 percentage points.
The drop in interest rates caused fixed-term deposits to increase by a modest 4.4%, and although the growth in savings deposits more than doubled to 25.1% in 1999, broad money supply (M3) expanded by just 11.8%, versus 15.8% in 1998.
Currency in circulation grew by 18.2% in 1999, following a 14.5% increase the year before, while demand deposits expanded by 29.5%, compared to 15.1% in the previous period. 320 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean 2.
Economic performance Refurbished and augmented tourist capacity in New Providence, together with associated activity in the construction and financial services sectors, ensured a healthy rate of economic growth in 1999, although its extent cannot yet be precisely quantified in the absence of official GDP figures.
Tourism recovered strongly in 1999 as major hotel renovations were completed, and visitors responded to active marketing by taking up the extra capacity.
Preliminary data indicate that visitor expenditure grew by some 11% to $1.5 billion, having fallen slightly in 1998.
Capacity expansion and improvements in accommodation are expected to continue into the year 2001.
Construction activity peaked in 1998 on completion of a major hotel project, before declining somewhat in 1999; nonetheless, the sector continued to provide a stimulus to output and employment growth throughout the year.
Estimates for the first nine months of 1998 and 1999 indicate a 15.7% reduction in building starts in the latter year, with value falling by slightly less to $ 123.0 million.
Agricultural value added declined by an estimated $ 8.8 million to $ 45.0 million, with crop production dropping by 21.6% to $ 15.7 million in the major producing areas, as a result of damage by tropical hurricanes.
Estimates from the Department of Fisheries for the first nine months of 1999 show a slight rise in output in this sector, as larger fish and lobster catches, coupled with better prices, helped to boost recovery.
The value of fish catches increased by some 7.8% to $ 46.8 million, despite volume declining by 2.5% to 7.9 million pounds.
Crawfish tails were the dominant component of catches, accounting for 47.6% of total volume and 81.4% of value.
Inflation, as measured by the change in the annual average retail price index, amounted to 1.3% in 1999, essentially reflecting the stable inflationary environment in the country's main trading partner, the United States.
The largest individual price increases were seen in education costs (12.2%) and in recreation and entertainment (4.3%).
Provisional balance-of-payments estimates for 1999 point to a considerable narrowing of the current account deficit ($ 667.2 million versus $ 994.4 million in 1998).
The shortfall for the year was mostly financed by the $ 605.2 million surplus on the capital and financial account, with Central Bank external reserves being drawn down by $ 65.3 million.
The merchandise trade gap widened by 3.9% to $ 1,427.6 million, mainly as a result of larger non-oil imports, despite the fact that fish exports increased in value by 20.9% during the year to $ 71.4 million, the bulk of this ($ 70.6 million) being accounted for by crawfish.
Services trade was in surplus by $ 859.7 million -a 58.4% increase over the previous year's figure of $ 542.8 million, due mainly to an 8.8% increase in net tourism receipts.
On the income account, net factor payments fell by increase in payments to foreign labour and a 41.6% drop in the net repatriation of investment income.
Net private-sector remittances grew moderately to $ 5.1 million during the year.
The estimated surplus on the capital and financial account, although 25% below the 1998 figure, is still the second highest on record and is explained by the major hotel construction and refurbishment projects mentioned above.
Net outflows in respect of migrant transfers, at $ 14.6 million, were slightly higher in 1999 than the $ 11.7 million recorded the year before, while private-sector direct investment rose slightly to $ 146.6 million.
In the public sector, net borrowing of $ 17.0 million was a reversal of the situation in 1998 when the Government ended the year with a net repayment of $ 11.4 million.
Net short-term inflows through the banking system increased significantly to $ 95.3 million in 1999, up from $ 29.9 million the year before.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 1999-2000 Barbados The Barbadian economy recorded its seventh straight year of growth in 1999, expanding by an estimated 3.2% compared to 4.2% in 1988.
The non-traded sectors grew faster than tradables for the third successive year, with the result that foreign exchange earnings weakened and the balance-of- payments deficit on current account grew by slightly over one percentage point compared to the 1998 figure.
The Government scaled back its capital investment programme to prevent the economy from overheating, and liquidity was tightened to protect foreign exchange reserves, which were replenished in the second quarter of 1999 with a $ 150 million loan raised on the regional capital market.
Per capita gross domestic product Real effective exchange rate b Unemployment rate Balance on current account Disbursed gross external debt Annual growth rates a Preliminary estimates. b A negative rate signifies a real appreciation. 1.
Economic policy The economic authorities successfully managed the trade-offs between growth, low inflation, higher employment and protection of the country's foreign reserves.
Fiscal management had to deal with revenue that undershot expectations, while monetary policy, which was tightened late in the year, was used to balance conflicting objectives.
Central government operations incurred a deficit during calendar 1999, estimated at $ 101.635 million; this was equivalent to 2% of GDP and was significantly worse than the previous year's shortfall of $ 39.740 million.
Total expenditure and net lending grew by 5.2% over the same period, while current revenue for the calendar year totalled $ 1.546 billion, virtually unchanged from its 1998 figure of $ 1.527 billion.
Bank lending to the private sector grew in the first half of the year to support demand from the personal, distribution and construction sectors, and by year-end 322 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean had posted an expansion of $ 308.4 million - more than the growth of domestic deposits ($ 276 million).
Expansion led to strong import demand and caused the Central Bank to take steps to restrain foreign exchange losses; these entailed increasing the cash reserve ratio from 5% to 6% and raising the discount rate by one percentage point to 10%.
To further absorb liquidity in the system, the Central Bank allowed 1.5% of deposits in the domestic banking system to be invested in foreign securities.
Apart from this, the minimum savings rate was raised from 4% to 5% in order to encourage saving and restrain spending, following a slowdown in the growth of domestic deposits.
By the second half of the year, lending to the private sector had moderated, and the excess liquidity ratio had fallen by year's end to 4% from the 8.5% recorded a year earlier. 2.
Economic performance Construction continued to be the main driving force in the non-traded sector, which grew by 4.7% in 1999.
Ongoing investment in commercial, residential and hotel properties generated sectoral growth of 9.3% versus 13% the year before, while the distribution sector expanded Growth in the tourism sector, at 0.2%, was the lowest since 1993.
Cruise passenger arrivals declined by 14.6% while the number of stopover visitors increased by 1.1%.
Activity in the international business and financial sector expanded in 1999, despite a slowdown in the entry of new competitors.
Manufacturing output declined by 0.8% following five years of growth, as the industry adjusted to the challenges of trade liberalization.
Beverages and food processing shrank by 4.2% and 2.6%, respectively, and the closure of the oil refinery in 1998 meant a discontinuation of the production of petroleum products.
Relatively strong growth in the construction sector led to an 11.5% increase in the output of other non-metallic mineral products.
Increased acreage harvested and better weather offset a late start to the cane harvest caused by protracted wage negotiations, but sugar exports to the European Union were slightly below the quota notwithstanding the year's larger crop.
Non-sugar agriculture declined by 6.5%, after first-quarter results had held out the promise of growth for the year as a whole.
Changing marine conditions caused by the "La Niña" weather pattern resulted in a 15.1% decrease in the volume of fish caught, contrasting sharply with the 29.3% increase in 1998.
Milk production decreased by 12.2%, as result of a prolonged rainy season compounded by management/ownership changes in the sub-sector.
Chicken production rose by 4%, on the back of stronger demand as consumers bought poultry instead fish, which was in short supply.
The annual average of the "All Items" retail price index rose by 1.5% over its 1998 level, following the 1.2% fall registered in 1998.
Categories that were responsible for the increase included food, housing and education.
The higher level of economic activity helped to bring unemployment down to 11.8% by December 1999, versus 12.3% a year earlier.
The balance-of-payments deficit on current account widened for the third year running, to 3.6% of GDP -slightly more than one percentage point above the 1998 figure.
This resulted from slower growth of foreign receipts and high import demand.
Although export earnings grew by some 3.5%, on the back of stronger electronic component sales, net receipts from trade in services were sluggish, with earnings from tourism increasing by just 0.1 %, following the closure of two major hotels.
On the import side, retained merchandise imports grew by 5% in 1999 to approximately $ 2.135 billion.
Motor vehicle imports were up by 15%, while imports of food and beverages grew by 8.5 %.
A major portion of the capital goods purchased abroad consisted of machinery for use in the construction industry.
Intermediate good purchases, destined mainly for the manufacturing industry, contracted for the second year in a row.
The agricultural sector responded well to favourable weather conditions and technological improvements, while manufacturing recovered strongly; mining, on the other hand, lost ground.
Inflation rose to 8.6%, with wages and salaries increasing considerably following strong trade-union pressure; this prompted the authorities to tighten monetary conditions.
Labour unrest led to a drop in registered imports and a narrowing of the merchandise trade gap.
Per capita gross domestic product (annual average) Real exchange rateb Interest rate on deposits Interest rate on loans Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services Balance on current account Disbursed gross external debt Annual growth rates a Preliminary estimates and projections. b A negative rate signifies a real appreciation. c As of the end of June. 1.
Economic policy The Government pursued a number of social and economic policies through its Public Sector Investment Programme (PSIP), specially targeting the following five priority areas: health care, education, water supply and sanitation, home ownership, and improvement and expansion of the economic infrastructure.
Despite a 55-day strike by public-service workers in the second quarter of 1999, central government current income surpassed its target for the year.
Major factors behind this result included a greater-than-expected increase in national output, and a change in the method used by the Inland Revenue Department to assess company tax liabilities.
Customs revenue grew by some 6.1% in 1999 to G$ 15.9 million, but still ended nearly G$ 200 million short of the target, owing to difficulties in clearing imports through customs during the strike by public-service workers.
Central government current expenditure for 1999 is estimated at G$ 24.1 billion, up by 22.5% from the previous year, partly as a result of large increases in wages, salaries and allowances.
Staff emoluments 324 Economic o Latin America and the Caribbean amounted to an estimated G$ 11.8 billion -some G$ 2.7 billion more than in 1998 and G$ 2.2 billion above budget.
Of the latter figure, about G$ 1.6 billion is accounted for by higher wage and salary payments to public-sector employees, while a further G$ 500 million was used to meet the cost of higher allowances.
Scheduled foreign interest payments amounted to G$ 6.5 billion, but thanks to the debt relief extended under the Highly Indebted Poor Country (HIPC) Initiative, interest actually paid only came to G$ 3.9 billion.
Capital expenditure and net lending declined by G$ 600 million to G$ 12.3 billion.
The overall deficit excluding grants narrowed to G$ 9.9 billion, or 8.2% of GDP.
Of this, G$ 6.6 billion was funded through HIPC relief and non-project grants, while the remainder was mainly financed through other external flows.
Revenues received by public-sector enterprises and the National Insurance Service totalled G$ 50.0 billion in 1999, compared to G$ 50.2 billion in 1998.
Although increased production and exports of sugar, supported by a weak Guyanese dollar, boosted income at the State-owned sugar company, revenues earned by the 2.
Economic performance Real GDP grew by 3% in 1999, driven mainly by agriculture; this exceeded the target rate of 1.8% in sharp contrast to the 1.3% decline recorded the previous year.
Sugar production increased by 25.8% from its 1998 level as a result of favourable weather conditions, new cane varieties, better yields and the application of science and technology.
Livestock production grew significantly in response to government support for the sub-sector, while poultry meat expanded by 10.2% to 12.4 million kg, and egg production grew by 7% to 25.7 million.
Both calcined and chemical-grade bauxite production declined, however, by 27% and 33% bauxite and rice industries were hit by lower export prices.
Monetary policy focused on price and exchange-rate stabilization by absorbing excess liquidity in the financial system.
The monetary base shrank by 4% in 1999, following its 11.8% increase during the previous year, with Central Bank liabilities to the commercial banking system decreasing by 20%.
Both components of the narrow money aggregate grew more strongly than in 1998: demand deposits expanded by 25.7%, compared to 4.7% in 1998, while currency in circulation grew by 18.4%.
Despite a moderation in overall net domestic credit expansion, loans and advances to the private sector increased by 7.7%.
This mainly reflected larger deposits by the public sector and subdued private-sector borrowing, despite a fall in the weighted-average of commercial-bank lending rates.
About 18% of outstanding private-sector loans were in the manufacturing sector, 19% in the distribution and personal sector and 15% in agriculture.
Domestic debt rose to 35.3% of GDP, up from 31.9% at the end of 1998. respectively, although this was partly offset by an 8.4% increase in the production of metal-grade bauxite.
Manufacturing recovered strongly in 1999 to grow by 6.8%, boosted by a combination of aggressive marketing techniques, greater processing capacity and increased use of modern technology by manufacturing enterprises.
Garment production declined by 1.5%, on the other hand, because of weaker demand on foreign markets, and the engineering and construction sector shrank by 10%, largely because of a cutback in the public-sector investment programme.
Prudent monetary and fiscal policies helped to contain inflation to single digits, despite strong cost pressures.
Nonetheless, prices rose by an average of 8.6%, compared to the 4.6% recorded in 1998.
Factors contributing to this included a weakening of the Guyanese dollar, quarterly increases in electricity rates and a major hike in fuel prices during the second half of the year.
Other cost pressures stemmed from the substantial wage increases awarded in 1999 in response to strong union pressure.
Wage increases for other categories of public-service workers varied between 8.5% and 12%.
The merchandise trade gap narrowed to US$ 25.2 million from US$ 54.2 million in 1998, largely because of slower import growth.
Although agricultural exports increased in volume terms, total merchandise export earnings fell by 4% to US$ 525 million.
In the case of sugar, the volume exported increased by 19%, but a significant drop in the average price from US$ 544.8 per tonne in 1998 to US$483.5 per tonne in 1999, meant that receipts grew by only 5.6%.
Rice displayed a similar pattern: the average export price dropped to US$ 282.7 per tonne from US$ 293.5 in 1998, and earnings shrank by 3% to US$ 71.1 million, despite a slight increase in the volume exported.
Gold and bauxite prices were also down, leading to lower export earnings in 1999.
In the case of timber, on the other hand, a combination of higher prices and a larger export volume generated revenues of US$ 37.3 million in 1999, some 20.3% higher than in the previous year.
Merchandise imports declined by 8.5% to US$ 550.2 million, with imports of consumer and capital goods shrinking by 9.7% and 16.7% respectively.
Part of the reason for the slowdown in imports in 1999 related to widespread labour unrest during the first half of the year.
Net services imports amounted to US$ 89 million -virtually unchanged from the previous year- while net transfer payments were US$ 5 million lower at US$ 39 million.
The goods, services and transfer accounts combined to reduce the current account deficit from to US$ 75.2 million from US$ 98.5 million in 1998, while the capital account surplus narrowed slightly to US$ 71.4 million versus US$ 79.8 million the year before.
Jamaica According to preliminary estimates, GDP in Jamaica declined by 0.4% in 1999.
Output in the goods-producing sectors fell by 0.8% in real terms, in response to international and local factors, while the services sector grew strongly.
Depressed domestic demand was the main reason for the decline, despite a substantial liquidity expansion and lower interest rates.
This also helped to keep inflation in check at 6%, but was unable to prevent a worsening of the balance of payments, with net international reserves shrinking by US$ 131.8 million.
Economic policy Economic policy concentrated on consolidating past stabilization gains, while creating more favourable conditions for real economic growth.
Major objectives continued to include bringing inflation down in line with rates in the country' s main trading partners, and reducing the fiscal deficit to give more space for private-sector lending in an inflation-targeting context.
The fiscal deficit for the nine months to December 1999, excluding amortization payments, fell to $ 16.1 billion -a decrease of some 15.7%.
The fiscal out-turn was nevertheless worse than the programmed shortfall of $ 12.9 billion, since revenues undershot by 1.0% and expenditures went over budget by 3.3%.
To finance both the fiscal deficit and amortization payments, $ 51.2 billion was raised in loans on domestic and international markets.
This represented an increase of $ 5.1 billion, or 10.5%, over the total amount funded in this way during the corresponding nine-months of fiscal 1998/99.
Amortization payments grew by $ 11.2 billion to $ 37.8 billion during the period.
A lowering of bank reserve ratios and reduced open-market operations, in a context of lower inflation, made it possible to cut nominal interest rates during the year.
Liquid assets and cash reserve ratios at commercial banks continued to fall as programmed, to 34.0% and 16.0% respectively by October, versus 43.0% and 21.0% at the end of 1998.
Reverse repurchase (repo) agreements were the main open-market tool used to manage the growth of base money in 1999, and these grew by $ 711.6 million to a total of $ 27.4 billion.
Narrow money supply (Ml) and quasi-money increased by 39.5% and 12.4% respectively; currency in circulation grew by 45.7%, and demand deposits expanded by about 34.6%. 2.
Economic performance Goods production declined by 0.8% overall in 1999, while services grew by 4.8%.
The generally lower level of output during the year seems to have been caused by slow growth in both private and government consumption, and in private investment.
Export growth was also sluggish, but net exports of goods and services still increased as weak consumption demand drew in fewer imports.
Agriculture, forestry and fishing was the only goods sector to register positive growth in 1999 (1.7%), following two years of contraction.
The production of crops for the domestic market increased, benefiting from better weather conditions, but the export crop segment shrank by 7.9%, and most of the traditional crops continued to fare poorly.
Adverse price movements in coffee and cocoa were part of the reason for this.
Sugar cane production, however, benefited from the better weather to grow by 2.6% in real terms during the year.
After three growth years, output in the mining and quarrying sector declined by 1.2% in 1999, mainly because of cutbacks in crude bauxite production following an accident at the United States refinery to which this commodity is exported.
In contrast to this, alumina benefited from increased production and higher prices on the international market.
Performance in the manufacturing sector was mixed, with higher output in the following segments: Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 1999-2000 327 sugar, molasses and rum, alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages, textiles, apparel and footwear, furniture and fixtures, chemicals, and other non-metal products; the other sub-sectors, meanwhile, slipped back.
The net result was a decrease in manufacturing output of 1.4% in 1999 -the fifth straight year of negative growth.
Construction and installation shrank for the fourth year running (1.6%), having dropped by 5.9% in 1998.
The building sub-sector, and non-residential construction in particular, declined, while other sub-sectors grew by 9.0% overall thanks to greater activity stemming from major government projects.
Growth also accelerated in the transport, storage and communications sector (8.5%), but electric light and power expanded more slowly (5.0% in 1999 compared to 6.5% in 1998), as did water and sanitation services (3.8% versus 5.5% the year before).
Hotel occupancy rates fell to 55.9% in 1999, as the supply of rooms expanded.
The financial sector registered a turnaround in 1999, as valued-added by finance and insurance services expanded by 19.5%, following four years of decline.
This is likely to have been the result of restructuring and consolidation initiatives, supported by innovation and better strategies to enhance profitability.
The distribution sector, which contributed about 22.5% to total GDP in 1999, declined by 1.0%.
This was the second straight year of negative growth, and reflected weaker domestic demand stemming from sluggish growth, not only in private and government consumption but also in private investment.
Price increases were held to single-digit levels for the third consecutive year, with the point-to-point rate of inflation coming in at 6.8% for calendar year 1999, compared to 7.9% the year before (the annual average was 6% higher in 1999 than in 1998).
Significant increases in the prices of housing, miscellaneous expenses, food and drink, health care and personal services had a major impact on the overall index.
The average weekly wage for workers in large establishments rose by 16.1%, substantially less than in previous years, although increases ranged widely across sectors from 4% to 44.2%.
The economy's weak performance in 1999 was accompanied by a 0.8% decline in the labour force, maintaining the downward trend for a fourth successive year.
Women continued to account for a smaller share of the labour force (roughly 45%), and represented 41.7% of all employed persons in 1999.
The balance of payments worsened in 1999, as net international reserves fell by US$ 131.8 million, in contrast to their US$ 41.5 million improvement in 1998.
The merchandise trade deficit came in at USS 1,140.6 million, representing an increase of USS 43.9 million over the 1998 figure.
The drop in export earnings was largely due to a 16.6% fall in the non-traditional goods category.
Manufacturing exports continued to decline in 1999, shrinking by 9.2% to USS 414.6 million, partly because of sharply lower exports of wearing apparel (down by US$ 41.1 million to USS 159.8 million).
A steep fall in drink and tobacco exports was the result of weaker demand for tobacco and tobacco products.
Exports from the food-processing industry grew by USS 7.8 million to USS 38.1 million.
These movements on the goods and services accounts led to a current account deficit of US$ 273.1 million in 1999 -an improvement of USS 17.3 million on the previous year's result, with the services, income and current transfer accounts all strengthening to outweigh the deterioration in merchandise trade.
The increasing share of services in export earnings is indicative of Jamaica's transformation into a service economy, with tourism accounting for most of the sector's earnings.
Visitors from the United States, the United Kingdom and the Caribbean between them provide most of the tourist traffic.
The net balance of current private transfers grew by USS 14.1 million to USS 603.4 million during the year, reflecting larger remittances received from abroad, consistent with the continued expansion of remittance company networks.
Average unemployment for the first nine months of the year fell to 13.1%.
Government revenue and the balance of payments were both hit by lower oil prices in the early part of 1999, but later improved as oil prices strengthened.
This prompted the Central Bank to take stabilization measures in the foreign-exchange and money markets to sustain the value of the currency and keep inflation to a level of 3.4%.
The year ended with an improvement in the country's international reserve position.
Economic policy Counter-inflationary monetary policy and a stable exchange rate underpinned economic growth during the year.
In response to large foreign-exchange outflows and weak inflows due to soft prices among the country's main export commodities early in 1999, the Central Bank provided US$ 150.5 million to support the market, and this contributed to exchange-rate stability throughout the year.
Monetary policy had to deal with conditions of high liquidity in the financial system caused by government deficit financing.
During this period, government expenditure grew by 9.6% compared to its 1998 level, outstripping revenue growth.
The deficit was financed by drawing down balances at the Central Bank and by making use of divestment proceeds.
Total tax receipts grew by 1.4% in 1999, following a 3% fall in the previous year.
This was partly attributable to developments in the petroleum sector, where a recovery in oil prices from an average of US$ 14.40 per barrel in 1998 to US$ 19.24 in 1999, together with an increase in production, contributed $ 1,998 million (20.4%) of total revenue collected.
This was mainly the result of sharply lower receipts from value added tax (VAT), which generated 22.6% less than in 1998 and accounted for 17% of total revenue collected.
Non-tax income grew by 15.1% as profits from State enterprises more than doubled, and administrative fees and charges rose by 65.4%.
In all three cases, the bond contracts containing CACs have been trading at lower spreads than equivalent bonds that do not include these clauses (see figure I.2).
Mexico, Ecuador and Peru also halved their sovereign spreads, while Chile’s and Panama’s spreads were reduced by one third.
Argentina’s spread has also been trending downward, but it continues to reflect the market’s perception of insolvency.
Uruguay’s spread is narrower than Argentina’s but moves in step with its neighbour.
The Dominican Republic has suffered the effects of the failure and intervention of the Banco Intercontinental (BANINTER) last May, and its sovereign spread is consequently twice as high now as it was in the third quarter of 2002.
It is possible that the high spread demanded by the market for bonds not involved in the swap is due to the perception that they are higher-risk assets than the bonds that were swapped.
This is certainly a case of the utmost interest for Argentina, which must find an orderly way out of its current default position.
The number shown beside the name of the country indicates the time to maturity of the bond (e.g., “Brazil 4” refers to a sovereign bond issued by Brazil that has a residual term of four years).
Because the expected reactivation of the world economy has been slow in coming, no external engine of growth has been available.
It is clear, in particular, that most of the economies that are more closely integrated with the United States (Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean) have continued to perform poorly in 2003.
In South America, where the major economies faced crisis situations in 2002, the response to more competitive exchange rates has been apparent in a number of them, and the financial situation, although still troubled, is improving.
Brazil is a particularly noteworthy case, since its combination of a growing trade surplus and declining sovereign risk (in conjunction with fiscal discipline) is providing it with more degrees of freedom that may allow it to achieve a faster pace of growth in the medium term.
Meanwhile, the non-oil-exporting economies are obtaining some relief as the deterioration in their terms of trade has come to a halt for the first time since 1997.
Finally, there are also some economies for which the international environment is of secondary importance in explaining their behaviour in 2003, such as Venezuela and the Dominican Republic. 22 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean B.
Changes in economic policy The most remarkable events in the realm of economic policy in 2003 have been the deepening of structural fiscal reforms throughout the region and the recovery of degrees of freedom in the management of monetary policy in the major South American economies.
This latter development stands in contrast to the situation the year before, when, as discussed by ECLAC in the Preliminary Overview 2002, a great deal of autonomy was lost in terms of the capacity to use these policy tools in most of the economies, especially those of the MERCOSUR countries.
In fact, 2002 was the fifth year of what ECLAC has called the “lost half decade”, and in this issue of the Economic Survey, ECLAC points out that 2003 will be the sixth year in a row that has been lost to the region in terms of economic growth.
The adverse international environment was transmitted to the region through various channels.
In a number of economies –especially those of MERCOSUR– the main factor was the deterioration in international financial conditions.
For Mexico, the five CACM economies, Panama, Haiti, the Dominican Republic and part of the English-speaking Caribbean, the major factor has been the United States economy’s loss of forward momentum since 2001.
For other non-oil-exporting countries (especially Peru and Chile), the downtrend in the terms of trade that began in 1998 has been the most influential external factor in the slowing pace of growth.
In several economies, the implementation of restrictive macroeconomic policies in 2002 has been an additional factor.
Some countries’ currencies came under attack, and their central banks were forced to opt for tight monetary policies, hiking interest rates.
In other cases, the economic slowdown brought to light problems with regard to the sustainability of the public debt, which also made the use of contractionary fiscal policies necessary.
In other words, the adverse external environment was compounded by a policy mix that magnified the contractionary forces already at work.
Of all the economies in the region, only those of Barbados and Chile (both of which had built up their degrees of freedom during the preceding boom years) implemented expansionary fiscal and monetary policies simultaneously. 2.
Structural changes in fiscal policy One of the hallmarks of economic policy in 2002-2003 has been the scale of structural fiscal reform efforts.
This indicates that the region’s fiscal problems are not purely short-term in nature, but rather pose challenges that should be addressed from a more institutional perspective.
El Salvador is the only Latin American economy that has neither legislated fiscal reforms nor attempted to do so during this biennium, although such reforms have been a subject of public debate.
All the other economies in Latin America have either passed tax reforms (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru (partially), Uruguay and Venezuela), are in the process of doing so (Costa Rica and Ecuador) or have attempted to do so but without success (riots in Bolivia, public demonstrations in Mexico and deadlocked Executive and Legislative branches in Paraguay)13.
There have also been a large number of changes and attempts to introduce 13 Paraguay’s newly elected Administration has stated that it intends to undertake a tax reform programme.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 23 new tax codes, fiscal responsibility laws, structural changes in public expenditure (or rules governing changes in spending levels), pension reforms aimed at reducing structural fiscal deficits, and adjustments in public rates and charges.
Chile’s and Brazil’s efforts in these directions are of interest in this respect because they may prove instructive for other economies of the region.
The Chilean Congress has just passed an increase in the value-added tax (VAT).
Its main reason for doing so was to generate enough funds to make up for the revenue that will be lost as a result of the tariff reductions provided for in the free trade agreements recently concluded with the European Union and the United States (0.6% of GDP less per year).
Because of its structural nature, this decrease in revenue could jeopardize compliance with the country’s fiscal policy rule.14 This reform bill indicates that the Chilean economy has taken prompt action to meet the fiscal challenges posed by the recent substantive trade agreements concluded by the country.
Negotiations on a trade agreement between the United States and the CACM economies are likely to reach a successful conclusion in the near future as well.
The fiscal challenges that such an agreement will pose for the five Central American economies may be proportionally more formidable than those faced by Chile because tariff revenues represent a larger portion of public-sector income in their case.
By the same token, future progress in advancing the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) agenda with other economies and subregional integration schemes will also have a fiscal impact that should be dealt with on a synchronized basis in order to uphold public-sector solvency.
Another interesting case is that of Brazil, which has five years of fiscal efforts and public-sector structural reforms to its credit.
Brazil’s newly elected Administration has set itself a strict target for its primary surplus of 4.25% of GDP for 2003 (which is higher than the goals agreed with the International Monetary Fund) in an effort to make rapid progress in achieving greater credibility and building up its reputation on external financial markets.
The logical route for Brazil to take in the short run entails reducing the still abnormally high spreads on its external sovereign debt and domestic interest rates.
The efforts already made in the areas of fiscal policy and foreign trade will enable the country to remain on a path of fiscal and external financial solvency provided that it can obtain reasonable interest rates, which lately seem to be determined more by expectations than by any other factor.
The main point for the region overall is that during the biennium 2002-2003 a transition process from shortrun fiscal adjustment towards more structural fiscal reforms is clearly in progress.
There are still numerous challenges to be met in this respect, but the region is headed in the right direction.
The inescapable short-term corollary, however, is that during 2003 fiscal policy will not serve as a means of spurring domestic spending to rise from its 2002 levels in any country of the region except in those economies where fiscal revenues decline for cyclical reasons rather than as a result of policy decisions.
The absence of an external engine of growth is thus compounded by the absence of a fiscal engine capable of providing the driving force for a reactivation. 3.
A more active monetary policy Monetary policy is clearly the short-term economic policy tool for which the most degrees of freedom have been regained.
In an effort to defend themselves from the exchange-rate pressures generated in 2002, many economies of the region (especially in South America) shifted towards a more restrictive monetary policy stance.
In other economies, monetary policy was tightened in order to counter the effects of expansionary fiscal policies (particularly some of the Central American and Caribbean economies, such as Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic).
The economies in which monetary policy was expansionary (Chile, Colombia, Guatemala, Peru and some English-speaking Caribbean economies) or neutral (Mexico and the dollarized economies)15 in 2002 were the exception to the rule. 14 Early in 2000, Chilean economic authorities adopted a structural fiscal rule designed to isolate fiscal policy from short-run, cyclical forces.
In Colombia, for example, monetary policy was loosened in 2002, with reductions in the interbank rate and increased liquidity.
In the third quarter, as mentioned earlier, the country’s sovereign spread widened considerably, thus driving up long-term domestic rates (which are more directly connected to the business cycle).
As a result, the yield curve grew abnormally steep (low short-term rates and very high long-term rates), affecting operations involving public debt securities.
Since then, monetary policy has been tightened and longterm rates have been lowered, thereby creating a yield curve that makes more economic sense.
This was a case in which the monetary authorities’ efforts and the financial market’s response were at odds with one another.
Up to the third quarter of 2002, the authorities’ monetary stance was becoming increasingly contractionary.
In the fourth quarter, a major shift in monetary policy towards greater liquidity reversed the upward trend in the interbank rate.
The market, however, did not follow in the authorities’ steps, and deposit rates decoupled from monetary policy.
This is a case in which, in effect, policy makers lost control of the market; some progress has been made, albeit slowly, in regaining that control in 2003.16 At the same time, lending rates decoupled from deposit rates, with the spread between the two widening.
This gave rise to an exceedingly odd situation in which monetary policy was injecting liquidity into the economy but the cost of credit was rising.
This type of phenomenon has been seen before in other economies of the region when the domestic banking systems adopts a strategy aimed at reducing its portfolios’ risk levels at a time when steps are being taken by the monetary authorities to boost liquidity.
This is an economy in which deposit rates and interbank rates have moved in step with one another.
In other words, it is a case in which the monetary authorities’ and the market’ actions have been synchronized.
Nominal interest rates also rose, but not as steeply as inflation had, and real interest rates consequently fell.
Inflation then began to decline, but the reduction in nominal interest rates has lagged behind and real interest rates have consequently risen in 2003.
The fact that inflation has been more volatile than nominal interest rates has generated a curious effect in which the expansionary and/or contractionary effect of interest rates has been determined more by swings in the inflation rate than by monetary policy.
In the short run, Brazil has an opportunity to adopt a more expansionary monetary policy stance while maintaining macro-economic equilibrium.
Above and beyond the specific situations existing in some economies, one of the noteworthy events observed thus far in 2003 is that more countries are implementing more expansionary monetary policies, including those that were overtaken by crises in 20012002 (especially Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela)17.
Among the economies for which the relevant information is available, only Costa Rica has adopted a neutral monetary policy position in 2003.
In the particular case of the Dominican Republic, the more expansionary monetary policy implemented in the second quarter has been specifically linked to the injection of liquidity occasioned by the failure of the Banco Intercontinental (BANINTER).
Everything else indicates that this economy will have to move towards a tighter monetary policy during the remainder of the year.
The expansionary orientation of monetary policy reflects the recovery of degrees of freedom for monetary management, but it also stems from the fact that private domestic expenditure has weakened in most of the region’s economies.
In all likelihood, 2003 will, with few exceptions, prove to be a bad year for consumption and, especially, private investment.
The sharp adjustment in the trade balance that was mentioned earlier is directly associated with this probability.
This is because the trade balance represents the difference not only between exports and imports, but also between GDP and domestic spending.
A lowgrowth year (as 2003 is projected to be) in which a trade balance adjustment is made (as is also expected) is also a sign of a slump in domestic spending.
Improved exchange-rate stability Exchange-rate policy –the third policy tool to be analysed here– is being implemented within a relatively more tranquil framework in 2003, following the disruptions of 2002, especially in the MERCOSUR economies.
The year 2002 began with Argentina’s abandonment of its convertibility regime in the wake of the steep drop in economic activity seen throughout 2001 and the onset of a severe financial, political and social crisis.
The subsequent events in the Argentine economy are well known and will be analysed in later sections of this edition of the Economic Survey, but it is worth noting that the sharp real depreciation, which then slackened but continued until June 2002, was followed by a moderate appreciation.
Thus far in 2003, the Argentine peso has appreciated by 19% in real terms against the United States dollar and by 7% against the euro.
This has made it possible to take partial, gradual steps towards dismantling the exchange controls introduced during the worst days of the crisis.
Recently, however, Argentina has also introduced financial measures designed to avert a massive inflow of short-term capital which initially won praise from multilateral institutions.
The purpose of these measures has been to curb the recent trend towards an appreciation of the Argentine peso.
In the end, the idea is that the pace of the exchange rate should follow a real sector rationale rather than a financial one, thus avoiding past mistakes.
Somewhat later, in June 2002 (but clearly in response to the Argentine crisis), Uruguay discontinued its currency band when it, too, was at a critical juncture.
Uruguay’s exchange-rate regime was certainly not the pillar of its economic and financial system, as Argentina’s convertibility regime had been, and the abandonment of this system, although traumatic, therefore did not have the systemic ramifications that were seen in its neighbour.
Nevertheless, in this case too, the steep real depreciation of 2002 has been followed by a real appreciation (7% thus far in 2003) against the dollar.
In the case of Brazil as well, a 40% depreciation against the dollar in 2002 has been followed by a 25% appreciation in 2003 to date.
In fact, during the first half of 2003, the currencies of 12 countries in the region –led by the four MERCOSUR economies– have appreciated against the dollar in real terms.
These events have followed the logical sequence to be expected after the overshooting of these exchange rates in 2002.
This has also been the consequence of reversing capital outflows in the most critical cases, of strengthening the countries’ trade balances and, to a lesser extent, of the dollar’s depreciation against the euro.
Haiti’s currency has depreciated sharply as the country remains immersed in a domestic political crisis and continues to feel the effects of the partial suspension of financial facilities.
Jamaica has also been hurt by the deterioration of its macroeconomic and especially fiscal policies in 2003, following the fairly stable exchange-rate conditions it enjoyed in 2002.
The Dominican Republic’s economy started out the second semester of 2002 with rising inflation and exchange rates.
These upward trends were a consequence, in part, of the implementation of an expansionary economic policy despite the slowdown in export growth, but they were mainly attributable to the injection of liquidity received by the Banco Intercontinental (BANINTER) and its subsequent intervention.
The Dominican economy is expected to undergo an adjustment process during the remainder of the year.
Venezuela, meanwhile, has been adversely affected by the domestic political crisis in that country and by the strike of December 2002-January 2003.
These disturbances, in conjunction with the abandonment of the country’s currency band system the year before, have triggered a steep depreciation and mounting inflation together with a sharp drop in GDP and sizeable capital outflows.
The introduction of exchange controls has afforded some respite during which the authorities have been able to peg the nominal exchange rate, but these measures distort economic signals and would be difficult to maintain in the long run.
The exchange-rate policies of the region’s three dollarized economies can be analysed only in terms of the relationship between domestic and international inflation.18 El Salvador’s and Panama’s domestic inflation rates have been aligned with international rates, and their real exchange rates have therefore exhibited no major fluctuations.
Although the debate surrounding Ecuador’s macroeconomic situation continues, this oil-producing economy has invested in new oil exploration and transport projects, and these investments are expected to improve its balance of payments situation.
In that case, the real appreciation derived from accumulated inflation would be more closely limited to a “Dutch disease” problem than to the financial sustainability of dollarization.19 Mexico, the Central American economies and Peru have enjoyed a relative degree of exchange-rate stability.
In Mexico’s case, following a protracted real appreciation, the peso has recently shown a tendency to depreciate, although this has not yet reversed the Mexican economy’s apparent loss of competitiveness, as discussed earlier.
All in all, two main features are brought out by an analysis of exchange rates in the region.
The first is that, despite the recent appreciation of exchange rates in some of the South American economies, almost all of them are ending up with more competitive real exchange rates that boost their exports and sectors that compete with imports.
In the absence of external and/or fiscal engines of growth, the forward momentum being conveyed to the real sector by this increased competitiveness is opening up areas of opportunity more rapidly than in the past.
In all of the South American economies whose currencies have depreciated substantially, the agricultural sector (and especially annual and semi-annual crops) are booming.
The other noteworthy development is that exchangerate variations in South America are having spillover effects on trading partners within the region.
Paraguay’s currency has appreciated by 14% in real terms against the dollar in the first half of 2003, but, because of the appreciation of the Argentine and Brazilian currencies, its real effective exchange rate has appreciated by just 4%.
During the same period, Uruguay’s currency has appreciated by 7% against the dollar in real terms, but its real effective exchange rate has depreciated (-4%).
The Brazilian real, as mentioned earlier, appreciated by 25% against the dollar in real terms, but, given the appreciation of the Argentine peso and the euro, its real effective exchange rate has appreciated by only 20%.
Along the same lines, the Argentine peso has appreciated by 19% against the dollar in real terms but by only 11% in effective terms.
All of these cases reflect a reversal of the effects described by ECLAC in the Preliminary Overview, 2002.
The main lesson to be drawn from these developments concerns the interdependence of exchangerate policies at the subregional level, which is increasing further as trade integration processes progress.
The internal situation 21 Despite certain features that set it apart, Chile is more similar to the Andean economies than to the MERCOSUR economies, with an export structure intensive in non-renewable natural resources. 1.
Venezuela will post the year’s lowest growth rate (–13%), despite having begun a significant recovery in the second quarter of 2003.
It will thus experience a sharp downturn for the second year in a row, largely because of its domestic political turmoil.
Chile’s growth will speed up to about 3.5% in 2003 thanks in large part to the strong performance of its export sectors.
Like Brazil, it is gearing up for faster growth in the medium term.
Ecuador will have a difficult year in 2003, but will continue to post positive growth, on the order of 1.5%.
Peru, the region’s fastest-growing economy in 2002 (5.3%), is expected to record a rate of 3.5% in 2003, based on a good export performance and an upturn in domestic demand.
The figures show that trends in the Peruvian economy are relatively orderly on almost all fronts.
Remarkably, this pattern is not associated with an improved capacity to reach political agreements that would enable it to tackle its structural challenges.
This country has successfully reduced the number of coca plantations and curbed smuggling activities.
Naturally, these activities are not fully reflected in the official figures, with the result that the Bolivian economy “feels” as though it were retreating even though its growth rate is positive.
Following the serious political problems of last February, the government, the more powerful social strata and representative social groups are working on a national strategy for progressing towards a brighter future.
Colombia is the only Andean country whose economic prospects look better now than they did several months ago, and it is projected to grow by 2.5% in 2003.
This country has taken action to address its structural fiscal problems, and took advantage of its recent situation of mild recession to achieve a more competitive exchange rate.
It is one of the few economies that will increase its investment rate in 2003, thus beginning a recovery from the historic lows of recent years.
As noted earlier, it is estimated that regional GDP will grow by 1.5% in 2003, which tops the 2002 rate (–0.6%) but trails the rate forecast six months ago (2.1%).
Moreover, countries with rapid growth rates, which could still be found in the region up until 2000, continue to dwindle in number.
This year it will be the Dominican Republic’s turn, since it will have to embark on an adjustment process and is expected to post negative growth of –1.0%.
The flattening of the regional growth curve predicted for 2003 is attributable to the lack of either a vigorous international economy or reactivating forces within the region.
The economies that will achieve the fastest relative growth, in a context of overall listlessness, are the ones that are emerging from recent crises, together with some of those that have successful export sectors.
Argentina will rank first in terms of growth in 2003 (5.5%), out of both the MERCOSUR countries and the region as a whole, with the fastest growth in the sectors that have benefited the most from the real devaluation of the peso.
Uruguay will also bounce back from the low point it reached in 2002, but will still not experience positive growth in 2003 (–2.5%).
In Paraguay, meanwhile, the new administration taking office in mid-August will face a number of pending challenges, including arrears in external debt payments and pressing fiscal problems.
Paraguay will nevertheless record positive growth, led by a robust agricultural sector buoyed by favourable weather and exchange-rate conditions.
Brazil will post growth of about 1.5% for the third straight year, also because of a burgeoning agricultural sector and expanding exports, albeit with sluggish domestic demand.
The degrees of freedom which this economy has accumulated should enable it to achieve greater prosperity in the medium term.
This economy turned in a surprising performance in the first half of 2003, led by assembly activities in its free zones, communications and agriculture, which rebounded from its poor performance in 2002.
Despite these positive factors, Costa Rica will have to undertake a structural fiscal adjustment in the short term.
Haiti will continue to experience difficulties and is expected to show zero growth in 2003, after two years of negative growth.
Cuba’s economy grew by 1.1% in 2002, despite a decline in tourism, unfavourable terms of trade and natural disasters.
Lastly, the Dominican Republic will record negative growth in 2003 (-1.0%), something that it has not done since 1990.
Nonetheless, a slight expansion is expected for the year as a whole, and a growth rate of up to 1.5% is projected.
This means that per capita GDP will be flat, after having shrunk during the two preceding years.
The country’s principal challenge in the medium term will be to boost its external competitiveness.
This oilexporting economy has received large inflows of investment, grew by an average of 5.5% between 1998 and 2002 and is projected to grow by about 4% in 2003.
This subregion will grow by about 2.5%, bolstered mainly by a recovery in tourism and, in some cases, a good year for agriculture.
Investment and saving Latin America’s gross fixed capital investment is expected to increase moderately in 2003 (1.0%), while its investment rate will remain at about 18% of GDP, measured in constant 1995 prices.
The low level of investment shows that the region as a whole is not increasing its medium-term growth capacity.
This is not surprising, since investment, along with imports, is the real variable most strongly affected by business cycles.
The highest investment growth rates will be in Argentina, Colombia, Costa Rica and Peru, as the first two countries recover from historic lows (experienced in 2002 in Argentina and in 19992000 in Colombia).
At the same time, it is important to note the response capacity that national saving will demonstrate this year.
The fact that the current account of the balance of payments has reached a state of near-balance indicates that almost all of this year’s investments will be financed with national savings.
While this development is associated at present with slack domestic spending, it is also driven largely by a change of behaviour with respect to saving.
To the extent that the region emerges from its current difficulties with higher saving rates, more competitive exchange rates and lower real interest rates, as has been the case up to now in most of the countries, it will have laid the groundwork for a more export- and investment-intensive recovery.
If this proves to be the case, the recovery will be able to support higher medium-term growth rates.
To achieve this outcome, however, some thorny economic policy challenges will have to be addressed.
The structural adjustment of fiscal accounts, which is proceeding throughout the region, represents a step in this direction. 3.
Inflation Inflation in Latin America is expected to average 8.6% for the period December 2002 to December 2003.
Of the 20 countries considered here, the number with double-digit inflation will fall from seven in 2002 (Argentina, Brazil, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela) to only three in 2003 (Dominican Republic, Haiti and Venezuela).
In other words, in 2003 this group will no longer include the four MERCOSUR economies, but will continue to include the economies with the highest nominal depreciation rates.
This clearly demonstrates that the recent fluctuations in inflation rates have been associated primarily with exchange-rate volatility.
In the cases of Argentina and Uruguay, three relevant observations may be made.
These three features of the relationship between the exchange rate and inflation are also observed in the cases of the Dominican Republic and Venezuela, albeit less clearly owing to the fluctuations in their exchange rates.
These observations do not hold in cases of moderate inflation and devaluation, such as that of Mexico, where inflation is expected to fall from 5.7% in 2002 to about 3% in 2003 despite the moderate devaluation of its currency this year.
In short, the main conclusion for the bulk of the region is that the acceleration of inflation in 2002 and the slowdown in 2003 are phenomena primarily related to the exchange-rate.
As mentioned earlier, the biggest slowdown in inflation in 2003 is taking place in the four MERCOSUR economies.
Argentina will make the most progress, with inflation of around 5% (compared to 41% in 2002).
Bolivia and Peru will post rates of between 2% and 3%, consolidating their low rates of recent years, while Chile’s inflation will stay within the target range, at 3.5%.
Since Ecuador has a dollarized economy, its inflation rate is especially relevant to its external competitiveness.
Although it is finally achieving inflation rates that are consistent with international standards, its annual rate will exceed 6% as a result of the inflation accumulated in the first quarter and will not reverse the real appreciation which its currency has accumulated since dollarization was introduced.
Central America will keep its inflation at a rate similar to that of 2002.
The highest rates will be found in Costa Rica (at about 9%) and Nicaragua (at about 7%, as compared to 4.0% in 2002).
El Salvador and Panama, the two dollarized economies in this area, will again post inflation rates in line with international standards (about 3% in El Salvador and 1.5% in Panama).
The Dominican Republic is grappling with a complicated situation involving a depreciating currency and an upswing in inflation.
The inflation rate is expected to triple this year, bordering on 30%.
If the adjustment process is carried out quickly, the authorities may manage to rein in the depreciation of the exchange rate and bring monthly inflation down towards the end of the year.
The situation in Haiti is even more complex, and will be reflected in significantly higher inflation that is hard to estimate for this year (having reached 14.8% in 2002).
Most of the English-speaking Caribbean countries will continue to post low inflation in 2003.
The exceptions will be Suriname, where inflation sped up significantly last year, and Jamaica, which, as mentioned earlier, is faced with complex macroeconomic policy dilemmas. a.
Given Brazil’s size, this is also true of regional figures that include information on Brazil derived from the old and new methodologies, respectively. 4.
Employment and wages In 2002 the region’s labour markets were heavily influenced by the contraction or slowdown in economic activity.
The employment rate fell for the second year in a row, the generation of formal employment was weak and most new jobs were concentrated in low-productivity sectors.
Urban unemployment increased by about one million people, and the unemployment rate reached a record high of 8.9% of the workforce.
Meanwhile, real wages followed the pattern of changes in inflation, and in 2002 fell by an average of 1.6%.
The deterioration of working conditions was concentrated in countries suffering severe economic crises –especially within MERCOSUR– but the sluggishness of employment generation was a widespread phenomenon that also affected countries achieving moderate growth.22 In 2003, the labour situation is expected to improve slightly.
In the first half of the year, Chile, Colombia, Peru and, especially, Argentina succeeded in increasing employment and reducing unemployment.
However, the listlessness of the region’s two biggest economies (Brazil and Mexico) has affected the regional average.
This is why, for the region as a whole, unemployment in the first half of this year declined only moderately in relation to the same period of 2002, and no major changes are expected for the second half of the year.
Its labour situation became more volatile in the biennium 2002-2003; with a loss of formal employment that reached a year-on-year rate of over 10% in mid-2002, open unemployment rose to a new high of 21.5% in May.
Owing largely to a massive public-sector employment programme, the expansion of informalsector employment and the gradual stabilization of formal employment through an improvement in the competitiveness of tradable goods-producing sectors, Argentina’s employment rate began to recover in the second half of 2002.
Accordingly, in May 2003 the employment and unemployment rates reached levels similar to those recorded in May 2001.
At the same time, reflecting trends in inflation, real wages plummeted for much of 2002, though they have stabilized since the end of that year.
The labour situation in Uruguay and Venezuela, meanwhile, seems to have bottomed out but has yet to show any clear sign of an upturn.
In 2002, changes in real wages in the region were determined largely by the sign and magnitude of changes in the inflation rate, which, as shown earlier, mirrored changes in exchange rates.
In one group of countries (representing the majority), declining inflation had the effect of pushing up real wages in the formal sector, while in the countries with the biggest increases in exchange rates and inflation (the MERCOSUR countries and Venezuela), the purchasing power of wages fell.
In 2003, nominal wages in that first group of countries have inched upward only slightly, in a context of sluggish economic activity and stalled average labour productivity.
Since inflation has generally stayed relatively stable (and low) in these countries, real wages have shown little movement.
In the other group of countries, a year-onyear comparison continues to show negative results.
However, as their currencies appreciate and their inflation rates subside, as of mid-year these countries’ real wages are stabilizing and are tending to recover at least partially, depending on the strength of economic recovery, especially in Argentina and Uruguay.
Overall, 2003 will be a better year than 2002 in terms of growth, employment, inflation and the situation of the financial and external accounts, although the basis for comparison is hardly a demanding one.
These variables are expected to continue to make progress in 2004, albeit at a slower pace than might be desired.
The external sector In 2002, Latin American and Caribbean imports suffered a massive contraction, and, for the first time in a decade, the balance of trade in goods and services posted a surplus, which significantly reduced the balance-of-payments deficit on current account.
For 2003, the trade surplus is forecast to increase further, on the back of stronger exports, with imports recovering only slightly.
Given the behaviour projected for the other accounts, the regional current account is likely to be virtually in balance.
Foreign sales strengthened in 2002, especially in countries that made exchangerate corrections during the year and thus became more competitive on the world market.
In most cases, however, devaluations in 2002 were associated with major financial upheavals that affected several countries and caused large-scale capital flight.
The region’s net outward resource transfer amounted to US$ 40.4 billion, equivalent to 2.5% of GDP at current prices; in 2003 this is forecast to drop to US$ 15 billion, or 0.9% of GDP. 34 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 1.
Meanwhile, a near-recessionary climate prevailed throughout 2002 in the euro zone and Japan, which grew by 0.9% and 0.2% respectively (see figures II.1 and II.2).
The first quarter of 2003 was overshadowed by the armed conflict in Iraq, which heightened uncertainty throughout the world economy and caused a steep rise in the price of oil.
Following the rapid conclusion of the war itself, most analysts expected worldwide economic activity to gather pace in the second part of the year, with growth continuing into 2003.
These predictions were largely based on two assumptions, however: that the United States economy would grow faster than it had in 2002, and that oil prices would ease back.
The euro zone has also been in the doldrums, with signs of recession and deflation visible in Germany.
Even assuming a degree of recovery in the second half of the year, the outlook is for annual growth of about 1% for the European Union as a whole.
In Japan, first-quarter figures revealed a slight strengthening of activity, suggesting a 1% expansion for the year overall, provided exports recover as expected.
Ozmucur, Weekly update on the US economy and financial markets, 4 August 2003.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 35 4% –broadly similar to results in 2002.3 Only more vigorous demand in the United States could produce the change in trend needed to climb out of the downswing that began in 2001.
The problems weighing on the world economy stem partly from uncertainties caused by geopolitical events, or others such as the outbreak of atypical pneumonia that affected a number of Asian countries; but they also reflect more deep-seated economic factors.
These include low profitability, the existence of idle capacity in a number of industrial sectors (communications and information, the aeronautical and automotive industries) and falling stock-market indices.
The steep slide in share prices is putting heavy pressure on financial-institution and enterprise balance sheets, and has also eroded family asset values, thereby discouraging consumption and investment.4 In addition, the recent depreciation of the dollar against the euro, and to a lesser extent against the yen, makes it harder for United States imports to energize the world economy.
Macroeconomic imbalances have also worsened in that country, and higher unemployment is dampening consumer demand.
This panorama, while not one of outright recession, is far from displaying propitious conditions for restoring the global economy to a sustained growth path, as was expected following a short war in Iraq.
This general lack of momentum reduces net capital flows to developing countries.
Projections by the Institute for International Finance (IFI) suggest that such flows will grow from US$ 110 billion in 2002 to US$ 139 billion in 2003; but this would still leave them 30% below their 2000 level.5 Foreign direct investment (FDI) is forecast to shrink in 2003, yet it will still contribute about 80% of total net capital inflows.
During the same period the Dow Jones and the Dow Jones Europe indices fell by 20% and 54% respectively.
During the stock-market crash of 1929 the Dow Jones index fell by 48%, measured as the difference between its highest and lowest values in that year. 5 See Institute for International Finance (IFI), Capital flows to emerging market economies, 15 May 2003. 6 See OECD, Trends and recent developments in foreign direct investment, June 2003.
The balance of payments Between 2001 and 2003 the balance of payments of Latin America and the Caribbean saw major changes.
First and foremost, the current account deficit narrowed appreciably, from 2.7% of GDP in 2001 to 0.8% in 2002.7 In 2003 a deficit of just 0.2% of GDP is forecast, which means the current account will be practically in balance.
As figures II.3 and II.4 illustrate, current account trends vary widely across the region, and were heavily influenced by large surpluses in Venezuela and the MERCOSUR countries (except Brazil) in 2002.8 Projections suggest that these countries will maintain surpluses in 2003, while the current account deficit in Brazil will be practically nil.
In contrast, Chile and the Andean Community countries (except Venezuela) posted current account deficits similar to those of 2001, although these are expected to narrow slightly in 2003.
These balances (with the opposite sign) differ from external saving because the latter is calculated from national account figures in which balance-ofpayments data are adjusted for this purpose.
In 2002 the region generated a surplus of US$ 24.3 billion in its merchandise trade, following a deficit of US$ 1.6 billion in the previous year (see table II.1); and for 2003, the surplus is projected to widen to about US$ 37.2 billion.
The underlying factors differ from one year to the next: in 2002 there was a steep fall in imports (6.7%), caused mainly by the crisis facing the MERCOSUR countries and Venezuela.
The import contraction explains 60% of the variation in the regional current account balance for that year, while merchandise exports grew by 0.8% (0.1% excluding oil).
In contrast, for 2003, exports are projected to expand by about 4.4% (3.5% excluding oil), with imports staging only a slight recovery (0.8%).
This means that the region’s external sales will have gathered pace during the course of the biennium.
In 2002, export buoyancy was confined to a group of countries in which investments to exploit natural resources reached maturity (e.g., Peru) or foreign sales reacted to exchange-rate corrections (as occurred in Brazil).
In 2003, exports are expected to grow on a more widespread basis, but will also reflect the effects of devaluations –particularly in the MERCOSUR countries, but also in Chile and the Dominican Republic, among others.
There are also cases that probably reflect supplyside influences, such as the oil pipeline in Ecuador coming on stream, and production strategies among firms established in Central American duty-free zones.
Foreign sales by Mexico and Venezuela were particularly weak during the biennium –the first case resulting from an overvalued exchange rate and loss of competitiveness, and the second reflecting a severe institutional crisis.
Although net payments of interest and profits receded in 2002 for the first time since 1992, gross outflows in this category rose to US$ 50.7 billion –far outweighing the combined surplus in goods and services trade and current transfers, which amounted to US$ 37.2 billion.
For 2003, net payments on the income account are projected to expand further to US$ 54.8 billion.
In some countries, this is explained by larger profit remittances, stimulated by currency appreciation and the recovery of economic activity.
The balance on the capital and financial account in 2002 showed a net capital outflow of US$ 14.2 billion, following the US$ 32.9 billion inflow recorded in the previous year.
This is the result of net inward FDI amounting to US$ 39.0 billion –about 57% of the figure recorded in 2001– and an outflow of financial capital (which covers all other capital flows, including errors and omissions) totalling US$ 53.2 billion, equivalent to 3.3% of regional GDP.
Financial capital has been moving out of the region since 1999, but in 2002 the outflow grew to exceptional levels, clearly related to the ongoing crises in Argentina, Brazil, Uruguay and Venezuela.
The net outcome of current account flows combined with flows on the capital and financial account produced an overall balance-of-payments deficit of US$ 27.6 billion in 2002 (1.7% of regional GDP).
The shortfall had to be met by drawing down reserves and making use of exceptional financing, such as credits from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and, in some cases, by delaying external debt principal and interest payments.
Countries with external liabilities in euros have also seen their debt increase given the real appreciation of that currency in recent months. 10 The net resource transfer (NRT) is calculated as the total net capital inflow, minus the balance on the income account (net profit and interest payments).
The total net capital inflow corresponds to the balance of the capital and financial account, plus errors and omissions, plus loans and the use of IMF credits and exceptional financing.
The direction of the region’s net resource transfer began to change in 1999. 11 The total capital inflow corresponds to the sum of autonomous capital inflows, exceptional financing and IMF loans.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 39 These results make 2002 the fifth consecutive year in which the region has recorded a net resource transfer abroad (see figure II.5); moreover, this year the outflow reached the unprecedented level of US$ 40.4 billion (2.5% of GDP), half of which is accounted for by results in Argentina.
In contrast, direct investment inflows are expected to remain positive in 2003.
Capital flows in this category prevented the overall transfer from being negative between 1999 and 2001, despite their clearly declining trend, which continued in 2002-2003.
Future difficulties can be foreseen for the region in financing its substantial factor-service payments, if FDI inflows continue to decline at their current rate, profit remittances gradually increase and financial transfers remain negative (as is now happening for the eighth year in a row).
The pattern of net resource transfers from abroad is not homogeneous throughout the region (see figure II.6).
The Central American and Caribbean countries have received external funding continuously since 1989, albeit at a decreasing rate since 1997.
Mexico, meanwhile, has recorded positive transfers since overcoming its 1995 financial crisis.
In contrast, in MERCOSUR, the Andean Community and Chile, transfers have been declining or overtly negative since 1996-1997.
As the world economy slowed in 2001, the aggregate index of commodity prices fell sharply, pulled down mainly by the price of oil.
Symmetrically, 2002 saw a marked recovery that extended into the first half of 2003, again basically reflecting the behaviour of hydrocarbons prices.
The recent rise in oil prices is explained by a number of factors that have counteracted sluggish world demand for this product, which grew by just 0.5% in 2002.
The Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) cut production levels by 6% in 2002, and this was compounded by uncertainty during the year concerning the possibility of armed conflict in Iraq, and various interruptions of oil production in Venezuela and Nigeria during the same period.
The average per-barrel price of Tía Juana crude (which is included in the index) and in the first half of 2003 reached US$ 27.6 –38% above the level recorded during the same period of 2002.
Any future easing of the price depends on the speed with which stocks are replenished in the United States; these stocks were at unusually low levels in mid-2003.
Clearly the rapid conclusion of the war in Iraq has not had positive repercussions on this market, since a sustained fall in prices had been expected.
Commodity prices Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 41 Excluding oil, commodity prices fell by 1.1% in 2002, but then rose by 6% in the first half of 2003 compared to the same period a year earlier.
Falling prices affected the vast majority of commodities in 2002, albeit with important exceptions including maize, wheat, cacao, soya products, wool and fish meal.
The price of soya products climbed by 20% during the first half of 2003, having risen in 2002 on the back of stronger world demand, particularly from China and India, assisted by production cuts in the United States.
Soya prices are likely to remain strong in 2003, thanks to sustained demand and the fact that the area currently under cultivation in the United States is less than in 2002; but they will probably weaken in 2004 as worldwide production expands.
Sugar, maize, wheat, cotton, wood pulp, tin and steel sheet displayed similar price trends (two-digit increases in the first half of 2003 while remaining at very low levels).
After falling in 2002, the price of copper enjoyed a minor upturn in the first half of 2003, reflecting low inventory levels; but it remains 26% off the average recorded in 1997.
The only non-oil products to register prices significantly higher than in 1997 are cacao and wool, worldwide production of which has declined in recent years.
Following a 10% fall in 2002, the price of coffee rose slightly in the first half of 2003, in the wake of production cuts and the withholding of sales in several countries, but it remains 70% below its 1997 value.
Banana prices, which were already very low, again fell steeply in the first half of 2003.
The terms of trade Unfavourable price trends among the region’s export products, combined with a much more moderate decline in import prices, caused the terms of trade to worsen between 1998 and 2002 (see figure II.8).12 During this period, the non-oil economies accumulated a loss of 14.9%.
Even when oil-exporting countries are included, the terms of trade for the region as a whole declined by 3.4%.
On the other hand, the purchasing power of exports grew steadily over the same period (see figure II.9),13 which means that the region has more than offset its terms-of-trade loss by exporting larger volumes.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 43 the international economy has been based on selling larger quantities of goods at generally lower prices.
The countries worst hit by the fall in the terms of trade between 1998 and 2003 –with cumulative losses in excess of 10%– are Brazil, Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Peru.
A slight easing of the deterioration is projected for 2003, which for the region as a whole could amount to 0.5%.
In the case of oil countries, the gain is likely to be 1.2%, while non-oil countries stand to benefit by 0.8%.
The small improvement forecast for the latter group is the result of price rises among certain export products in 2003, as discussed above. 6.
The positive balance in 2002 was the result of a 0.8% rise in exports and a 6.7% fall in imports, both in relation to their 2001 levels.
Exports are forecast to grow by about 4.4% in 2003, while imports are set to strengthen marginally by 0.8% compared to the previous year’s figure.
The surplus achieved in 2002 is largely explained by a steep decline in the value of imports in MERCOSUR countries, which had been shrinking since mid-2001; but sharp devaluations were responsible for restricting foreign purchases during 2002.
The real exchange rate of the Argentine peso against the dollar rose by 2.5 times between December 2001 and December 2002,15 while the Brazilian real depreciated by 40% in dollar terms over the same period, and by 54% between January and October 2002.
Paraguay and Uruguay endured situations similar to those of their MERCOSUR trading partners, while imports collapsed in Venezuela as a result of the conflictive political and economic situation prevailing in the country during the year, compounded by devaluation of the bolívar.
In Chile, foreign purchases also retreated, but to a lesser extent than in the other countries mentioned.
In Mexico, imports grew slightly, following a 3.5% drop in 2001, whereas the Central American and Caribbean countries saw foreign purchases expand by 4%, especially in Costa Rica and Guatemala.
The import growth projected for 2003 is likely to be strongly influenced by events in MERCOSUR, whose member countries can be expected to resume more normal levels of trade compared to the critical juncture reached in 2002.
A decisive factor in this regard will be the recovery of economic activity in Argentina.
In Mexico, on the other hand, foreign purchases seem to be flagging, reflecting the fragile state of its trade with the United States and the weakness of its domestic activity.
On the other side of the equation, although exports contributed less to the surplus in 2002, an incipient improvement could be discerned in the second half of the year among both non-oil and total foreign sales.
Export values in 2003 are projected to rise in 16 of the 19 countries considered –in five cases at two-digit rates (see figure II.11).
Only in Mexico and Colombia will this growth be attr ibutable exclusively to the effect of prices, particularly that of oi l .
The contribution made by the r ise in hydrocarbons prices can cer ta in ly not be underestimated, however, since this accounted for about 12% of the region’s surplus in 2002.16 The higher price was positive for the merchandise trade balances of net exporters, namely Argentina, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico and Venezuela.
Nonoil exports have also performed strongly since the 14 As table II.2 is based on annual trade figures (fob) taken from the respective balance-of-payments data, whereas figure II.10 shows monthly data, there may be differences between the two sets of records.
In the Central American and Caribbean subregion, Costa Rica produced outstanding export results.17 17 The monthly export series for this subregion is underestimated, since Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua do not report figures for the maquila sector.
United States import records of goods purchased from those countries show a larger increase than that recorded in official national statistics, especially in 2003.
Non-oil exports have declined steadily since mid-2002, broadly following their 2001 trend when the United States was in recession.
As shown in figure II.12, non-oil imports into the United States from Mexico fell steeply in 2001.
Although there has been an upturn in the second quarter of 2002, the trend in the remainder of the year and first few months of 2003 has again been negative.
In contrast, United States imports from Central America and the Caribbean, which had also declined in 2001, recovered even faster than purchases from the rest of the world in The sluggish performance of Mexican exports, which represent about half of the regional total, is one of the salient features of the present conjuncture.
It is worth recalling that Mexico’s foreign sales enjoyed exponential growth during the 1990s, attaining a level of US$ 166 billion in 2000.
This happened while the domestic economy was integrating with that of the United States, which absorbs 90% of the country’s exports, approximately half of them produced under the maquila regime.
The 2001 recession interrupted this growth trend, however; manufacturing exports stalled in 2002, and maquila exports grew by just 1.6%.
The downswing intensified in the first half of 2003, when both activities reported reductions in relation to the same period a year earlier (of 2% and 2.6% respectively).
Mexican imports, which are closely related to its export trade, grew by 0.5%, although capital goods purchases shrank by 7.2%.
First of all, Mexico’s competitive advantage has been eroded by an overvalued exchange rate.
From 1997 to 2002, the real exchange rate of the peso against the dollar fell by 18% (appreciation); and despite a devaluation in 2003, it still remains close to its mid-2000 level.
In addition, the maquila industry is facing competition from China and elsewhere, where wage levels are lower; and several firms have transferred their operations to those countries.
Mexico has also partially implemented the rules of origin contained in its free trade treaty with the United States and Canada, which impose tariffs on maquila enterprises that use components from outside the area; this has particularly affected Japanese and Korean electronic assembly businesses.
This loss of competitiveness could intensify further as a result of the free trade agreement the five Central American countries have signed with the United States.
In Costa Rica, the expansion has been dominated by the activities of Intel and other firms located in the duty-free zones.
In 2002, Intel made large-scale imports related to the production of a new microchip, the production and export of which began only late in the year but proceeded vigorously in the first few months of 2003.
In El Salvador, maquila activities now represent about 60% of total external sales and recently have been expanding strongly: in the first half of 2003 this sector grew by 10% in relation to the same period of 2002, having increased by 7% during the previous year.
In the Dominican Republic, maquila activities account for about 80% of all exports.
Although sales contracted in 2002, they recovered in the early months of 2003 following a currency devaluation; United States imports from the Dominican Republic grew by 11% in the first five months of 2003.
Although the 2002 devaluation of the Argentine peso did not immediately benefit that country’s total exports (they actually decreased), foreign sales staged a clear recovery in 2003, exports of agricultural manufactures having previously expanded by 9% in 2000.
The nucleus of this expansion is the soya complex (soybeans, oil and other subproducts), which has been boosted by rising world demand, production cutbacks in the United States and a consequent rise in prices.
Peso devaluation enhanced the profitability of 18 In 2001, the United States crop accounted for 39% of world soya production, whereas Argentina and Brazil contributed 16% and 26%, respectively.
The downside to this generally positive export performance was provided by Argentina’s manufacturing industry, which showed no signs of recovery between 2002 and 2003.
This largely reflects the weakness of the Brazilian market, which for many years has been the natural destination for products from this sector.
In 2003, this country’s foreign sales are expected to increase by about 15%, easily surpassing the 3.7% expansion of 2002.
As in Argentina, soya and its subproducts have been key players, but sales have also increased in the iron and steel complex.
The latter is responsible for 40% of the expansion achieved in 2002, whereas soya and its subproducts account for one third.
Unlike Argentina, Brazil made an exchange-rate correction in 1999 which boosted profitability in the export sector.
Although the exchange rate has since fluctuated sharply, it has remained consistently above its pre-1999 levels.21 The steep devaluation recorded in 2002 stimulated exports still further, which in the first seven months of 2003 grew by 22% compared to the same period in the previous year.
In the first six months, foreign sales from the soya complex expanded by 114%, iron and steel by 47%, and coffee by 39%, while automotive-industry sales recovered thanks to a revival of demand from Argentina (35%).
As also occurred in Argentina, booming exports, combined with meagre expansion of the domestic market and imports (which are trending downward), are pushing up the value of the real, and this appreciation could detract from the vigour of exports in the final part of the year.
In the first five months of 2003, exports from Paraguay grew by 31% in relation to the same period a year earlier, led by cotton and soya.
Sales of the latter product doubled, as a result of substantial increases in both price and volume.
This export boom makes it likely that imports will also recover to some extent over the year as a whole.
In Uruguay, export growth is still incipient, but foreign sales figures suggest a recovery in 2003 from the extremely low levels recorded in 2002. c) The Andean countries Exports from Chile and the Andean Community countries (except Venezuela) trended upward in 2003.
Bolivia’s foreign sales grew in 2002, driven by natural gas and soya products; the latter are expected to perform even more strongly in 2003, while exports of certain mineral products also look set to regain ground.
In contrast, the country’s imports are likely to remain flat, given the weakness of domestic activity.
In Chile, total exports failed to increase in 2002 partly because of reduced sales of copper, the price of which has been in the doldrums in recent years.
Projections for 2003, however, show significant export growth led by a slight recovery in copper, wood pulp and timber, supported by a variety of products in which the country has gained competitiveness in recent years, and which are sensitive to the devaluation of the peso.
Imports can also be expected to recover strongly, having grown by 13% in the first six months compared to the same period a year earlier.
In 2002, exports from Colombia were down by 3.8%; oil sales declined by 0.3% (lower volumes) while non-oil exports shrank by 4.3%.
After this it rose again by 60% between April and October 2002 in a climate of uncertainty induced by the elections.
Imports soared in the first quarter, and this is bound to show through in the annual rate.
The higher oil price contributed to export growth in Ecuador in 2002 and the first part of 2003.
By the end of the year, the heavy crude oil pipeline is expected to come on stream, making it possible to increase the volume of oil sales; nonetheless, export growth for the year as a whole is likely to fall short of the 2002 figure.
Imports are forecast to remain flat in 2003, reflecting the slowdown in domestic economic activity.
In Peru, export growth in 2002 and 2003 was based on a major increase in shipments of certain minerals, particularly copper.
Gold sales also increased in 2003, following a rise in price, and this metal now represents one fifth of the country’s total foreign sales.
The exceptional cir cumstances experienced by Venezuela in 2002 and 2003 had major repercussions on its external trade.
In 2002, total exports fell by 1.9%, and oil exports dropped by 1.2%; then in the first two months of 2003 the latter declined by about 20% compared to the same period a year earlier.
The effect of this break in trend is such that, even assuming the path of normalization that began in March is maintained, total exports for the year as a whole are likely to be down by 10%. 7.
Intraregional trade Slow growth region-wide and, in particular, outright contraction of economic activity in a number of economies caused trade within the region to shrink by Although the crises in Argentina, Uruguay, Paraguay and Venezuela played a major role in reducing trade within the region, commercial exchange weakened in all trade groupings, and also in Mexico and Chile.
Lack of buoyancy in the MERCOSUR countries had caused trade to shrink in 2001, in contrast to the prevailing trend of the past decade.
Projections for 2003 see a slight recovery in the regional total, with increases in MERCOSUR, Chile and CACM.
In MERCOSUR, a key factor has been the growth of Argentine imports from Brazil and Chile; in contrast, Brazilian imports from Argentina remain weak – especially manufactured goods.
In CACM, the growth in trade predicted for 2003 is explained by Costa Rican exports and Guatemalan imports.
Trade between Mexico and the rest the region is likely to remain depressed, however, the decisive factor being the sluggishness of sales to Venezuela and Brazil, both of which represent important markets for Mexico within the region.
Trade within the Andean Community is expected to shrink further in 2003, reflecting the import contraction in Venezuela and the negative effects of devaluations in Bolivia, Colombia and Venezuela. 8.
Family remittances In recent years, workers’ remittances have become one of the most dynamic components of the current account of the balance of payments in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Although part of the growth can be attributed to improvements in record keeping and the financial transfer mechanisms used, flows of this type are becoming increasingly important for the region’s external accounts.
Their total in 2003 could approach US$ 25 billion, equivalent to about 85% of expected FDI inflows.
Remittances represent a decisive income source for all the Central American countries (except Costa Rica), and for the Dominican Republic, where they represent about 10% of GDP.
They are also essential for Mexico, which in 2002 received inflows in this category equivalent to 70% of total FDI during the year, and for Ecuador, where remittances represent about 6% of GDP.
As can be seen in figure II.14, remittances inflows were smaller in 2001, consonant with the slowdown of economic activity in the United States, but they bounced back in 2002.
Financial capital is expected to register a net outflow abroad as in 1999-2002, albeit this time on a smaller scale.
Compensatory capital, including IMF credits and exceptional financing (which includes arrears in interest and amortization payments), are expected to approach US$ 25 billion.
As a result, the total capital inflow into the region should come to around US$ 40 billion.
This recovery helped to replenish international reserves in the first half of 2003 in countries running current-account deficits, while international interest rates have fallen to their lowest level of the last 40 years.
IMF support has been crucial in some countries, given recent difficulties in obtaining external financing.
Between early 2002 and May 2003, credits from the Fund were mainly channelled to Brazil and Uruguay; Argentina did not receive any IMF funding in 2002, but made repayments amounting to US$ 800 million.23 In January 2003, the country signed an agreement for US$ 1.4 billion to cover amortization payable to the Fund by April 2003.
Other commitments are due to expire in August and are expected to be rescheduled in the framework of a new three-year agreement.
Bolivia and Ecuador signed arrangements with IMF in the early months of 2003, and have made disbursements totalling US$ 55 million and US$ 42 million, respectively.
Colombia, for its part, reached an agreement with the Fund in January and has credits approved totalling US$ 2.2 billion, but as of mid-2003 no disbursements had been made.
In contrast, Paraguay held two rounds of negotiations with IMF in 2002, but neither of them came to fruition: the first, owing to the suspension of privatization of the phone company Compañía Paraguaya de Comunicaciones (COPACO), and the second, because of the delay in approving a fiscal reform package.
In July 2003 new negotiations began, which will be concluded by the new government that took office in mid-August.
As regards autonomous capital inflows towards the region, despite a recovery in the rate of gross bond flotations in the first half of 2003, the negative external financing trends that began to appear in 1999 still persist (see table A-13 of the statistical appendix).
Thus, the end of 2003 will complete a five-year period (19992003) in which the contribution of autonomous capital inflows to the region’s development will have fallen to an average of 1.7% of GDP –no more than half their level of the preceding five years (1994-1998).
Although net FDI is set to fall from US$ 39 billion in 2002 to US$ 30 billion in 2003, it will continue to be the main source of financing received by the region.
Larger gross non-bank debt flows to the region (mainly bonds) are unlikely to compensate for the reduction in bank loans and other short-term capital, so the net debt flow is again likely to be negative.
Given this situation, at least seven Latin American countries will continue to require compensatory financing, mainly in the form of IMF loans, to meet their factor-payment obligations (net interest and profit remittances).
In the first half of 2003, a number of factors (including the successful handover of power in Brazil) helped improve financial conditions in the region, following their sharp deterioration in 2002.
This worsens indicators of the public-debt burden, which in turn encourages spreads to widen further.
The overreaction of the financial market in the second half of 2002 was confirmed when spreads on Brazilian sovereign debt eased back to around 750 basis points (bps) in July 2003, having soared to 2,500 bps the previous September.
Another positive factor has been the inclusion of collective action clauses (CACs) in sovereign bond issues, which will help solve disputes between governments and investors.
These clauses in the bond contracts enable issuing governments and a qualified majority of bondholders to take decisions that commit all creditors of a given issue.25 The specified majority can impose a restructuring agreement on the remaining creditors either before or after non-performance.
Thus CACs afford greater certainty to investors, and to the government in its capacity as issuer, and they facilitate the process of external-debt restructuring should this be necessary.
The governments of Mexico and Brazil adopted this scheme in their 2003 bond issues, and the corresponding flotations were both oversubscribed.
The government of Uruguay also included CACs in the debt swap carried out in May 2003 Nonetheless, external financing problems persist.
Some countries in the region have absorbed large amounts of external funding in relation to their GDP, particularly through bond flotations.
In some cases governments have used the proceeds to finance current expenditure, without any benefit to productive sectors.
It is measured as the difference between the rate of return on sovereign bonds traded internationally and the rate on equivalent bonds issued by the United States Treasury Department; 100 basis points (bps) is equivalent to 1% interest per year. 25 See International Monetary Fund, IMF Survey, 2 June 2003. 26 See ECLAC, A decade of light and shadow.
On this point, the ECLAC secretariat has been arguing since the early 1990s that transitory capital flows seeking to exploit the spread between domestic and external interest rates over the short term should be avoided.
Reserve requirements have been proposed as a policy tool to discourage inflows of this type, by forcing foreign investors to keep their capital in the country for a certain period of time, or pay a tax for withdrawal before the established deadline.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) Since 2000, FDI flows into the region have suffered a gradual but substantial decline, even though they continue to be the region’s main source of external financing (see table A-16 of the statistical appendix).
Nonetheless, the central bank predicts a recovery in the second half of the year and is projecting an FDI inflow of US$ 10 billion for the year as a whole.
In Argentina, FDI was practically non-existent in the first few months of 2003, in a continuation of the downward trend that began in 2001.
Venezuela saw investment outflows (amounting to US$ 617 million) in the first three months of the year, for the first time since the fourth quarter of 1994, thereby confirming the downturn that began to appear in 2002.
The forces underlying the dwindling trend of FDI include the fact that the privatization process has run its course in many countries, and foreign residents have been acquiring fewer domestic assets in the private sector.
A number of transnational groups have also scaled down their expansion strategies to a significant degree, having acquired enterprises in various sectors in Latin America (including many privately owned businesses) during an exceptionally active period of international mergers and acquisitions.
The decline of FDI in 2002 was also affected by specific factors in each country, linked to recession, greater political instability or uncertainty caused by changes in the rules of the game, as happened in Argentina.
Among countries in which FDI remained buoyant, about 30% of inflows represented profit reinvestment.
Official projections for 2003 see Mexico maintaining FDI at the US$ 13 billion level it has registered since 1994.
Other countries likely to continue the positive trend of recent years include Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru, where major investments are expected in the hydrocarbons subsector.
Credit conditions and the new external financing Following a very lean period for bond flotations lasting from May to November 2002, fund flows of this type gathered pace between December that year and June 2003, as revealed by the figures for bond placements in nine of the region’s countries.
In the first half of 2003, bond issues totalled US$ 20.6 billion (excluding the bond swap made by Uruguay in May), which compares favourably with the US$ 13 billion recorded in the first half of 2002.
Gross flotations on international bond markets in 2002 totalled US$ 18.215 billion –just over half the figure recorded in 2001 (see table A-17 of the statistical appendix).
These operations consisted largely of sovereign issues, made mainly by Brazil, Colombia, Mexico and Uruguay, whose governments used the proceeds almost entirely for loan repayment or debt swaps.
In addition to these placements, others were made by Chile, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Jamaica and Peru –the latter for the first time since 1928.
In these cases, the proceeds were used mainly to refinance existing external liabilities.
In recent years, borrowing in the form of bonds has increasingly replaced commercial bank loans.
At the same time a number of countries (Chile and Mexico, among others) have been pursuing a systematic policy to improve their maturity profile, prepaying current loans or replacing expired debt with new borrowing under better conditions.
Other countries (especially in Central America) have been replacing domestic debt with external borrowing, in some cases on a large scale.
In the first half of 2003, nine Latin American and Caribbean governments accounted for 60% of all bond placements; these include Mexico, which became the region’s main borrower, and Chile, in response to the more favourable conditions being offered.
Following the pattern of previous years, nine of the Latin American and Caribbean countries that issued sovereign bonds used the proceeds partly to repay expired debts and finance their fiscal deficits.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 55 and Mexico proceeds were also used to prepay existing loans, while in Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Peru, they were also used to replace domestic debt with external borrowing and take advantage of better credit conditions.
In the Dominican Republic, bond proceeds will also be used to build up international reserves.
In Brazil, Mexico and Peru in recent years, available funds have been used to buy back Brady bonds, in an operation that has made it possible to retrieve the collateral on those bonds, thus generating a saving for the government, in addition to taking advantage of improved credit conditions.
In mid-2003 Mexico concluded the process of buying back all its Brady bonds (US$ 35 billion) issued in 1990 in the wake of the 1980s external-debt crisis.
Having deteriorated in mid-2002, external financing conditions staged a substantial recovery late in the year and in the first half of 2003.
The average cost of external financing on new issues by the region’s governments had fallen to 10% per year by mid-2003 after approaching 14% in the third quarter of 2002 (similar to the level reached in August 1998 when the Russian Federation declared a moratorium).
Morgan and Merrill Lynch. a Sum of the average spread between rates on bond placements and the yield on long-term bonds issued by the United States Treasury Department.
The spread corresponds to the figure estimated in the eurobond index for Latin America (Latin Eurobond Index, LEI). b LEI recalculated using November 2001weightings.
The reduction reflects the smaller spreads the countries of the region are having to pay, since the yield on 10-year United States treasury bonds remained stable at around 4% per year between October 2002 and June 2003.
With investors displaying greater risk aversion, sovereign spreads widened generally in Latin America and the Caribbean between June and September 2002, with the regional average rising above 1,000 basis points.
Bonds issued by Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay were worst hit by this surge, as their spreads grew to levels that meant the virtual closure of the voluntary market.
In the Dominican Republic, meanwhile, the spread doubled during the first half of 2003 as result of the domestic banking crisis, to reach 830 bps.
Thus, in mid-June average sovereign bond spreads in the region were fluctuating around 600 bps, substantially lower than the 900-point level they had reached in mid-2002.
It needs to be said that markets continue to differentiate between countr ies according to creditworthiness, so in some cases interest rates remain onerous.
As regards maturities, in the first half of 2003 these were broadly unchanged from their levels of the recent past, with terms tending to stabilize around nine years –still far below the average of 15 years that prevailed before the Asian crisis.
In recent months, nearly all bond issues have been made in dol lars , par t ly because of the substantial recent appreciation of the euro against that currency. 12.
The region’s external debt The gross disbursed external debt of Latin America and the Caribbean amounted to US$ 727 billion in December 2002 –practically the same as a year earlier, when it had grown by 2% (see table A-18 of the statistical appendix).
In 2003, in contrast, external liabilities are expected to rise to the US$ 745 billion range, thereby returning to their 2000 levels.
In most countries, this increase is explained almost entirely by heavier government borrowing from multilateral agencies, although in some cases it is also caused by arrears in amortization and interest payments.
In a few countries, debt growth reflects additional borrowing by the private sector.
Given the problems faced by Latin American and Caribbean countries in obtaining external financing, in 2002 most countries recorded large variations in their external liabilities, and there were even nominal reductions in eight cases.
Estimates made by the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) show that bank debt retreated most sharply in 2002, as the regional aggregate shrank by nearly 5% in nominal terms.
This was partly offset by stronger non-bank borrowing (mainly in the form of bonds).
Uruguay’s foreign debt grew by 42% because of exceptional commitments acquired with multilateral agencies, mainly IMF; in El Salvador, external obligations increased by 27% in the wake of its aggressive policy to convert domestic debt into external borrowing (bonds), in order to reduce short-term financial pressures; and in Ecuador there was a 13% increase, reflecting increased private-sector borrowing.
Countries displaying a moderate increase in external liabilities included Chile (mainly private borrowing), Costa Rica (conversion of domestic into external debt) and the Dominican Republic (increased government liabilities).
In over half the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean (mostly those with economies that are more open than the regional average) the two traditional debtburden indicators have remained within prudent ranges.
The eight most heavily indebted countries include Bolivia, Brazil and Peru, which displayed debt/export ratios as high as 300%.
Nonetheless, it is positive to note that in Brazil and Peru these indicators have been improving systematically since 1999.
Despite accumulating US$ 4.3 billion in overdue interest on its public debt, in 2002 Argentina reduced its overall external debt burden by 4%, as a result of net payments to multilateral agencies and the partial payment of private-sector debts.
The government declared a unilateral moratorium on its debt with privatesector creditors in late 2001, but has continued to honour its commitments towards multilateral agencies.
The country now needs to reschedule amortization and overdue interest payments on its external public debt under conditions that include substantial discounts, longer maturities and interest rates that make it possible to service medium- and long-term obligations on a sustainable basis.
The government is expected to announce a proposal for an external debt swap in September, which will include bond refinancing amounting to over US$ 50 billion.
In the case of private-sector external debt, several Argentine firms are trying to exploit a recent amendment to the local bankruptcy law in order to simplify debt work-out procedures.
These firms have presented restructuring proposals under the acuerdo preventivo extrajudicial mechanism, which enables debtors to reach an out-of-court settlement with the approval of just two 58 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean thirds of their creditors.
In 2002, the government amended the domestic bankruptcy law to make such agreements applicable to all creditors rather than just those committing to the procedure under new agreements.
A telecommunications firm with overdue financial debts of around US$ 3.2 billion set a precedent in this regard by proposing to use the restructuring agreement to exchange older debt for new borrowing at a discount of about 50%.
In late 2002, the government of Nicaragua reached an agreement with IMF in which fulfilment of the proposed programme will make the country eligible for international financial cooperation once again and enable it to reach the “culmination point” in the framework of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, thereby affording it external debt relief.
Honduras will also be able to join the HIPC Initiative, with similar results, provided it meets the targets stipulated in its new agreement with the Fund.
The Uruguayan government agreed on a “marketfriendly” sovereign debt swap with its creditors in May 2003, with IMF support.
The terms of the deal involve a five-year extension of sovereign bond maturities, while maintaining the original currency of the contract with no reduction of principal or interest.
The proposal was aimed at creditors holding bonds with a total par value of US$ 5.2 billion, of which US$ 3.5 billion corresponded to external and the remainder to domestic bonds.
By May, the vast majority of the respective creditors had accepted the proposal, thereby reducing debt-service pressure for the next few years.
Economic policy Fiscal policy management in 2002-2003 was implemented in difficult macroeconomic circumstances, both domestically and internationally; in some cases, sluggish economic growth in the United States and deteriorating terms of trade in the non-oil economies made the situation even worse.
In the most indebted countries, the salient features have been capital-market volatility, worsening international financial conditions and the constraints that public sectors have consequently had to cope with.
As was pointed out in Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2002, in this particular situation most of the region’s economies lost degrees of freedom for fiscal-policy management, despite pursuing very different courses in general.
This is illustrated by the fact that most governments are implementing or negotiating programmes with IMF that include fiscal-austerity measures that could deepen the effects of the business cycle.28 Moreover, macroeconomic circumstances have directly or indirectly affected fiscal revenues in nearly all countries and increased the demand for assistance policies.
Fiscal policy is increasingly at the forefront of agendas in the countries of the region, whose governments in 2003 are striving to implement a variety of policies to strengthen fiscal results, either through programmes to curtail primary expenditures or by raising tax pressure (through reforms or administrative improvements).
Although fiscal management would normally call for expansionary measures in the present circumstances, few countries managed their fiscal accounts in previous years so as to allow greater room for current fiscal-policy manoeuvre.
Debate over the use of this type of instrument began to intensify following the onset of the South-East Asian crisis; for, in many 1.
Fiscal policy countries of the region, a situation of fiscal balance was a prerequisite for introducing such measures, and this had to be achieved in the midst of a recession.
In the few countries that implemented countercyclical policy by design (Chile is the most obvious example), the length of the current recession raises doubts as to whether the surpluses accumulated to cope with the crisis will prove sufficient.
Moreover, the various structural reforms implemented during the 1990s have failed to provide governments with more solvent public sectors or to resolve problems arising from high levels of past borrowing.
Nonetheless, as a first approach to fiscal trends in recent years, this analysis will focus on central-government accounts.29 The overall deficit at that level shows a minimal improvement between 2001 and 2002, narrowing from 3.3% to 2.6% of GDP (as a simple average),30 while the average primary deficit eased from 0.7% to 0.1% of GDP.
In both cases the deficits recorded in 2001 were the largest of the last 10 years (see table II.4). 28 In the region there are countries that have ongoing arrangements with IMF (Brazil), others in which arrangements were signed in 2002 (Ecuador, Nicaragua, Uruguay), and lastly countries where agreements will come to an end in 2003 (Bolivia, Guatemala).
Apart from a few individual cases, the countries of the region are striving to consolidate a more solid fiscal situation, and are generally negotiating with multilateral financial organizations to introduce new fiscal programmes or renew those already under way.
A few countries do not fit this pattern, either because they do not require it (Chile) or because their political situation has put them in a condition that makes negotiation difficult (Honduras).
The figure above also illustrates two additional features of the behaviour of the region’s public accounts.
This reflects the partial moratorium on debt service declared by the government, on which a renegotiation process is expected to begin in late 2003.
In Ecuador, on the other hand, the smaller weight of interest payments is explained by a significant revaluation of output in current dollar terms. 32 The average central government primary result varied between 0.4% and 1.0% of GDP between 1992 and 1997, before slipping to -0.3% of GDP in 2001.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 61 that borrowing countries have to pay in such circumstances, and the effects of currency devaluation.33 The second feature relates to the trend of the standard deviation of the two series.
The average situation discussed above is the net outcome of widely diverging situations, and standard deviations can provide a first approximation to the extent of the disparities.
In general, the dispersion of results has tended to decrease when the average situation has improved (specifically up to 1998), and to increase during the ensuing crisis.
At the most critical junctures it is predictable that economies in the vanguard of the process suffer a more pronounced deterioration in their fiscal results, which serves to widen overall dispersion (countries such as Argentina, Bolivia, Nicaragua, Uruguay and Venezuela would fit this description in the regional situation of recent years).
At the same time, countries less affected by the crisis display a more stable behaviour pattern, in some cases reinforced by the use of countercyclical instruments (Chile).
Once again, Nicaragua is excluded from the calculation, because its results improved to such an extent that including them in the figure would make it impossible to adequately differentiate between the other countries using the same scale.
The invariability of the average, as mentioned above, reflects the fact that in half the countries the overall and primary results improved while in the other half they worsened.
There are two countries whose results varied in opposite directions in 2002.
One is Ecuador, whose central-government primary balance deteriorated while the overall result improved, thanks to significantly lower interest payments resulting from debt reduction and GDP growth measured in current dollars.
In Argentina, meanwhile, specific aspects of these two cases conspired to produce the largest overall central-government surplus in the entire region after Nicaragua.
Like its neighbour Uruguay, Argentina achieved a considerable improvement on its primary balance; but, given the partial moratorium on debt service, its accounts also registered significantly lower interest payments.
Among the remaining countries, there is an equal number of improving and deteriorating primary and overall results, as shown in table II.5.
When analysing whether the changes in the 2002 results were achieved with a larger or smaller State presence (measured by central-government primary expenditure as a percentage of GDP), four groups of countries can be distinguished in addition to the three special cases mentioned above.
Of the eight countries that achieved better results in 2002, Brazil and Colombia increased their primary expenditure, while the State presence declined in the other six (El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru and Venezuela).
Among the other eight countries, where results deteriorated, primary expenditure grew in six cases (Bolivia, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Mexico and Paraguay) and decreased in just two (Haiti and Panama).34 The situation described in the foregoing classification and the accompanying figures relates exclusively to events over the last two years.
To put the regional fiscal-policy panorama during the past year into historical perspective, figure II.22 combines information on the primary balance for 2002 with a synthetic indicator of the fiscal situation in the past, in this case consisting of the debt/GDP ratio.
When the regional averages of these two indicators are plotted on a graph, the four groups of countries can be located in quadrants representing increased or reduced fiscal solvency, both now (ratio between primary balance and GDP) and in the past (level of public debt as a percentage of GDP).
In Argentina, GDP fell abruptly in dollar terms as a result of the moratorium, devaluation and debt renegotiation, and there was a simultaneous increase in the debt/GDP ratio.
In Nicaragua, this quotient is related to the level of output, for which the calculation methodology is currently under review.
These are El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru and Venezuela, all of which achieved better results with lower levels of primary expenditure than in the previous year; ii) Countries with below-average debt/GDP ratios whose primary balances deteriorated in 2002.
These include Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Mexico, and Paraguay, where primary expenditure was down from the previous year’s level; iii) Countries with above-average debt/GDP ratios and improved primary balances in 2002.
There are four members of this group: Brazil and Colombia, where primary expenditure increased, and Honduras and Uruguay, where it decreased; iv) Countries with above-average debt/GDP ratios whose primary balances worsened.
This group includes Panama, even though it cut back its primary expenditures, along with Bolivia, Ecuador and Haiti, where primary expenditures grew in 2002.
A number of distinctive patterns can be discerned in the fiscal behaviour of countries in the different subregions and integration groupings.
In 2002 and 2003, the MERCOSUR countries suffered most directly from the deterioration of international and local financial conditions.
In 2002, all of these countries experienced steep currency devaluations and significant changes in their relative prices.
The Argentine crisis and its contagion to neighbouring countries –compounded by conflictive political situations (Argentina and Paraguay), the change of government in Brazil, onerous financial costs and high country-risk premiums– marked all these economies.
In addition, fiscal-policy design was tightly constrained by the macroeconomic crisis itself, which resulted in continuous negotiation of arrangements with In the case of Argentina, the severe curtailment of primary expenditure is the outcome of a drastic change in the economy’s relative prices, involving significant cuts in real wages and social-security benefits.
Much of the fiscal improvement achieved is the result of a withholding scheme applied to exports, whereby the Treasury obtains a portion of the funds generated by the extraordinarily high value of foreign currency and its consequent effect on exporters’ earnings.
The maintenance of this source of funds will clearly depend on macroeconomic conditions, which are bound to be different in the future.
The domestic fiscal situation has also benefited from a peculiar form of the OliveraTanzi effect.
The inflationary surge in early 2002 generated real revenue losses that were recouped a few months later when the pace of inflation slowed sharply.
Nonetheless, as many of the prices paid by the public sector remained practically frozen, including wages and social-security benefits, a fiscal surplus was achieved as a result of the higher real value of taxes compared to the prices paid by the public sector.
Although the additional funds were partly used to finance a major assistance programme to tackle the social crisis, a large portion helped form the primary surplus described above.36 Public accounts in Uruguay also display a remarkable increase in the primary balance, as a result of cuts in primary expenditure across the board.
The basic difference that distinguishes it from the Argentine case is that the latter also managed to reduce its total expenditures significantly by partially suspending debt service.
In Brazil, on the other hand, fiscal improvement in 2002 reflected more buoyant revenue, induced by fiscal reform and improvements to tax administration.
Since these measures involved exceptional payments that are unlikely to be repeated in 2003, the government’s goal of achieving a larger primary surplus this year is founded on a more austere expenditure policy.
Lastly, in Paraguay, the fiscal situation worsened steadily as income fell abruptly.
Uruguay aims to strengthen its fiscal situation in 2003 to lay the foundation for a sustainable fiscal programme in the medium term.
To achieve this, it is projecting a reduction in the real level of expenditure, supported by a slight upturn in receipts.37 It is also worth mentioning the importance of social security in this group of countries, since they have the region’s most mature pension systems.
Argentina and Uruguay are each facing problems characteristic of their different social-security reforms.
In 2003 debate is expected in Brazil and Paraguay over the reform alternatives promoted by their new governments – especially, in Brazil’s case, in relation to changes made to the pension regime covering public-sector workers.
In Paraguay, half of the fiscal deficit stems from the financial shortfall in the country’s social-security institute.
This section concludes by considering the effects of provincial- and state-government finances on the consolidated results achieved in Argentina and Brazil in recent years.
Use of central government statistics makes it hard to gain insight into the accounts of countries with more deep-rooted federal traditions.
The particular type of fiscal adjustment undertaken in Argentina, based on a change in relative prices, significantly increased room for fiscal manoeuvre by provincial governments whose budgets are largely used to pay workers in the education, health and security systems, and finance their own public administration.
Moreover, in an agreement signed between the provinces and the nation, the central government undertook to renegotiate a large proportion of provincial debt, thereby significantly reducing the debt service payable by the corresponding provincial authorities.
Three of its members improved their primary balances in 2002 (Colombia, Peru and Venezuela), while another three suffered deteriorations (Bolivia, Chile and Ecuador).
Peru was clearly one of the countries that proved best able to cope with the regional macroeconomic and fiscal turbulence.
Nonetheless, fiscalpolicy debate in that country revolves around factors of political uncertainty, albeit on a smaller scale than those affecting Venezuela or Colombia.
In addition, the fiscal consequences of certain reforms introduced in the 1990s need to be highlighted in some cases.
In Bolivia, for example, pension reform has been the main cause of imbalance, although other expenditures also grew while income retreated.
Results in Colombia and Peru were also affected by the expenditure implications of their decentralization policies.
In the first case, the surplus of the decentralized public sector (about 2% of GDP in 2002) partially offset a deficit of over 6% of GDP registered by the central government.
In Ecuador, for example, investment in the hydrocarbons area (in addition to current public expenditure, especially wage payments and social-security benefits) has acted as an engine of economic growth, and the fiscal results achieved in 2002 were founded partly on high oil prices.
Another case worth mentioning is Venezuela, where the strike hit oil production, with knock-on effects on overall economic activity and fiscal revenues.
A fiscal improvement can be expected in 2003, although its extent will depend on what happens to oil production. 36 The Unemployed Male and Female Heads of Household Plan was implemented in 2002, and distributed subsidies equivalent to 0.74% of GDP.
An innovation made in the 2003 budget process consisted of involving experts from outside the government in estimating potential GDP and the price of copper for the coming year.
This forces the authorities to abide by a fiscal rule that is becoming less and less discretionary.
An improvement is also expected for this year as a result of more robust growth and an upturn in the price of copper, which is likely to reduce the central-government accounting deficit.
The economic slowdown in the United States has been felt most strongly in the subregion comprising Mexico and Central America.
In addition, slower growth in nearly all the countries in this group, except Costa Rica, has brought pre-existing problems to the fore.
Prospects for 2003 are not very promising, and fiscal policy in these countries is tending towards greater austerity.
As mentioned above, the case of Nicaragua needs to be considered separately.
In complicated macroeconomic circumstances in which economic activity slowed for the third straight year, the government that took office in early 2002 has had to deal with a very complex fiscal situation.
In 2001, public accounts deteriorated sharply, leading to a loss of international reserves; nonetheless, the new administration managed to reduce the central-government primary deficit by over 10 percentage points of GDP.
Factors contributing to this result included increased grants (2.2% of GDP) and tax revenues (1.2% of GDP), supported by reduced expenditure on goods and services and fixed capital formation (2.6% of GDP) and lower current and capital transfers (3.9% of GDP).
The adjustment was partly responsible for the slowdown in economic activity and for the delay in agreeing on a new three-year arrangement with IMF, which was not finalized until late 2002.
In the Dominican Republic, on the other hand, public expenditure was increased in order to boost economic growth in the first half of 2002, but the government was forced to change policy direction towards the end of that year, when other macroeconomic imbalances began to surface.
Among the countries for which relevant information is available, income in this category declined in El Salvador and Guatemala, but staged a remarkable recovery in Nicaragua.
In Mexico, the economic-policy goal for 2002 was to maintain the fundamental balances through fiscal discipline against a backdrop of economic stagnation, but slow output growth prevented this from being achieved.
The deficit widened to 1.2% of GDP, compared to an official target of 0.7%, with much of the divergence stemming from the cost of reforms to the rural credit system.
The aim in 2003 is to keep public expenditure on a tight rein and take steps to increase revenues.
In Costa Rica the Legislative Assembly approved a fiscal contingency plan in December 2002 aimed at generating additional revenue equivalent to 1% of GDP in 2003, in order to fulfil a fiscal-deficit reduction programme.
At the same time, expenditures were cut both at the central level and in the decentralized sector.
In Guatemala, fiscal policies are being tightened in order to further reduce the accumulated deficit.
In Panama, the authorities are striving to meet the targets contained in the Fiscal Responsibility Act passed in 2002.39 Tighter fiscal policies have also been proposed in the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Honduras, although these three countries face more complex situations.
In Haiti, political crisis, rumours of a change of monetary regime, foreign-currency flight and arrears in meeting commitments with multilateral lending agencies have combined to heighten the uncertainty.
In Honduras also, uncertainty persists over the future of the economy and the chances of success for the government’s fiscal policy.
The government failed to reach an agreement with IMF, so its deficit reduction programme is based on a tax reform passed in April 2003 (the Financial Balance and Social Protection Act), which is expected to yield additional funds equivalent to 1% of GDP.
The Dominican Republic also redoubled its fiscal austerity drive in the midst of uncertainty and a banking crisis, with a view to reaching an agreement with the Fund.
Nonetheless, income stalled and by mid-2003 Congress had not yet approved the fiscal reform bill.40 c) Structural reform and fiscal policy in the region As shown throughout this chapter, in nearly all the countries fiscal policy has been dominated in recent years by the explicit goal of balancing public accounts.
Peru and Honduras have pursued countercyclical fiscal programmes, as evidenced by the improvement in their primary results at a time when their economies grew faster than their average growth during the 1990s.
The results obtained in Chile and Costa Rica can also be classified as countercyclical, since fiscal policy took account of the need to boost the economy; so too can the results achieved by Bolivia, Dominican Republic, Mexico, Panama and Paraguay.
These latter cases partly reflect typical attempts by the countries of the region to break out of critical conjunctures by means of rigorous fiscal adjustment processes.
Nicaragua is excluded because its primary balance improved too much to be interpreted in terms of countercyclical public finance.
Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela are not included because they represent a sample of situations that have characterized the region in the recent past.
Examples include legislation passed in Brazil and Panama and, more recently, in Ecuador, which in January 2003 issued regulations for the Fiscal Accountability, Stabilization and Transparency Act; and also in Peru, where a fiscal prudence and transparency bill has been sent to Congress.
Four constraints on the effects of this type of reform need to be mentioned.
First, in some countries the rules were not introduced with the aim of building a more disciplined and solvent fiscal structure in the medium term, but instead merely to show signs of such discipline.
Argentina is a case in point, where legislation of this type was unable to ward off the effects of the crisis.46 Second, in most cases, these rules were debated or adopted after the post-1998 economic slowdown had occurred and not during the preceding boom.
Third, this crisis has lasted longer than could have been foreseen when the countercyclical funds were created.
Finally, it is important to mention that most of the tax reforms implemented in the region have increased the structural share of valued added tax (VAT), thereby accentuating the procyclical nature of public finances.47 That is precisely the orientation of many of the tax reforms currently being debated or implemented in the region.
Brazil is in the process of converting an old tax, levied in cascade form on different productive activities (thereby distorting allocational efficiency), into VAT.
In Paraguay and Venezuela, VAT rates have been increased, and exemptions have also been eliminated in the latter.
Other countries such as Bolivia and Uruguay are taking what are expected to be permanent steps to modernize their tax administrations (Uruguay is combining improved tax administration with an expansion of the VAT base).
Nonetheless, there are also countries where tax reform has become habitual in the face of recurrent needs to strengthen fiscal outcomes.
In Nicaragua, the Tax Base Expansion Act is the sixth tax reform implemented in the last seven years, while Argentina, Costa Rica, Peru and Venezuela are all planning to levy exceptional taxes.48 Lastly, fiscal policy in Latin America and the Caribbean includes other reforms introduced by various countries that could have medium-term effects on fiscal solvency.
Questions have already been raised about the effect of pension reforms and the decentralization of public spending in a number of countries.49 A special case of structural reforms likely to have negative medium-term fiscal effects consists of the trade agreements already signed or being negotiated by Chile and the Central American countries.
In the case of Chile, these treaties will imply a fiscal-revenue loss on the order 45 The most obvious forerunners in this type of debate are the various types of stabilization fund introduced in a number of Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Some of these aim to cushion fluctuations in fiscal revenues obtained from the hydrocarbons sector, such as the Macroeconomic Stabilization Investment Fund created in Venezuela in 1998; the Oil Income Stabilization Fund established in Mexico in 2000 and the Oil Stabilization Fund set up in Colombia in 1995.
The resources of all these funds have been depleted in recent years.
Subsequently, given the difficulties that the Argentine economy had to face in 2000, the timetable was extended to five years and the plan was expanded to encompass provincial governments.
Finally, in 2002, when the irreversible nature of the crisis could no longer be denied, the government attempted to gain credibility by announcing a zero-deficit rule that would take effect immediately.
For an analysis of the fiscal cost of some of the region’s pension reforms, see C.
In the other countries they correspond to the public sector. e Data on revenue correspond to central government.
For 2003, most of these countries expect public investment to pick up without adversely affecting the fiscal situation.
In contrast to these experiences, it is impossible to find a common denominator in the fiscal behaviour of the remainder of the Caribbean countries, although income trends were decisive in most cases.
Revenue growth in Belize and Guyana made them the only countries to improve their fiscal results.
On the other hand, faltering revenue produced wider deficits in the Bahamas and Jamaica, and eroded the surplus in Trinidad and Tobago.
Suriname and Barbados saw their fiscal situations deteriorate, mainly because of growth in the various expenditure components.
Income levels are expected to recover in most of these countries in 2003, while expenditure is set to expand in Belize, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago. 2.
Exchange-rate policy a) General trends In 2002, the regional pattern of foreign-exchange policy was marked by changes of exchange-rate regime in three countries.
In January, Argentina abandoned the currency-board system that had prevailed since 1991 and allowed the peso to float.
This took place against the backdrop of a collapsing real economy, a public debtservice moratorium and general financial crisis.
Second, and following a run on bank deposits related to the Argentine crisis, in June 2002 Uruguay abolished its crawling-band regime and also floated its currency.
In February that year, Venezuela had also replaced its currency-band system with a free-flotation regime; nonetheless, twelve months later, following the strike that brought the country to a standstill between December 2002 and January 2003, the government fixed the exchange rate against the dollar once again and imposed strict currency controls.
Exchange-rate trends in the region in 2002 were dominated by currency depreciations against the dollar in the MERCOSUR countries and Venezuela.51 The Colombian, Dominican Republic and Haitian currencies also depreciated significantly during the year, while the other countries generally also experienced moderate declines.
In the first half of 2003, the exchange-rate panorama in the region changed dramatically.
In 12 countries, led by the four full MERCOSUR partners, the real exchange rate appreciated against the dollar, while moderate real depreciations of under 3% were posted in all the other countries except the Dominican Republic (14.7%), Jamaica (11.3%) and Venezuela (6.1%).
In 13 countries, domestic currencies depreciated more (or appreciated less) against the dollar than in real effective terms.52 The wide gap between the two indices in some countries, mainly MERCOSUR members (Paraguay, Uruguay, Bolivia), reflected the knock-on effect of depreciations in Argentina and Brazil on the currencies of their most important trading partners.
A local currency depreciates/appreciates nominally when, in the current period, more/fewer units of that currency must be given up to obtain one unit of the foreign currency than was the case in the reference period.
The real bilateral exchange-rate index against a foreign currency (such as the dollar) is calculated by deflating the nominal exchange rate by the ratio between the domestic and foreign-country inflation rates (in the case of the dollar, the foreign country is the United States).
A currency depreciates/appreciates in real terms when the real bilateral exchange-rate index rises/ falls. 52 A country’s real effective exchange rate index is calculated by weighting its real bilateral exchange rate indices with each of its trading partners by their shares in the country’s total trade flows in terms of exports or imports.
This chapter uses the average real effective exchange rate for exports and imports.
A currency depreciates/appreciates in real effective terms when the respective index rises/falls.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 71 in 2000, Ecuador can no longer adjust its nominal parity in response to changes in its trading partners’ dollar exchange rates.
Real effective exchange rates remained volatile in 2003, with depreciations occurring in 14 countries.
As in 2002, this dichotomy between the behaviour of parities against the dollar and the trend of trade-weighted exchange rates reflects the large volume of trade that several of the region’s countries maintain with partners whose currencies appreciated sharply against the dollar, such as Argentina, Brazil and the European Union.
Capital inflows from investors seeking higher returns than those offered in industrial-country markets are one of the factors driving currency appreciation in Argentina and Brazil.
Prospects for the remainder of 2003 point to greater stability on foreign-exchange markets, since the largest imbalances recorded in the region in 2002 (particularly in MERCOSUR) seem to be have been reduced.
Nonetheless, doubts persist over exchange-rate trends in the Dominican Republic and Venezuela, for countryspecific reasons in each case.
The MERCOSUR countries and Bolivia (an associate member that maintains major commercial ties with Argentina and Brazil) constitute a first group, having posted the region’s largest real depreciations during that year.
From October 2001 until April 2002, Brazil’s currency (the real) appreciated nominally as country risk fell, but the appreciation was even greater in real effective terms from January 2002 onward, given the depreciation of the Argentine peso.
Between April and October 2002, the Brazilian real suffered considerable nominal, real and effective depreciations, reflecting uncertainty surrounding the national elections, the heavy burden of domestic public debt combined with the moratorium on public debt service in Argentina, and reduced capital flows from abroad.
Once the elections were out of the way, country risk fell steeply in response to the economic-policy signals emanating from the new government and the achievement of substantial trade and fiscal surpluses, all of which was accompanied by high interest rates in the framework of the inflation-targeting policy implemented by the central bank.
These factors helped to strengthen the Brazilian currency against the dollar between October 2002 and June 2003.
Nonetheless, given the steep previous depreciation, Brazil registered a real depreciation of 39.7% against the dollar for 2002 as a whole.
In 2003 so far, Brazil’s currency has appreciated by 24.7% in real terms against the dollar, although the real effective appreciation is only 20.1%, since both the Argentine peso and the euro have also strengthened nominally against the dollar.
As a result, the year ended with a rise in the real effective exchange rate of 137.7%.
In 2003, the Argentine peso has continued to strengthen despite a partial relaxation of controls on foreign currency outflows and periodic interventions by the central bank, against a backdrop of substantial trade surpluses and short-term capital inflows in the second quarter.
Although this involved real appreciations against the dollar (19%) and the euro (7.1%), the rapid appreciation of the Brazilian real over the same period limited the Argentine currency’s effective appreciation to 10.9%.
Uruguay suffered a run on bank deposits in the first half of 2002, which led to a faster pace of devaluation in the framework of the crawling-band system and a widening of the band.
Nonetheless, the scale of the crisis forced the government to put the peso into a float in June 2002, after which it depreciated steeply against a backdrop of uncertainty and banking crisis.
By the end of 2002 the Uruguayan peso had depreciated by 57.3% in real terms against the dollar, and by 32% in effective terms given the concurrent depreciations in Argentina and Brazil.
Thus far in 2003 the peso has appreciated by 6.7% in real terms against the dollar, but as the currencies of Argentina, Brazil and the European Union (euro) have all appreciated against the dollar by larger amounts, the Uruguayan peso has recorded a real effective depreciation of 4.3%.
In Paraguay the central bank took steps to stabilize the guaraní in a situation overshadowed by official intervention in the country’s third largest domestic bank, compounded by contagion from the exchange-rate turbulence prevailing in Argentina and Brazil.
In 2003 to date, the Paraguayan currency has strengthened nominally against the dollar to generate a real appreciation of 14.4%, thanks particularly to the buoyancy of soya exports.
Nonetheless, since the Argentine and Brazilian currencies both appreciated against the dollar to a greater extent, the real effective appreciation of the guaraní was limited to 3.8%.
In the case of Bolivia, depreciations against the dollar among its trading partners led the central bank to devalue the boliviano with respect to the United States currency, which resulted in a real devaluation of 9.5% for 2002 as a whole.
In the first half of 2003, currency appreciation in Brazil and Argentina slowed the boliviano’s nominal devaluation against the dollar; but it still depreciated by 11.4% in real effective terms, raising the real effective exchange rate to its highest level A second group consists of non-MERCOSUR countries whose currencies also depreciated sharply in 2002.
Until February 2002, Venezuela’s central bank strove to restrain capital flight by raising interest rates, in an unsuccessful attempt to prop up the crawling-band regime.
In February, the latter was replaced by flotation, after which interbank interest rates fell steeply; but demand for dollars in a context of political turbulence caused the bolívar to continue depreciating rapidly in the first half of the year.
As a result, by the end of 2002 the bolívar had depreciated by 37.1% against the dollar in real terms.
In February 2003, the government introduced exchange controls and fixed the nominal exchange rate below the currently prevailing parity.
This led to the emergence of a parallel foreign-exchange market in which the domestic currency traded at rates above the official level.
Fixing the exchange rate in an inflationary context led to a real appreciation of the bolívar starting in February 2003.
It should be noted that the State is the leading exporter in Venezuela (Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A.), while the private sector is a net importer; so exchange-rate fluctuations have significant fiscal implications in addition to effects on private disposable income.
In the third quarter, the central bank began to inject liquidity into Banco Intercontinental (Baninter), the country’s second-largest domestic bank, which caused an expansion of the monetary base and built up pressure for a devaluation of the peso.
This contributed to a 16.7% real depreciation against the dollar in 2002 and boosted the inflation rate in the final quarter of the year.
In April 2003, the central bank took control of Baninter, and an audit of its accounts in May revealed that it had been rendered insolvent by fraud on an unprecedented scale.
This triggered an even steeper slide in the nominal value of the peso, despite improvements in the balance of payments and efforts to control fiscal spending.
The size of the quasi-fiscal deficit generated by the Baninter liquidity transfusion, compounded by worsening expectations, caused a sharp nominal depreciation between April and June 2003, taking the real depreciation against the dollar for the first half of 2003 to 14.7%, despite the inflationary upsurge.
Colombia also experienced significant currency depreciation in 2002; but, unlike the previous group, managed to keep crisis at bay.
The peso depreciated in real terms against the dollar as from April, in a lowinterest-rate environment compounded by market concerns over fiscal accounts, heightened uncertainty in the region and a downturn in exports to Venezuela.
Under these conditions, country risk soared to a peak in September 2002 before falling back in the wake of President Uribe’s stated commitment to strengthen public accounts.
By the end of the year the real depreciation against the dollar amounted to 16.7%, as the pace of inflation eased.
In early 2003, renewed inflationary pressures led the central bank to tighten monetary policy, which, supported by the arrangement signed with IMF in January, caused the Colombian peso to appreciate nominally beginning in March.
In 2003 to date it has strengthened by 3.3% in real terms against the dollar.
A third group includes economies whose currencies did not depreciate significantly in relation to the dollar in 2002 and 2003.
Both Chile and Peru saw little change in their real exchange rates, while the Mexican peso depreciated moderately, breaking the trend of real appreciation that had lasted since 1995.
Expansionary monetary policy, regional crisis and deteriorating terms of trade conspired to devalue the Chilean peso by 4.5% in real terms against the dollar during 2002.
In the first half of 2003, this exchange rate barely altered (0.4% in real terms), but real depreciations against the Argentine peso (23.9%) and the euro (15.1%) were mainly responsible for the real effective depreciation of 7.5% recorded in the first half of the year.
Pressure on the local currency eased thereafter as interest rates were lowered, and 2002 ended with a real depreciation of 3.2% in dollar terms.
For most of the first half of 2003, the exchange rate remained below its levels of the final quarter of 2002, which, combined with low inflation, generated a real appreciation against the dollar of 1.2%.
In Mexico, the peso depreciated from April 2002 onward, matching the change of direction in the tight monetary policy prevailing in the first quarter and after the real exchange rate had fallen to a 10-year low.
The trend was reinforced in the second half of 2002 by economic slowdown in the United States and an erosion of expectations, while the depreciation began to have inflationary consequences.
This led to monetary tightening which moderated the nominal depreciation, although fluctuations persisted, and by the end of 2002 the peso had depreciated by 7.8% in real terms against the dollar.
From December 2002 to February 2003, the Mexican currency continued to depreciate sharply, partly because of external factors such as concerns about impending war in Iraq and the trend of the dollar.
From March onward, monetary tightening and the unfolding of the Iraq conflict helped the peso to strengthen in real terms against the dollar until May.
As a result the Mexican currency appreciated by 2.9% in real terms against the United States currency in the first half of 2003, and in June its real parity was just 1.6% above its level of November 1994, on the eve of the “tequila crisis”.
Other countries whose currencies depreciated to some degree against the dollar in 2002 were Honduras (0.7%), Costa Rica (3.4%) and Nicaragua (4.4%).
Up to the second quarter of 2003, real dollar exchange rates in these countries had not departed significantly from their levels in the final quarter of 2002.
The fourth group consists of countries whose currencies appreciated in real terms during 2002, namely Guatemala and Trinidad and Tobago.
The Guatemalan quetzal has been strengthening in real terms since 2000, mainly because of inflation, and in 2002 the appreciation against the dollar amounted to 7.4%.
The nominal depreciation that has occurred since the end of the year produced a slight real depreciation (1.3%) against the dollar in the first half of 2003.
In Trinidad and Tobago, exports and investment in the hydrocarbons subsector fuelled a nominal appreciation of the local currency until August 2002.
As this was followed by a virtually symmetrical nominal depreciation, partly reflecting seasonal factors, by December 2002 the nominal exchange rate was broadly unchanged from its level of twelve months earlier, although inflation had generated a real appreciation of 2% against the dollar.
In the first half of 2003 there was a further small real appreciation against the United States currency.
The fifth group consists of economies that have adopted the dollar as their currency of legal tender.
Panama and El Salvador maintained inflation rates close to those of the United States in 2002 and 2003, and their real exchange rates have hardly varied in dollar terms.
In Ecuador, the real exchange rate against the dollar has fallen continually (meaning that the currency has appreciated) since dollarization was made official in January 2000.
As the domestic inflation rate has gradually declined, currency appreciation has also slowed.
Nonetheless, inflation in 2002 (9.4%) was considerably higher than in the United States, so the real exchange rate appreciated against the dollar by 6.3%.
As this rate outpaced the ones observed in some of Ecuador’s Latin American trading partners, the result was an effective appreciation of 8.5% during the period.
In the first half of 2003, the real exchange rate appreciated in dollar terms by 3.6%, because, despite continuing to trend lower, domestic inflation continued to outstrip its counterpart in the United States.
In June 2003, the real exchange rate against the dollar was slightly below the average recorded between January 1992 and December 1998 (i.e., appreciation), although above the minimum for that period.
In April 2003, the real effective exchange rate fell to a 10-year low, but from then until June it rose (depreciated) slightly. 3.
Monetary policy a) General trends In a situation where most of the region’s economies are either stalled or at best growing very slowly, the monetary authorities in several Latin American and Caribbean countries have focused on lowering the interest rates under their control in order to boost economic recovery.
In 2003 this proved possible even in countries that raised interest rates to absorb currencymarket pressures the previous year.
There are exceptions, however, where other factors were in play that prevented the adoption of expansionary monetary policies in 2003, particularly Brazil and the English-speaking Caribbean.
Inflation targeting has become the preferred monetary-policy regime in the region and has now been adopted in most countries where economic conditions have allowed; the respective monetary authorities in these countries have tended to use an intervention interest rate as their operating mechanism.
The behaviour of interest rates most directly controlled by central banks generally shows that the latter have tried to support economic recovery.
The result in terms of credit expansion and the growth of monetary aggregates has been more complex, however, depending on a series of factors, including the level of private-sector borrowing, expectations regarding demand and profitability trends, perceptions in the banking sector of the risk of increased lending to this sector and the level of trust in economic prospects and policies.
Effective control of the interest rate as a policy tool applied by the monetary authority has a significant and relatively immediate effect on deposit rates, which is then also transmitted to lending rates.
In Chile, for example, movements in the interbank rate are fully reflected in the deposit rate almost instantaneously, so the path of the two series barely diverges, while the lending rate shadows the other rates with a large but virtually constant spread. b) National cases The analysis makes it possible to distinguish several groups.
The first comprises the MERCOSUR countries, which faced very critical situations in late 2001 and 2002, but whose behaviour patterns since the crisis have varied.
In Brazil, devaluation and price increases accelerated (from very low levels) in the second half of 2002 in response to the approaching presidential elections and the uncertainty they caused both domestically and internationally.
This caused deposit and lending rates to rise, while the spread between them remained very stable (see figure II.30); the process continued into 2003.
The Brazilian real appreciated in 2003 and inflation gradually eased from its late-2002 peak, thereby raising real interest rates.
Monetary policy began to be relaxed in July, when the SELIC interest rate was lowered to 24.5%.
The credit arrangement signed with IMF in September 2002 set an annual inflation target of 6.5% for December that year, but this proved impossible to fulfil.
Once the new government had taken office in January, the inflation target for 2003 was raised to 8.5%, on the grounds that “steeper inflation reduction paths entail excessive loss of output growth”.56 In Argentina, loss of bank deposits and capital flight led to a substantial rise in interbank rates from mid-2001 onward, before the convertibility regime was formally abandoned.
In December 2001, the government’s inability to staunch the haemorrhage of bank deposits and international reserves forced it to impose strict controls on the withdrawal of funds from the banking system (a policy known as the corralito).
Then in early 2002, dollar deposits were converted into pesos and their maturities were rescheduled (giving rise to the corralón).
Nonetheless, deposits continued to leak out of the system in a substantial flow as a result of legal rulings, and this forced the central bank to grant substantial rediscounts to the banking system and kept the currency market under pressure.
Starting in the second quarter of 2002, tensions on the monetary front finally began to ease.
The central bank issued treasury bills at high interest rates, which revived demand for financial assets in pesos, while foreign-exchange-market interventions and the large trade surplus succeeded in restraining currency depreciation.
The interbank interest rate peaked in the second quarter of 2002, and a few months later deposit and lending rates also levelled off; the latter had reached 80% per year for prime borrowers.
From that moment onward, both interest rates and inflation began a descent that had taken them by mid-2003 to similar, if not lower, levels than those prevailing in early 2001.
In the first half of 2003, the central bank allowed the level of international reserves to rise, in order to avert excessive appreciation of the local currency against the dollar; the counterpart of this meant putting substantial quantities of pesos into circulation.
In June, the central bank revised its monetary programme, since the monetary expansion during the year had not affected prices, and a range of between 20% and 35% was defined for the growth of the monetary base in 2003 as a whole.
For the government that took office in May 2003, the most pressing problems that remain to be solved include restoring solvency in the financial system, re-establishing the credit system and dealing with the debt.
In this regard, a medium-term arrangement with IMF has been put forward as a possibility.
The Uruguayan economy’s exposure to financial risk from Argentina caused foreign-currency deposits (of which almost 60% belonged to non-residents) to retreat by 45% in the first seven months of 2002.
In late June, the prevailing foreign-exchange regime collapsed, setting off a crisis in the financial sector which ended with the suspension of several banks.
Against this backdrop, the authorities had recourse to a programme agreed with IMF that included the establishment of a Banking System Stability Fund, and the United States Treasury Department granted a bridging loan broadly matching the amount extended by the programme.
After the peso had been put into a free float, bills were issued in local currency at high interest rates in order to keep the rate of monetary expansion consistent with the inflation target.
In the final quarter of 2002, the run on bank deposits was halted.
In 2003, interest rates in local currency fell, and the pace of currency devaluation and inflation both slowed sharply.
Paraguay also suffered as a result of the unfolding crisis in Argentina.
Monetary-policy interest rates climbed steeply, from 21% in late 2001 to an average of 30% in the third quarter of 2002, before falling back in the ensuing months to reach 12% by June 2003.
In the first half of 2002, foreign-currency deposits shrank by 33%, and private-sector credit fell by 13% in real terms over the year as a whole.
One of the country’s largest banks was forced into liquidation as a result of losses suffered in Argentina, and this had repercussions for the rest of the financial system.
The average arrears index has approached 20%, and in the early months of 2003 three banks and another financial institution were closed down.
As progress could not be made in negotiating an arrangement with IMF, access to external credit became difficult and led to the postponement of debt-service payments, including amounts owed to multilateral organizations.
Countries in the second group (Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru) managed to avoid crises such as those outlined above, and their inflation rates remained in single figures.
These countries all operate with freefloating exchange rates and inflation targeting; the respective targets were met in Chile and Peru, but not in Mexico and Colombia.
In all cases, annual variations of the exchange rate against the dollar were relatively moderate, but greater than the rise in consumer prices.
In Mexico and Colombia, monetary policies seem to have wavered between supporting economic recovery and meeting the inflation target.
In an attempt to kick-start output, Mexico lowered interest rates aggressively in 2001, and again more moderately in the first nine months of 2002.
This took place against a backdrop comprised of the recession that began in the United States in 2001, prolonged appreciation of the Mexican peso and wage hikes above inflation.
As from April 2002, the equilibrium interbank interest rate (TIIE) was lowered by between one and two percentage points until September, when it returned to its previous levels of around 9%.
In 2002, the inflation target of 4.5% was breached for the first time in four years, as prices rose by 5.7%.
On two occasions during the second half of 2002, and three times in the first quarter of 2003, Banco de México tightened monetary policy by increasing the corto from 300 million pesos to 700 million).57 This aimed to restrain the fall in interest rates resulting from Mexico’s improved country-risk rating.
Interest rates rose until mid-April 2003 before falling back as the peso strengthened once again and inflation fell; the TIIE reached 5.5% in late June.
The 2003 inflation target was set at 3%, but the authorities expect growth to undershoot original projections.
The gyrations in Mexico’s monetary policy seem to be explained by the conflicting aims of supporting economic recovery while at the same time meeting inflation targets.
In Colombia, monetary policy was expansionary in 2001 and 2002 until the regional crisis of the third quarter, which kept interest rates on hold.
The local currency appreciated by 22% during the year, while 57 The corto is the name given to the target balance established by the monetary authorities for the current accounts that the banking and financial system maintains at Banco de México.
As an indicator of monetary policy intentions, a larger positive balance in these accounts points to monetary tightening.
In April 2003, the reference system for calculating the corto was changed from cumulative to daily balances.
Consequently, under the new system the 700 million pesos became 25 million, and this amount was still in force as of the end of June.
This rate of price increase pushed up intervention interest rates by 100 bps in January 2003, and then again in April.
In January, Colombia renewed its IMF programme for a further two years.
Twelve-month inflation stood at 7.2% in June 2003, which raised the spectre of again missing the annual inflation target, this time set at 5.5%.
Accordingly, Colombia’s expansionary monetary policy was reined in during the year to meet the target.
In Chile, the priority goal of monetary policy was to boost domestic demand, for which reason it was kept consistently expansionary.
The monetary-policy interest rate was lowered six times between January and August 2002, and a further cut was made in January 2003.
Since then, it has remained at a historically low level of 2.75%.
Transmission of these interest-rate cuts to market operations was weak for a long period of time, but seems to have strengthened recently, judging by the 9% growth recorded in financial-system lending during the 12 months ending in June 2003.
Peru adopted an expansionary monetary policy in 2001, following four years of flat economic activity.
This policy was maintained in the two ensuing years, except in the months immediately after September 2002, when exchange-rate volatility triggered by regional crises forced the authorities to raise the interbank rate and intervene in defence of the exchange rate.
Once this situation had been overcome, interest rates fell back and then held steady at 3.8% in the first half of 2003.
Nonetheless, bank lending to the private sector remained stalled, and began to register negative year-on-year growth rates in early 2003.
During 2002-2003, Peru abided by the policies agreed upon under the programme with IMF; inflation in 2002 came in at 1.5% (equal to the lower limit of the established band), and the same target of between 2.5% and 1.5% was set for 2003.
Bolivia, Dominican Republic, Haiti and Venezuela comprise the third group, for the crises in these countries have each had their own peculiarities.
In Venezuela, the government abolished the currency-band regime in the face of falling oil revenues and burgeoning capital flight, and in February 2002 adopted a free-floating system, with the supply of foreign exchange controlled by the monetary authorities.
The consequent nominal exchange-rate depreciation and surge in inflation (from 12% in 2001 to 31% in 2002) prompted the authorities to fix the exchange rate in February 2003 and impose currency controls.
In 2002, efforts to defend the existing exchange-rate regime by raising interest rates were unsuccessful, and although the demise of the currency band allowed interest rates to fall substantially, they rose again in response to the escalation of political conflicts towards the end of the year, when capital flight also gathered pace once more.
Since then, restriction of foreign-currency supplies to the private sector under the new regime has reduced capital outflows and allowed for significantly lower interest rates and an increase in international reserves (see figure II.30).
Nonetheless, the general uncertainty prevailing in the country has prevented lower borrowing costs from generating a credit expansion.
The Dominican Republic saw its inflation rate double in 2002, together with a large devaluation of its currency and sizeable capital outflows; this pushed interest rates to substantially higher levels, which have been maintained in 2003.
The Economic Development and Stability Pact signed by the government and the business sector in late 2002 was intended to prolong fiscal and monetary austerity in the first half of 2003.
The most important adjustments occurred in the foreigncurrency domain and in local-currency interest rates, while at the same time the dollarization of banking operations gathered pace.
Economic management was complicated further in May when one of the country’s leading private banks was declared insolvent.
This forced the central bank to inject a large volume of liquidity into the system, and will entail complementary public expenditure.
As pressure on the foreign-exchange market and domestic prices persisted in mid-2003, the central bank had to inject liquidity into the banking system, but at the same time attempt to reabsorb it by issuing investment certificates at high interest rates.
Bolivia suffered two runs on bank deposits linked to political events in June 2002 and February 2003.
Withdrawals spread to financial institutions of all types and accentuated the vulnerability of the country’s highly dollarized financial system.
The central bank had to satisfy liquidity needs, raise interest rates in 2002 and accelerate the pace of nominal depreciation against the dollar under the crawling-peg regime.
Nominal interest rates in dollars resumed their downward trend in early 2003, and in April that year a standby arrangement was signed with IMF, aimed at moving towards a mediumterm programme in the framework of the poverty reduction and growth facility (PRGF).
Haiti pursued an expansionary monetary policy in 2002 aimed at moderating the recessionary trend, in the midst of a prolonged economic and political crisis.
Interest rates on bonds issued by the Banque de la République d’Haïti were cut during the fiscal year from 20.1% to 10.3%, and the money supply grew by 6.4% in real terms.
Private credit recovered slightly (4.3%) following its 18% decline the previous year, but this was not enough to reactivate the economy’s productive sectors.
Countries comprising the fourth group mostly display sluggish growth associated with the economic 82 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean slowdown in the United States, together with single-digit inflation rates in 2002 and orthodox policies –in some cases in the framework of programmes agreed with IMF.
Dominica, Guatemala, Grenada, Guyana, and Nicaragua all have ongoing programmes with the Fund, while the arrangement signed by Honduras ended in late 2002.
In this group, Costa Rica posted the best results in terms of economic growth: 2.6% in 2002 and an estimated 4.5% for 2003.
In addition, inflation has been held at around 10% in recent years.
Interest rates were raised in 2002 to help curb growth in the consolidated public-sector deficit (from 2.9% to 5.4% of GDP), and at the same time the nominal exchange rate was devalued slightly.
In 2003, deposit rates edged down marginally, while lending rates remained stable at high levels (25% in nominal terms).
Nicaragua met its 2002 targets for inflation (4%) and the pace of devaluation (6%), and designed a fiscalpolicy adjustment in conjunction with a less restrictive monetary policy.
In December 2002, a three-year arrangement was signed with IMF in the PRGF framework.
Compliance with the clauses signed will enable the country to reach the “completion point” to join the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative towards the end of the year and thus alleviate its external debt burden.
In Guatemala, interest rates fell continuously from 2001 until the most recent date in 2003 for which information is available, but this has failed to energize lending to the private sector.
Inflation in 2002 came in at 6.3% and the fiscal deficit amounted to 1% of GDP, in a setting of exchange-rate stability under a floating regime.
A target range for inflation of between 4% and 6% was set for 2003, with a fiscal deficit of 1.7%.
The programme agreed with IMF, which was renewed in May 2003, has been applied.
In Honduras, although interest rates fell during 2002-2003, credit extended by the banking system did not expand.
A possible renewal of the arrangement with IMF has been widely discussed, since it would open up the possibility of joining the HIPC Initiative but require reductions in both the deficit and fiscal expenditure.
In most English-speaking Caribbean countries, growth was below 1% or non-existent in 2002, with only Trinidad and Tobago and Belize achieving higher rates (3.2% and 3.7%, respectively).
The economic slowdown in the subregion led to higher liquidity ratios in the banking system, which forced the authorities in countries with flexible exchange-rate regimes to intervene on the currency market.
In Jamaica and Suriname, however, such efforts proved insufficient to prevent substantial devaluations.
In Jamaica, monetary policy was mildly expansionary in the first half of 2002, but changed direction from June onward in response to downward pressures on its currency which continued into 2003.
In Barbados, liquidity expanded in a context of low inflation, but lending to the private sector declined.
In Guyana, the central bank intervened moderately in the foreignexchange market to keep domestic prices and the value of the local currency stable.
Demand for credit stalled, and the financial system maintained a conservative lending policy.
In Suriname, the monetary authority imposed direct controls aimed at restricting credit creation by the banking system and slowing the pace of nominal exchange-rate devaluation.
In the countries of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), which maintain a monetary union under a fixed exchange-rate regime, the demand for credit contracted.
This ended up generating a liquidity overhang in the banking sector, which was used to acquire foreign assets.
The two countries with highest growth rates in the subregion are Belize and Trinidad and Tobago.
The former kept monetary policy tight in order to counter the weakening trend of its currency, while in Trinidad and Tobago, monetary policy fluctuated: in the first three quarters of 2002 it pushed interest rates higher; then in August a more flexible stance was adopted, but policy was tightened once again towards the end of the year.
Exchange rates and inflation have both remained stable thus far in 2003.
In these countries, interest rates on deposits are close to international levels, and, having adopted the rules of dollarization, monetary policy as such does not really exist.
In Ecuador, nominal interest rates have remained relatively stable, although they have trended slightly downward.
In real terms, however, they have swung from negative in 2001 to positive in 2003, reflecting the fall in inflation.
In El Salvador, dollarization has now been in force for two years; interest and inflation rates have remained low, but domestic demand for credit has also been slow to expand.
In Panama, interest rates followed the international trend towards lower levels in 2002, in a low-inflation setting.
Level of activity (a) Growth and investment in 2002 and 2003 The gross domestic product of Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole shrank by 0.6% in 2002 and is only expected to grow by about 1.5% in 2003, thereby prolonging the economic stagnation that took hold almost six years ago.
Gross fixed capital formation declined again in 2002, this time by 6.1%, and is estimated to have remained relatively stable in 2003.
As a result, the investment rate in the 2002-2003 biennium will have retreated to its 1988 level (18% of GDP), which in turn was the lowest recorded during the “lost decade” of the 1980s.
The individual economies did not all falter at the same time, nor has the economic situation been equally dire in all countries; nonetheless, the individual cases of rapid growth that could be found up until 2000 had disappeared by 2002-2003.
An overview of the region reveals both common and differentiating features between the individual countries.
The Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2002 pointed out that a variety of circumstantial factors had affected the ca pi (In x (as GFCF (right-hand axis) Per capita GDP (left-hand axis) Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 85 economic performance of each country or group of countries in different ways.
Although world trade remains sluggish, United States imports are recovering from their lows of late 2001 and early 2002, and most commodity prices are beginning to climb out of their 2002 troughs –although, apart from oil, they have yet to regain their pre-Asian-crisis values.
Financial conditions, measured by the interest-rate spread on sovereign bonds, have improved in comparison to 2002, and several governments have again issued debt on the international market to meet their funding requirements.
Nonetheless, in many cases, sovereign spreads continue to be large, net capital flows remain at comparatively low levels and several countries are having to make use of exceptional financing or funds from multilateral agencies, or else attempt to reschedule the maturity profile of their external debt.
The relative improvement in external conditions in 2003 brought internal factors to the fore, although these had already been decisive for economic performance in 2002.
A particular case in point was the costly defence and eventual forced abandonment of the currency-board system in Argentina.
This foreign-exchange regime plunged the economy into a lengthy recession, which worsened substantially in the second half of 2001 while convertibility was still in force, and only bottomed out in the first quarter of 2002 after the exchange rate had been allowed to float.
Uruguay and Venezuela also had to face major capital outflows, which led to the abandonment of their exchange-rate flotation bands.
In the first case the decision was linked to a severe banking crisis, and in the second it was associated with the introduction of exchange controls.
Other countries are facing difficult financial situations in 2003 for more specific causes; for example, the Dominican Republic was hit by an acute banking crisis.
Without necessarily facing macroeconomic management problems as severe as these, most of the region’s countries displayed limited ability to sustain activity levels through monetary or fiscal policy in 2002-2003.
In fact, a number of governments pursued contractionary fiscal policies with a view to strengthening capacity to service their large public debt.
Lastly, in several countries, the exacerbation of domestic social and political conflicts eroded both economic activity and the investment process.
Such conflicts cannot always be viewed as exogenous or noneconomic factors, for they are by no means independent of medium- and long-term economic results in terms of growth and job creation.
Weakness in domestic markets has also restrained growth and made economies more reliant on international trading conditions.
Investment shrank considerably faster than output: while per capita GDP declined by 2.5%, fixed capital formation per person fell by 16.5%.
Investment is the expenditure component that displays the widest fluctuations in response to changing economic circumstances: it usually falls furthest during recessions, and it is the last to recover in the subsequent upswing.
In 2002, investment declined both in construction and in the machinery and equipment segments.
Apart from the usual causes of investment slowdowns during recessions (increased idle capacity, lower sales and weakening demand prospects), other factors seem to have come into play on this occasion.
The sharp decline in construction investments probably was influenced by financial conditions that pushed up interest rates and held back lending in several countries, while in many other cases real devaluations raised the cost of imported machinery, which accounts for a large proportion of machinery and equipment investment.
From this standpoint, the adoption of more flexible monetary policies in 2003, supported by stabilization or revaluation of domestic currencies, generated more favourable conditions in several countries.
A lower investment rate means that fewer goods and less infrastructure are channelled into the productive capacity of the different economies, thereby undermining their growth potential in future years.
The retreat of fixed investment, both in construction and in machinery and equipment, was particularly severe in the MERCOSUR countries and Venezuela; investment also declined in Mexico, but less sharply than in 2001.
The indicators available for 2003 do not show a recovery in investment at the regional level, since it continued to fall in Brazil (1.5% in the first quarter) and in Mexico (1.1% in January-April).
First-quarter figures for 2003 also show investment sliding steeply in the Dominican Republic, Uruguay and Venezuela (compared to levels of a year earlier), while investment grew more slowly than GDP in Chile.
In Ecuador, the momentum displayed by investment over the last three years is fading following the completion of construction work on the heavy crude oil pipeline.
Meanwhile, fixed investment is recovering strongly in Argentina (20.6% in the first quarter) and more moderately in Peru, while also continuing to grow in Colombia and Costa Rica. 58 In recent years Peru has also seen major investment projects in mining (Antamina) and natural gas (Camisea), which have boosted economic activity.
Nonetheless, in 2002 this had not yet shown through as an increase in total gross fixed investment.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 87 Measurement in terms of current prices makes it possible to assess the contribution of domestic and external saving to a given level of gross domestic investment.
The first phase, between 1997 and 1999, is explained by lower levels of national saving; in contrast, the retreat of investment since 2000 has been associated with a major decline in external saving –in other words, smaller deficits on the current account of the balance of payments.
Thus, the retreat of public and private consumption in 2002 (and possibly also in 2003) did not stop investment from shrinking as a percentage of GDP, in either currentor constant-price terms.
In some cases exports stalled or decreased in 2001-2002, having grown by between 7% and 15% per year on average between 1997 and 2000; examples include Belize, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico and Nicaragua.
The early months of 2003 presented a more favourable, albeit heterogeneous, outlook: significant export growth in Costa Rica (mainly sales from duty-free zones), Haiti (textiles), Jamaica (bauxite) and Trinidad and Tobago (oil and gas), compared to more moderate trends in Belize, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua and stagnation in exports from Mexico, despite stronger oil sales.
In addition, tourismrelated activities were down in 2001-2002 following the events of 11 September 2001, although this phenomenon has been fading, and in fact tourism inflows in the first quarter of 2003 regained their early-2001 levels.
Foreign trade prices have also had a strong and generally negative effect on the non-oil countries in this group.
Plunging coffee and banana prices (although the former regained some ground in 2003) have had significant economic and social effects on the agricultural sector in several countries, while higher oil prices worsened the terms of trade except for Mexico and Trinidad and Tobago.
External factors include the positive effect of larger remittance inflows, which play a decisive role in several of these countries, both in the balance of payments and in terms of maintaining private consumption levels.
Although external events have had a major influence on economic performance in this group of countries, which are particularly open to trade and tourism, they have not been the only factors in play.
Fiscal adjustment policies and low levels of bank lending in several countries have also weakened domestic consumption and investment demand. 88 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Mexico grew by 0.9% in 2002, and preliminary data suggest the rate will be similar in 2003 (see figure II.34).
These meagre growth figures reflect the sluggishness of domestic and external demand; in particular, exports have stalled and investment is far below its 2000 levels.
Such growth as there has been is based on private consumption, which is expanding slowly.
Activities in manufacturing and agriculture and in commerce, restaurants and hotels were worst hit in 2002 and early 2003, while construction and oil activity staged a recovery.
These figures may be pointing to a problem of competitiveness, attributable at least in part to the level of the exchange rate, although this has depreciated somewhat over the last year and a half.
In most Central American and non-Englishspeaking Caribbean countries, the growth slowdown of recent years has continued.
The conclusion of armed conflicts in Nicaragua and El Salvador, together with the prolonged upswing in the United States, had fuelled growth at annual rates of over 4% for several years, but this stimulus has now run its course.
Loss of economic dynamism revealed the existence of fiscal problems, in some cases stemming from high levels of public debt, but also relating to shortcomings in the financial system.
Moreover, better conditions for foreign trade and tourism in 2003 have brought the domestic determinants of economic performance to the fore in these countries, and such factors have generally not been positive.
Although the causes of this slowdown were initially exogenous (weaker external demand and a reduction in tourism), the current recession reflects the weakness of domestic demand against a backdrop of combined currency and banking crisis.
In the first half of 2002, economic policy attempted to sustain activity through public spending, but exchangerate and inflationary pressures led to a more restrictive stance being adopted in the second half of the year, mainly through monetary tightening.
Nonetheless, while it raised interest rates, the central bank also expanded the money supply to support a major private-sector bank (Baninter) that was slipping into a crisis situation.
This adjustment failed to contain either the peso devaluation or the rise in inflation in the final months of 2002 and the first half of 2003, and economic and political management was made exceptionally complicated by the intervention and declaration of insolvency of Baninter in May, involving an asset loss of around 15% of GDP.
This has required the central bank to provide a massive liquidity transfusion, and has resulted in significant supplementary quasi-fiscal expenditure in an already fragile fiscal framework.
The predictable fiscal adjustment, banking crisis and erosion of incomes by inflation are weakening domestic demand.
As a result, economic activity seems to be sustained merely by factors linked to the external sector, such as export activity in duty-free zones, tourism and remittance inflows.
The only country in this subregion where economic growth strengthened during the biennium is Costa Rica.
This can largely be explained by the major impact of activities in the electronics assembly industry carried out in the country’s duty-free zones.
Much of the high level of gross domestic investment in the first three quarters of 2002 reflects the fact that Intel started to build up stocks in the middle of that year in readiness for a planned expansion of output and exports.
Consequently, in 2003 the contribution made by investment to economic growth has decreased, but net exports can be expected to grow once the previously imported inputs get used.
Slight upturns in coffee production and external demand for fruit and agroindustrial products improved the situation in agriculture, following a weak performance in 2002.
Domestic demand will not provide a comparable stimulus because of the restrictive monetary and fiscal policies in force at the start of 2003, which will restrain expansion overall.
In the end, GDP growth in Costa Rica amounted to 2.6% in 2002 and is unlikely to be less than 4.5% in 2003, thanks to the performance of manufacturing (both inside and outside the duty-free zones) and the communications subsector, supported by a recovery in agriculture and tourism-related services.
National income can be expected to expand by less, however, because larger flows of profits are being repatriated abroad.
The other countries of the subregion grew slowly in 2002: El Salvador and Guatemala by 2.2%; Cuba by 1.1%; Haiti by -0.5%; Honduras by 2.4%; and Nicaragua and Panama by less than 1%.
These countries faced unfavourable terms of trade (high oil prices and low prices for sugar and coffee, although the latter staged a slight recovery in 2003 so far), compounded by sluggish demand in the United States and Mexico, all of which resulted in exports that are either stalled or in outright decline.
Private consumption was generally maintained thanks to family remittances, and this situation is expected to continue in 2003.
Agriculture in general, and the banana and coffee segments in particular, performed weakly in most countries, with sectoral GDP reductions registered in Haiti, Panama and Nicaragua and weak growth in El Salvador and Guatemala (Honduras has been the exception).
In Cuba, a shortage of foreign exchange caused by the decline in tourism and weak exports eroded growth in 2002; moreover, restructuring in the sugar sector, compounded by natural disasters, undermined agricultural output.
Fiscal tightening led to cutbacks in public consumption in Guatemala and Nicaragua and to sharp falls in public investment in Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, which mostly affected the construction sector.
The situation in El Salvador from this point of view is ambivalent, since government consumption fell, but public investment did not.
The modest expansion recorded in 2002 was based on construction (mainly public investment in repair work following the 2001 earthquakes) and manufacturing.
For 2003, most countries expect to tighten their fiscal policy stance, in several cases in the framework of IMF arrangements.59 59 Guatemala has made a commitment to reduce its public-sector deficit to 1.7% of GDP.
Honduras is negotiating a new arrangement with IMF, in which compliance with the agreed targets is a requirement for access to the HIPC Initiative.
The expansion projected for 2003 is very much in line with that achieved in 2002.
Family remittances will continue to play a vital role in sustaining private consumption.
Haiti is again likely to post zero or negative growth, since the suspension of foreign assistance is being compounded by rapid currency devaluation (amounting to 42% between July 2002 and 2003) and inflation, which is steadily eroding domestic purchasing power (the CPI rose by 32% in the first half of 2003).
Economic performance in Haiti over the next few years will largely depend on when and how external grants are resumed.
Panama, meanwhile, could grow at healthier rates than in 2002 (about 2%), based on upturns in the construction sector, tourism (especially cruise liners) and activity in the Colón duty-free zone.
Growth in most of the English- or Dutch-speaking Caribbean countries slowed in 2002 as a result of contractions in the leading sectors (tourism, agriculture and mining).
The decline in trade and tourism flows had a negative effect on both the balance of payments and the fiscal accounts, given the importance of customs duties and specific taxes linked to tourism in the revenue structures of several countries.
This gave rise to fiscal adjustment policies that weakened domestic demand in countries such as Bahamas, Barbados, Jamaica, the OECS countries60 and Suriname.61 Several important commodity exports suffered falling prices in 2002 (alumina, bauxite, sugar, bananas), and in some countries their volumes also shrank because of adverse weather conditions.
Worsening balance-of-payments current accounts, in most countries resulting partly from higher oil prices, put pressure on several foreign-currency markets and led to monetary tightening (Bahamas, Jamaica and Suriname).
As a result, in 2002 most of these countries posted slightly negative growth rates (OECS members and Barbados) or expansions of around 1% (Guyana, Jamaica and Suriname).
Belize achieved better results, growing by 3.7% thanks to an acceptable performance by the tourism sector (a new record was set for the number of tourists arriving on cruise liners) and to public investment.
In Trinidad and Tobago also, GDP expanded by 3%, sustained by the oil and natural gas subsector.
The pace of economic activity is expected to pick up moderately in 2003 in most countries in this group, based on a recovery in tourism and exports of certain agricultural and mining products.
In Trinidad and Tobago, the oil and gas subsector is expected to stimulate growth of around 4% in 2003.
Nonetheless, fiscal and banking problems continue to make themselves felt in Barbados, Jamaica and Suriname, for which reason GDP growth in those economies is unlikely to surpass 2%.
Among the Englishand Dutch-speaking Caribbean countries, GDP growth is expected to approach 2.5% in 2003. (ii) The MERCOSUR countries In 2002 and 2003, domestic and external financial variables played a key role in the pattern of economic activity in MERCOSUR.
The drastic changes made to exchange-rate regimes in Argentina and Uruguay in 2002, followed by devaluation of their currencies, have had a marked effect on banking organization in MERCOSUR countries and have influenced the trend of economic policies and variables.
In Brazil, too, macroeconomic policies have been defined in response to tensions prevailing on currency markets and their impact on inflation; and in Paraguay the banking system is going through a severe crisis.
In 2002, the currencies of these four countries devalued sharply, boosting inflation and altering domestic relative prices.
Inflation seriously reduced the real incomes of wage earners, which, together with high levels of unemployment, undermined private consumption demand.
Domestic demand was weakened further still by public expenditure cuts and a sharp decline in fixed capital formation.
The upturn in inflation was short-lived, and did not trigger a widespread and sustained rise in prices as some had predicted.
Thus, the nominal devaluations, which moderated and were partly reversed in 2003, produced real depreciations resulting in relative price corrections between tradable and nontradable goods that enhanced international competitiveness.
This has been a major factor in the contribution made by net exports (exports minus imports) to aggregate demand and thus to the pace of economic activity overall.
Nonetheless, the economic authorities are promoting recovery in the domestic market to give a further boost to economic growth.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 91 The financial instability that Brazil had to face in 2002 resulted in a widening of its sovereign-debt spread, compounded by capital flight and devaluation of the real.
Against this backdrop, the authorities adopted restrictive monetary and fiscal policies, which were continued and even strengthened by the new government that took office in early 2003.
Midway through the year these policies, supported by a substantial trade surplus, had succeeded in easing the situation on international financial markets: the local currency has been appreciating since then, and the external sovereign-debt spread has fallen from a maximum of 2,500 bps in September 2002 to 750 bps in July 2003.
At the same time, high domestic interest rates and fiscal tightening, in conjunction with the above-mentioned erosion of real incomes among wage earners, curtailed domestic consumption and investment demand, thus dampening economic activity as a whole.
From a sectoral point of view, strong growth in agriculture (6% in 2002 and nearly 9% in the first quarter of 2003) contributed to the surge in exports.
In contrast, manufacturing generally stalled in early 2003, except in subsectors that have participated in the export boom, such as iron and steel.
For the rest of the year, however, lower inflation should make it possible to continue cutting interest rates (in July, the central bank reference rate was eased from 26.0% to 24.5%), which will help domestic demand, particularly private consumption, to recover to some degree.
This would suggest growth in 2003 similar to that recorded in 2002, albeit with a tendency to rise.
Defence of the convertibility regime in 2001 had deepened the economic crisis, increased the level of external debt, undermined fiscal revenue and finally led to the freezing of deposits in the banking system (the corralito), although this failed to stem the outflow of international reserves.
The situation eventually led to a partial moratorium on external debt service and abandonment of the fixed exchange rate.
The government that took office in early 2002 had to redefine the ground rules in an economy where many contracts and financial assets were dollarized, and it had to do so without the assistance of voluntary external financing.
In the first half of the year, reserves continued to shrink as a result of capital flight and payments to multilateral agencies; the local currency continued depreciating, and prices rose by a cumulative 30% over the first six months.
Midway through the year, currency controls and intervention on the foreign-exchange market were strengthened and the exchange rate was brought under control.
This made it possible to curb the inflationary upsurge and start processes to re-establish payment mechanisms and lower interest rates.
The government also decided to suspend payments to multilateral agencies until the latter unblocked previously approved loans, which were intended to finance debt repayments to those same organizations.
Although the economy began to recover in the second quarter of 2002, GDP shrank by 11% for the year as a whole.
Two thirds of this was attributable to the slowdown in the second half of 2001.
The stronger pace of activity is being driven by net export growth, with import substitution playing a key role.
In 2003 exports have grown even faster than in 2002, but, as imports are also recovering, the trade surplus is likely to be similar to that recorded a year earlier.
The currency appreciation registered in the first half of 2003 has helped stabilize the general level of prices.
Gross fixed investment grew by 20% in the early months of this year, following a 36% retreat in 2002; consumption stalled but showed signs of revival in mid-2003.
Having been in the doldrums in the first quarter of 2002, the manufacturing and construction sectors led the expansion in early 2003, although agriculture also performed particularly strongly in the second quarter.
A resumption of restaurant and hotel activity shows that devaluation also boosted tourismrelated sectors.
GDP growth is projected at around 5.5% for the year as a whole.
Contagion from the banking and currency crisis in Argentina resulted in a loss of foreign-currency deposits in Uruguay, which ultimately caused faith in the crawling-band exchange-rate regime to evaporate and heightened risk perceptions in the banking system.
Loss of bank deposits and capital flight forced the authorities to float the local currency (and accept its depreciation) in June 2002.
The banking system underwent widespread restructuring, which included the suspension of several institutions and the rescheduling of official bank deposits.
Meanwhile, recession and devaluation eroded the country’s capacity to service the public debt, which also had to be restructured.
In this setting, fiscal policy was unable to perform a compensatory function, and government consumption was cut by almost 10%.
The central bank raised interest rates in an attempt to absorb liquidity and restrain exchange-rate overshooting.
Against this backdrop, private consumption and gross fixed capital formation fell by 12% and 30% respectively, while the steep fall in demand from neighbouring countries depressed exports.
In June 2002, the country’s third-largest private bank was intervened, and four other financial institutions were closed down in the first few months of 2003.
Output shrank by 2.3% in 2002, with only exports showing any growth, since private consumption contracted by 5%, gross fixed capital formation slumped by 12% and the government attempted to implement a fiscal austerity package at the same time.
In 2003, the factors undermining domestic demand are having negative effects in many productive sectors.
Consequently, international price trends among the corresponding products also played a significant role.
The prices of most minerals remained comparatively low during 2002 and 2003, although some staged a recovery in the first half of 2003 (tin, nickel, copper).
Gold, along with oil and gas, posted the largest increases, particularly from December 2002 onward, reflecting international tensions and the restriction of oil supplies by OPEC countries.
This combination has maintained the terms of trade at relatively high levels for oil- and gas-exporting countries (Venezuela, Ecuador, Bolivia and Colombia), but at historically low levels for countries that export minerals and import oil, such as Chile and Peru, notwithstanding a slight upturn in 2003.
Another element common to several countries in this group has been the passing of the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA) in the United States, which allows free entry of certain textile and agricultural products into that country, as a way of supporting the fight against illegal drug production and trafficking.
Although this could potentially give a renewed boost to textile exports, no significant improvement is yet discernible.
Political conflicts are having a major effect on economic performance in the Andean countries, particularly in the mining and oil and gas sectors, given their strategic importance.
Major debates are raging on the subject of taxation and the role of external capital in these sectors, and there is also discussion concerning the routes to be taken by oil and gas pipelines –an issue that raises environmental problems and arouses national claims.
On top of this, a strike called to terminate the mandate of the President of Venezuela had severe repercussions on oil activity.
Political and social protests have also made it difficult to implement fiscal adjustment measures or carry out privatizations, and in some cases have forced such policies to be reviewed or even abandoned altogether.
The economies of Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru grew much more strongly than the regional average in 2002, driven by investments either in the oil and gas sector or in mining.
In Bolivia, growth of 2.7% in 2002 was based essentially on the production and export of natural gas and on investments linked to these activities.
Public spending was another stimulating factor, but was not sustainable in 2003.63 The financial panorama was complicated further by a withdrawal of deposits from the banking system in mid-2002 and by a rise in interest rates and capital flight in February 2003, which eroded international reserves.
Although prospects for 2003 include factors of external stimulus, such as investment in the production and export of natural gas, there is uncertainty over its amount; the outlook also contains contractionary factors arising from fiscal and financial difficulties and weak consumer demand.
In Ecuador also, activity growth (3.8% in 2002)64 has been based on investments in the oil and gas sector (construction of the heavy crude oil pipeline) and public expenditure.
Private consumption has also played its part, thanks to remittance inflows and higher public-sector wages.
In early 2003, the plan to curb public-sector wages had to be abandoned in the wake of the protests and violence that erupted in February. 64 This is the growth rate calculated by ECLAC in terms of 1995 dollars.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 93 however, as export volumes stalled while imports grew by about 20% against a backdrop of burgeoning currency appreciation.
This is hurting the manufacturing industry, where activity levels have remained flat, and projections for 2003 see growth slowing to around 1.5%.
It will be impossible to maintain the previous year’s fiscal expenditure stimulus; in fact, the first economic decision made by the government that took office in early 2003 involved fiscal tightening in the framework of an arrangement with IMF.
Another source of growth that will come to an end in 2003 is the construction of the oil pipeline, although bringing the pipeline on stream will boost the potential for export growth.
Economic growth in Peru in 2002 (5.3%) was driven by large-scale mining projects coming into production (which gave a substantial fillip to exports) and by a recovery in domestic demand in the second half.
Public funding for the construction of low-income housing also made a significant contribution.
Thus, the most buoyant activities were mining and quarrying and construction, while the other goods-producing sectors (agriculture and manufacturing) also put in strong performances.
Peru is one of the countries least constrained by its macroeconomic accounts, having managed to increase exports, stabilize the exchange rate and keep inflation low.
Nonetheless, a slightly lower growth rate is expected for 2003 (3.5%), reflecting a loss of dynamism in mining (as the effect of the Antamina project coming on stream fades), a poor first quarter for fishing (and consequently for the commodity processing industry) and fiscal tightening through tax increases.
The latter reflects the government’s determination to curb the growth of the public debt and to reschedule its maturity profile, thus complying with the demanding targets agreed with IMF.
Although 2002 was another year of relatively modest growth in both Chile (2.1%) and Colombia (1.5%), growth in both countries is expected to improve in 2003.
Chile tried to spark economic recovery through low interest rates, narrow spreads on its external debt, absence of currency-market tensions and an exchange rate that favours tradable-goods-producing sectors.
The low interest rates did not have much effect on investment, but manufacturing has been benefiting from private consumption growth since mid-2002.
Exports to date in 2003 have increased in both value and volume, reflecting the strong pace of mining activity (which began to show through in the final quarter of 2002) and stronger foreign sales of other products such as salmon, wine and wood pulp.
A potentially more robust economic performance in 2003 could be undercut by the fiscal adjustments needed to sustain the medium-term fiscal rule; consequently, the economy will probably grow by about 3.5% for the year as a whole.
Nonetheless, currency depreciation, particularly in the third quarter, followed by a rise in inflation between January and April, led the government to tighten its policy stance in 2003.
The behaviour of long-term interest rates did not reflect the management of short-term rates, but instead reacted to variations in the sovereign spread: an increase in the latter during the third quarter of 2002 forced up the long-term interest rate, and the interbank rate declined; the opposite occurred in 2003.
Meanwhile, the sustained expansion of Colombia’s public debt stock has elicited a series of tax hikes from the fourth quarter of 2002 onward.
Thus, although by mid-2003 it had proved possible to stabilize (and even strengthen) the value of the peso, in addition to moderating inflation and securing fiscal funding for the rest of the year, such achievements required policies that have kept domestic demand on a tight rein.
As in previous years, the most dynamic growth factor in 2002 was investment, which is rebounding after sinking to historically low rates in 1999.
At the sectoral level, there has been significant progress in construction and basic services, with trends broadly persisting into the first quarter of 2003, when there was also an upturn in manufacturing.
For the year as a whole, growth is expected to come in at around 2.5%.
The sharp GDP contraction suffered by Venezuela in 2002 was associated with capital flight (US$ 12 billion for the year) and political crisis, as a succession of events caused GDP to shrink by 9%.
In the first quarter, capital outflow and the drop in the price of oil in late 2001 put additional pressures on the currency market and on public accounts, resulting in a tightening of monetary policy and fiscal adjustment.
These measures were unable to stave off currency devaluation, however, and inflation gathered pace, eroding private consumption.
The relative economic recovery achieved in the third quarter failed to be consolidated in the fourth, when a strike shut down most of the oil industry and lasted until early February 2003.
From that month onward, currency controls have managed to staunch the capital outflow, replenish international reserves and lower interest rates, but at the same time it has become harder to obtain the foreign exchange needed to finance imports.
Inflation (a) General trends The rate of inflation in 2003, as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), is projected at around 8.6% for Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole.
This represents a fall of just over three percentage points from the previous year’s figure –thereby halting the price surge recorded in 2002, when inflation had soared to twice the 2001 figure following eight years of sustained decline.
The monthly inflation rate for the region rose to 1% in 2002 (compared to about 0.5% in 2001), with increases approaching 1.5% recorded in April and November.
In January 2003, monthly inflation reached 1.7%, but thereafter a steady decline set in and the figure for June was just 0.2%.
Region-wide, inflation is expected to continue falling in the second half of the year, with positive trends in all countries except the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Jamaica (where price rises may continue to accelerate), and Venezuela, which is expected to maintain the high rates recorded in 2002 and the first half of 2003 (see table II.8).
Indices of wholesale (WPI) or producer prices in the 12 countries for which data are available rose by 3.7% in the first half of 2003, which would translate into an annual rate of 7.4%.
This represents a major change compared to events in 2002, when the corresponding index soared by 31.3% after having risen by just under 6% in 2001.
Wholesale or producer prices had also comfortably outpaced consumer prices in 2002, which is understandable in the context of the widespread devaluations predominating that year.
The sharp slowdown in price rises in 2003 is explained in particular by exchange-rate variations, since the currencies that suffered major devaluations in 2002 have since rebounded considerably, albeit without regaining their late-2001 levels.
Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Paraguay and Uruguay, which had recorded steep WPI rises in 2002, all saw substantial falls in 2003.
The exception was Venezuela, where the WPI continued to climb, reaching an annualized rate of 70% in the first half of Inflationary trends over the last 18 months have thus been heavily influenced by exchange rates, although these have affected the WPI more than the CPI.
Even so, devaluations have not been fully passed through to wholesale prices.
Domestic prices have also been affected by the surge in the price of oil on the international market, which in mid-2003 was 50% higher than in late 2001.
In contrast, the prices of other products imported by the region have remained relatively stable.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 95 In seven economies, substantial exchange-rates hikes generated high rates of inflation in 2002: 41% in Argentina, 31% in Venezuela, 26% in Uruguay and between 10% and 15% in Brazil, Dominican Republic, Haiti and Paraguay.
This contrasts with the situation in 2001, when price rises had been significantly lower in those countries, and there was outright deflation in one case.
In some countries, exchange-rate overshooting was followed by nominal currency appreciation starting in the final quarter of 2002.
As a result, the inflationary upsurge was controlled in nearly all these economies, especially that of Argentina, where prices have risen by very small amounts in 2003.
Only two of the countries mentioned (Dominican Republic and Haiti), along with Jamaica, have suffered inflationary surges of any significance in 2003.
Thus the higher rates of inflation recorded in 2002 did not represent a long-term trend, but resulted from devaluations that have been gradually absorbed without generating sustained inflationary processes.
In nearly all countries, inflation rates have been much more modest than the devaluations that gave rise to them, given the weak growth or recession that the countries of the region have been experiencing.
What did happen was a major change in relative prices, with tradable goods rising appreciably in price at the expense of nontradables.
Wages, in particular, have risen by much less than the CPI and even less than exchange rates.
In 14 other countries of the region, inflation in 2003 was broadly unchanged from the levels of recent years, as nearly all these countries kept price rises in the single digits, and in some cases close to zero.
Although several of the economies experienced devaluations, there were no major consequences for domestic prices.
Moreover, the knock-on effects of the steep rise in international oil prices were also limited and did not significantly alter the overall pace of inflation.
Although the results are similar, some of the policies applied differ significantly from one country to another.
The drastic change of foreign-exchange regime caused the respective currencies to depreciate sharply.
In four other countries (Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Paraguay) that already had floating exchange rates, local currencies also depreciated, but more slowly.
Following steep depreciations in 2002, the Argentine peso, the Brazilian real, the Paraguayan guaraní and the Uruguayan peso have all rebounded in nominal terms during 2003; whereas the Haitian gourde, the Dominican peso, the Jamaican dollar and the Venezuelan bolívar have continued to weaken.
In Argentina devaluation was so steep in the first half of 2002 that the currency lost three quarters of its value.
Although this had a major effect on prices, it failed to set off an inflationary spiral, given the depressed state of demand, high unemployment and lack of indexation, particularly among public-utility charges.
Nominal wages were not increased significantly to compensate for steep price hikes, and the latter moderated considerably as the months went by.
Moreover, in the midst of major upheaval, and with emergency instruments in place, fiscal and monetary authorities were acutely aware of the need to avoid an abrupt escalation in prices and to ensure the survival of behaviour patterns adapted to situations of low inflation.
Stabilization of the exchange rate from the second half of 2002 onward, followed by revaluation in 2003, made it possible to lower the rate of inflation in Argentina to the point where cumulative inflation in the first half of 2003 was just 2%, compared to 30% in the same period of 2002.
Inflation for 2003 as a whole is forecast at around 5% (see figure II.35).
The brunt of the 2002 devaluation was absorbed by wholesale prices, in which imported goods have a high weighting; the WPI rose by 118% in 2002, which was far more than the CPI increase.
Nonetheless, in the first six months of 2003 the rise in wholesale prices also slowed sharply and even turned negative.
The imported products component of the consumer price index rose by over 200% in 2002, and agricultural prices increased by 171%.
In contrast, there were more modest variations in service-sector prices (16% in the case of private services).
Food and beverage prices rose by 58%, however, which was more than the overall CPI increase.
This pattern of price rises in Argentina stood in clear contrast to various previous episodes in which sharp devaluations had triggered major inflationary surges.
In Venezuela, inflation rose from its 2002 level, following a sustained five-year decline.
The break in trend occurred following the abolition of the exchangerate band, which led to a sharp devaluation in the first half of the year.
Following a brief period in which inflation eased, price increases gathered pace again in 2003 as a result of the serious political and social tensions afflicting the country, when the bolívar was devalued 96 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean once again.
This situation has caused a radical change in economic policy, involving the establishment of a fixed exchange rate and the imposition of foreignexchange and price-control measures aimed at stabilizing the currency and reducing inflationary pressures.
In Uruguay, the inflationary resurgence in the second half of 2002 also reflected the steep devaluation that occurred particularly after the crawling-band system was replaced by a floating exchange-rate regime.
The severe recession through which the country is passing, compounded by problems stemming from financial crisis, a drastic reduction in lending and the blocking of deposits in a number of institutions, have eased the impact of the devaluation.
Nonetheless, the widespread dollarization of the economy has made it impossible to soften the effect of the exchange-rate increase to any great degree, although many prices had to adjust to the new reality.
The slower rise in the exchange rate starting in the fourth quarter of 2002, followed by appreciation in the second quarter of 2003, have made it possible to reduce inflation, despite steep increases in public-utility charges.
The annual inflation rate is forecast to come in at just below 10%, which is less than half its 2002 level.
In Paraguay, consumer prices rose by 20% in the 12 months ending in May 2003, while wholesale prices climbed by 42%, owing entirely to devaluation, which gathered pace from the third quarter of 2002 onward.
In keeping with the pattern of the cases discussed above, the combination of recession and high unemployment prevented the cost increases caused by devaluation from being passed through to domestic prices to any significant degree.
The sharp upturn in inflation in the first quarter of 2003 gave way to deflation between May and July, thanks to which the Paraguayan currency has been appreciating since the start of the year.
For 2003 as a whole, inflation is forecast to remain below 10%.
The resurgence occurred in late 2002 as a result of the currency devaluation that had taken place between May and October that year.
Consequently, the target established by the central bank was overshot by an even bigger margin than in the previous two years.
Wholesale prices came under even stronger inflationary pressures, as the corresponding index rose by 35% in 2002, surpassing the 2001 figure by over 23 percentage points.
Apart from the effects of devaluation, price hikes were driven by rises in fuel prices and public-service charges.
An even stronger inflationary surge has been averted by the economy’s persistent slow growth, in conjunction with a continuation of the tight monetary policy applied by the authorities to restrain upward pressure on prices and, in particular, to help stabilize the currency market.
The monetary-policy benchmark interest rate rose throughout 2002 before settling at 26% per year in February 2003, where it has remained with minor variations since then.
Thanks to the revaluation of the real in 2003, inflation began to ease from February onward and deflation was recorded in June.
All of this points to a rate of around 10% for 2003 as a whole.
In the Dominican Republic, inflation has accelerated significantly since 2002, with consumer prices rising by the 12-month increase in prices amounted to 26%.
This acceleration is mainly explained by currency depreciation, the rise in international oil prices and the removal of electricity subsidies.
The rise in the exchange rate, particularly in the fourth quarter of 2002, reflected pressures in the foreign-exchange market arising from reduced capital inflows from abroad, private capital outflows and a loss of international reserves.
The major banking crisis that erupted in 2003 has aggravated these difficulties, forcing the central bank to provide financial assistance on a massive scale.
In Haiti, meanwhile, political and institutional instability had a negative effect on the currency market, generating a steep devaluation, particularly in late 2002 and early 2003.
This forced the authorities to raise fuel prices substantially, thereby triggering a rapid inflationary process that brought price increases to 13% in January 2003 and the 12-month inflation rate to 39% by April.
In Jamaica, 12-month inflation in June 2003 rose to 10%, reflecting a 16% rise in the exchange rate in the first half of the year.
Countries achieving positive results on the inflation front again included Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, which operate floating exchange-rate systems.
In 2003, these countries’ consumer price indices again rose by small amounts, even though some of them had seen their currencies depreciate, and the solid performance on prices enabled them to implement countercyclical monetary policies.
Chile is an outstanding example in this regard, having pursued a clearly expansionary monetary policy involving successive reductions of the central bank benchmark interest rate, which currently stands at an extremely low level.
Nonetheless, the other three countries in this group have sometimes found it necessary to restrain the growth of monetary aggregates in response to the international financial situation, and especially the larger spreads charged on the region’s foreign borrowing.
Colombia, in particular, was forced Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 97 to abandon its expansionary monetary policy because the foreign-exchange market was coming under heavy pressure and the local currency had depreciated sharply since the second half of 2002.
Inflation picked up slightly in 2003, but from May onward it has shown signs of easing.
In recent years, the authorities in these four countries have adopted inflation targeting, which gives them an appropriate system for monitoring the stabilization achieved in the recent past.
The inflation targets set by the respective central banks have been met.
In Guatemala, which also has a freely floating exchange rate, inflation fell again, although more slowly this time, and the 12-month rate as of mid-2003 stood at 5.2%, one percentage point below the corresponding 2002 figure.
This was achieved as a result of the tight monetary policy applied by Banco de Guatemala and the nominal exchange-rate stability maintained over several years.
The latter has undermined competitiveness, however, since the real exchange rate has fallen by about 13% over the last three years.
Trinidad and Tobago also managed to reduce inflation, posting an annual rate below 4% in 2003; this positive outcome has also been assisted by the exchange-rate stability maintained in recent years.
In Nicaragua inflation fell to 4% despite local currency devaluation in 2002, although in 2003 there has been a slight increase since May.
In Bolivia the domestic currency has continued to devalue against the dollar at a faster rate than inflation, but this has not affected domestic stability, and the CPI has risen by just 3% year-on-year.
Annual inflation in Honduras currently stands at 7%, following several years of two-digit rates, thanks to the fact that the exchange rate has varied only slightly.
Lastly, in Costa Rica, inflation stayed close to the 10% rate from which it has hardly varied in recent years, and exchangerate adjustments matched this.
Ecuador, El Salvador and Panama all kept their dollarization regimes in place.
Domestic inflation could soon reach developed-country rates, thereby halting the erosion of the country’s competitiveness, which has been intensive since the start of dollarization.
El Salvador again registered a very small rise in prices, also similar to rates in industrialized countries; but, unlike Ecuador, this country has had single-digit inflation since before the introduction of its new foreign-currency regime.
Panama, where dollarization has long been established, maintained its traditional low rate of inflation, and Barbados, which has had a fixed exchange-rate regime for many years now, reported slight deflation.
The inflationary outlook for the rest of 2003 is promising in most Latin American and Caribbean countries.
In nearly all cases, exchange-rate misalignments have been overcome, so no further large devaluations are foreseeable that might trigger indexation processes or massive pass-throughs of higher costs to domestic prices.
Moreover, countries that devalued by too much will probably continue to gradually absorb the exchange-rate overshooting, so inflation should moderate further.
In the remaining countries the conditions that made it possible to steadily reduce regional inflation in the 1990s still persist, along with the high priority attached to making this economicpolicy achievement secure.
Employment and wages The “lost half-decade” left its mark on labourmarket trends in the region, as employment levels fell significantly and the unemployment rate climbed to a new high, even surpassing the levels recorded during the debt crisis of the 1980s.
Between 1997 and 2002 the employment rate (the number of persons employed as a percentage of the working-age population) fell from 54.0% to 52.9%, unemployment rose from 7.5% to 8.9% and real average wages stalled at their 1997 level (see table II.9).
In those that suffered a sharp GDP contraction and accelerating inflation, employment shrank, especially in the formal sector; and there was a pronounced rise in both unemployment and underemployment, while real wages eroded.
In the second group, which includes the vast majority of the region’s countries, economic growth rates ranged from low to moderate while labour-market variables performed somewhat more strongly, but even here lower employment rates and higher unemployment prevailed (see table II.10).
This group includes the Caribbean countries, where unemployment rose for the first time following a sustained reduction since the early 1990s.
In the region as a whole, the slackness of economic activity was reflected in worsening labour-market indicators.
While the urban labour force expanded by 3.9 million people, only 2.9 million new jobs were created, many of them poorly paid and of low productivity.
Consequently, urban unemployment grew by around 1 million people, to make a total of some 11 million people seeking work.
Unemployment posted a new high of 8.9% as a weighted average and 10.7% as a simple average, while the employment rate fell to its lowest level since 1990.
Real wages, which tend to shadow the trend of inflation, declined in weightedaverage terms, although the median real wage increased.
In keeping with the trend of economic growth, which staged a modest recovery in most countries and registered a slight improvement at the regional level, employment strengthened in early 2003.
The unemployment rate fell only slightly, however, because of a concurrent expansion of the labour supply.
Given the lack of momentum among the region’s largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, no significant reduction in unemployment is forecast for the year as a whole.
Following several years of weak labour demand, nominal wages rose very slightly in most countries, which meant that real wages remained flat in the first few months of the year.
In countries that still have high inflation rates, the purchasing power of wages was eroded still further. (a) Economic growth and labour supply and demand Sluggish economic growth and concomitant weak labour demand are usually reflected in changes in the level of employment and in the composition of supplementary employment.
Specifically, the employment rate usually shadows the path of economic growth, and in low-growth situations there tends to be an increase in the proportion of poorly paid lowproductivity jobs.
As will be discussed in greater detail below, at the regional level the number of persons employed grew by 1.3% in 2002; but as this was less than the growth of the working-age population, the employment rate fell by 0.3 percentage points.
The fact that employment fell by less than usual moderated the rise in open unemployment, albeit thanks largely to an expansion of precarious jobs and public employment programmes.
Thus, if this pattern had persisted, the rise in unemployment could have been expected to slow substantially.
Nonetheless, in 2002 the total participation rate remained virtually constant, and changes in the labour supply failed to cushion the effects of low economic growth on unemployment.
This contrasted with events the previous year, when unemployment had remained unchanged despite economic growth of close to zero, and was even more different from the situation in 1999, when labourmarket participation had fallen sharply throughout the region.
In brief, although the participation rate failed to resume its long-term upward trend, there was no retreat in labour-market participation in 2002 as had happened in previous years, so this variable failed to act as a buffer to absorb rising unemployment.
Although the long-term rising trend of total labourmarket participation was interrupted during the “lost half-decade”, this did not mean a retreat in terms of the growing participation of women.
In general, their participation rate rose more or fell less than the corresponding rate for men, so the gender gap in labourmarket participation continues to narrow.
In fact, in 2002 the fall in the total participation rate was entirely caused by the reduction in the male rate, since female participation continued to rise slightly (see table II.9).
The break in the rising trend of labour-market participation is better explained by the fact that young men and women are delaying their entry into full-time employment.
In some cases this is because they are staying longer in the educational system, but in other cases it reflects a situation in which they are “neither studying nor working”, which damages their future job prospects and impairs social integration in general.
In the longer term, population ageing also contributes to a lower participation rate among men, especially in a context of expanding pension-system coverage. (b) The characteristics of job creation In 2002, employment did not retreat by as much as the contraction in economic activity would have suggested.
Even so, a comparison of 11 countries reveals a slight positive correlation between the increase in employment and economic growth (see figure II.38).
Nonetheless, in many countries flat activity levels meant limited labour demand by firms (especially in the formal sector), and a large proportion of the new jobs created were in low-productivity areas.
Consequently, if economic growth is compared to the trend of formal wage-earning employment in those same 11 countries, the correlation between the two is stronger (see figure II.38).
The main exception is Peru, where formal job creation was very scarce.
The situation was similar in Bolivia and Ecuador, where moderate growth (2.7% and 3.8% respectively) had little impact on jobs and the corresponding employment rates dropped sharply between 2001 and to 54.1% in Ecuador).
Much of the economic growth in these countries was based on stronger performances by non-labour-intensive, natural-resource-based activities, against a backdrop of real exchange-rate appreciation, which at the same time reduced the competitiveness of activities that generate greater labour demand.
In contrast, economic stagnation causes a reduction in formal employment, as firms seek to raise productivity by maintaining output levels using fewer workers.
The weakness of labour demand on the part of firms is also reflected in figures showing employment growth by occupational category.
Wage-earning employment grew by 1.3% region-wide, matching the expansion of employment overall and clearly outstripping GDP growth.
This means that average labour productivity in the region has fallen by 2%, not only when the denominator used is the total number of employed persons, but also when considering wage-earning employment alone.
The largest-scale experience of this type was in Argentina, where it has been calculated that 798,000 out of all the individuals employed in urban areas in October 2002 were beneficiaries of the Unemployed Heads of Household Plan, which raised the employment rate to 34.6% of the population, compared to the 32.3% it would have been without the Plan.
In Peru, special urban and rural employment programmes created 125,000 and 69,000 temporary jobs lasting four and six months respectively.67 As a consequence of these and other similar experiences, and contrary to the trend in the 1990s, public-sector employment grew by 4.5% (measured as a weighted average of 14 countries).
These programmes clearly played an important role in limiting the decline in the employment rate, and helped to cushion the rise in unemployment.
Nonetheless, most of these jobs are temporary by design and are bound to disappear in the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 105 future, which will cause the share of public-sector employment in the occupational structure to fall back again.
At the other extreme are countries such as Ecuador, which registered major reductions in both open unemployment and visible underemployment.
In other countries, such as Colombia and El Salvador, visible underemployment grew despite a drop in open unemployment, which probably means that many of the new jobs that made it possible to lower the open unemployment rate were part-time and were accepted by job-seekers in the absence of better alternatives, despite their desire to work full time.
Although there are no reliable figures on migrant flows in 2002, estimates of remittances reveal the growing importance of this phenomenon.
Most of this came from the United States, with the main recipient countries being Mexico, Brazil and Colombia; nonetheless, the countries benefiting most in relation to the size of their population, and hence those that probably have the largest colonies of citizens working abroad, were the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guyana, Jamaica and Nicaragua (see table II.11).
As shown in figure II.39, this heterogeneity largely reflects the inverse relation between the trend in real wages and variations in the inflation rate.
If the resurgence of inflation coincides with a deep economic crisis, the bargaining power of workers is also weakened, which makes it even harder to maintain the purchasing power of wages.
Nonetheless, the high correlation in both cases can be partly attributed to situations in Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela, and, in the case of minimum wages, Ecuador.
Moreover, the weak influence of the minimum wage on the average wage is shown by the lack of correlation between the two variables if Argentina, Uruguay and Venezuela are excluded from the calculation.
Although the goal of wage policy in some countries is to improve the purchasing power of workers receiving 71 A sharp change in the inflation rate is not always unforeseen; for example, in the case of the reduction in inflation in Ecuador in 2002, a larger percentage-point variation was factored into the forecasts.
So, strictly speaking, the behaviour of real wages should be compared to the difference between predictions by agents, both public and private, as to the behaviour of prices and the measured behaviour of the CPI.
Difference between average annual inflation rates in 2002 and 2001. the minimum wage, other countries try to keep the real value of the minimum wage constant, or use it as a tool for reducing labour costs and/or combating inflation.
In recent years, “conservative” policies of this kind have tended to prevail in the countries of the region.
From 1990 to 2002, the median real minimum wage rose by just 1% on a cumulative basis, which means that these wages practically remained frozen (see table II.9).
This policy orientation was even more predominant in 2002, when the median fell by 0.5% and the weighted average slipped by 0.7%. (d) Employment and real wages in 2003 Early in the year, regional employment and unemployment indicators improved moderately, against a backdrop of still-sluggish economic growth, albeit with significant differences between individual countries (see figure II.40).
The trend of the main indicators in the region’s largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, and the meagre growth being projected for the second half of the year suggest that the regional labour-market situation is unlikely to improve significantly in 2003 overall.
As a result, the unemployment rate rose continuously between December 2002 and June 2003.
On the other hand, significant erosion of the real wage in a situation of persistently high inflation makes labour hiring cheaper and shifts relative prices in its favour, which could maintain the stimulus for formal job creation.
In Chile, practically all branches of economic activity reported employment growth in the early months of the year compared to the same period a year earlier.
This showed that economic activity was strengthening on a widespread basis, and led to a moderate reduction 72 The Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) introduced a methodological change in 2002 that makes it difficult to analyse the data, especially from a long-term historical perspective, but also in comparison to the previous year.
In the case of Ecuador, there were also measurement changes that caused larger variations in certain variables.
The data presented here should therefore be considered as preliminary. in unemployment compared to the previous year.
Nonetheless, businesses still remain cautious in their new hirings, and the year-on-year comparison shows that employment growth remains concentrated in ownaccount occupations.
Peru saw a continuation of the moderate expansion of formal employment that had begun late in the previous year, as this indicator rose by 1.9% over the first five months compared to the same period in 2002.
Commerce is the most buoyant sector in employment terms, reflecting a revival of private consumption and modernization of the structure of retail trade.
Aggregate job growth for both wage-earning and self-employed workers raised the employment rate slightly and reduced unemployment.
A modest revival in economic growth in Colombia also generated relatively favourable labour-market outcomes early in the year; employment grew as a result, and both underemployment and unemployment retreated despite remaining at historically high levels.
In Ecuador, employment indices recovered slightly, but growth in the labour supply meant that the unemployment rate also rose.
Since then, negative year-on-year rates have steadily decreased, and the first quarter of 2003 saw an increase of 0.7%.
Nonetheless, in April formal employment slipped back once more, and jobs have tended to become more precarious, since most new hirings are based on temporary contracts.
The revival of employment in the maquila sector has also been very weak, and the current import-export dynamic in this industry does not suggest active job creation in the coming months.
Accordingly, in the first half of the year there was a moderate fall in the employment rate and a slight rise in unemployment.
Given the country’s economic growth projections, this situation is unlikely to improve in the second half of the year.
In Argentina, following a sharp previous reduction, formal employment began to grow as from the fourth quarter of 2002, and it has been registering positive yearon-year rates since March 2003.
As a result of currency depreciation, new job creation has been concentrated mainly in manufacturing and agriculture, although employment in construction has also picked up.
Thanks to the stabilization of formal employment and an expansion of jobs in the informal sector, supported by public employment programmes, the open unemployment rate fell significantly; real wages are also showing signs of stabilizing.
In contrast, the labour situation in Uruguay and Venezuela remained in a parlous state in early 2003.
In Venezuela, employment and unemployment rates reflected the impact of the conflictive domestic situation, while in Uruguay the labour market showed signs of stabilization in the second quarter, echoing the slight upturn in economic activity.
Overall, the regional employment rate rose during the early months of 2003, while unemployment fell slightly.
Nonetheless, this is due to its continuous increase in Brazil during 2002, measured using the new methodology applied in that country, whereby 2003 began with a relatively high level of employment.
The figures refer to the January-May period, except for Colombia and Venezuela, where they correspond to January-March.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 109 Following several years of sluggish economic activity, growth in real average wages has practically come to a halt in all countries for which data are available (see figure II.41).
In previous years, against a backdrop of falling inflation, the purchasing power of wages grew in several countries despite weak labour demand, either because nominal wages were rigid downward or because they were indexed on past or predicted future inflation.
Data for the early months of 2003 suggest that this process has now come to an end.
In the eight countries for which information is available, only Nicaragua saw real wages grow by more than 1%, while increases ranged between 0.2% and 0.7% in Chile, Colombia and Mexico, compared to the same period a year earlier.
In Brazil, Uruguay and Venezuela, where inflation remains relatively high, the purchasing power of wages continued to decline.
In Argentina, although the monthly trend is stabilizing, real wages still display a significant year-on-year deterioration. 110 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean D.
External debt: recent trends The build-up of external liabilities between 1989 and 1998, when there was easy access to international financial markets, followed by the drastic curtailment of financing since the crisis that broke out in the Russian Federation in mid-1998, has left several countries with major debt-service problems.
Despite retrenchment since then, total external debt was still equivalent to about 190% of annual goods and services exports between 1999 and 2002 (see tables A-8 and A-19 of the statistical appendix).
Starting in 1997, gross inflows of market borrowing from abroad began to diminish, and the US$ 120.6 billion registered that year had shrunk to US$ 45.3 billion by 2002.
Even in periods considered normal there has been a net outflow of resident-owned capital offsetting the inflow of non74 Gross flows from abroad are those that can be attributed to non-resident private agents and net inflows from abroad, after deducting amortization payments made during the period.
See World Bank, Global Development Finance, Washington, D.C., April 2003, statistical appendix, table A.25. 77 In situations of “good” equilibria, the financial market trusts in the potential of the country in question and continues to extend loans that enable it to refinance cumulative debt service, even though external deficits persist.
In “bad” equilibria, investors lose faith in the country’s capacity; not only do they stop lending, but capital tends to flee to safe havens abroad.
The first case does not give rise to payment difficulties, but the second triggers a crisis.
As for the possibility of multiple equilibria in this type of situation (some “good” and some “bad”), there is an abundant literature starting with Maurice Obstfeld’s “Models of currency crises with self-fulfilling features”, NBER Working Paper No.
These models were initially inspired by the crisis in the European Monetary System rather than crises that have affected developing countries.
These crises could be referred to as “triplets”, for they simultaneously affect the banking, exchange-rate and debt domains.
They have thus grown from current-account crises –difficulties in financing deficits arising from trade, interest payments, profit remittances or a combination thereof– to become crises concentrated in the financing accounts, characterized by sudden large-scale U-turns in capital flows.77 While difficulties in discharging external liabilities have mainly affected governments, they have also made themselves felt in the private sector.
Such problems have fuelled each other through devaluations, sometimes compounded by pre-existing problems in the domestic banking sector.
Aside from the debate over whether or not such funding is justified, there is a growing consensus influencing government policy-making in some of the largest economies that “bail-outs” of this type distort the functioning of international financial markets by allowing investors and borrowers to evade the costs of their mistaken decisions (the moral hazard problem).
This should not be limited merely to the provision of funding, but should also characterize the renegotiation process.
Against this backdrop of difficulty in refinancing a rapidly growing level of debt service, and reluctance among international financial institutions to keep extending massive loans, several developing countries have had to embark on far-reaching restructuring of their external liabilities.
In some cases, this has involved voluntary rescheduling processes which normally do not involve any reduction in the net present value of the debt.
The aim here has been to postpone principal repayments and reduce the volume of bonds currently circulating in the market in order to give greater liquidity to those issued at the time of restructuring.
In other cases, concerted operations have been carried out including a “haircut” factor on the net present value of the debt, as happened in Ecuador in 1999 and is projected in Argentina following the moratorium declared in early 2002.
Renegotiations have enabled debtors and creditors alike to gain experience and try out new negotiating strategies.
Meanwhile, in the international domain, both official and private, there has been discussion of new ways of averting and dealing with debt crises.
Collective action clauses (CACs) The inclusion of CACs in bond issuance contracts is one of the solutions proposed to tackle the specific difficulties arising in debt renegotiations involving bonds issued by governments and private firms.
The complications involved in renegotiating this type of debt, which is held by investors dispersed among several countries, are very different from the problems of negotiations with bank creditors.
First, the creditors involved usually have little interest in maintaining a permanent relationship with the country in question.
Second, the bond issuance contracts do not call for payments made to an individual creditor to be shared among all creditors.
Also, in general, and specifically under the legislation of the State of New York –where a large proportion of the bonds issued by Latin American and Caribbean countries are placed– any amendment of contractual clauses relating to debt service requires unanimous investor agreement.
Such negotiations face an additional obstacle in that it is hard even to identify individual investors, let alone organize their representation as a group.
Consequently, coordination between creditors tends to break down and often leads to individualistic behaviour.
The latter, on the other hand, recognize the risk of having to pay creditors that do not participate in the negotiations, and offer less than they might otherwise have done.
Following the Mexican crisis at the end of 1994, the search began for new crisis resolution mechanisms, in the belief that the existing formulas made it virtually impossible to leave bond debt renegotiation entirely to the market.
One of the first proposals was to introduce CACs.79 Initially it was claimed that the international market would not accept clauses of this type, but studies carried out in the ensuing years suggested that their use would not raise the cost of debt issuance by countries with good credit ratings.
The purpose of CACs is to avoid some of the difficulties discussed above by establishing majorities empowered to amend the original payment clauses, distribute any payment obtained from the debtor among all participants and establish collective representation mechanisms for negotiations between the debtor and creditors.
This type of clause did not gain immediate acceptance, and in the meantime several cases of external debt problems occurred in developing countries, where it proved possible to achieve restructuring without using the CAC mechanism.
Such experiences fuelled outright opposition in financial circles to any innovation in procedures for renegotiating non-performing debts, on the grounds that the market itself was capable of overcoming creditor-coordination problems and the other difficulties mentioned.
In November 2001 IMF proposed the sovereign debt restructuring mechanism (SDRM), a formula for renegotiating public debts similar to the rules for convening creditors and bankruptcy proceedings contained in the domestic legislation of many countries.
As this proposal was welcomed in government circles, the International Monetary and Financial Committee recommended that IMF should study both initiatives: CACs and SDRM.
Financial-market representatives were flatly opposed to the latter, however, so the governments of the economically more powerful countries (particularly the United States) began to swing behind CACs.
International investor circles, which also had initially opposed these clauses, ended up accepting them in mid-2002, and by late January 2003 they had formulated a complete proposal for modifying bond issue contracts, stressing creditors’ rights.
Given these new circumstances, Brazil, Mexico and Uruguay all included CACs in their debt issues or renegotiations in 2003.
In each case, the markets absorbed the issues and tended to favour them in comparison to others that did not contain such clauses.
Mexico used only “qualified majority clauses” set at 75%, to alter arrangements for the repayment of amounts due.80 Nonetheless, it also accepted alteration of the usual terms in bond issues that would make future renegotiations less favourable to the borrower.
In these issues it was established that matters relating to the legislation governing contracts, jurisdiction and waiver of sovereign immunity required a unanimous vote by the creditors.
In the official domain, inclusion of these clauses was first raised in the Rey Report: Group of Ten, The resolution of sovereign liquidity crises.
A report to the ministers and governors prepared under the auspices of the Deputies, May 1996. 80 There is consensus that the indebted governments or entities under their jurisdiction should not have a vote in such cases.
Nonetheless, certain sectors of the financial market have begun to argue that institutions subject to regulatory bodies, such as banks and pension funds, also should not have votes.
Application of this approach to the case of Argentina or Turkey would place voting power in the hands of a small minority of creditors. 81 “Exit consents” are used to amend clauses not requiring unanimous agreement and make “old” bonds surrendered in exchange for “new” ones less attractive.
Once the majority in favour of restructuring has been obtained, and before carrying out the swap for the new securities, bondholders are asked to “consent” to amendment of such clauses.
This encourages the minority to participate in the renegotiation, since by opting out they would be left holding a security of inferior quality.
These “exit consents” are used very frequently in renegotiations in the private domain, in the United States for example, for the same purpose of forcing recalcitrant creditors to accept a restructuring.
The cases of Argentina and Uruguay In the last two years Argentina and Uruguay have represented two extreme cases of debt crisis in Latin America.
Argentina defaulted on a large proportion of its domestic sovereign obligations, while the government of Uruguay succeeded in agreeing on a massive debt swap without any reduction in net present value, but with a significant postponement of principal repayment. (a) Argentina In early 2002, the government of Argentina declared default on a large portion of its domestic and external debt.
The process that led to this situation had its roots in circumstances that had been accumulating steadily throughout the 1990s at least.
As regards the external and public debts, the final crisis was preceded by three attempts to find a solution: “armour-plating” in late 2000, a “mega-swap” in mid-2001 and “phase 1” of public debt restructuring in late 2001.
In the second quarter of 1998, the Argentine economy slid into a lengthy downswing, accompanied by rising unemployment and price deflation, under a currency-board foreign-exchange regime.
Although recession combined with deflation helped to improve the current account of the balance of payments, it undermined the primary fiscal result, which was further aggravated by high prevailing international interest rates and an increased country-risk rating.
Total public-sector debt amounted to US$ 144.453 billion, just 2.7% of which was denominated in local currency.
Expressed in terms of that year’s prices, the external and public debts represented 52% and 54% of GDP respectively.
A peculiarity of Argentina’s external and public debt was the large share of multilateral financial institutions in both cases, particularly IMF, an organization reputed to reject restructuring of its loans.
Another distinctive feature was the fact that a large proportion of the public debt was held in local bank portfolios, where it ended up representing nearly a quarter of all loans.
Lastly, dollarization of the banking system, in terms of loans and deposits alike, was extremely high and still rising.
In fact, the major surge in borrowing from international financial institutions had occurred in 2001, when such liabilities had suddenly expanded by over US$ 10 billion as a result of a major operation with IMF.
In the second half of 2000, the private international financial market had been practically closed to Argentina, so additional support from international financial institutions had become necessary.
This was the so-called “armour-plating” that extended large quantities of official financing to save Argentina from having to appeal to the market in 2001.
The total amount involved was US$ 39.7 billion, equivalent to 15% of GDP, with a disbursement of US$ 23.3 billion scheduled for 2001 –12.5% less than total projected financing needs for that year.
Nonetheless, the only really assured sums covered barely a third of the public sector’s financing needs for 2001.
Having achieved this “armour-plating”, Argentina saw its country risk decline slightly for a period of two or three months, before it returned to its pre-operation levels in March, when the fiscal-deficit target agreed with IMF for the first quarter was missed.
In February heavy withdrawals of bank deposits and international reserves began to occur, and the government suspended the issuance of treasury bills and bonds owing to a lack of buyers.
In these circumstances, a new arrangement was negotiated with IMF and a massive swap offer was launched, known locally as the “megacanje” or megaswap.
This aimed to defer interest and amortization payments and to reduce both the number and the variety of issuance conditions.
The new programme did not alter the figures contained in the “armour-plating” and, although compliance with the first-quarter fiscal deficit target was waived, the target for 2001 was maintained.
The mega-swap involved US$ 65.137 billion in bonds that could be presented for voluntary swap.
Eventually, bonds totalling US$ 32.818 billion were presented –compared to the US$ 20 billion originally anticipated– and US$ 29.494 billion were accepted.
The face value of the newly issued bonds was US$ 30.401 billion, which meant an increase of US$ 2.255 billion in the par value of the public debt compared to the technical residual value of the bonds redeemed.
As a result of the operation Argentina gained significant relief for its immediate financing needs and also for subsequent years.
In return, it had to accept high yields of close to 15% per year; it agreed to pay significant premiums on market values; and, starting in 2004, the coupons on medium-term “Global 2008” bonds would be raised substantially.
The operation was perceived at the time as successful in overcoming immediate problems, given the circumstances, 114 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean but it left serious questions in its wake that will need to be resolved in the relatively near future.
Despite the appreciable (US$ 4.59 billion) reduction in borrowing requirements for the subsequent year (2002), and even assuming that the funds committed by international financial institutions in the “armourplating” framework would be disbursed within the expected deadlines, an additional US$ 15 billion was still needed.
Release of the “armour-plating” funds, which were essential to meet financing requirements even during the remainder of 2001, also depended on compliance with increasingly ambitious fiscal-deficit targets, which were likely to be hard to achieve in a recessionary setting.
In July, the government adopted a zero-deficit rule and had its standby credit arrangement with IMF raised by US$ 8 billion: US$ 5 billion available for immediate release and the remainder reserved to support a “voluntary and market-based operation to increase the viability of Argentina’s debt profile”.
In the ensuing months a third attempt was made to solve the debt problem, as recession deepened and both deposit and international-reserve losses intensified.
In October 2001 the government declared its willingness to negotiate a restructuring of its public debt, and a few days later it announced its intention to split this into two phases.
Phase 1 would be restricted to local debt holders, while phase 2 would include foreign creditors.
In November the government agreed on a public-debt restructuring with local investors amounting to nearly US$ 58 billion.
Consequently, the arrangement with IMF was suspended and was not renewed until early 2003.
In early 2002, under a new economic affairs minister and then a new President, the government decided to default on the public debt that had not been covered by phase 1.
Peso devaluation then drove the ratio between public external and domestic debt (almost all of which was issued in foreign currency) and GDP, and between this debt and fiscal receipts, to such high levels that the government decided to convert the “collateralized loans” into pesos.
These “pesified” loans, along with new National State Optional Bonds (BODENs) issued subsequently to compensate the banks for the mismatch caused by the asymmetry of the “pesification” process, as well as existing debts with international financial institutions, totalling US$ 96.0 billion altogether, are not in arrears.
On the other hand, the remainder of the public debt, which by late 2003 is projected to stand at US$ 76.701 billion including overdue interest, is past its due date.
Most of this debt consists of bonds issued under international laws and dispersed among hundreds of thousands of individual investors.
The bulk of the private external debt of the non-financial sector (just over US$ 35.2 billion by late 2001) out of a total institutionalized debt with residents and non-residents approaching US$ 47.0 billion, is in a default situation, as is a significant proportion of domestic private-sector debt, which in addition is subject to litigation to contest its “pesification”.
Although restructuring is fraught with difficulties under these conditions, most debt-holders have sought to associate and are trying to negotiate with the State without recourse to the justice system.
The government has insisted that it intends to pay, but that it will ask for grace periods, together with longer amortization terms and reductions in interest rates and/or principal.
It has also welcomed the idea of issuing bonds indexed to GDP.
During that period, the overall public-sector deficit shrank to an average of 1.2% of GDP and the country achieved “investment grade” rating.
Following the establishment of MERCOSUR, Uruguay’s goods exports were increasingly sent to the region’s two largest markets.
Free flotation of the peso as from mid-2002 pushed this ratio above 100%.
Meanwhile, contagion from the Argentine crisis spread to the banking system in Uruguay, which saw nearly half of its deposits drain away.
In early 2002, Uruguay’s public debt lost its “investment grade” rating, and country risk soared.
The government tried to ride out the crisis without defaulting on its commitments or renouncing its obligations to the banks, which were overwhelmingly denominated in foreign currency.
By mid-2002 systemic difficulties began to be overcome through the rescheduling of maturities with official banks, while the problems of closed banks and public-sector obligations were put on hold.
In order to solve the banking-sector and public-debt problems, an enormous financing package was negotiated and obtained from IMF and multilateral development banks.
In late 2002, the public-sector debt was estimated at US$ 10.797 billion, of which US$ 5.804 billion (59% of GDP) represented “market-based” debt; 65.2% was held by residents and just under 5% was denominated in local currency.
The due dates on the corresponding bonds varied widely, from just a few weeks to 2027.
In early 2003, the government decided to attempt a voluntary public-debt swap operation to reduce the quantity of bonds maturing that year and into the future.
The announcement of the swap proposal on 14 April covered a total of US$ 5.350 billion.
In the case of a bond issue offered in Japan, equivalent to US$ 250 million and subject to CACs, an attempt was made to amend the original conditions of issue with the consent of the bondholders.
In the other cases, encompassing 46 domestic bonds totalling US$ 1.6 billion and 18 bonds issued abroad for a total of US$ 3.5 billion, the offer was to exchange them virtually at par.
For this purpose two new alternatives were proposed: “maturity extension bonds” and “benchmark bonds”.
The first involved extending the expiry date of the bond surrendered in the swap for a further five years, without altering its other terms, and was aimed fundamentally at individual holders.
The second alternative, targeting institutional investors, offered a smaller set of new bonds, thus affording greater liquidity at longer maturities and rising interest rates.
In addition, bonds paying a coupon of 7.875% and maturing in 2003 received a cash payment.
The Government of Uruguay made every effort, both before and after formalizing the offer, to maintain a highly active and cordial dialogue with its creditors.
It also pointed out that if rescheduling were to fail, the country would very soon be forced to default.
Also, to discourage recalcitrant bondholders, it was made clear that the new bonds would take precedence over earlier ones in terms of servicing.
Exit consents were also used, as in the Ecuadorian case, whereby a majority of holders were able to alter the terms of the “old” securities in order to make them less attractive.
Lastly, to avoid possible payment embargoes on holders of the “new” bonds, a trusteeship structure was designed instead of the usual “fiscal agent” scheme.
The “new” bonds were also issued with collective action clauses that included an innovative “aggregation” clause whereby the minimum 75% majority required to alter payment terms on each individual bond could be reduced to two thirds, if 85% or more of the bondholders wishing to amend the terms accepted the changes.
This was an attempt to prevent investor groupings holding 25% or more of a specific bond issue from being able to block renegotiation.
In addition to what had already been accepted by Mexico, Uruguay agreed to tighten up on certain aspects of the new bonds.
Unanimity was required to amend the waiver of sovereign immunity, applicable legislation and jurisdiction, and if “exit consents” were used in future debt swaps the new clauses could not be less favourable to the holders than the previous ones.
Moreover, individuals accepting the swap could not be issued new bonds that would dilute the value of pre-existing holdings by making the debt even larger.
This will make it much harder to use exit consents in future renegotiations (which, as mentioned above, have proved highly effective for borrowers).
Since a high level of participation was required for the swap to be successful and substantially reduce financing requirements, the offer was made contingent on the participation of 90% of bondholders, including 90% of those whose bonds were scheduled to expire before 2008.
If the level of participation represented between 80% and 90% of the total debt, and not just the eligible securities, the government reserved the right to go ahead with the operation.
In fact, bondholders participating in the swap did represent 90% of total eligible debt, and the operation made it possible to reduce principal repayments on medium- and long-term bonds.
As a result, the debt/GDP ratio should fall steadily towards a level of 60%.
Although no reduction in the face value of 116 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean the bonds was requested, the original coupons were preserved; but as these now represent below-market yields, many analysts consider the net present value of the debt to have been reduced.
The successful reprofiling of Uruguay’s public debt was assisted by a favourable trend in interest rates on developing-country bond issues and by the fact that until recently the country’s debt had been rated “investment grade”, which meant that interest rates on its bonds already in circulation were relatively low.
Nonetheless, the ultimate success of the operation will depend on whether the government achieves a significant increase in its primary surplus, for which targets have been set of 3.2% of GDP in 2003, 3.3% in the biennium 2004-2005 and 4% in the medium term. 3.
Conclusions The sudden drying-up of external financing flows and the high level of debt presage difficulties in meeting external debt service obligations, which have already come to the surface in some countries.
Also, contrary to beliefs held until recently, it has been found that it is not impossible to restructure bond debt, or even in some cases to obtain face-value reductions; the international financial market also, in practice, accepts collective action clauses, despite the continued opposition expressed by some organizations representing sectors of that market.
Nonetheless, doubts persist as to whether experiences thus far can be generalized.
As regards the use of CACs to solve problems generated by debt crises involving dispersed creditors, two types of difficulties arise.
An initial practical problem is that most of the bonds in circulation do not have CACs, so the success achieved in the few countries that have issued bonds which include them might not be replicable elsewhere, at least not without higher costs.
Paradoxically, the countries whose debts are least in need of restructuring are likely to obtain the most flexible contracts, while those most likely to encounter problems will probably gain the least in terms of market concessions.
The second problem is the question of whether the inclusion of this type of clause will be enough to ensure successful negotiations, which many people doubt.
Several studies have argued that, in a world of incomplete information, coordination problems among creditors (leading to “strategic” behaviour whereby creditors define a negotiating strategy based not only on their own information, but also on assumptions about the behaviour of the other participants) cannot be solved by the market even with assistance from CACs.
In such conditions, the only possible solution would be intervention by a third party such as a bankruptcy court; this implies a sovereign debt restructuring mechanism.
Although the fact that some negotiations have been concluded without CACs seems to belie this need, the disadvantages of excessively lengthy negotiations for all participants suggest the opposite.
The fact is that the endless preliminary discussions of the 1980s were ultimately mostly resolved through third-party intervention in the Brady Plan framework.
Moreover, following the withdrawal of the SDRM proposal, institutions representing the financial market have refloated an idea once promoted by Banque de France, which consists of designing a code of conduct to govern relationships between creditors and debtors in emerging markets.
Some analysts see this as a way of reintroducing the proposal for that mechanism; others consider it a means of ensuring that official institutions participate in debt restructuring on an equal footing with the private sector.
This would be tantamount to an initiative for public-sector participation in crisis resolution, as a counterpart to the proposal on privatesector participation put forward by the Group of Seven a few years ago.
In terms of the potential of restructuring operations in the future, a number of additional points need to be considered.
First, the operations that were successful in the past had massive support in the form of funding from international financial institutions, but the political backing needed for this is lacking today.
Second, if the current international financing shortage persists, it is quite possible that mere postponement of expiry dates will store up problems for the not-too-distant future.
Third, the fiscal effort required to sustain the new debt profiles is still very onerous.
This could impair growth and detract from efforts to address social needs, without regaining the international financial market access needed to lighten the burden of external debt service and make additional resources available for development.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 117 Chapter III Development banks and production financing Introduction The financing of productive activity requires that policies for increasing national saving be complemented with measures to ensure that these resources are actually allocated to investors in the production sector.
An effective financial system should efficiently channel savings into investment and technological innovation and should make those funds more accessible to the different agents of production.
In general, the financial systems of the Latin American and Caribbean countries are not well developed.
Although they have undergone major structural changes in the last few years, they have yet to create deeper, more stable financial markets.
The banking crises that have broken out in a number of countries in the region have shown that the health of these systems depends not only on macroeconomic stability, but also on regulatory and prudential supervision mechanisms that guarantee adequate levels of solvency and liquidity on the part of financial intermediaries.
Also needed are explicit policies and instruments to promote long-term financing and facilitate access to the financial system for sectors that have traditionally been excluded.
Latin America’s financial markets are dominated by banks and its capital markets are poorly developed.
Private bank financing tends to focus on short-term loans, interest-rate spreads are high and credit is conspicuously geared to large corporations, leaving small and mediumsized enterprises largely ignored.
This chapter will briefly examine the development of the financial system in the region and will analyse the role of development banks in financial intermediation for productive development and in the promotion of capital markets, particularly the securities market. 118 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean 1.
One indicator that is commonly used to measure the depth of the capital market is the stock market capitalization-to-GDP ratio.
This variable rose in the developed countries (except Japan), even though stock prices dropped, while data for 10 Latin American economies show that the region’s stock markets have been adversely affected.
Moreover, as shown in table III.1, the number of firms that finance their investments through the issue and sale of shares has actually declined.
In addition, some countries lack suitable regulations to address the risks associated with transparency problems and to protect the rights of minority shareholders in the management of open companies.
Another trait of domestic financial systems is that they are based on banking activity.
Bank credit to the private sector as a percentage of GDP continues to be low in the region, however, in comparison with international standards.
This indicator has followed different trends in different countries; since 2000 the regional average has stabilized at around 30% of GDP, but the average for developed countries exceeds 100%.
By the same token, bank interest-rate spreads, measured as the difference between lending and deposit rates, are well in excess of the spreads seen in OECD and Asian countries (see table III.3).
Wide interest-rate spreads hurt the production sector’s competitiveness by raising the cost of financing.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 121 In addition to the considerations outlined above, the supply of credit, which is mainly short-term, is poorly suited to the borrowing needs of firms, which tend to be long-term.
This forces firms to take out short-term loans to finance their long-term investments, thus heightening the vulnerability of the production sector and, indirectly, of the financial sector itself.
The Latin American and Caribbean countries suffered a string of severe financial crises in the 1990s.
In general, these crises were set off by two sets of factors.
First, financial regulation and oversight were weakened by deficient risk management, inadequate regulations on capital and loan-loss provisions and the presence of explicit or implicit State guarantees on deposits and other obligations.4 Second, distortions in relative prices and highly volatile macroeconomic activity impacted negatively on the financial system.
Regulation should serve to effectively avert systemic risks and contribute to the smooth operation of the payment chain.
Most of the countries in the region have now adopted the banking regulation standards set out in the 1988 Basle Accord.5 The Accord centres the assessment of credit risk on individual loans, without considering the benefits of diversifying loan portfolios by type of activity or geographical area.
It thus encourages a heavier concentration of bank credit and magnifies the bias against applicants that carry a higher relative risk.
This raises the cost of financial intermediation for applicants rated as more risky and deepens the segmentation of the credit market.
This considered only reserves of capital to cover the banks’ loan portfolio risk, however, not the market risk of their portfolios of tradable assets. 6 A number of criticisms have been levelled at the Basle Accord, one of which is that it restricts bank lending capacity by applying a standard rather than a domestic criterion for risk classification.
In particular, under Basle 1998, the value at risk is calculated for a 10-day time horizon and a 99% one-tailed confidence level, which in practice translates into a multiplier of 3 for regulatory capital, given riskweighted assets.
The development banking system This section examines the role that the development banking system can and should play in improving the access of different production sectors to financial intermediation, in the framework of standards of regulation and prudential supervision that guarantee the stability and solvency of the financial institutions concerned.
It also looks at development banks’ potential role in creating markets for long-term financing and in expanding the capital market by addressing unmet needs.
The existence of public development banks is justified by market failures, asymmetric information and the endogenous segmentation of credit.
Public banks play a role in financing production even in developed 122 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean countries that have deep financial systems.7 As mentioned above, the Latin American and Caribbean countries, with few exceptions, have small and relatively unsophisticated financial markets and fewer financial intermediation instruments than the developed countries.
Financing is highly concentrated in short-term instruments, especially in economies that have experienced repeated bouts of high inflation.
Credit markets are segmented, with the result that access to credit is limited for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), small-scale farm owners and young people who have innovative projects but no credit history.
In addition, the Latin American financial system, like the European one, relies heavily on bank lending.
Other forms of financing, such as the stock market, are little used.
While this chapter focuses mainly on banks at the national level, multilateral development banks have performed well at the regional and subregional levels. 7 See Joseph Stiglitz and A.
Financial institutions for development encompass a wide variety of organizations operating at the global, regional, subregional and national levels.
Although each has its own specific features and operating procedures, to a greater or lesser degree they all work to promote economic and social development by mobilizing financial resources, building technical and institutional capacity and knowledge bases and providing global, regional or national public goods, as the case may be.
They also mobilize resources from official sources and channel them to beneficiary countries.
The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development or World Bank operates at the global level, although it also conducts regional operations).
Their main objective is to promote productive development through technical assistance and the intermediation of financial resources from the State, multilateral banks and the private financial system.
Their activities target sectors that normally have difficulty in gaining access to the private financial market, namely SMEs, the agricultural sector, environmental projects and activities related to technological innovation.
Since its founding in 1959, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) has been a major driver of economic and social development in the region.
It has become a significant source of financing, channelling resources to productive and social sectors.
The IDB Private Sector Department offers partial risk and loan guarantees in order to attract private investors.
Risk guarantees cover loans in relation to specific political risks, such as government contractual obligations and monetary convertibility or transferability.
Loan guarantees cover part of the funds lent by private sources and, in practice, convert medium-term loans into longer-term operations.
By way of example, in 1997 a project to treat waste water from the Bogotá River was Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 123 the first of this type to be funded with resources raised on the international private capital market, thanks to the guarantees furnished by IDB.
Since it came into existence six years ago, the Private Sector Department has co-financed projects worth US$ 12.7 billion, of which IDB has contributed US$ 2.1 billion directly.
The Inter-American Investment Corporation, which began operations in 1989, has channelled more than US$ 8 billion in loans and capital investments to over 2,400 goods and services suppliers in Latin America and the Caribbean.
These resources have been used to support SMEs in the countries of the region.
The Multilateral Investment Fund, which was established in 1993, has approved 386 projects for a total of US$ 1.2 billion, of which US$ 660 million came from the Fund itself.
The money has been used to develop both human resources and small businesses.
The Fund has shown a notable capacity to attract additional resources: in 2000, for example, average project co-financing was as high as 54%.
The Andean Development Corporation has become one of the leading multilateral banks in the Andean subregion.
In the five-year period 1995-2000 it provided 51% of the US$ 27 billion in loans approved for the Andean countries (see table III.4).
Loan approvals are not necessarily equivalent to the amounts disbursed in the year under consideration.
Since the Andean Development Corporation has a better risk rating than its member countries, it is in a position to facilitate their access to international private financial markets at more attractive rates and maturities.
This serves to illustrate how important the support of multilateral development banks has been in giving the countries access to more stable, preferably medium- and long-term international financing at lower cost.
With respect to national development banks, productive development activities have traditionally been associated with lending to certain sectors at belowmarket cost in the form of interest-rate subsidies.
Such lending has not necessarily targeted activities with an acceptable social rate of return.
In recent decades national development banks in a number of Latin American and Caribbean countries have experienced financial difficulties rooted in serious failings in resource management.
Where explicit mandates and institutional frameworks have been lacking, resources have often been managed according to political criteria.
Lending has typically failed to give due regard to risk management and this, together with inadequate collection policies, has translated into loan recovery rates that are well below those of commercial banks.
Since financing has been based mainly on fiscal and multilateral sources and budgets have been insufficiently transparent, those resources have carried a high opportunity cost.8 In the 1990s far-reaching financial reforms were carried out in the Latin American and Caribbean countries to improve the quality and efficiency of financial intermediation.
In particular, the chronic problem of insufficient saving, especially long-term saving, has not been resolved.
This means that the engagement of development banks continues to be necessary to strengthen the market.
Long-term financing, especially mortgage lending, is on the rise in a number of countries, but there has been no significant development of markets for long-term investment lending, at least not for domestically financed investment.
Faced with imperfect information and an uncertain economic environment, private financial lenders tend to ration funds or raise the cost of borrowing significantly.
In practice, the worst affected by credit rationing and segmentation are SMEs, small-scale farm owners and new businesses specializing in technological innovation; these sectors have higher risks and transaction costs in the financial intermediation process.
Since would-be borrowers in these sectors usually have only limited information, evaluating and financing them is costly for private financial institutions.
Large corporations, which generally have information more in tune with the requirements of the private financial market, can secure funding at lower cost.
The principal lesson to be drawn from the numerous financial crises that have hit the Latin American and Caribbean countries is the importance of preserving and defending financial stability and solvency by means of proper oversight.
These crises sharpened discrimination against borrowers who carry a higher potential risk, while the setting-up of loan-loss provisions raised the cost of borrowing.
The need to expand the coverage of financial services while observing prudential standards of regulation and oversight of risk management opens up a large playing field for development banking.
Development banks should be capable of raising funds and channelling them to high-risk activities without compromising the solvency of the banking system or the stability of the regulatory system in general, and should thus guarantee the efficient allocation of credit with satisfactory rates of return.
In short, development banking should be governed by the principles of complementarity and transparency, and its financial instruments should operate according to criteria similar to those of the market. (b) Development banking in today’s world Public development banks are not the only entities engaged in productive development activities.
As shown in table III.5, out of 105 institutions in 21 countries of the region, 22% are privately owned and 10% are of mixed ownership.
Includes 105 development financing institutions in 21 countries of the region. 9 Information problems are one of the main justifications for government intervention in these markets (Joseph Stiglitz, The Role of the State in Financial Markets, World Bank, 1993).
Asymmetric information leads to problems known as moral hazard and adverse selection, among others.
Moral hazard refers to situations where the risk structure of a borrower’s project changes after the loan is extended, potentially resulting in a lower rate of return for the lender.
Adverse selection refers to the concentration of lending in more risky projects, since borrowers are prepared to pay a higher price to secure funding for such enterprises. 10 See R.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 125 Development financing institutions have embarked on far-reaching alterations to their institutional structure and management in order to adapt to the new economic and financial conditions in the countries.
One of the main results of this process has been the growing tendency of development institutions to operate as second-tier banks.
This kind of bank channels resources to public or private first-tier commercial banks, which then use those resources to extend loans.
The financial risk is thus spread between the two types of banks, and the evaluation of end-borrowers’ levels of risk and creditworthiness is the responsibility of the first-tier banks.
This arrangement makes it easier to improve financial risk management but harder to target funding, which is an essential part of development activities.
As shown in table III.6, out of 104 institutions, 21 operate as second-tier banks and 10 as both first- and secondtier institutions.
Includes 104 development financing institutions in 21 countries of the region. 11 For example, the maintenance of real net worth could form part of their mandate. 12 See ECLAC, Growth with stability: Financing for development in the new international context, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2002.
Development banks now face the challenge of ensuring that their financial management promotes sound banking discipline in terms of risk management, profitability and financial solvency.
To this end, their operational independence should be strengthened within a framework of functions and objectives defined by the appropriate authorities. (c) Institutional framework The objectives and functions of development banking must be clearly defined so that the allocation of funding will reflect developmental rather than political considerations.
Development banks’ resource endowment, decision-making criteria, lending policies and technical assistance must be determined in accordance with the principles of sound business management.
The new institutional structures should enhance the autonomy of decision-making and minimize direct government intervention in the extension of credit.
In order to guarantee that development banks are independently, transparently and responsibly managed, it is necessary to devise criteria with regard to what can and cannot be done and to establish independent boards of directors made up of individuals who are legally accountable for the results of their actions.
Like independent central banks, development banks should report annually to the appropriate authorities on the results they have achieved in relation to their objectives and functions.11 They should also strengthen their financial viability by having their risk portfolios regularly rated by external auditors.
Collection policies need to be improved if banks are to avoid the large volume of unpaid loans that was common in the past.
The issuance of commercial paper to attract private investors should be an important source of funds for development banking.
In Europe many successful institutions of this type have a wide variety of funding sources, which has afforded them greater independence in management and decisionmaking, better risk management and more stable financing flows.
The private capital market has become a significant source of funds for Germany’s development banking system and for Spain’s Official Credit Institute, among others.
Moreover, development bank instruments issued on private financial markets can become a significant engine of market growth and deepening.
Indeed, an increasing number of such institutions in the Latin American and Caribbean countries are licensed to participate in a broad range of financial activities, although their involvement is limited in practice (see table III.7).
Includes 49 development financing institutions in 20 countries of the region. 13 See ECLAC, Growth with stability: Financing for development in the new international context, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2002.
As public banks, development banks generally enjoy the backing of State guarantees when raising funds on financial markets.
This obviously benefits their risk rating, which in turn lowers the cost of raising funds.
Insofar as this lower cost is passed on to borrowers, it reduces the cost of loans.
The downside of this type of guarantee is that it distorts risk ratings by leading to a situation where the assessment of the risk structure of the banks themselves is tainted by the incorporation of the sovereign risk of State financing.13 The State guarantee also introduces an element of unfair competition for resources between development banks and the private sector.
In this respect, consideration should be given to the use of the funds.
When they are to be used for development activities, in which competition with the private sector is unfortunately scant, the State guarantee should be maintained.
When the funds are to be used for activities in which competition with the private sector is more intense, the State guarantee should not be allowed to affect the cost of raising the funds.
An interesting example in this regard is the agreement between the German development bank Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (KfW) and the European Commission.
The Commission agreed to allow the State guarantee as compensation for the development activities carried out by KfW, while for areas where KfW competes with private banks, such as export and project financing, the bank set up a special subsidiary subject to the same conditions as private banks.
Both in their financial market operations and in the administration of the fiscal resources assigned to them, development banks must conform to transparent accounting standards in keeping with market requirements.
It is essential to avoid a situation in which Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 127 the subsidies implicit in a poor policy of assessment, risk management and loan recovery indirectly affect the public budget by generating unforeseen costs.
Subsidies must be provided transparently and be financed from State resources if development banks are to retain their capacity to generate profits.14 (e) New financial instruments SMEs, the rural sector and innovative activities are the development banks’ natural clientele, as their intermediation costs are higher and their risks less diversified than those of large corporations.
There is a need for new financial products especially designed to channel resources to these sectors.
Like commercial banks, development banks need to maintain positive and competitive rates of return if they are to remain financially solvent.
The profits they generate enable them to increase their resources in the long term and to raise additional funding on the private financial market.
Given that the return on the assets held by development banks is subject to institutional and market constraints, the quality of these banks’ resource management is crucial to their financial viability.
International experience suggests that the standardization of financial products and processes reduces intermediation costs and facilitates access to new forms of financing.
In Latin America and the Caribbean development banks have focused on lending and on complementary non-financial services.
They have only recently ventured into the terrain of new financial instruments, factoring, leasing, securitization of assets, trust administration and provision of guarantees (see table III.7).
Thus far, these new instruments have been used mainly to finance housing and infrastructure in the region.
Project financing with the involvement of both public and private entities has gained ground as a way of funding infrastructure works in several countries.
Mexico’s Nacional Financiera has a programme of supplier development through electronic billing, which has expedited SME financing and lowered its cost.
Guarantee funds set up in several countries of the region are another example of instruments that stimulate synergies between public and private financing for SMEs.
At the international level the involvement of development banks in the securitization of loans and trusts (which is not very common in the region) has also helped to attract resources for SMEs.
Operating in the secondary market, development banks can securitize loans by buying first-tier commercial banks’ portfolios of loans receivable from SMEs, packaging them and selling them on the stock market, thereby turning them into liquid assets.
The banks thus transfer their credit risks to the stock market and obtain more leeway for further lending.
A case in point is that of the German development bank KfW, which in 2002 issued bonds of this type in the amount of some 5.5 billion euros.
The volume of securitized loans has to be quite large for the securities to be financially attractive.
Although trust funds are a long-established financial instrument, they have only recently come into their own as a development tool.
Trust funds can be used to channel resources into higher-risk activities and sectors without affecting the assets of the institutions administering these funds.
In other words, trust funds can be useful for managing financial resources in such a way as to give a variety of economic agents easier access to credit.
For example, commercial banks, acting as trustees, can channel resources to SMEs without increasing their loanloss provisions; since such loans are not part of the banks’ portfolios, the standard rules on regulation and prudential supervision do not apply.
Since there is also the danger that first-tier banks may be tempted to transfer the risks of their non-performing portfolio to trust funds, standards regulating the management of trust funds must be developed.
Trust funds can also serve to enhance the budgetary transparency of development banks, since they enable the banks to allocate resources for emergency financing without affecting their asset structure.
Mexico’s National Bank for Public Works and Services recently adopted a mechanism of this type for infrastructure works in the states, financed from windfall petroleum revenues.
In El Salvador the Multisectoral Investment Bank set up a trust fund for microenterprise and small business development.
Loan guarantee schemes, while not new, have attracted growing interest in the last few years as a means of giving SMEs easier access to bank credit.
Guarantees should be extended in a rapid and timely manner, without repeating the entire credit evaluation process carried out by the banks.
The default rate should initially be no more than 5% of the portfolio, and should drop to 2% to 3% over time.
Banks or other lenders should assume between 30% and 40% of the risk and never less than 20%; risk-sharing of 50% or more could discourage them from participating.
In view of the non-traditional risk structure of these funds’ business and their potential for growth and profitability, they may require State guarantees for a time, though not on a permanent basis.
Venture capital funds are designed to finance the establishment of new firms working in innovative –and therefore risky– lines of business.
These ventures are not guaranteed to survive but, if they do, they can generate very high rates of return.
Venture capitalists form a fund which receives proposals seeking financing, organizational and legal support and strategic advice.
Depending on the requirements of the investors, firms that receive financing and strategic support must be sold (or liquidated if they are not profitable) after a certain length of time so that profits can be realized and recycled back into the original fund.
The firms can be sold on the stock market if they are listed, or through other mechanisms.
In the United States the venture capital industry has played a key role in financing the information technology sector, Internet development, electronic commerce and biotechnology.
In the last few years the industry has also gathered momentum in Europe and, to a lesser extent, in Latin America.17 In Chile a debate is under way on the possibility of setting up a guarantee fund to encourage private institutional investors to engage in venture capital schemes.
Stock and bond markets Financial markets can be broadened to help channel liquidity to the real sector and provide more opportunities for portfolio and risk diversification.
In Latin America stock and bond markets represent a very small fraction of corporate financing raised on the domestic market.
The sale of bonds abroad, however, is a means of widening this source of financing.
Resources for the region’s productive sector come mainly from entrepreneurs’ own capital, undistributed earnings and bank credit.
The low liquidity indices and capitalization ratios of developing-country stock markets hinder the supply of funds by this means.18 Bond markets, though increasing in importance, provide even less financing than stock markets in most emerging economies.
The level of stock- and bond-market financing Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean y 2002-2003 129 is lowest among small firms, which are less capitalized and have a more concentrated risk structure than larger concerns, making them less attractive for institutional investors.
These findings clarify how the stock market and banking system operate independently to boost economic development.
Pension systems based on some form of capitalization, like the insurance industry and mutual funds, are an important means of deepening capital markets.
Most international demand for bonds comes from institutional investors whose liability structures lead them to prefer long-term securities.
They not only generate the demand, but also provide the liquidity needed by bond markets.
The liquidity shortfalls typical of the Latin American and Caribbean countries both affect the cost of financing and prevent the emergence of agents willing to invest in the markets.
Since the formation of long-term markets in the region has also been held back by repeated outbreaks of inflation, such markets must be indexed if they are to become established at all.
Conclusions The financial system’s ability to efficiently channel resources to productive activity depends on the provision of low-cost intermediation services and on the development of financial instruments and institutions that can adapt to the different risk profiles and liquidity and maturity needs of the production sector.
In general, suitable systems of prudential regulation and supervision, combined with macroeconomic stability, are vital for deepening and developing financial markets.
Although the reforms of the 1990s increased the volume of financial intermediation in Latin America and the Caribbean, the region does not yet have a flexible long-term credit market to finance productive investment.
Another problem is that SMEs, small-scale farm owners, technological innovation initiatives and, in general, all sectors of production that carry a higher relative risk have been sidelined from the benefits of intermediation by the persistent segmentation of financial markets.
Domestic development banks can help to make up for these capital market deficiencies and promote financing for production in the Latin American and Caribbean countries.
In order to do so, development banks must have clearly defined functions and objectives and be able to make lending decisions free of political interference.
In working with intermediation instruments, they should maintain financial equilibrium by seeking suitable levels of profitability and by properly managing risk in their loan portfolios.
Like independent central banks, modern development banks should be accountable to the relevant authorities.
The basic operational guidelines that should govern development banks are complementarity, emphasis on socially beneficial activities (to which the private sector pays too little attention), additionality, profitability and transparency, and the promotion of synergies between public and private financing.
Public banking should play a key role in developing new instruments to help standardize processes and products that make financial intermediation more accessible and less costly, boost the growth of stock markets by securitizing loan portfolios and encourage the use of guarantee funds and the venture capital industry.
The convertibility regime had served as a basic economic institution and factor of political legitimacy for nigh on a decade, but in recent years it had faced growing macroeconomic imbalances as recession set in.
The collapse of the regime in January 2002 shook the foundations of the entire contract system and was accompanied by political convulsions and deep public discontent.
At times, fundamental aspects of the workings of the economy were affected.
The deterioration of economic performance was reflected in a sharp output contraction starting in mid-2001, together with soaring poverty indices.
The drop in output was particularly steep in the first quarter of 2002, but thereafter a slow but persistent recovery began to take hold.
This limited the output decline for the year overall to 10.9%, much of which represented the aftershock of the negative results of 2001.
Recovery gathered pace in the new year, and 5.5% growth is forecast for 2003 as a whole.
In the midst of this critical situation, continuous negotiations were held with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), but these only produced a provisional agreement in early 2003.
In 2002 meanwhile, massive private-sector capital flight coincided with demands from multilateral organizations for loan repayments amounting to several percentage points of GDP.
Possibly the IMF attitude reflected an expectation that economic meltdown had further to go.
Nonetheless, performance indicators started to improve from mid-2002 onwards, despite the intractable problems that continued to bear down on the economy.
The early part of the year witnessed major disturbances caused largely by the effects of a rising exchange rate on asset values, in an economy where most financial assets were denominated in dollars.
The “pesification” of dollar deposits decreed by the Government aroused fierce opposition among savers, which expressed itself through public protests and lawsuits.
It also generated tensions between the Government and the banks over compensation to be paid for the asymmetry in the rates at which loans and deposits were converted.
The public was clamouring to withdraw its holdings from the financial system and purchase foreign currency.
Deposit withdrawals restrictions and frequent bank holidays, aimed at staunching the haemorrhage of funds from the banking system, disrupted normal transaction mechanisms.
Nonetheless, large-scale deposit withdrawals continued to occur largely as a result of court rulings. 134 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean With the Central Bank granting rediscounts to the banking system, the very low level of tax revenue being collected meant that the Government was also short of funding –it even fell behind with its interest payments.
The excess supply of domestic assets put added pressure on the foreign-currency market, with the result that the exchange rate rose sharply and the Central Bank lost massive amounts of reserves.
The abrupt slowdown in activity, compounded by financial meltdown and a clearly abnormal monetary and fiscal situation, completed a panorama of great tension.
Although the hike in the exchange rate had clear repercussions on prices and real wages, it failed to set off an inflationary spiral.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 135 conjunction with high unemployment and the fact that public-utility charges were not adjusted, helped to keep price rises in check.
In addition, using emergency instruments, fiscal and monetary policies were specifically aimed at staving off the threat of hyperinflation, while the maintenance of measures suited to conditions of low inflation had a major influence on the demand for money and price-setting.
Once the momentum generated by the external depreciation of the currency was halted, the inflation rate moderated appreciably.
The significant rise in the real exchange rate was associated with a sharp increase in the demand for foreign assets –especially in the vortex of events in early 2002– and with a turnround in the current account of the balance of payments.
Following drastic cutbacks in imports, the trade surplus grew to the equivalent of over 15% of GDP in dollar terms –clearly reflecting the decline in domestic activity and, above all, the real devaluation.
The behaviour of external accounts was consonant with the major contraction in aggregate demand, reflecting expectations and attitudes engendered by conditions of extreme turbulence.
The rise in the level of prices and the effect of recently imposed export duties helped to bolster government revenues; and with public expenditure tightly constrained, primary surpluses began to be generated.
In addition, monetary policy focused on reducing rediscounts and generating instruments of regulation through bill issuance.
The large trade surplus, combined with a perception that the real exchange rate was now at a very high level, and the introduction of requirements to surrender foreign currency earned from exports, increased the supply of foreign exchange.
With the exchange rate no longer gyrating wildly, the foreign-currency market began to open up again, and this moderated expectations of devaluation and reduced incentives to hoard foreign currency.
Higher profit margins in a number of firms allowed funds to be generated to ease the constraints of the credit drought.
Following a pronounced fall in the first quarter, output then expanded slightly, which, in a situation plagued with risk and doubts over immediate prospects, suggested that the crisis could be levelling out.
This perception gained strength as time passed, although uncertainty was by no means banished.
In the final months of 2002, with the foreign-exchange market operating with substantial stability, the Central Bank accumulated reserves at a falling rate of exchange.
Real output grew slightly during the second half of the year, especially as a result of expansions in activities related to foreign trade.
Although the public continued to display deep distrust of financial institutions, there was a slight but significant revival in “voluntary” demand for time deposits, starting from rock-bottom levels.
Nonetheless, the legal disputes over bank deposits persisted, and in 2003 the Supreme Court ruled against the “pesification” measure.
The early months of the year were dominated by political uncertainty surrounding the presidential elections scheduled for May.
Nonetheless, these events failed to reverse the excess supply of foreign currency, which fuelled a substantial appreciation of the peso against the dollar.
This softened the effect of the “redollarization” ruling, since it increased the dollar value of the deposits that had been converted into pesos.
The fall in the exchange rate led the authorities to renegotiate the monetary limits established with IMF, in order to expand margins for foreign-exchange purchase, although the Central Bank was aiming at an inflation-targeting scheme.
In the first quarter of 2003, GDP grew by just over 5% in relation to its depressed level of a year earlier; and increased revenue enabled the Government to easily meet its primary surplus targets.
Notwithstanding clear signs of normalization in the economy, the deep crisis left visible scars.
The large number of problems requiring solution comprised a very full agenda for the elected authorities that took office in late May.
The new administration maintained the existing general policy criteria, and the Minister of Economic Affairs was confirmed in his post.
The Government made the promotion of social mobility one of its broad goals, by pursuing an economic growth path free from major fluctuations.
On the fiscal front, emphasis was placed on bringing public accounts into balance, although the Government was expected to be more active in the infrastructure domain and attached special importance to improving tax compliance.
The authorities pledged to allocate funds to service the public debt, following a negotiation adapting obligations to payment capacity; and new negotiations were initiated with IMF with a view to reaching a medium-term agreement.
The crisis not only called into question a specific set of measures and instruments, but at times even put the basic institutions of economic policy at stake.
The treatment of loans and deposits generated serious conflicts between the executive and judicial branches, in the midst of a highly damaging loss of credibility in economic policies.
Nonetheless, in the 2003 electoral campaign a majority of voters agreed on the need to maintain exchange-rate flexibility and to act prudently in fiscal and monetary management.
In 2002, the public-sector primary surplus was restored as a percentage of GDP, in the midst of deep depression.
Primary expenditure was cut by 1.7% of GDP: payroll and social-security outlays declined as a result of lower real wages; and capital expenditure retreated sharply.
Tax receipts as a percentage of GDP also declined in 2002 and continued to plunge in early 2003, Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 139 registering a first-quarter fall of over 15% in nominal terms compared to the same period in 2001.
The primary balance of the national government, which had already been in deficit during the preceding months, became strongly negative.
Revenue from levies on domestic activity (VAT and the tax on banking transactions) also gradually recovered.
In the early months of 2003, government expenditure was kept under control while income grew steadily.
In particular, revenue collected from taxes on profits and personal assets, on which adjustments for price rises were not allowed, increased substantially.
In the first quarter of the year, the national government primary surplus came in at close to 2% of GDP, and a primary surplus of 2.5% of GDP is forecast for the year as a whole (2.1% for the national public sector, and 0.4% for the provinces).
The conversion of liabilities from dollars into pesos had repercussions on the public debt.
The “pesification” of certain government liabilities, particularly with the banks, lowered their value in dollar terms.
Amounts paid to compensate the banks for asymmetries in the conversion of deposits and loans, and the issuance of securities to savers who opted to trade-in their reprogrammed deposits, worked in the opposite direction.
Despite repayments on loans with multilateral agencies, the outstanding debt of the national government expanded to US$ 155 billion in 2002 –an extremely high figure in relation to GDP.
Operations that would increase liabilities still further were held back, including: the transfer of provincial debts to national government; the issuance of securities to banks and savers; and recognition of debts owed to public employees and pensioners, in compliance with court rulings against the nominal cuts in wages and pensions that had been applied.
Monetary and financial conditions were clearly atypical during the convertibility-breakdown period; and while order was subsequently restored particularly on the monetary front, credit-market operations remained far from normal.
In the closing months of 2001, both the provinces and the national government issued large amounts of bonds in small denominations as means of payment.
At the end of that year, the Government imposed restrictions on cash withdrawals from banks and the transfer of funds abroad, but this failed to lift the pressure being felt in the foreign-exchange market.
On the contrary, transaction costs rose steeply, which hurt the informal segments of the economy in particular.
All of this helped to foment the protests that led to the government’s demise in December 2001.
Initially the Government decided to adopt a dual foreign-exchange market: one for commercial operations at an exchange rate of 1.4 pesos per dollar; and another operating with a floating rate, albeit subject to controls.
The conversion of bank loans and deposits into pesos gave rise to lengthy discussions and heavy pressures, which resulted in different conversion rates being applied on deposits (1.4 pesos per dollar) and loans (one to one).
Limits on cash withdrawals (known as the “corralito”) were maintained, and “pesified” debts were rescheduled (the so-called “corralón”).
One way or another, the crisis did not lead to many bank closures, the most notable cases being a few foreign-owned institutions which suddenly decided to pull out of the country.
Nonetheless, the configuration and functioning of the financial system continued to be called into question.
The monetary and financial upheaval generated glaring imbalances, which made it hard to interpret the movements of monetary aggregates.
In the first quarter of 2002, the monetary base expanded sharply, since domestic credit creation more than compensated for the loss of reserves.
Massive rediscounts were granted to overcome liquidity shortages in the banking sector, and the Central Bank stepped up its lending to the Government.
The deposit conversion process resulted in liquid peso assets growing by over 70%, while the circulation of quasi-monies also expanded rapidly.
During this period, signs of excess money supply and severe liquidity shortage existed side by side, and there was strong pressure on the currency market.
As foreign-currency sales at the fixed exchange rate were few and far between, the official market was abandoned shortly after its creation.
While conversion at 1.4 pesos to the dollar increased the domestic purchasing power of “pesified” funds, savers viewed the measure as a serious and unfair attack on their contractual right to receive dollars.
For several months, virtually no new deposits were taken or loans granted.
At one point, a compulsory swap for government bonds was proposed, but the idea was never implemented.
This episode was one of the 140 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean factors leading to the replacement of the economic team in late March.
In the ensuing months, voluntary swap operations were accepted by a fraction of depositors, but many of them continued to insist on receiving dollars.
Despite a ongoing climate of extreme tension, the monetary chaos gradually subsided.
Efforts were made to reduce the practice of granting rediscounts and credits to the Government; and the Central Bank began to issue bills, which suggested the existence of some demand for interestbearing assets denominated in pesos.
The authorities also sold reserves in the foreign-currency market, and this served to restrain the monetary base, which remained more or less constant throughout the second quarter.
Price rises and the reduction in the aggregate volume of saving deposits reduced the real value of money balances, but from then on the demand for money was sustained.
In the following months, as domestic credit creation by the Central Bank remained limited, there was no liquidity overhang in pesos putting pressure on the foreign-currency market.
The easing of monetary tensions gradually made itself felt in the latter part of 2002 and the early months of 2003.
With the effect of the “corralito” fading, the lifting of the corresponding restrictions had no consequences.
Moreover, stronger demand for liquidity made it possible to increase reserves while the exchange-rate was falling, At the same time the issuance of quasi-monies was suspended, and in mid2003 the Government announced it would buy back the corresponding securities.
In addition, voluntary demand for fixed-term deposits was being restored little by little, at interest rates that dropped from about 5% per month in mid-2002 to around 1% in June 2003.
During 2002, the nominal value of loans extended to the private sector fell by 40%, to represent less than 10% of GDP by the end of the period.
In the last few months of the year the Central Bank actively intervened to sustain the dollar price, in the face of an excess supply of foreign currency.
The first half of 2003 saw a significant nominal appreciation in the peso, despite a relaxation of restrictions on currency purchase.
Following output reductions in the previous three years of recession, the 10.9% slump recorded in 2002 was the steepest for several decades.
In addition to a drastic reduction in the volume of production, the abrupt real depreciation of the local currency slashed per capita GDP to US$ 2,700, having peaked at over US$ 8,000 just a few years earlier.
The drop in activity levels in the first quarter of 2002 was steeper than that recorded in the second half of 2001 and proved to be the floor of the contraction.
The monthly indicator of economic activity for January-May 2003 posted a rise of 6.1% in relation to the same period a year earlier, and GDP is forecast to grow by just over 5% in 2003 as a whole.
Private consumption fell more steeply than GDP (-15%), reflecting income loss especially among the poorest groups, compounded by pessimism about the future and crippling liquidity constraints.
In addition, fixed investment collapsed (-36%) to reach levels unseen since the early 1990s.
The downward trend levelled out in early 2002, after which there were signs of a tentative recovery in construction, especially in activities such as repair and maintenance, and in locally produced machinery, particularly for the agricultural sector.
As a result of the massive 50% collapse in import volumes and a slight expansion in exports (0.2%), the trade surplus grew to over 7.5% of GDP measured in constant prices.
Given the sharp rise in the real exchange rate, this represented a very substantial 15% of current GDP.
The national saving rate in current prices rose by over five percentage points of GDP, while the investment rate slipped by nearly five points.
These turnrounds reflected the large volume of resources spent in accumulating net external claims, and the extent of “over-adjustment” in the domestic economy stemming from those movements.
Aggregate sectoral results posted widespread reductions, although these were relatively slight in the primary sector.
Despite the decline of agricultural output overall, the 2001/2002 grain harvest was a record.
Part of the harvest was held back by producers, as a way of Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 141 saving without having to make use of the banks.
There was a significant increase in the share of soybeans in the total grain harvest (40%), and this trend continued into the 2002/2003 season.
Cattle prices rose in relation to domestic price indices, but fell in comparison to grain prices.
In 2002, the total slaughter was maintained at about 11.5 million head.
A large percentage of meat sales were sent to export markets, and progress was made in controlling foot and mouth disease.
Dairy activity suffered difficulties arising from higher costs and weaker demand both domestically and from Brazil.
Manufacturing activity declined by over 10% in 2002, while construction shrank by 33%.
The fall in manufacturing industry was widespread, apart from certain sectors producing intermediate goods (steel, paper and chemicals, particularly those used in agriculture).
The reduction in manufacturing activity as a whole was very pronounced during the early months of 2002, reflecting the impact of sagging demand and financial upheaval.
Nonetheless, the effects of the gradual normalization of domestic transactions as firms began to generate funds, supported by price incentives to substitute imported products, started to make themselves felt from mid-year onwards.
First-semester industrial output was 17% above its rock-bottom level of a year earlier.
There was also a very pronounced upturn, albeit again from extremely low levels, in importsubstituting activities such as heavy engineering (excluding the automotive sector) and textiles.
The production of widely used intermediate goods and construction materials grew at a more sedate pace.
During 2002 the services sector posted significant reductions in commerce and related activities (-16%) and in financial intermediation.
The electricity and transport sectors also receded, albeit to a lesser degree.
Although prices rose sharply in 2002, this did not develop into a full-blown inflationary process.
The way price increases were distributed reflected the steep rise in the real exchange rate.
The imported and agriculturalproduct components of the wholesale price index rose by about 200% and 170%, respectively, during the year.
Movements in the consumer price index (CPI) were less pronounced: a cumulative 40% rise during the year, with smaller increases among services.
Food, beverage and clothing prices rose by about 58%, nearly twenty points above the overall index.
The easing of price increases over time was reflected in a CPI rise of under 5% (annualized) between September 2002 and June 2003.
Nominal wages grew much more slowly than prices, with the average wage earned by social-security contributors rising by less than 9% in 2002.
Although the Government decreed fixed-sum pay rises for the private sector during the year, compliance seems to have been only partial.
In July 2003, the Government raised the minimum wage to 250 pesos and plans to further increase it by 10 pesos each month until the end of the year, by which time it would stand at 300 pesos –50% higher than a year earlier.
Employment declined on average for the year, despite a sharp increase in the number of persons employed through official employment plans which encompassed about 4% of the economically active population.
These included a subsidy plan for male and female household heads, which managed to cover nearly 2 million people, some of whom provided labour services in return.
Surveys conducted in October revealed recoveries in both employment and labour-market participation, with the unemployment rate edging down to around 18%.
In the fourth quarter, the number of jobs declared to the social security system was almost 9% down from a year earlier.
By May 2003, the unemployment rate had eased back to 15.6%, nearly six percentage points lower than Although partly mitigated by the expansion of assistance schemes, the contraction in employment and drop in real wages, especially in terms of the basic consumption basket, caused poverty and indigence indicators to deteriorate sharply.
In October 2002, nearly 40 million people were living below the poverty line, with 6.6 million in conditions of indigence.
The demise of the convertibility regime in 2001 was accompanied by massive private capital flight, which overwhelmed the emergency funding provided by international organizations.
During the first half of 2002 in particular, following the collapse of the fixed exchange-rate regime, private capital flowed out of the country in large amounts while international bodies called in their loans; both the Government and the private sector fell into debt service arrears.
The net capital outflow was matched by a loss of reserves, concentrated 142 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean during the initial months of the year, and a sizeable current account surplus –even including total accrued interest, the service of which was interrupted by a suspension of payments.
In 2002, direct investment flows dwindled, and the private sector suspended bond flotations, having accumulated arrears in debt service despite making amortization payments.
Private-sector operations resulted in a net fund outflow on the order of 12% of GDP, about two thirds of this being recorded in the first half of the year.
Domestic residents accumulated foreign assets in a variety of forms, including a considerable increase in foreign-currency holdings.
During the final months of 2002 and early 2003, the net balance of private-sector financial flows remained negative but shrank significantly in amount.
Net amortization of loans with international agencies accounted for about 30% of the deficit on the capital account in 2002, and was equivalent to over 3% of GDP.
The non-financial public sector accumulated arrears in its external debt service of about US$ 8 billion, which added to existing liabilities.
The external debt of the public sector grew slightly while private-sector debt shrank, so the total debt diminished somewhat in absolute terms, despite multiplying several times as a proportion of GDP.
The value of exports fell by 3.5%, in the wake of lower prices.
Part of this variation may have reflected under-invoicing, following the imposition of export duties and currency-surrender requirements.
The reduction in export values was concentrated in fuels and manufactured products.
There were a number of contradictory forces operating in the latter category: depreciation of the local currency and weak domestic demand stimulated the search for external markets; but the credit shortage constrained supply, while absorption of goods by other Mercosur members declined.
The region’s share of the country’s total sales continued to shrink, from 28% to 22% –its lowest level for a decade.
Among exports of agricultural origin, meat sales recovered thanks to a reopening of markets and an increase in the sales quota to the European Union (EU).
On the other hand, the total volume of grain exports shrank, affecting both cereals (wheat, maize and sorghum) and soybeans, while exports of oils and oilseeds increased.
Import values in c.i.f terms were sharply down on a widespread basis, with particularly steep reductions in capital and consumption goods –about 70% in both cases.
Equipment purchases fell to slightly over US$ 1 billion, just 15% of the value recorded four years earlier.
There was also a substantial reduction in the value of intermediate goods purchased abroad (- 45%).
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 143 The Bolivian economy posted a 2.7% expansion in 2002, in a context of sluggish household demand, political uncertainty and faltering exports.
In the first quarter of 2003, gross domestic product (GDP) expanded by just 1.4%, reflecting continued slackness in household consumption compounded by the social disturbances that occurred in February.
These growth figures meant a fourth straight year with no improvement in per capita GDP.
In 2002, the non-financial public sector (NFPS) registered a deficit of 8.9% of GDP.
Although a major part of this balance reflected the pension deficit resulting from the 1997 reform, its deterioration was largely due to increases in public spending at a time of low activity levels and a drop in hydrocarbon taxes.
In the agreement signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the Government set an NFPS deficit of 6.5% of GDP as its fiscal target for 2003; and although the deficit continued to worsen through January-May 2003, the fiscal measures adopted following the signing of the agreement seem to have achieved the aim of curtailing expenditure growth and boosting revenues.
As a result of the bank runs that occurred in mid2002 and again in February 2003, the Central Bank injected large amounts of liquidity into the system.
Nonetheless, 2002 ended with a contraction in both bank deposits and loans.
The bank runs temporarily pushed up interest rates throughout the financial system, but these tended to fall back again during the second quarter of 2003.
Even so, credit remains flat, while the nonperforming portfolio of the banking system has grown substantially during the period, to stand at 19.4% in May Inflation remained at a low level, despite rising the 12 months ending June 2003, mainly as a result of the depreciation of the local currency against the dollar during 2002.
This devaluation did not prevent a small real effective appreciation of the boliviano, however, given the sharp depreciations experienced by the currencies of Bolivia’s trading partners during the course of the year.
In 2003 it proved possible to slow the nominal rate of devaluation since the Argentine peso and the Brazilian real both strengthened.
Higher international prices for tin and soya, together with access to the United States market under that country’s Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA), could potentially boost exports in 2003, and this would have a positive impact on demand.
In contrast, the future of natural gas production for export remains uncertain because of domestic conditions in the Brazilian energy market.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit widened from 3.4% to 4.3% of GDP in 2002, mainly reflecting a deteriorating trade balance.
Financing equivalent to 3.8% of GDP was required during the year, since capital flight amounting to 8.9% of GDP, reported as errors and omissions, almost entirely absorbed the surplus of 9.5% of GDP achieved on the capital and financial account.
In the latter year, public-sector spending excluding pensions increased in nominal terms, while revenues shrank.
Relative to GDP, revenue slipped by 2.9 percentage points, while expenditure declined by just 0.9 points.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 145 On the expenditure side, outlays in the personal services category increased, mainly as a result of publicsector wage hikes and other current expenditures.
On the other hand, purchases of goods and services decreased from 8.6% to 6.5% of GDP, in the wake of privatization of the petroleum product wholesale division of Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Bolivianos (YPFB).
Capital expenditure grew by 6.3%, as a result of an increase in public-sector investment and continuation of the National Emergency Employment Plan (PLANE); but relative to GDP its share was unchanged at 8.5%.
In 2002, 71% of the fiscal deficit was financed by external borrowing, with disbursements amounting to US$ 527 million.
Public-sector external debt was unchanged at 55% of GDP, of which the medium- and long-term component decreased from US$ 4.412 billion to US$ 4.3 billion, mainly thanks to reductions granted by the Paris Club, and relief obtained under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative.
This meant a change in the composition of the debt: amounts owed to multilateral lenders grew by 11.4%, whereas bilateral debt shrank by 38%.
The domestic public-sector debt stock expanded by 2.5 percentage points of GDP, rising from US$ 1.975 billion to US$ 2.17 billion, mainly as a result of bond placements in AFPs.
A major portion of the external debt, unlike its domestic counterpart, has a strong concessionary element.
In 2003, fiscal policy strove to comply with the terms of the standby arrangement with IMF approved in April, which set a public-sector deficit target of 6.5% of GDP (or 1.6% excluding pensions).
The programme envisages cuts in current expenditure along with several measures to enhance revenue collection and reduce evasion, including the introduction of a new code of tax procedures, and changes in the method for calculating petroleum product prices.
As part of the latter, the Government eliminated the “refining margin” (one of the components of the final price of petroleum products), which has boosted revenue collected from the hydrocarbons tax in 2003.
Nonetheless, elimination of the refining margin submission of the new tax code bill to Congress and efforts to reduce unnecessary (fraudulent) pension spending, are proof of the government’s determination to meet its fiscal targets, even though this probably means cutting back on non-essential public investment.
Total expenditure grew by 10.2%, driven by a 14.8% increase in spending on personal services and higher interest payments on sovereign debt.
Total income expanded by just 3%, largely reflecting the weak performance of the hydrocarbons tax in the first quarter of the year and a reduction in customs revenue, despite a robust trend in receipts from hydrocarbon sales.
For 2003, the Government has budgeted public investment totalling 4.88 billion bolivianos, much of which is earmarked for highway infrastructure.
Interbank interest rates in dollars climbed from 0.9% per year in March 2002 to 8.3% by August, as result of the mid-year run on deposits, after which they gradually dropped to a new floor of 1.5% in January 2003.
In the following month, a new bank run pushed rates up to 3.9%, before falling back once more.
The Bolivian financial sector is highly dollarized: in May 2003, 91% of deposits held by the public were denominated in that currency.
The Government has adopted a policy of promoting financial intermediation in local currency, to facilitate monetary policy management and strengthen the role of BCB as lender 1 Gas exports are very important from the fiscal standpoint, with royalties in 2002 amounting to 1.3 billion bolivianos (2.3% of GDP).
The firms pay royalties on the value of gas produced, but amounts exported to Brazil in 2002 under the gas export contract signed between Petrobrás and YPFB were less than the minimum volumes the Brazilian firm had agreed to purchase, under the “take or pay” clause.
Petrobrás is paying for this minimum volume although effectively there is no demand for gas, so the Bolivian State does not receive royalties today on the gas that Petrobrás pays for but does not consume (since the firms do not extract it).
This situation is likely to be repeated in 2003. 146 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Net interest and earnings Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 147 of last resort, thus making the financial sector less vulnerable to a bank run.
The introduction of an inflationlinked unit of account (UFV) is intended to support this aim, with the idea of promoting financial operations denominated in UFV rather than dollars.
Up to mid2003, however, banking and financial operations in UFV were virtually non-existent.
The run on deposits in mid-2002 caused serious difficulties in the financial system, such that the year ended with a 13% fall in total bank deposits.
Bank lending had also not fully recovered: the loan portfolio was 0.9% smaller in May 2003 than in the previous December, with a cumulative reduction of 5.9% since May 2002.
Deposits and credit both expanded slightly between March and May 2003, however.
The non-performing portfolio of the banking system continued its upward trend of recent years, rising from 4.6% in December 1998 to 19.9% in May 2003.
During the past year, prudential standards have been altered: an increase in the value of collateral was included for provisioning purposes; loan rescheduling was permitted with no deterioration in risk rating; and the arrears accounting criterion was amended to exclude loans that are less than 30 days overdue.
Since late 2001, the nominal interest-rate for borrowing in dollars has trended downwards (from 13.7% in January 2002 to 9.9% in May 2003), while the nominal deposit rate in that currency has held steady around 2.2% per year.
Both rates rose temporarily (in particular the deposit rate) during the bank run of July and August 2002, and the lending rate rose again during the events of February 2003.
Low interest rates on dollar deposits have meant cheap funds for the banks, and the substitution of resources obtained abroad at higher cost and shorter maturities.
The two recent bank runs highlighted the need for a strong and stable financial system, since banking-sector deposits and loans have both been contracting steadily since 1998, and problems of arrears in a shrinking portfolio exacerbate systemic risk.
It is therefore worth highlighting the government’s pledge to reduce the vulnerability of the system through incentives to use local currency in financial transactions, improvements in supervision and problem-solving, and an expansion of mechanisms for accessing liquidity.
In 2002, the nominal devaluation of the boliviano against the dollar amounted 9.5%, implying a real depreciation of 9.9%; but the currency also appreciated in real terms by 56.2% against the Argentine peso and by 21.6% against the Brazilian real during the same period.
Thus, events occurring in Mercosur mainly explain why the real effective boliviano exchange rate strengthened by 4.6% during the period, despite a sharp real devaluation in dollar terms.
In 2003, the nominal devaluation of the boliviano against the United States currency has been much slower (1.4% between December 2002 and May 2003), owing to the appreciation of the Argentine and Brazilian currencies against the dollar.
The real depreciation of the boliviano against its most important trading partners raised its real effective exchange rate by 10.3% during the period, and in June 2003 it was at its highest level (devaluation) since 1995. 3.
The main variables Growth in 2002 was hampered by the sluggishness of private-sector domestic demand, compounded by political uncertainty and a cooling of demand both worldwide and in neighbouring countries.
GDP grew by 2.7%, boosted by construction (which expanded by 14.2%) and hydrocarbons production (6.5%, mainly gas), which in turn provided positive stimulus to transport and communications (5.1%, especially gas pipelines).
Public administration services grew by 3.2%, reflecting higher levels of public spending.
During the first quarter of 2003, output grew by just 1.4%, partly reflecting the events of February that year.
Moderate growth is expected for the year as a whole –driven mainly by exports, given the depressed state of private consumption and budget constraints on public-sector investment.
On the demand side, public-sector consumption growth picked up from 2.5% in 2001 to 3.3% in 2002, while private consumption continued to expand at about 3.7% per year.
Gross fixed capital formation grew by 10.9%, thereby partially reversing the previous year’s slippage of 19.7%.
In the first quarter of 2003, government consumption rose by 3.6%, in contrast to the sluggishness of household consumption (0.1%).
Soya production is looking good for 2003 thanks to this year’s bumper harvest and the high prices prevailing in the first half of 2003.
During the first quarter, agriculture, hunting, forestry and fishing grew by 3.3%.
The Government is projecting 3.5% growth in the agribusiness products sector (which includes soya) for 2003 as a whole.
Export-oriented manufacturing is also likely to be buoyant this year, particularly industrial soya production, whose subproducts are displaying strong prices as of mid-2003.
The Government also projects an upturn in the production of textile, leather and wood (furniture) products, following Bolivia’s inclusion in the agreement contained in the United States Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act, whereby the country obtains preferential access to the United States market in return for collaboration in the fight against drugs.
To gain the benefit from these tariff preferences, the Government adopted measures such as fiscal credits to encourage capital goods imports and investment in industrial infrastructure, postponement of VAT payments on capital good imports, and inclusion of replacement parts and pieces in the list of capital goods subject to a zero tariff.
During the first quarter of 2003, the manufacturing sector Hydrocarbons extraction fell by 0.1% during the first three months of 2003.
For the remainder of the year, investment in this sector is likely to be below its 2002 level, while doubts are dispelled surrounding the future trend of the Brazilian energy market and the project for exporting liquefied natural gas to California.
In the case of construction, sectoral output fell by 7.9% in the first quarter of 2003 relative to the same period a year earlier, and by 42.2% compared to the fourth quarter of 2002. b) Prices, wages and employment Consumer price inflation in Bolivia came in at 2.5% in 2002, above the 0.9% recorded in 2001.
The rate was very low or negative during the first half of the year, but gathered pace from July onwards, partly reflecting the devaluation of the boliviano against the dollar.
The low rate of inflation in tradable goods during 2002 can be 150 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean attributed to the sharp devaluation of the Argentine and Brazilian currencies, which made goods imported from these two countries cheaper in dollar terms, although the 9.8% devaluation of the boliviano against the United States currency partly mitigated this effect.
Cumulative twelve-month inflation amounted to 3.2% as of June 2003, and the Government is projecting a rate of 2.8% for the year as a whole.
There are at least three reasons why inflation is likely to stay low in 2003.
Firstly, the most buoyant sectors of the economy are oriented towards commodity exports (soya, hydrocarbons) and have little impact on domestic employment and prices.
Secondly, if fiscal revenue fails to grow sufficiently to fulfil the agreement on drawing rights, the Government will probably be forced to underexecute budgeted public expenditure, thereby restraining aggregate demand.
Lastly, the rate of devaluation against the dollar is expected to be less than in the previous year.
The urban employment rate slipped from drop in the number of persons employed, while the working-age population expanded by 2.8%.
The urban open unemployment rate only edged up from 8.5% in 2001 to 8.7% in 2002, because the reduction in the number of people employed was partly offset by a 1.6% decrease in the economically active population.
This trend affected female workers in particular: the number of women in employment fell by 4.7%, and their urban open unemployment rate rose from 9.7% to 10.3%.
During 2003 it will be hard to achieve sufficient growth in formal employment to absorb the large number of people joining the labour force, considering the limited demand for labour in the most dynamic sectors, which tend to be either capital-intensive (hydrocarbons, industrial soya production) or natural-resource intensive (the soybean agricultural sector).
Sectors with jobcreating potential include services and public works, in addition to textiles, leather goods and furniture manufacture –in the latter case assuming growth in exports encompassed by the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act.
The current account deficit of the balance of payments widened in 2002 (4.3% of GDP) compared to 2001 (3.4%), reflecting a worsening trade performance.
Imports grew by 3.7%, partly reflecting purchases of capital goods to build the Yacuiba-Río Grande gas pipeline and for other natural-gas investment projects, while exports expanded by just 2%.
The capital and financial account posted a surplus equivalent to 9.5% of output, thanks to net FDI inflows amounting to 8.4% of GDP.
The latter consisted of investments of US$ 979 million, less disinvestments and outward investment abroad amounting to US$ 325 million.
Of total FDI inflows, 70.5% was channelled into activities relating to the extraction and transport of natural gas.
Errors and omissions registered a negative balance of 8.9% of GDP, representing the capital flight provoked by the mid-2002 bank run.
Consequently, the current account deficit was largely financed by drawing down international reserves.
During the first quarter of 2003, the current account deficit narrowed, mainly because export values grew faster than imports.
The latter are expected to grow little during the year because of the real depreciation of the boliviano against the Argentine and Brazilian currencies, compounded by sluggish domestic demand and fewer imports for the construction of gas pipelines.
Bolivian exports are heavily concentrated in three product groups: hydrocarbons (particularly natural gas); minerals; and soya and related products (such as soybean oil and residue cake).
Overall, these categories account for about three quarters of the country’s exports.
The value of hydrocarbon exports rose by 14.3% in 2002, while external sales of natural gas, mainly to Brazil, grew by 10.9% to reach US$ 266 million and account for 20% of total foreign sales.
Growth of these exports in the short run is subject to the terms of the contract signed between YPFB and Petrobrás in 1996; in the longer term, their performance also depends on implementation of the Pacific LNG project for exporting liquefied natural gas to Baja California.
Gas exports grew in volume terms during 2002, although their price fell slightly.
Even so, exports to Brazil (10.3 million m3/day on average) were less than the 14.3 million m3/day that Petrobrás had undertaken to purchase in the take-orpay clause of the signed contract.
The Bolivian and Brazilian governments are currently discussing this issue, bearing in mind that the volume of gas to be acquired by Petrobrás under this clause rises to 18.45 million m3 per day in 2003.
In the first quarter of 2003, the value of natural gas exports increased by 19.7%, thanks to sharply higher prices, while volume rose by just 5.1% to 11.9 million m3 daily.
The value of mineral exports grew by just 1.4% in 2002, with varied performance across the different minerals.
While gold, silver, tin and led exports all increased, zinc sales fell back.
In January-April 2003, mineral exports expanded by a further 17.2%, as a result of strong performances in silver, zinc and tin.
Prospects are good for the remainder of the year, for although gold production is forecast to decrease in the short term its price is expected to remain strong.
The price of tin could continue to trend upwards in response to global supply Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 151 and demand factors; but zinc prices are set to remain low until demand from industrialized countries recovers.
Exports of soybeans and subproducts increased by 15.6% in 2002, and will continue to grow on the back of this year’s strong harvest and the prevailing attractive prices.
The total value of imports fell by 5.6% during the first quarter of 2003; consumer goods imports declined by 17.9%, while those of raw materials and intermediate products dropped by 12.7%, despite higher fuel prices.
Economic policy was accordingly geared to regaining the confidence of financial markets and keeping inflation in check, which forced the authorities to apply very tight monetary and fiscal measures.
These actions, together with the end of the uncertainty surrounding the election, made it possible to stem the speculative attack, especially when the new government took office in 2003.
However, this tight policy dampened the level of activity, which again posted modest growth (1.4%); the rate for 2003 is expected to approximate the levels of the past two years.
Over the course of 2002 Brazil’s country risk soared to 2,200 basis points, eventually causing its external debt instruments to be traded at only 48% of their face value.
This loss of confidence shut off the inflow of new resources, generating pressure on the foreign-exchange market and driving the exchange rate up by 62% over its level of late 2001.
This external shock also hit the local financial markets, mainly because some of the country’s domestic public debt instruments were indexed to the exchange rate.
As of late 2001 these instruments already represented nearly 30% of the total, or almost 10% of GDP.
Net public debt thus reached the equivalent of over 60% of GDP in September 2002, when the crisis reached its height.
These changes took place primarily in the last quarter of 2002 (6.6% of the change in consumer prices and 17.5% of the change in wholesale prices).
The situation was further complicated by the effects of higher international prices for fuel and certain agricultural exports and by public utility rate increases, particularly electricity surcharges reflecting the costs of 154 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean the power rationing that became necessary in 2001 and lasted into 2002.
A record primary fiscal surplus (equivalent to 6% of GDP) and an austere monetary policy (which raised the benchmark interest rate to 26.5% annually) demonstrated the government’s commitment to fighting inflation.
Thanks to the currency’s revaluation and to renewed confidence in macroeconomic management, inflation gradually subsided over the first six months of 2003, with both consumer and wholesale prices showing deflation in June.
For the year as a whole, inflation is expected to be close to the target of 8.5%.
Nevertheless, both expectations of faster growth in 2003 and the possibility of raising wages and reducing unemployment were sacrificed for the sake of maintaining this tight economic policy.
Likewise, unemployment is projected to show little progress, ranging between 11% and 12% of the economically active population (EAP).
Lastly, the uncertainty that emerged in 2002 and the country’s austere fiscal and monetary policies have led to the deferral of investment, which has prolonged the difficulties faced by sectors such as construction.
The government is hoping that a growth-friendly virtuous circle will re-emerge once the country’s credibility in financial markets has been restored and low inflation has been achieved.
Economic projections for 2003 are hampered by uncertainty as to the international context and, especially, the decisions to be taken by the monetary authorities with regard to interest rates and the possibility of easing fiscal policy, since the primary surplus target of 4.25% of GDP has already been exceeded.
In 2002 economic policy had to respond to increasing pressure from abroad, but without exerting too adverse an effect on the level of activity, employment and public finances.
The authorities opted to maintain the currency float but also to regulate foreign-exchange transactions in the financial system.
The central bank is to provide support for maintaining credit lines for foreign trade.
Moreover, the agreement with the International Monetary Fund was expanded in terms of both the amount and the term of the credit to be provided, which was extended to September 2003.
The consequent increase in available resources (US$ 30 billion) will be more than enough to finance the current-account deficit.
In 2002 the authorities sought to ensure that fiscal and monetary policy reacted only to actual changes and not to temporary shocks.
In the face of severe financial turmoil, the consolidated public sector’s primary surplus target was raised from 3.5% of GDP in 2001 to 3.8% in 2002, but the actual surplus amounted to nearly 4%.
Tax increases boosted receipts to a record high, equivalent to 35.9% of GDP.
Public-sector financing needs, including the impact of the devaluation on total dollar-indexed domestic debt, reached 10.3% of GDP, their highest level since 1995.
The larger volume of available resources enabled the federal government to increase spending in real terms; the increases were concentrated primarily in social security payments, health care, targeted poverty reduction programmes and compensation to the states for maintaining federal highways.
One of the main outcomes of this policy was the generation of a sizeable primary surplus between January and April (6.5% of GDP), which nearly exceeded the six-month target agreed upon with IMF.
Between January and April, federal government outlays on other current expenditure (excluding payroll expenses, social security benefits, unemployment insurance and subsidies) and capital expenditure fell by 10% in nominal terms.
In addition, steps were taken to control the growth of other expenditure.
For the second year in a row the original inflation target (5.5% for the year) could not be met.
Total income expanded by 14.5% in nominal terms, but income as a percentage of GDP fell by 1.8 percentage points, mainly because pension funds and other taxpayers finished making extraordinary income tax payments to the government.
Not until October did the central bank begin to react to price pressures by raising the rate, first to 21% and then, in December, to 25%.
The delay in using the interest rate as a policy instrument was due in part to problems in addressing external shocks.
Apart from the currency devaluation, at the end of the first half of the year the central bank changed the financial market’s operating procedures.
Those two changes prompted investors to adjust their portfolios by withdrawing resources from public securities transactions and showing a preference for liquid assets and foreign currency.
Accordingly, beginning in June 2002 the monetary base expanded rapidly (by 7.8% that month) and continued to do so until October.
The flight to liquidity triggered by uncertainty was reflected in the growing daily availability of resources on the overnight market.
After having shown a balanced daily position in April, excess liquidity reached nearly 10 billion reais in May, 20 billion in July and over 50 billion in October (equivalent to 80% of the monetary base).
To soften the impact of the large volume of resources in circulation, the central bank issued securities with a swap option whereby they could be linked to either the interest rate or the exchange rate and took steps to raise the amount of banks’ mandatory deposits with the monetary authority.
In June and August the central bank raised reserve requirements on savings and time deposits to 20% and 15%, respectively, with higher requirements for amounts exceeding US$ 100 million.
These additional requirements can raise the mandatory deposit as high as 30% for savings deposits and 23% for time deposits.
In the initial months of 2003 the central bank gained greater control over monetary management.
As the country regained access to external financial markets and was even able to float a new sovereign bond issue, investors began to show more confidence in domestic public debt.
At the same time, the proportion of dollar-indexed domestic public debt fell from 36.4% of the total in January to 30.4% in April.
Moreover, the increase in the benchmark interest rate to 26.5% signalled the firmness of the central bank’s commitment to controlling demand as a means of softening the impact of the 2002 devaluation.
The authorities also turned once again to reserve requirements as a way of reducing liquidity, raising the rate on sight deposits from 45% to 60%, with an immediate impact on the bank multiplier.
As a result of these measures, the supply of money and credit shrank considerably.
In addition, the banking system cut back the supply of credit, since the total amount of credit in April represented 23.3% of GDP, compared to 26.8% a year earlier.
As the rate fell by 10% in the final quarter, the year ended with a cumulative increase of 52%.
This was higher than the 49% variation registered in 1999, when the free float had been introduced.
Net capital inflows dropped sharply in 2002, especially from the second quarter onward, with the withdrawal of portfolio investments and the non-renewal of notes and other lines of credit, including, for the first time, commercial credit lines.
On the supply side, the government negotiated an extension of its agreement with the International Monetary Fund, which had been set to expire in December 2002.
Under the extension, in addition to the resources already agreed upon, a credit line of up to US$ 30 billion was granted, which will be available to Brazil up until September 2003.
While this amount has been paid out in instalments in line with the performance of economic policy, it will, in all likelihood, be more than enough to finance the projected current-account deficit.
The build-up of reserves enabled the central bank to offer directly to the market limited amounts of foreign exchange and credit lines to sustain trade flows.
On the demand side, in view of the climate of uncertainty surrounding the elections and the depressed level of economic activity, the central bank took action to shore up liquidity in the economy with measures to offset the monetary impact of foreign-exchange outflows.
At the same time, it endeavoured to raise the cost of currency speculation by setting limits on foreignexchange transactions and reserve requirements on bank liabilities.
Once the election was over, the orderly transition made it possible to control the devaluation spiral.
Moreover, currency speculation was further reined in by the consolidation of the merchandise trade surplus, which afforded the foreign-exchange market more liquidity.
In the first six months of 2003 the real’s value in relation to the dollar climbed by 14%, reflecting increased inflows of external financing.
This has sparked an intense debate, since some analysts and even some authorities have pointed out that these inflows consist primarily of short-term capital and that their entry should therefore be more tightly controlled.
In addition, government authorities and some production sectors are worried about the falling exchange rate’s possible effect on export performance.
The real exchange rate’s 9.5% decline in the first half of 2003 has opened up a debate as to what the exchange rate’s equilibrium level should be to prevent it from compromising the export sector.
The tax reform proposal is limited in scope and focuses on three objectives: unifying and simplifying the laws on the state-administered tax on the circulation of goods and services, making the financial transactions tax permanent and seeking ways to reduce tax regressivity and tax accumulation.
The new social security reform proposal is aimed at making changes in the civil-service retirement and pension system over and above the changes introduced under the constitutional amendment adopted in 1998.
Its basic objective is to bring the amounts and conditions of retirement benefits in the public sector closer to those provided under the general regime (National Social Security Institute).
These proposals have been highly controversial and may therefore undergo major changes in the Congress.
The outlook for 2003 points to a growth rate similar to the ones posted for the past two years, of about 1.5%, although a degree of recovery is expected at the end of the year, driven by a probable reduction in interest rates.
Economic activity in 2002 would have been even more lethargic had it not been for the performance of external trade, since the volume of exports rose by 7.7% and the value of imports slid sharply (12.8%).
This outcome, which was mainly attributable to the combination of currency devaluation and economic recession, offset the 0.2% contraction in private consumption that resulted from the slump in workers’ real income and unfavourable terms for consumer credit.
Investors’ response to this situation was procyclical, prompted by high interest rates, the uncertainty surrounding the election, the drying-up of external capital inflows, the soaring exchange rate and, in the second half of the year, the rise in prices.
These factors brought gross fixed capital formation down by 4.1%, as the volume of capital goods imports plunged (18%) and construction activity retreated (2.5%).
This poor performance was observed throughout 2002, with little movement in the main economic aggregates.
The only significant change was in external trade, with respect to both imports (which dropped by 4.3% in the final quarter) and, especially, exports (which jumped by 25% between the second and third quarters).
As in 2001, in 2002 the different sectors contributing to GDP posted varying results.
Agriculture expanded by 5.8% and mining, by 10.4%, but manufacturing rose by only 1.9%, as intermediate goods increased by 3%, consumer goods stagnated and capital goods dipped by 1%.
The combination of a recessionary environment and strong export performance was still in evidence in 2003.
In the first quarter GDP stalled in comparison to the final Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 161 quarter of 2002, although consumption rose slightly.
Industry grew by 2.9% but suffered a setback in the second quarter.
The upshot was that industrial activity expanded by only 0.6% over the first five months in relation to the same period of the preceding year as a result of upturns in the mechanical and metallurgical industries and downturns in the electrical equipment, communications equipment, textile, clothing and footwear and pharmaceuticals industries.
In 2003 GDP growth is projected to border on 1.5%, mainly on the strength of an estimated 3.7% expansion in agriculture resulting from the production of 120 million tons of grain, representing a 23% increase over the previous year’s output.
Conversely, manufacturing and services will grow more slowly, at about 1.8% and 1.3%, respectively.
As in 2001, in 2002 the inflation targeting system did not guarantee favourable price trends.
The consumer price index rose by 12.5%, compared to a target of 6.5%.
This discrepancy was due mostly to the steep currency devaluation and also to the effects of administered prices (particularly for energy), higher fuel prices and dwindling expectations.
These factors had even more pronounced effects on wholesale prices, which surged by 35.4% in 2002, the biggest annual increase since 1999.
Prices for agricultural products, which are more sensitive to exchange-rate fluctuations, jumped by 47%, while manufactures prices increased by 31%.
One of the main outcomes of the new government’s economic policy in 2003 was the turnaround in inflation.
The marked slowdown in price increases was due largely to the local currency’s revaluation against the dollar.
After having risen by 3% in November 2002, prices showed slight deflation (-0.1%) in June 2003 and inflation for the year as a whole will probably drop down to a single digit, at just under 10%.
Thus, it is likely that the target will again be overshot, but to a lesser degree than in 2002.
The decline in inflation was even more dramatic in the case of wholesale prices, which went from a 7.5% rise in November 2002 to contractions of The labour market has not been a good one for workers, who suffered a 3.8% loss in real average remuneration over the course of 2002.
All categories of workers were affected, even those with higher levels of education.
Average unemployment reached 11.7% between March and December 2002, according to the new methodology used by the Brazilian Geographical and Statistical Institute (IBGE).
This high rate reflected large increases in both the working-age population (2.2%) and the workforce participation rate, which more than offset surprisingly strong job creation (1.7% in metropolitan areas).
Stalled GDP growth in the first quarter of 2003 led to a downturn in employment and income indicators.
Unemployment hit 12.4% in April, representing nearly 2.6 million jobless workers in the main metropolitan areas.
In March 2003 the wage bill and real average income were 5.6% and 6.4% lower, respectively, than they had been in March 2002.
In 2002 Brazil posted a merchandise trade surplus of US$ 13.1 billion, which was US$ 10.5 billion (2% of GDP) higher than the previous year’s surplus.
A surplus this size had not been achieved since the early 1980s, when high import barriers had brought about a comparable result.
The 2002 outcome was due, on the one hand, to the strong upswing in exports in the second half of the year, which more than offset the decline recorded in the first half; and, on the other, to the significant drop in the value of merchandise imports (15%) in comparison to the 2001 figure.
Consequently, the current-account deficit amounted to US$ 7.7 billion, which was one third the negative balance posted in 2001.
The upsurge in exports reflected a 9% increase in export volume, which offset the 5.5% drop in prices.
Commodities and semi-manufactures grew the fastest, while manufactures showed remarkable resilience: after falling steeply in the first half of the year, their volume increased by 17.8% in the second half and by 5.2% for the year as a whole.
Considerable declines were observed in the prices of coffee (11%), soybeans (3.4%), sugar (22.3%), cellulose Meanwhile, the drop-off in imports primarily reflected a 12% reduction in the volume traded.
The downturn was most pronounced in the case of consumer durables (38%) and capital goods (20%).
In 2003 the balance-of-payments out-turn was even better than the one achieved in 2002.
The overall balance for the first four months was positive and amounted to US$ 2.829 billion, whereas a deficit of US$ 2.882 billion had been posted in the same period of 2002.
This was attributable almost entirely to the performance of merchandise trade, which increased its surplus from US$ 1.5 billion between January and April 2002 to US$ 5.5 billion in the same period of 2003.
The deficit on the services account narrowed, likewise reflecting the effects of the currency devaluation and sluggish 162 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean economic growth.
The income account, however, was eroded by the considerable increase in profit and dividend remittances, which went from US$ 1.071 billion in the first four months of 2002 to US$ 1.595 billion in the same period of 2003.
At the end of the latter period it represented 0.6% of GDP –a big improvement over the 3.6% recorded in the same period of 2002 and, especially, the 4.7% recorded in 1999.
International reserves thus reached US$ 41.5 billion in April; however, after deducting the resources committed under the IMF agreement, available reserves totalled In the first five months of 2003 merchandise trade ran a surplus of US$ 8 billion, more than triple the surplus posted in the first five months of 2002.
Export value reached US$ 27.128 billion and import value, US$ 19.083 billion, which represented increases of 29% and 1%, respectively, over their levels in the same period of 2002.
Exports rose significantly in all product categories as increases were observed in both external prices and, especially, the volume of goods shipped.
Prices were up by 4.9%, with the biggest increases in commodities (6.4%) and semi-manufactures (12.2%).
Nonetheless, the larger merchandise trade surplus primarily reflected a 19.6% rise in export volume.
The value of commodity exports surged by 33.7% and that of manufactures exports, by 19.2%.
It should be pointed out that 31% of the expansion of total exports was accounted for by soybeans.
Some non-traditional exports –such as raw cotton, honey, marble, granite and fruit– also performed well, indicating a reasonable degree of export diversification.
An improvement was also observed in the geographical diversification of target markets for Brazilian exports.
Outstanding in this regard was the 230% increase in sales to China, which totalled US$ 1.7 billion, making that market the second most important for the country’s exports.
The rise in imports in the first five months of 2003 mainly reflected the fact that prices were 10% higher than they had been in the same period of 2002.
This overall increase was strongly influenced by the price hikes of 53% in fuels and lubricants, 7.2% in capital goods and 5.1% in intermediate goods.
Import volume dropped by 7.9%, with downturns in all categories, although the steepest slide was in capital goods (31%).
The biggest increases were seen in miscellaneous chemicals, agricultural products, petroleum and coal, and plastics.
The fact that import volume has continued to trend downward while industrial output has recovered since the end of 2002 and the real has appreciated in recent months is regarded by some analysts as a sign that an import substitution process is under way and that this process is most intensive in the case of capital goods.
The less rosy aspect of this phenomenon is that capital inflows by way of foreign investment have declined.
This means that the FDI-to-GDP ratio has dropped from 4.6% to just 1.9%.
In the same four months of 2003 portfolio investment amounted to US$ 1.257 billion, which is considerably lower than the US$ 3.649 billion recorded in the first four months of 2002.
Debt reduction has been most pronounced in the private sector, which has been forced to convert debt to investment in view of low external liquidity.
As of late 2002, the composition of external debt was as follows: non-financial public sector, 40%; private sector, 30%; short-term private debt, 10%; IMF debt, 9%; and financial public sector, 4%.
The traditional indicator ¯the debt-to-GDP ratio¯ categorically demonstrates that the country’s borrowing has always been very low, especially in comparison to that of other developing countries.
The debt-to-exports ratio is less auspicious, given the relatively limited value of external sales.
In 2002 this latter ratio was 3.77, which, though high, is considerably lower than the ratio of 5.03 recorded in The average maturity of medium- and long-term debt is 6.79 years.
Public-sector debt maturities average 9.65 years, while private-sector maturities average 4.06 years.
The cost of this debt is relatively low, at 7% to 8% a year.
Although inflation displayed seasonal fluctuations and was sensitive to oscillations in the exchange rate and the international price of oil and petroleum products, the rate for the year as a whole ended around 3%, broadly in line with the target set by the monetary authorities.
Since 2001, the worldwide economic slowdown, together with the regional crisis and heightened global risk, have conspired to dampen external trade, reduce capital inflows and worsen Chile’s terms of trade, which in 2002 failed to recoup the previous year’s deterioration of nearly 7%.
While merchandise exports expanded by over 44% between 1996 and 2002 in volume terms, the fact that prices dropped by almost 25% is a clear indication of how external conditions have deteriorated over the past few years.
The economy is showing signs of rallying, and GDP is forecast to grow by over 3.5% during the year as a whole.
The monthly indicator of economic activity rose by 3.2% between January and May with respect to the same period in 2002.
During the first four months of 2003, merchandise exports were up by 8.1% compared to the same period a year earlier, which marked the strongest percentage rise since 1999.
Exporters are banking on this rate of growth lasting throughout the year, which would bring in foreign-exchange earnings of between US$ 19 and US$ 20 billion, to set a new historical record.
This upturn reflects recovery among the main export products, and also an increase in volumes actually shipped.
Expectations are that the price of copper (which accounts for 38% of merchandise exports) will rise from an annual average of US$ 0.71 per pound to US$ 0.76, in view of the steady rundown in inventories that has occurred in recent months.
Forestry exports expanded by 14.1% during the first quarter and, together with woodpulp, are expected to grow by over 10% for the year overall.
Salmon prices began to strengthen in the Japanese market, the main destination for this product, and exports rose by 33% in value terms.
Wine exports have also performed robustly, posting a rise of 11% at the end of the first quarter.
In addition to this generalized improvement, the lower oil price is likely to induce a terms-of-trade improvement of at least 2%.
One of the most significant developments for Chile’s external trade is the free trade agreement signed with the United States on 6 June.
This is scheduled to take effect in early 2004 following congressional ratification on both sides.
An aspect of the agreement that caused controversy was Chile’s reserve requirement on short-term capital (known as the “encaje”), which remains a potentially usable mechanism despite currently being set at a zero rate.
The final agreement eliminates all restrictions on the free movement of capital between the United States and Chile, but allows for temporary capital controls to be imposed should conditions arise that are likely to have serious economic consequences.1 These barriers are not expected to conflict with the other clauses of the agreement, however.
As the United States absorbs over 20% of Chile’s foreign sales, the agreement is expected to generate a major export expansion.
On 18 November 2002 Chile signed an association agreement with the European Union (EU), the trade 1 Nonetheless, any disputes arising on this point have to be resolved through a dispute settlement mechanism with special rules, that are favourable to Chile.
The European Union is Chile’s largest trading partner, its main source of foreign direct investment (FDI) and its largest provider of international cooperation.
Under the agreement, 85% of Chilean exports now enter EU tariff-free, while the remainder of the tariff universe will be gradually phased out over a maximum period of 10 years.
Official estimates see agricultural exports doubling within five years, including substantial increases in exports of red and white meats.
In the first three months after the agreement came into effect, the value of exports to EU rose by almost 30%, although this is probably also attributable to the appreciation of the euro against the dollar.
Although it is too soon to evaluate the results, Chile’s export industry will clearly be boosted as a result of this accord.
A free trade agreement has also been signed with the Republic of Korea, marking the first trans-Pacific trade agreement between Asian and Western economies.
The Republic of Korea is one of Chile’s major trading partners, currently ranking between fourth and sixth as an export destination in competition with Brazil and Mexico.
When these agreements come fully into effect, 50% of Chile’s exports will enjoy a zero tariff, and the overall average tariff faced will be around 2% –one of the lowest rates in the world.
Economic policy adopted an expansionary stance in 2002 in response to the economy’s modest growth rate.
In keeping with the government’s structural surplus rule, fiscal policy was counter-cyclical, while the benchmark interest rate, known as the monetary policy rate (TPM) continued to drop to very low levels.
The trade agreements signed by Chile mean that the Treasury will forgo revenue amounting to about US$ 430 million per year as from 2004, owing to the elimination or reduction of import duties.
The authorities expect this loss of income to be temporary, however, since the additional economic activity generated by the agreements is expected to make up for the initial deficit (the joint economic impact of the agreements with the United States and EU is estimated at almost two percentage points of GDP, in equal proportions).
The loss of government income will be compounded by social programmes costing US$ 320 million scheduled to come on stream in 2004.
Congress has also authorized the sale of the State’s minority stake in the water utilities, and certain spending items will also probably be trimmed back in order to preserve the structural surplus.
In 2002 and 2003, fiscal policy has continued to be based on the principle of maintaining a central government structural surplus of 1% of GDP.
This is calculated by forecasting the level of fiscal revenue, considering growth trends in economic activity and the long-term trend price of copper.
As macroeconomic conditions worsened, fiscal revenues came in under budget, yet the Government made no adjustments to projected public expenditure in real terms.
The cyclical component of the public-sector balance thus turned even more sharply negative than in 2001, with the deficit widening from 1.5% to 2% of GDP.
In 2002 the non-financial public-sector (NFPS) deficit of 1.6% of GDP was financed by the proceeds of a US$ 900 million international sovereign bond issue made in April.
The surplus left over from this operation was used to prepay older foreign loans carrying higher rates of interest, and to replenish the Copper Stabilization Fund.
Nonetheless, the overall central government deficit was financed basically by drawing down financial assets rather than net borrowing.
Revenues from copper totalled US$ 502 million, comprised of US$ 80 million in transfers from CODELCO in the form of taxes, and US$ 422 million in withdrawals from the Fund, whose balance at 31 December 2002 stood at US$ 277 million.
In the same month, the gross financial debt of the central government amounted to 15.9% of GDP, of which only 5.8 percentage points was owed abroad.
In 2003, more vigorous GDP growth and an upturn in the copper price should narrow the central government deficit to about 0.7% of GDP.
This will be financed by an external debt issue of US$ 1 billion placed in January, supported by the fiscal measures mentioned above.
The budget law sets a borrowing limit of US$ 500 million 166 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Gross domestic product by type of expenditure Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 167 above this, so domestic debt can be issued for this amount if necessary.
The structural surplus rule has meant that public finances have played a key stabilizing role in recent years, by softening the effects of adverse external conditions on domestic spending.
In preparing the budget for 2003, the Government hired independent experts for the first time to estimate GDP and the price of copper for the coming year, thus making the fiscal rule less discretional.
A potentially favourable trend in these key prices, together with widespread tariff reduction as a result of the free trade agreements, could mean a sharp contraction in external costs.
Commercial margins are expected to return to normal levels having narrowed in 2001 and 2002.
Following a fairly low passthrough of the exchange-rate rise –around 18%– over a two-year period, the recent decline should not alter this coefficient nor, as a result, underlying inflation.
In 2003 the nominal exchange rate has reflected international disturbances, especially fluctuations in the oil price; and after peaking at 750 pesos to the dollar, it has since stabilized around 700 pesos.
Wage trends are not exerting inflationary pressure either, since the nominal indices of hourly wages and labour costs displayed 12-month variations of 3.8% and 4%, respectively, in March 2003.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 169 With inflation under control, the main priority of monetary policy has been to invigorate domestic demand.
Between January and August 2002, the Board of the Central Bank lowered its benchmark interest rate six times, by a total of 350 basis points.
Following the latest 25 basis point cut in January 2003, the rate has remained at the historically low level of 2.75%.
Reductions in the benchmark interest rate have been slow to filter through to market operations, but have been passed on more rapidly to segments associated with larger and long-term loans.
One of the lessons to emerge from the long period of sluggish growth in the Chilean economy is that the combination of a fiscal policy based on a structuralbalance target, together with a flexible exchange rate and an aggressively counter-cyclical monetary policy is not enough to offset the effects of persistent macroeconomic uncertainty when external shocks occur.
The problem appears to lie in monetary policy transmission mechanisms, since their slowness (or nonexistence) is related to market conditions.
Recent studies have blamed a number of factors for the rigidity of market interest rates despite changes in the benchmark rate.
These include the size of the bank in question, the type of clients it has and the credit risk involved.
In this situation, the solution appears to consist of more active policies to mitigate the risk associated with small and medium-sized enterprises, in the form of debt restructuring and direct production incentives.
In addition, the steps taken in August 2001 to “nominalize” monetary policy, bringing to an end 16 years of monetary policy based on an indexed instrument, reduced the volatility of nominal rates and monetary aggregates, while deepening markets and assets denominated in pesos.
As a counterpart to this, the rapid generalization of peso-denominated loans increased the risk of inflationary shocks to the financial system.
Given the scant competition existing in the banking sector, financial institutions have covered this risk by keeping lending rates much higher than would be warranted exclusively by the inflation rate projected by the Central Bank.
This seems to have hindered transmission of the reduction in the benchmark rate, to judge by the huge spread that exists between lending and deposit rates.
A special regime has been established whereby profits earned abroad that are being repatriated to the country in which the investment originated, are given tax-free status as they pass through Chile.
More than 16 double taxation agreements are being negotiated, in addition to those that already exist with Argentina, Mexico and Canada.
Expansion of the accelerated depreciation mechanism also enables firms to recoup their investment costs more quickly.
The new legislation also eliminates stamp duty on the rescheduling of mortgage loans with over one year to run, granted for the purpose of acquiring, building or enlarging a dwelling.
The new legislation on administrative procedure has also come into force, under which public procedures can be dealt with more quickly.
This is of particular benefit to small and medium-sized firms, as it simplifies 35 basic procedures (if specified bureaucratic matters remain unresolved within 30 days, the respective requests are deemed to be approved).
A bill designed to raise funding for two programmes to which the Government attaches particular importance are currently making their way through Congress.
These are a plan to give explicitly guaranteed universal access to healthcare (known by its Spanish acronym “AUGE”) and the “Chile Solidario” programme.
The AUGE plan consists of a broad legislative package intended to improve public healthcare and secure funding for the attendant reforms.
The programme establishes a group of priority medical procedures, for which the public system will guarantee maximum waiting times.
In August 2002 pilot plans began for five pathologies (child cancer, congenital heart conditions, renal insufficiency, cervical and uterine cancer and palliative care for terminal cancer patients).
Given constraints on the budget and on the supply of services, the plan is expected to be phased in gradually.
Another 17 priorities will be incorporated in 2004, with the aim of covering a total of The Chile Solidario programme has been created to institutionalize a system of social protection for the country’s 225,000 poorest households.
This covers a number of aspects, such as family support, social protection payments contingent upon compliance with a contract signed with each family, traditional monetary benefits, preferential access to social advancement programmes and labour benefits.
The corresponding bill is currently at the second stage of constitutional approval in the Senate. 170 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Growth of expenditure on final household consumption slowed from 2.8% in 2001 to 1.6% in 2002, while gross fixed capital formation expanded by 1.4%.
A significant development during these years of slow growth has been the downturn in investment as a percentage of GDP, which has slumped from an average of almost 27% between 1996 and 1998 to 22.5% from 1999 to 2002.
Gross national saving fell less steeply, largest variation occurred in external saving, which slid from 5.1% of GDP in 1998 to 0.8% in 2002, reflecting the reversal of capital flows following the Asian crisis.
The downturn recorded in gross fixed capital formation was particularly steep in housing construction, which has shrunk by over 30% on a cumulative basis since 1998.
This is explained by the failure of housing demand to rally, despite substantial reductions in the relevant real rates of interest and the award of large subsidies and significant tax credits.
An incipient revival in house and apartment sales in recent months signals the start of a new expansionary cycle.
In 2002, the fastest growing sectors were fishing (8.2%), agriculture and forestry (4.2%) and electricity, gas and water (4.3%).
Manufacturing; construction; commerce; financial services; and transport and communications all expanded by rates that reflected the economy-wide average of around 2%.
The inflation rate came in at 2.8% in 2002, just two tenths of a percentage point above the 2001 figure.
Price rises fluctuated during the course of the year, however, particularly in the last quarter.
This volatility carried over into the early months of 2003, because of exchangerate fluctuations exceeding 10%, and instability in international oil prices.
Nonetheless, for 2003 as a whole, inflation is forecast at around 3%, which is within the Central Bank’s target range.
The reluctance of growth to rebound has contributed to the persistence of unemployment, which remains one of the Government’s most pressing pieces of unfinished business, although the job climate has been more optimistic since the latest unemployment figures were issued.
More importantly, the number of persons employed grew by around 3.1%, the largest rise since the start of the slow growth cycle.
The expansion in employment has been most vigorous in financial services, transport and communications, agriculture and manufacturing, with the private sector creating most of the new jobs.
The winter months saw the largest absorption of unemployment by direct public employment programmes and subsidies for private employment (back-to-work and training benefits), which financed 160,000 jobs during the winter quarter of 2002.
The trade balance posted a surplus of US$ 1.556 billion in 2002, US$ 420 million more than the previous year, with imports declining faster than exports (-3.2% and -1.2%, respectively), offset only slightly by growth in the services deficit.
The current account balance was negative again, but only by US$ 553 million, or 0.9% of GDP, compared with a US$ 1.2 billion deficit in 2001.
In the first quarter of 2003, the trade account registered a surplus of US$ 974 million, reflecting rises of 9.9% and 13.9% in the values of exports and imports, respectively.
Exports to Asia (especially copper shipments to Japan and China) grew most strongly (by 43% in nominal terms over 12 months), followed by exports to the rest of Latin America which were up by 8.7%.
The c.i.f. value of imports recorded a 12-month increase of 12.9% in the first quarter, with volume and unit values growing by 6% and 6.5% respectively.
The latter was heavily influenced by an 83% rise in the price of crude oil.
On the services front, the largest variations occurred in travel, where revenues were up by 21%, thanks to an increase in arrivals of European tourists, while outlays rose by 17%, reflecting larger numbers of Chileans travelling abroad, especially to Argentina.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) totalled US$ 1.603 billion –little more than a third of the 2001 figure.
Projects in the pipeline, however, suggest this indicator should rally in 2003, and indeed the first quarter results bear out these projections.
Direct contributions, such as equity purchases, other forms of capital participation and related credits all displayed positive flows, mainly targeting the mining, energy and telecommunications Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 171 sectors.
International reserves stood at US$ 15.653 billion as of 15 May 2003, which represents a substantial increase with respect to late 2002, largely reflecting replenishment of the Copper Stabilization Fund with foreign exchange generated from the sovereign bond issue in January.
An aspect that is causing concern is the level of external debt in the private sector, which has expanded from around US$ 18 billion in 1996 to just over US$ 33 billion in May 2003 –almost 51% of the previous year’s GDP.
The internationalization of many firms has generated a large number of FDI-related loans.
The bulk of this debt is medium- and long-term, however, and nearly a third of the total corresponds to a single large enterprise in the electricity sector, which is in the process of restructuring its assets and liabilities.
These were badly hurt by the deep crisis unfolding in the Venezuelan economy, which is one of their main destinations.
An overvalued exchange rate had a negative impact in 2002, but dwindling capital inflows and powerful international speculation exerted pressure for devaluation during the second half of the year.
Although this increased Colombia’s risk premium (as happened with other Latin American countries) it also allowed for a recovery of exchange-rate competitiveness.
With no rapid turnaround foreseen in the Venezuelan economy, prospects for export growth depend on sales to the United States, which have benefited from renewal of the United States Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA).
The fiscal situation deteriorated because of a decline in receipts and an increase in both military spending and debt service.
Nonetheless, the authorities expect the consolidated public-sector deficit to narrow in 2003, thanks to measures put in place in the second half of the previous year.
The adjustment programme agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) envisages a deficit of 2.5% of GDP.
In January, the Fund extended a new two-year stand-by arrangement for 2003-2004.
Projections for 2003 are based on expectations of a strong performance from most sectors of the economy, particularly construction, industry and agriculture.
In 2002 the economy was swayed by both domestic and external forces.
Growth was driven by domestic spending which offset faltering external demand, particularly in the second half of the year.
The interruption of the peace process in February 2002 undermined confidence in the economy during the first half of the year, thereby compounding the negative impact of persistent unemployment and sluggish credit expansion.
In 2002, Álvaro Uribe took office as President of the Republic, following a first-round election victory that was interpreted as a mandate to bring a rapid solution In 2003 the Colombian economy is showing signs of a moderate recovery, following annual growth of just 1.5% in 2001 and 2002.
First quarter growth in 2003 came in at 3.8%, in contrast to a virtual standstill during the same period in 2002.
The rate of expansion projected for the year as a whole is 2.5%, but data from the early months show better results.
Inflation for the year as a whole is forecast at around 7%, similar to the 2002 figure.
Although price increases trended upwards in the first four months of the year, they have eased off since May.
A few days into his term, the Government declared a “state of internal disturbance”, giving the President special powers to enforce temporary public order measures.
These included a 1.2% tax on the net worth of corporations and private individuals, to be used to finance higher spending on national security.
In addition, Congress approved a tax reform designed to raise the revenues needed to place fiscal affairs on a sounder footing.
The Legislature also sanctioned a labour reform, alterations to the pension scheme and the holding of a referendum which among other things would seek support for fiscal austerity measures.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 175 from multilateral banks (US$ 2.6 billion from the World Bank, IDB and the Andean Development Corporation), bond issues of US$ 1 billion on international capital markets (half of which was issued in January 2003), and a swap of foreign bonds for TES Treasury bills.
In December 2002 a tax reform was passed to provide some leeway in the management of fiscal affairs.
The measures included broadening the base and raising the rate of value-added tax (VAT), together with a temporary surcharge on income tax and an extension of the income tax base.
Congress also approved a reform to the pension system, which lengthened the time that workers must contribute to the fund; mapped out future increases in contributions; and eliminated a number of special regimes.
A labour reform was also introduced to make hiring and firing practices more flexible, with a view to facilitating job creation.
In addition, Congress granted the President special powers to alter the organizational structure of government bodies and enterprises.
There is also a programme for the renewal of public administration, involving an estimated 25% downsizing of the payroll at the central government level over a four-year period, which should save approximately 0.5% of GDP every year.
Lastly, a referendum is to be held in 2003 to decide on a number of measures aimed at reducing public spending, which would increase the fiscal adjustment to 0.7% of GDP in 2003 and 1.3% in 2004.
Some of these measures relate to a nominal freeze on operating costs in 2003 and 2004, including clauses relating to the middle and upper wage brackets, and pension reforms (minimum age, maximum pension and an end to special regimes as from 2008).
Over 6 million Colombians have to vote in the referendum for it to be valid.
In June 2003 a Fiscal Responsibility Act was passed, establishing conditions to prevent regional and local governments from exceeding their borrowing limits.
As meeting the inflation target became more problematic in early 2003, in January Banco de la República raised its whole interest-rate structure by 100 basis points for the first time since 1998, following this by a further 100 basis-point increase in April.
In addition to the rise in interest rates, in February the Bank announced that it would intervene in the foreignThe goal of economic policy has been to bolster the revival of productive activity, without endangering progress made on macroeconomic stabilization, such as reducing inflation.
For this purpose the Government will attempt to rein in the public-sector deficit urgently.
Monetary policy pursued ever-lower inflation targets while seeking to provide the liquidity needed to revive aggregate demand and boost growth.
One of the main objectives of the government’s macroeconomic programme is to narrow the fiscal shortfall.
The deficit of the consolidated public sector is targeted to fall to 2.5% of GDP in 2003, with a surplus of 2% in the decentralized sector (2.2% in 2002) and a central government deficit of 4.5% (6.3% in 2002).
During the first quarter of 2003, central government finances posted a deficit of 1.7% of GDP, as against 1.1% in the same period a year earlier.
Total revenues expanded by 30%, thanks to a 37% increase in tax receipts, largely reflecting revenues from the wealth tax and VAT, which was raised as part of the tax reform.
At the same time, total spending rose by 46%, with increases of 63% in interest payments, 38% in operating expenses and 52% in investment expenditure.
The consolidated public-sector deficit came in at 3.6% of GDP in 2002, which represented a deterioration from the previous year and clearly revealed the difficulties involved in meeting the target of curtailing the deficit to 2.6%.
This result was due to an increase in the surplus of the decentralized sector (2.2% of GDP compared to 1.9% in 2001) and to a central government deficit of 6.3% of GDP (5.7% in 2001).
Total NFPS revenues at 29% of GDP were slightly down from their 2001 level of 29.2%, while tax receipts from domestic activity and external trade also came in below forecast.
The floating debt in this period, at 0.6% of GDP, also exceeded the 2001 figure.
The central government deficit was covered in 2002 using the proceeds of external borrowing contracted in 2001 (34%), together with net domestic credit (47%) and profits earned by Banco de la República (9%).
In the first half of the year, Banco de la República lowered interest rates by 3.25 percentage points, thereby taking most of them below the inflation rate, where they remained throughout the second semester.
In 2002 the Bank sold dollars in exchange for public debt paper.
Following the cut in the benchmark rate, and thanks to increased liquidity, market interest rates followed suit.
The 90-day deposit rate stood at 7.7% at the end of 2002, which was 3.7 percentage points below the level recorded a year earlier, representing a real decrease from 3.5% to 0.7%.
The lending rate (the average for consumer, preferential, ordinary and treasury loans) dropped by 2.4 percentage points in real terms to end the year at 7.4%.
This downward trend was unaffected by a temporary rise in interest rates on public debt during the third quarter of 2002.
In the final quarter of the year, when the country risk spread was returning to normal, the Government issued international bonds in the amount of US$ 500 million.
Cash in circulation was up by 21.7% and current account balances expanded by 21%; the opportunity cost of holding liquid assets dropped because of the decrease in inflation and the low rates of interest.
The M2 aggregate expanded by 8.1%, while broad money supply (M3) grew steadily at around 8%.
At the same time, the low level of interest rates reduced the volume of term deposits, and the supply of public debt paper increased.
The financial system portfolio showed signs of recovery in the second half of 2002, as the total loan portfolio expanded by 5.4% nominally, while contracting in real terms, but at an ever slower rate.
The consumer credit portfolio grew by 1.4% in real terms, while the corporate loan portfolio shrank by 1.1%, and mortgage loans declined once more (13.5%).
Although the quality of the consumer and corporate portfolios continued to improve, the mortgage portfolio deteriorated.
The continuous devaluation seen since the second half of 2002 continued into the first quarter of 2003.
From April onwards, however, the measures taken by Banco de la República slowed this process.
In 2002 the nominal exchange rate displayed two contrasting trends, one after the other.
During the first half of the year the exchange rate was driven upwards by expectations of foreign-exchange abundance arising from the prefinancing of government’s external borrowing requirements, supported by buoyant remittances, and lower interest rates in the United States.
Then, in the second semester, the currency depreciated again, in the wake of devaluations elsewhere in the region, particularly Venezuela and Brazil; a weakening of exports to Venezuela; the fall in price of public debt during the first quarter; and speculative factors generated by electoral uncertainty.
This foreign-exchange market volatility forced Banco de la República to intervene in late July 2002 by selling dollar-denominated call options, and this was followed by further interventions in August and October.
The nominal exchange rate reached 2,813 pesos to the dollar in December 2002, representing a 22% rise in relation to the same month a year earlier.
The economy’s promising performance in the first quarter of 2003 was fuelled by an upturn in construction (16%), especially civil works (25%) which had fallen sharply (17%) in the first quarter of 2002, and in industry and financial services, which expanded by 8.3% and 5.8%, respectively (compared with previous declines of 4.1% and 0.5%).
Electricity sales were up by 3% during the first five months of 2003, and industrial output is moving in a positive direction, according to surveys conducted by the National Manufacturers’ Association (ANDI) and the Foundation for Education and Development (Fedesarrollo).
Meanwhile, data collected by the National Federation of Tradesmen of Colombia (FENALCO) reveal an upturn in commercial activity since April.
Output expanded by 1.5% in 2002 as a whole, matching the previous year’s rate.
The slowdown in 2001 lasted until March 2002; then in the second quarter the real sector began to rally, and the pace of economic expansion hovered around 2%.
This trend gathered strength in the early part of 2003, to post a growth rate of 3.8% in the first quarter.
Growth in 2002 was driven by domestic demand, led by household consumption (2.1%), and investment (5.2%) associated with building work and transport equipment.
Total exports lost ground in value terms throughout 2002 to register an overall decline of 3.9%.
This reflected the economic crisis and the strike in Venezuela, compounded by the slowness of recovery in the United States.
The value of imports receded by 5.3% in the first semester but recovered by 5.5% in the second half of the year.
Construction was the fastest growing sector in 2002, expanding by 5.7% – especially building (21.5%), which made up for a downturn in civil works (7.9%).
Strong performances were also recorded in following subsectors: transport, storage and communications 180 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (3.4%), electricity, gas and water (3%), and financial establishments (2.4%).
Industry took a positive turn with an expansion of 1.1% following its 1.3% contraction in 2001.
Mining and quarrying was the only sector to shrink (4.8%), reflecting a downward trend in petroleum production. b) Prices wages and employment The annualized rate of inflation measured by the variation in the consumer price index (CPI) gathered pace in the early months of 2003, but began to ease off from May onwards.
In June, the annual rate stood at 7.2%, compared to 6.2% at the same date a year earlier.
In 2002 as a whole inflation came in at 7%, which, although 0.6 percentage points lower than in 2001, was above the Central Bank’s target of 6%.
The greater upward pressure on prices was generated by supply shocks, which particularly affected the price of foods (especially potatoes), and tradable goods with a high import content, reflecting the devaluation that has taken place since mid-2002.
In July 2003, the PPI posted a 0.2% rise, taking the variation over the year thus far to 4.5%, and to 10.2% over the previous 12 months.
Although the situation in the labour market showed some improvement, unemployment remained very high.
This was lower than in the same period a year earlier (18.5%), however, thanks to the upswing in the economy driven by construction and stronger exports to the United States.
The rate of employment (52.6%) grew by 0.5 percentage points, while the labour force participation rate (63.8%) and the rate of underemployment (31.3%) slipped by 0.1 and 0.3 points, respectively.
For 2002 as a whole, the total number of persons employed had risen by 3%, although practically all of this increase apparently represented new underemployment, which expanded from 30% to 33% of the employed population, while the labour force participation rate had remained virtually unchanged at 64.2%.
The basic minimum wage (US$ 123) posted a real increase of 1% in 2002, while wages in manufacturing rose by 0.5%, also in real terms, following their 3% decline in 2001.
In the early months of 2003 external trade has been showing signs of recovery, especially imports, following weak results in 2002.
Even so, the merchandise balance continued to deteriorate and moved from a surplus of US$ 208 million in the first four months of 2002 to a deficit of US$ 172 million for the same period in 2003.
The factor-income account also deteriorated in 2002, but this was partly offset by an increase in current transfer inflows, mainly family remittances, which grew by US$ 413 million.
Overall, the current account recorded a deficit of US$ 1.579 billion (2% of GDP), which was US$ 364 million more than in 2001 (1.5% of GDP).
Net international reserves expanded by US$ 648 million and the year closed out with a balance of US$ 10.841 billion, equivalent to 10.8 months’ merchandise imports.
Excluding sales to Venezuela, total exports would have risen by 12% and non-traditional exports by 11%.
Nontraditional exports to the United States trended upwards by 32%, compared to a 16% drop in the same period of 2002, thanks to the effects of the United States Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act.
Entry into force of this legislation will benefit exports of new products, such as clothing and footwear, vacuum-packed tuna, oil and petroleum products, watches and watch parts, sugars and honeys (within established quotas) and leather manufactures, until 2005.
Traditional exports had dropped by 2.1% in 2002, owing to a downturn in coal exports (16%), and a decrease in the volume of oil exports (1.6%).
Earnings from exports of hydrocarbons and coffee were both similar to their 2001 figures.
Despite a more competitive Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 181 exchange rate in the second semester, non-traditional exports contracted by 5% for the year as a whole, after growing by 7% in 2001.
The hardest hit export sectors were industrial products (especially machinery and equipment), textiles and clothing, and chemicals.
The key factors in this downturn were the sluggishness of economic recovery in the United States and the slump in economic activity in Venezuela.
Exports to Venezuela were down by 35%, and the bilateral exchange rate fell by almost 20%.
Exports to the United States weakened by 2%, despite a strong 28% upturn in the last quarter, while sales to Ecuador grew by 16%.
Merchandise imports were down by 1.5% in 2002 as a whole, having fallen by 7.8% in the first half of the year, and then recovering by 5.1% in the second, boosted by a slight upturn in aggregate demand towards the end of the year.
The upward trend continued into 2003, with growth of 14% in the first four months, compared to a 9.6% decline in the same period a year earlier.
The recovery was felt first in the consumer goods segment and then spread to intermediate goods.
Capital goods imports retreated by 8% in 2002, especially items for manufacturing industry (-12%), but imports in this category expanded vigorously in 2003 (30%), particularly transport equipment and industrial machinery.
Net capital inflows in 2002 were significantly smaller than the year before, shrinking by US$ 715 million.
Long-term capital recorded net outflows of US$ 1.56 billion, in contrast to a net inflow of US$ 5.047 billion in 2001.
This reflected reduced government prefinancing (which had been substantial in 2001); increased amortization payments; and lower levels of private borrowing.
At US$ 2.034 billion, net inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) were US$ 488 million down on their 2001 level, mainly reflecting lower investment in the petroleum sector.
Net short-term inflows totalling US$ 2.739 billion offset the net outflow of long-term capital.
Gross domestic product grew by 2.6%, boosted by the expansion of domestic demand and an upsurge in exports after two years of decline.
At the same time, per capita national income rose for the second year in a row (0.7%) as a result of the less drastic deterioration in the terms of trade and the sharp reduction in profit remittances by foreign firms.
The recovery has been gathering strength in 2003 and output is expected to grow by over 4%.
Although the economy grew faster in 2002 and employment picked up by 2.2%, the high participation rate gave rise to a further increase in open unemployment, from 6.1% to 6.4%, the highest rate since 1985.
The significant expansion of public spending in 2002 helped to boost the economy, but also led to a substantial deterioration in the fiscal accounts.
The consolidated public-sector deficit rose to 5.4% of GDP, far exceeding the previous year’s gap of 2.9%.
Fiscal policy thus heightened the pressures generated by increased spending towards the appreciation of the real exchange rate and the erosion of the international reserve position.
The balance-of-payments current-account deficit increased from 4.5% of GDP in 2001 to 5.5% in 2002, while the total public debt as a percentage of GDP swelled to almost 60%.
Because of high domestic borrowing costs, the authorities again resorted to bond issues on international markets with the intention of replacing domestic debt with external debt on more favourable terms.
The central bank made use of available monetary control instruments to contain inflation (9.7%) and avoid a loss of international reserves.
At the same time, in order to maintain the external competitiveness of the country’s export sectors, it gradually stepped up its daily adjustments of the exchange rate, bringing about a real depreciation of the colón.
In the first five months of 2003 the monthly economic activity index recorded growth of 6.7%, almost two percentage points higher than the rate for the same period of 2002.
Its positive trend reflects increased exports, faster growth in construction, transport and telecommunications and an upswing in tourism.
Under the monetary programme for 2003, economic policy will focus on curbing inflation and reducing the fiscal gap and the balance-of-payments current-account deficit.
Output growth has been estimated at just 2.2% in 2003, but the results posted in the first few months of the year suggest that the actual growth rate will be considerably higher.
Inflation is expected to speed up slightly (10%), while unemployment is likely to remain at more or less the same level as in 2002.
The fiscal deficit raised the cost of monetary adjustment to control the increase in liquidity.
The measures taken to keep prices stable, forestall an increase in monetary substitution and preserve the level of net international reserves accentuated financial vulnerability by expanding the central bank’s liabilities and quasi-fiscal deficit.
The widening of the balance-of-payments current-account Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 185 deficit and the increased need for financing heightened the economy’s external vulnerability in a global environment of sluggish economic growth and high financial volatility.
The consolidated public-sector deficit amounted to 5.4% of GDP in 2002, which was substantially higher than the previous year’s level (2.9%).
The central government deficit increased to 4.3% of GDP, compared to 2.9% in 2001.
This negative outcome was due in part to the slackening growth of total income as a result of a fall in non-tax revenue.
The adoption of the Tax Simplification and Efficiency Act in 2001 slowed down the growth of receipts from income tax, excise taxes and sales tax, but this was partly offset by more efficient tax administration.
In this context, the tax burden remained practically constant (13.2% of GDP).
However, most of the expansion of the central government’s financial deficit was accounted for by the sharp rise in total expenditure (21.1%), which represented practically all items of expenditure rose faster than they had in 2001, the increase in current expenditure was especially pronounced (21.2%).
This increase reflected the escalation of interest payments (21.4%) because of higher domestic interest rates and increased government debt.
In addition, payroll expenses were higher (17.8%), owing mainly to the expansion of government employment and to existing incentive schemes.
Current transfers grew by 22.8%, reflecting an increase in pension payments from the national budget and in financing for social programmes.
The fiscal deficit was financed through an increase in net bond issues on the domestic market and the use of external resources, in particular through bond issues on international markets.
In December 2002 the Legislative Assembly adopted a fiscal contingency plan designed to generate additional income in 2003 equivalent to 1% of GDP.
The measures taken included the application of surcharges, for one year, on a number of taxes, such as those imposed on income and on profits derived from certain activities and transactions.
In addition, some items of expenditure were scaled back and limits were set on the growth of expenditure at the central government and decentralized levels.
The fiscal adjustment was intended to reduce the consolidated public-sector deficit to 3.1% of GDP.
However, since the government eased the restrictions it had imposed on expenditure by the Costa Rican Electricity Institute, the deficit will probably amount to approximately 4% of GDP.
In January 2003 the country issued US$ 450 million in bonds and placed them on international markets; of this amount, US$ 200 million will be used to redeem a previous issue and the rest, to finance the bulk of its fiscal requirements.
The total public debt balance stood at approximately 3.6 billion colones at the end of 2002, representing a 17.6% increase over the previous year’s balance.
Public-sector domestic debt was equivalent to 39.7% of GDP, while external debt remained practically constant as a percentage of GDP (19.4%).
Most of this debt consists of central government (67.6%) and central bank (24.9%) liabilities.
In terms of its composition by currency, the relative share of public debt denominated in foreign currency expanded substantially, from 51% to 53.2% of the total.
In order to reduce both interest-rate spreads and the cost of loanable funds, the legal minimum reserve requirement was unified at 5% for deposits in either local or foreign currency.
In an effort to stave off demand pressures that could affect domestic prices and undermine the country’s external position, the authorities stepped up open-market operations.
At the same time, the central bank began selling certificates of deposit in dollars with a view to improving the profile of its foreign-currency liabilities, especially in terms of maturities, and preventing sudden fluctuations in its net international reserves.
To make up for the effect of the colón’s faster devaluation against the dollar and prevent the rapid dollarization of investment portfolios, the monetary authorities sought to maintain an attractive premium for investments in colones.
Thus, the benchmark deposit rate –the market reference rate– gradually edged upward from 16% to 17.5%, which pushed up interest rates.
Total liquidity (M3) expanded by 20.4% in 2002 as local-currency liquidity (M2) rose by 18.6% owing to 186 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 187 an increase in sight and time deposits.
The sharp upturn in time deposits (24.9%) was associated with the rise in local-currency interest rates and the consequent increase in the premium on investments in colones.
Foreigncurrency deposits (representing 50% of the total) continued to grow briskly (22.9%).
Net domestic credit grew by 18.5% in 2002, primarily because of the expansion of credit to the private sector (21.3%).
The banking system continued to make most of its loans to households, in the form of housing and consumer credit (50% of total credit), and to the business and services sector (26% of the total portfolio).
Foreign-currency loans continued to expand rapidly as a result of the differential between the cost of borrowing in local and foreign currency, and now account for more than 50% of total credit.
In 2003 the central bank continued to apply a tight monetary policy closely linked to the results of the measures being taken in the fiscal sphere.
In midMarch the central bank announced a reduction in the reference interest rates it offers on its bonds.
Thus, the benchmark deposit rate –the market reference rate– was cut back from 17.5% to 16.75%.
As a result of the prudent management of fiscal and monetary policy, credit and liquidity showed moderate growth and inflation rose at a rate consistent with the target set in the monetary programme.
Exchange-rate policy continued to be geared towards shoring up the relative profitability of the country’s export sectors.
The central bank gradually stepped up its daily adjustments of the exchange rate, which in 2002 brought the annual nominal increase to 10.8% and corrected the real appreciation recorded in 2001.
In addition, discussions continued for the conclusion of a free trade agreement with Panama and with the countries members of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), and preparatory work was undertaken for the negotiation of a free trade agreement between Central America and the United States.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 189 In 2002 GDP grew by 2.6% on the strength of higher domestic demand and an upturn in exports of goods and services.
The rapid growth of domestic demand was associated with increases in gross fixed capital formation and total consumption.
The increase in gross fixed investment (7.9%) was attributable mainly to high levels of public investment in telecommunications and electric power generation and distribution.
Private investment also expanded, primarily in free-zone activities, the production of construction materials, tourism and building activity in the commercial and business segment.
Consumer spending rose as real income in the private sector increased and credit became more readily available.
On the supply side, the goods-producing sectors picked up slightly (0.9%) after having contracted for two straight years.
Their recovery was associated, to a large extent, with the performance of manufacturing (2.2%), which was bolstered by more vigorous growth in free-zone companies, including those in hightechnology industries.
Its value added declined by 1% as a result of the reduced output of coffee (6.6%), bananas (5.1%), corn (11.9%) and beef cattle (9%), which could not be offset by the upturns in the production of pineapples, flowers and foliage, roots, tubers and fresh fruit.
In the case of coffee, the slump was due to low international prices for coffee beans, which led to the neglect of some plantations and the abandonment of lowyield areas.
The fall in banana production was due to weather conditions and to an oversupply on the world market, which discouraged production in low-yield areas.
Low import prices for basic grains acted as a disincentive for local producers.
With respect to beef cattle for slaughter, the fall in production was linked mainly to the reduction of total herd size.
Despite the buoyancy of public works in the energy and telecommunications sectors and in the improvement of road infrastructure, the value added of construction shrank by 1%.
This result was attributable mainly to the decline in private housing construction due to the increase in real lending rates.
Service activities as a whole, which generated 57.4% of GDP, grew at a rate similar to that of the previous year (4.3%).
Telecommunications fared particularly well, especially in high-value-added services such as cellular telephone services, Internet access, international calls and data transmission.
Transport services also expanded thanks to the stronger performance of external trade.
Inflation, measured according to the consumer price index (CPI), stood at 9.7%, coming in at less than the previous year’s rate (11.0%) and undershooting the target set in the monetary programme (10%).
The factors contributing to this outcome included the tight monetary policy and the use of external resources to finance part of the fiscal deficit, as well as the drop in the prices of agricultural products and the more moderate increases in the prices of services and some imports, especially capital goods.
To some degree, these factors counteracted the inflationary pressures generated by the increasingly large adjustments of the nominal exchange rate and the rise in fuel prices.
Although employment picked up significantly (2.2%), the nationwide rate of open unemployment increased further (to 6.4%) because of the high participation rate.
At the same time, average real wages increased by 4%, owing mainly to wage increases in the autonomous institutions.
The balance-of-payments current-account deficit widened to US$ 937 million in 2002, representing an increase of 27.1%.
Consequently, the deficit as a percentage of GDP rose from 4.5% to 5.5%.
Even so, private and official capital flows were sufficient to bridge this larger current-account gap and to fuel an increase in net international reserves, which at the end of the year totalled US$ 1.495 billion, equivalent to 2.6 months’ worth of merchandise imports.
The increase in the balance-of-payments currentaccount deficit was due to the widening of the trade deficit, since the negative factor payments balance diminished and current transfers increased further.
The merchandise trade deficit expanded to 9.2% of GDP, considerably exceeding the previous year’s level 190 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (5.0%).
This was attributable to the sharp upswing in imports, which overtook the rise in exports.
This outcome marked a turning point in the wake of the 25% slump recorded in the 20002001 biennium owing to the adverse international economic environment and to specific problems that hurt external sales of traditional agricultural products.
This positive result was due for the most part to the performance of non-traditional exports, whose value increased by 6.5% in 2002.
Foremost among them were exports produced by companies benefiting from special export regimes, which grew by 11% and came to represent 56.5% of total exports.
This increase primarily reflected higher external sales of microprocessors produced by the telecommunications firm Intel (4.3%).
Other contributing factors included the increase in shipments of medical equipment and pharmaceuticals as new companies began operations and the fact that some producers of food products were shifted from the regular regime to the free-zone regime.
On the other hand, the maquila industry’s loss of competitiveness caused its exports to contract by 4.9%.
Exports of non-traditional agricultural products rallied; the standouts in this regard were plants, flowers, foliage, pineapples and tubers.
External sales of traditional products (13.2% of total exports) suffered a 6.3% contraction caused by a downturn in export volume.
Except in the case of coffee, this decline was not offset by better international prices.
Imports increased considerably in all categories of goods except oil, fuels and lubricants.
Particularly significant, however, was the upsurge in imports of capital goods (21.7%), due mainly to a 20.7% increase in those for the manufacturing industry.
This development resulted primarily from higher public investment in telecommunications, electric power generation and oil refining, as well as investments by firms located in the free zones.
This reversed the downswing in capital goods imports over the preceding three years.
Imports of raw materials and consumer goods grew at slower rates (6.3% and 9%, respectively).
In the case of raw materials, most of the increase was due to purchases by the manufacturing sector and imports of construction materials in response to the expansion of public investment and the build-up of inventories, and for new building activity in the commercial and business segment.
It should be noted that the slump in the import value of fuels and lubricants reflected the recommissioning of operations at the oil refinery of the State-owned oil company RECOPE.
In the case of consumer goods, imports of consumer durables, especially vehicles and articles for the home, continued to grow briskly (12.7%) thanks to the increase in real wages and the wider availability of credit.
In 2002 the balance of trade in services with the rest of the world posted a surplus (4.2% of GDP) that was slightly smaller than the one observed in 2001 (4.5%).
Exports of services grew by 2.2% after having contracted by 2% the previous year.
Most of this recovery was related to the tourism sector, which netted income of US$ 836 million, exceeding the previous year’s intake by 3.3%.
The income generated by other activities such as medical services and the production of computer software also improved.
The deficit on the income account shrank from US$ 793 million in 2001 to US$ 253 million in 2002; in terms of GDP, this represents a decline of more than three percentage points (from 4.8% to 1.5%).
One important factor behind this result was the decline in the repatriation of profits and dividends linked to foreign direct investment.
Most importantly, foreign direct investment climbed to the unprecedented figure of US$ 642 million.
This development mainly reflected the purchase of a 25% stake in Florida Bebidas S.A., a subsidiary of the Costa Rican firm Florida Ice and Farm, by Heineken International of the Netherlands, at a cost of US$ 218 million.
At the same time, foreign firms reinvested a bigger proportion of their profits.
In addition, private capital inflows strengthened thanks to the direct financing of companies and the repatriation of Costa Rican deposits in response to attractive interest rates at home.
The remaining capital inflows were related to public-sector operations, primarily the placement on international markets of US$ 250 million in 10-year sovereign bonds at an interest rate of 8.11%.
In the first four months of 2003 the trade deficit narrowed significantly (-20.4%), thus helping, in conjunction with high capital inflows, to consolidate international reserves.
This improvement reflected an upsurge in exports (24.5%) due mainly to increased sales from the free zones, especially of microprocessors.
After dipping slightly in the last quarter of 2002, imports picked up, buoyed by the more vibrant economy, which encouraged external purchases of capital goods and of oil, fuels and lubricants.
This recovery, together with the marked increase in the factor income balance in the first quarter (in relation to its abnormally low levels in 2002), could hinder the country’s efforts to bring the balance-of-payments current-account deficit below 5.5% of GDP, the level it reached in 2002.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 191 Cuba Beset by external shocks and bad weather conditions, the Cuban economy lost momentum for the second consecutive year in 2002, and gross domestic product grew by just 1.1%.
Per capita GDP increased for the fourth straight year (0.8%), while unemployment again declined (3.3%), and real wages fell by 3% as a result of an upturn in inflation (7%).
With the international scenario plagued by uncertainties, growth for 2003 is forecast to be as low as 1.5%.
The modest performance of these two years is partly explained by deterioration in the terms of trade (-9.1%), a fall-off in international tourism since September 2001, and damage caused by hurricanes Michelle in 2001 and Isidora and Lily in 2002.
This more constrained international scenario limited the Government’s room for manoeuvre in terms of economic policy and added to the serious problems caused by cumulative past imbalances, such as an acute shortage of foreign exchange, and the obsolescence of most of the capital goods supplied by the former socialist countries, compounded by a lack of spare parts to maintain them.
These disequilibria are largely due to the prolonged embargo imposed by the United States, the sudden dissolution of the special links with the socialist countries, and an almost total lack of access to international capital markets.
In terms of productive activity, priority was given to developing international tourism and high technology industries involved in the production of biotechnological, and pharmaceutical goods and medical equipment; and to reducing energy dependency and restructuring the sugar agribusiness.
Despite the modest economic performance, the Government maintained the social orientation of its economic policy geared to continuously raising the well-being of the population at large.
In the face of weakening external demand (10.7%) which accentuated the lack of foreign exchange, the meagre GDP growth was based on higher government consumption (4.9%), reflecting an increase in current fiscal expenditure.
Predictably, government services were the most buoyant component of production, and the fiscal deficit widened to 3.1% of GDP in comparison with the previous year’s 2.5%, thereby slightly breaching the 3% limit established in the economic policy programme.
The expansionary fiscal policy implemented to compensate for the demand weakness widened the budget deficit, which in turn was financed through money creation.
Unlike what normally happens in market economies, excess monetary issuance did not fuel galoping inflation because domestic prices are under administrative control.
Nor, however, did the injection of purchasing power revitalize the domestic market, the behavour of which in planned economies basically depends on supply possibilities.
In terms of the different sectors, there was an expansion in national extraction of oil and gas (20%; 4.1 million tons of oil equivalent), which made it possible to reduce imports.
As a result, nationally produced fuel 192 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean covered 90% of consumption by power stations (compared to 52% in the previous year), 100% of consumption for cement production, and almost 20% of crude oil refining requirements.
Consequently, the output of national crude has almost tripled over the last four years and is now meeting half of the country’s needs.
Investment again retreated (8.9%) in the wake of adjustment measures introduced in response to the acute shortage of foreign exchange in the country.
Although the decline in investment implies lower growth potential in the medium term, its natural counterpart is a reduction in the balance-of-payments current account deficit (i.e., external savings), which in 2002 narrowed to 0.9% of GDP from 1.9% in the previous year.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 193 Government spending increased by 8.1% while total revenue rose by only 6.8%, thereby widening the fiscal deficit to 3.1% of GDP.
Current revenue grew by 6%, reflecting improved tax collection (7.6%), while nontax revenue edged up slightly (0.6%).
Within overall fiscal revenues, indirect taxes grew faster (12.4%) than direct taxes, which expanded by a modest 1.5%.
Among direct taxes, larger receipts were obtained from social security contributions (8.2%) the labour force utilization levy (6%) and personal income tax (5.9%), while corporate tax revenues were down by 1.7% reflecting the production slowdown.
Circulation and sales taxes, the country’s main source of tax revenue, increased by 14.7%, while service taxes declined (6.8%) mainly because of the rise in wholesale fuel prices which was not passed on to the consumer.
In the current expenditure category there were increases in social assistance (118.4%) –which benefited 245,800 people– culture and Social security expenditure accounted for 6.6% of GDP, compared to 6.3% in 2001, benefiting 1.41 million people or 12.6% of Cuba’s total population.
The expansion in current expenditure was basically due to a deepening of programmes designed to raise the cultural and educational level of the population.
These transfers to Ministry of Agriculture and Sugar enterprises were due firstly to weather-related events, mainly hurricanes, and secondly to the agricultural restructuring process.
Nonetheless, economic assistance to basic cooperative production units (UBPCs) was down for the fourth consecutive year (20%), thanks to the increased efficiency achieved by these units.
The balance of public external debt grew slightly, to reach 36.5% of GDP, reflecting appreciations of the euro and the yen against the United States dollar, the main currencies in which the island’s debts are denominated.
The monetary aggregate M2 grew by 9.8% following expansions in M1A (10.1%) and fixed-term and time deposits (7%).
The narrow money supply (M1A) again expanded in relation to GDP (41.9% compared to 38.6% in 2001) following increases in its components of cash in circulation and instant-access savings accounts.
Fixed-term and time savings also grew, boosted by rises in annual interest rates (from 4.5% to 5.5% on 12-month deposits, from 6% to 7% on those of two-year terms, and from 7.5% to 8% on three-year instruments).
The size of these monetary aggregates had little macroeconomic impact, since unlike the situation in a market economy, production levels in Cuba are influenced more by supply constraints than by the behaviour of demand.
In economies dominated by the programming of material balances, monetary policy usually lacks autonomy and has few instruments for action, which renders it subordinate to fiscal management and the administration of State-owned enterprises.
Indirect monetary control instruments (interest rates, bank cash reserve ratios, rediscount) are either non-existent or underdeveloped, having proved non-functional under the previous institutional arrangements and the prevailing division of labour between State and market.
In Cuba, such instruments have only been in use since 1998 and then only on a partial basis.
This explains the peculiarities of the Cuban financial system, along with the relatively limited development of the banking system and mechanisms for attracting savings, not to mention the backwardness of capital markets.
Meanwhile, there is a lack of non-bank financing mechanisms to cover public deficits.
Nevertheless, when more private actors enter the market, autonomy is granted to State-owned enterprises and incentives are created for labour productivity or production, which inevitably results in the quantitative guidelines of the economic plan gradually giving way to monetary controls and incentives.
In recent years, major reforms have been introduced in the financial system, in order to promote greater enterprise autonomy and support incipient non-State activities.
In mid-2002, the euro started to circulate in the tourist resort area of Varadero.
This process then extended to tourist destinations in Jardines del Rey and Cayo Largo, and it is expected to spread progressively to the rest of the country.
This is an important development given the extent of Cuba’s economic relations with Europe through foreign direct investment (FDI) and trade in goods and services.
Lastly, neither the official exchange rate (US$ 1 = 1 Cuban peso) nor the commercial rate (US$ 1 = 26 Cuban pesos) showed any variation.
Preliminary figures. b Based on constant 1995 dollars. c Based on figures in local currency at current prices. d Includes errors omissions. f Calculations based on the official rate of 1 peso per dollar.
While the FDI openness policy was maintained, the number of joint ventures remained virtually the same as in the previous year (around 405 enterprises in partnership with foreign capital).
The funds committed amounted to some US$ 5.93 billion, half of which has already been disbursed.
Aggregate supply contracted by 1.2% as a direct consequence of a drop in imports of goods and services (15%) and domestic output growth of just 1.1%.
Total consumption grew by 1.6% as a result of stronger growth in government consumption (4.9%), while private consumption edged up by 0.3%.
In 2002, per capita daily consumption levels reached 2,916 kilocalories and 76.8 grams of protein; in both cases these are similar levels to those recorded in 1989.
In terms of individual sectors, government services grew (4.2%) along with commerce (3.1%), while 196 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean agriculture and manufacturing both contracted, by 9.5% and 1.1%, respectively, and construction stagnated (0.3%).
Mining expanded moderately (0.6%), thanks to oil and gas extraction, while nickel and cobalt production declined (1.7%).
Although national production of crude oil and gas increased, the effects of the smaller volume of imported crude were felt by the population especially through power supply, domestic fuel provision and public transport.
Government services expanded with the deepening of social development programmes (especially health, education, culture, the arts and sports), while commerce –especially State-owned restaurant services– expanded.
The standstill in the construction sector reflected the net outcome of the investment freeze caused by the acute shortage of foreign exchange, and reconstruction work in the aftermath of the hurricanes –basically restoration of 272,000 damaged dwellings, of which 35,700 had been totally destroyed.
The hotel infrastructure development programme continued with the addition of 2,300 new rooms for international tourism.
Apart from investments to expand hotel capacity for international tourism, some 1 billion Cuban pesos were invested between 1990 and 2002 (with an import component of 36.3% in dollar terms) in the development of technical infrastructure, including electricity services, water pipelines, sewerage systems, road communications and causeways.
Further amounts of 500 million and 783 million pesos were invested in airport infrastructure and non-hotel support and services respectively (with a total import component of 23.4% in dollar terms).
Having registered deflation during the last three years the consumer price index rose by 7%, and the rate of unemployment dropped to 3.3% from 4.1% in 2001, while the average wage rose (4%; 262 pesos).
The resurgence of inflation is due mainly to higher prices on agricultural markets (16%) and on the informal market (5%).
In foreign currency stores, the prices electrical appliances rose, while food and toiletries became cheaper.
Although economic growth was sluggish, some 158,000 new jobs were created in 2002, mainly in activities linked to urban agriculture (22%) and basic services for the population (19%), and among trainee and fully qualified primary school teachers, computer instructors, social workers, nurses, and video and television technicians.
As part of the human resource policy, both in the budgeted and in the business sector, the average monthly wage increased in nominal terms (6.9%; 262 pesos per worker).
Of workers engaged in the business sector 79% now have a pay regime based on productivity.
In addition, 1,432,185 workers (31.4% of the total) benefit from the system of foreign exchange incentives.
In the case of self-employment, the number of own-account workers remained at around 200,000.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit narrowed from US$ 552 million in 2001 to US$ 293 million in 2002, thanks to a reduction in the goods and services trade deficit (from US$ 863 million to US$ 513 million), and despite larger net factor service payments (up from US$ 502 million to US$ 600 million).
The latter basically reflected the repatriation of profits on direct investments in the island and interest payments on the external debt.
The narrower trade deficit (goods and services) reflected the fact that merchandise imports fell more steeply (14%) than service exports (4%) especially tourism (2.8%), while the values of merchandise exports and imports declined at similar rates, and current transfers remained broadly stable (US$ 820 million).
The surplus on the capital account (US$ 300 million) was sufficient to finance the current deficit and marginally boost the level of international reserves.
Although merchandise imports fell more sharply in volume terms (15%) than goods exports (6%), the country’s terms of trade also worsened (9.1%) in the wake of lower international prices for sugar and an upturn in oil prices, while nickel prices also rallied slightly.
Despite a smaller volume purchased, the oil bill (fuels and lubricants) grew to approximately US$ 875 million because of the rise in crude prices, while food imports increased to US$ 832 million.
As a result, oil and foodstuffs accounted for 21% and 20% of total goods purchased abroad, in that order.
There has been an increase in external sales of nontraditional products based on ultramodern technologies, such as biotechnological and pharmaceutical products, medical equipment and advanced diagnostic methods.
Progress was made in seeking new markets for these products and 200 health ministry registrations have been approved in 52 countries.
In this endeavour, the products manufactured by the Centre for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology are of particular interest.
This downward trend carried over into the first quarter of 2003, despite an upturn in oil prices; for although output expanded by 2.4% in relation to the first quarter of 2002, it shrank by 0.3% with respect to the fourth quarter.
Demand cooled as the confidence generated by dollarization in 2000 and the energizing effect of the construction of the heavy crude oil pipeline both wore off, while hydrocarbons production shrank, particularly in the State oil company, Petróleos del Ecuador (PETROECUADOR).
The pace of inflation continued to slow, from an annual rate of 22.4% in December 2001 to 7.6% in June 2003, as inflationary inertia steadily dissipated and the economy gradually cooled.
Nonetheless, as prices still rose faster than in the United States the real exchange rate appreciated strongly during 2001-2003.
The effects of this were further heightened by real depreciations among Ecuador’s main Latin American trading partners.
On the credit side, although the asset position of the financial sector strengthened thanks to a rapidly shrinking non-performing portfolio, this was not enough to allow for credit expansion, given high (though gradually falling) rates of interest.
The Government hopes that sovereign debt buybacks, using funds generated by the export of heavy crude oil through the new pipeline, will serve to narrow the sovereign spread and thus bring down domestic interest rates.
The overall fiscal surplus of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) in 2002 was larger, at 0.6% of GDP, than the previous year’s 0.4%, despite a smaller primary surplus, which slipped from 5.1% to 4.2% of GDP during the 2001-2002 biennium.
So far in 2003, tax revenue has slowed, reflecting a cooling of domestic demand and the retreat of oil prices from the highs recorded in the first quarter of 2003 (as a result of the war in Iraq), while spending increases decreed by the authorities have pushed up current outlays.
The Government of the day has agreed to implement a series of measures in the framework of the stand-by arrangement signed with the International Monetary Fund in the first quarter of 2003, whose fiscal targets for that year include an NFPS primary surplus of 5.25% of GDP.
The balance of payments deteriorated in 2002, with the current account deficit widening from 2.6% to 4.8% of GDP, mainly as a result of strong import growth that far outstripped the expansion in exports.
Since the level of remittances from Ecuadorians living abroad remained unchanged from the previous year and foreign direct investment (FDI) declined, the wider deficit was covered by drawing on foreign reserves and incurring arrears.
Total NFPS revenues expanded by 27.1% in dollar terms, increasing from 23.5% to 25.7% in relation to GDP.
Oil revenues expanded slightly (2.8%) in dollar terms in 2002, while non-oil income grew by 35.1%, rising from 16.5% to 19.2% of GDP, thanks to increases in social-security contributions and VAT receipts, the latter partly reflecting improvements made to the collection mechanism.
Current spending was up by 31.2%, largely because expenditure on wages rose by 51.5%, expanding from 24% to 28.8% of total expenditure, and from 5.5% to 7.2% of GDP.
Capital expenditure climbed by 13.3% in dollar terms, and NFPS gross fixed capital formation rose by 22.1% to represent 5.8% of GDP.
This legislation restricts growth in the central government’s real primary spending to a maximum of 3.5% per year; imposes an obligation to reduce public debt and the fiscal deficit, excluding oil revenues; and stipulates that 70% of fiscal revenues generated by the start-up of the heavy crude pipeline are to be used to redeem public debt.
The Government has set itself the goal of reducing sovereign debt, to help bring interest rates lower (by reducing the sovereign spread) and to lighten the heavy fiscal burden implied by public debt interest payments.
In 2002, these absorbed 3.6% of GDP (of which 2.7% was interest on external debt).
In 2003, fiscal policy will be guided by the targets agreed upon with IMF in the framework of the stand-by arrangement signed in the first quarter of the year.
Measures in the second group include: • Implementation of a tax reform, aimed at reducing the large number of earmarked taxes, since these severely limit the flexibility of fiscal policy; and reduction or removal of tax exemptions.
The draft legislation also contemplates a rise in vehicle tax. • Reform of the public-sector wage regime and extension of its tax base for income-tax and socialsecurity contribution purposes. • Reform of public enterprises in the electric-power, petroleum and telephony segments.
In addition, weaker aggregate demand meant that VAT receipts were down by 5% and the take from import taxes fell by 7.5%, while revenue growth from income tax slowed to a meagre 1.6%.
On the other hand, central government spending rose by 5% between January and May 2003, largely as a result of higher spending on public-sector wages following a pay rise awarded in 2002.
Ecuadorian Government does not have the scope to operate monetary policy in the traditional sense under the dollarization scheme, it can influence the extent of monetization and credit in the economy, help to restore confidence in the financial sector, and take steps to bring interest rates lower.
In 2002 the financial sector continued to gather strength after the crisis of 1999.
This could exacerbate the already highly cautious stance among lending institutions, as the banks strive to maintain the required degree of solvency, and the country moves towards adoption of the Basel Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision.
The base rate on weekly bond auctions by the Central Bank held steady at an annual rate of around 5% in 2002 and during the first half of 2003.
Nominal lending rates fell throughout the year, from 16% in January 2002 to around 13.8% in May 2003, in line with the reduction in cumulative inflation.
Includes hidden unemployment. l Underemployed as a percentage of the economically active population in three cities; up to 1998, urban total. m In January 2000, the country adopted the United States dollar as its currency. n Up to 1998: 30- to 83-day deposits in sucres.
As inflation continues to slow, however, real deposit rates should continue to rise, given the stability of nominal deposit rates, which hovered around 5% per year in the second half of 2002 and until May 2003.
The rate spread has also been narrowing gradually since mid-2002, largely reflecting the drop in lending rates; nonetheless in May 2003 it was still at high levels around 7%.
The persistence of high interest rates in the Ecuadorian financial system can be attributed to a number of factors.
First, financial institutions keep a large share of their reserves invested in highly liquid assets abroad, to enable them to respond in the event of a surge in demand for liquidity from depositors, and this makes credit more expensive.
Second, Ecuador’s country-risk rating remains high, at almost 1,100 basis points as of Total credit to the private sector receded by 8.8% in 2002, for although the performing loans portfolio expanded by US$ 608 million, the non-performing portfolio shrank by almost double that amount (US$ 1.115 billion).
Nonetheless, this credit contraction represents an improvement in the solidity of the system.
Total credit to the private sector has slipped again in 2003, albeit only slightly (0.9%), but the two components behaved very differently than the year before: up to May 2003 the performing loans portfolio contracted by 2.5% while the non-performing portfolio increased by 6.1%.
The establishment of an agency to collect information on private credit could, if successful, reduce the cost of consumer credit, since it would make it cheaper for borrowers to switch between lending institutions.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 203 Ecuador’s real exchange rate has been appreciating against the dollar and against most of its largest trading partners since the dollar was adopted as the national currency in January 2000.
Nonetheless, the gradual lowering of inflation rates and the relative appreciation of the currencies of some of those trading partners in relation to the dollar has slowed the appreciation of the Ecuadorian exchange rate.
Moreover, the strengthening of the euro against the dollar has had a positive effect on Ecuador’s competitiveness.
Although inflation at a rate above the United States figure brought about a real exchange-rate appreciation of 6.3% in 2002, there was a 6.7% real depreciation against the euro during the same period.
This trend continued in the first half of 2003, with a real appreciation of 3.6% against the dollar and real depreciation of 10.5% against the euro between December 2002 and June 2003.
Real currency appreciation against the dollar has thus far outweighed the effects of the heavy depreciation of the sucre in 1999, placing Ecuador’s real exchange rate at a level comparable to that of late 1998, before the crisis.
Perhaps the most significant development on the foreign exchange front is the real appreciation of Ecuador’s currency against those of its main Latin American trading partners.1 As these currencies have generally appreciated during 2003, the relative appreciation of Ecuador’s currency with respect to its partners has been mitigated, and real bilateral depreciations have even been recorded in a few cases.
In June 2003, however, the real effective exchange rate was close to its lowest level for the last 10 years.
On the demand side, GDP growth can be attributed to a 17.6% increase in gross fixed capital formation, a 4.8% rise in final household consumption, and an expansion of 3.2% in government consumption.
On the supply side, the most dynamic sector was construction, which expanded by 14.7%, while financial intermediation rebounded by 9.7% and agriculture also rallied (7.2%).
Among the five sectors to display negative growth rates in 2002, mining and quarrying fell particularly sharply (-3.5%) reflecting the downturn in oil production.
During the first quarter of 2003 GDP has trended below official projections, expanding by 2.4% with respect to the same quarter of 2002 but shrinking by 0.3% in relation to the fourth quarter.
These results point to growth of 1.5% for the year as a whole.
Government consumption rose by 0.8% in the first quarter of 2003, but fiscal expenditure on consumption and investment is expected to remain subdued for the rest of the year, in line with the requirements of the IMF programme.
Public investment will thus be restricted by both public expenditure constraints and the austere budget approved for PETROECUADOR.
Private consumption growth slowed from the second quarter of 2002 on, in parallel with the stagnation of credit and employment, posting a value of 3.7% for the first quarter of 2003.
In the same period, gross fixed capital formation, which has also been slowing, grew by 5.1%.
Expansion of this indicator for 2003 as a whole could be less than in 2002, as the economy cools down and the expansionary effect of construction of the heavy crude pipeline wears off.
Investments by private oil companies are expected to increase, however, as they seek to build up production to take advantage of the additional crude transport capacity that the pipeline will provide from the third quarter of 2003 on.
Construction was the most buoyant sector during first quarter of 2003, posting growth of 8%.
Even so, this and other sectors are showing signs of a slowdown with respect to 2002, although investment in the petroleum sector and, to a lesser extent, in housing construction is expected to have a positive impact.
Nevertheless, construction is unlikely to drive growth as strongly as in 2002 once the “pipeline effect” has 1 In 2002, the real appreciation amounted to 31.7% against the Venezuelan bolívar, 19.7% against the Colombian peso and 9.3% against the Peruvian new sol. 204 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean faded.
During the first quarter of 2003 manufacturing also displayed a satisfactory rate of expansion (3.8%), while another six sectors declined in the same period and most grew less than in the fourth quarter of 2002.
The steepest fall (9.2%) occurred in the financial intermediation sector, which has now run up three consecutive quarters of negative growth.
Mining and quarrying, the largest sector in the Ecuadorian economy, accounting for 19.4% of GDP, has now recorded zero or negative growth for three straight quarters and shrank by 1.9% between the first quarter of 2002 and the same period in 2003.
This is 7.3% down on total production for the first five months of 2002, although part of this decline is due to closure of the SOTE pipeline for a week during May 2003.
It is significant that both oil production and the share of PETROECUADOR in the total have been declining over the past 10 years: the State company’s production has decreased by a third since 1993, while Ecuador’s overall production has expanded by 14.2% in the same period.
Given the investment budget approved for PETROECUADOR in 2003, expansion of production at its five main fields (Shushufindi, Sacha, Auca, Cononaco and Libertador) will depend mainly on agreements to be reached with private firms for investment in restoring the production capacity of those fields.
In the medium term, oil production could increase substantially when the Government and private firms reach an agreement with respect to the latter’s stake in the development of the Ishpingo-Tambococha-Tiputini (ITT) project.
The rate should continue to drop further as inflationary inertia is dissipated, provided aggregate demand continues to slacken.
In 2002, inflation was driven mainly by increases of 10% or more in the cost of certain services (non-tradables), while food, beverages and tobacco (almost a third of the index) rose by 6%.
In the first semester of 2003, these same services, together with transport, continued to exert upward pressure on the CPI, while the prices of tradable goods either rose little or actually fell.
Rate adjustments implemented in January 2003, and their knock-on effects, gave a temporary boost to the inflation rate early in the year, after which it resumed its downward path for the rest of the first semester.
Non-tradable goods prices rose much faster than tradables during 2002 and in January-May 2003.
This shows that domestic relative prices have shifted heavily in favour of non-tradable sectors of the economy, possibly as a result of the appreciation of the real exchange rate.
It should be borne in mind that Ecuador’s economy is characterized by a super-fixed exchange rate (dollarization), inflationary inertia, large inflows of foreign exchange from hydrocarbons exports and trade liberalization.
On the employment front, an upturn in levels of activity in a number of labour-intensive sectors, such as commerce and construction, generated new jobs in the modern sector, whose share in urban employment rose slightly.
Nonetheless, the slowdown in aggregate economic growth compared to 2001 produced a slight fall in the overall employment rate from 49.8% to 49.5%, while unemployment dropped from 10.4% to 8.6%, owing to a sharp fall in labour supply, which may partly be explained by continuing labour emigration.
The minimum wage, which in Ecuador serves as an important benchmark for the evolution of the entire wage structure, edged up by 1.2% in real terms, thus continuing its rally following major losses between 1996 and 2000.
No improvement in the employment situation is forecast for 2003, given the slow pace of economic growth and the fact that the sectors with the best prospects for expansion –those linked to hydrocarbons– are not labour-intensive.
Ecuador closed 2002 with a balance-of-payments current account deficit of 4.8% of GDP, compared to the 2.6% recorded in 2001.
This result was chiefly due to a deterioration in merchandise trade, for while exports expanded by 8.6%, imports grew by 19.6%, partly 2 At least two private firms have publicly expressed intentions to invest heavily in the production of heavy crude, although part of this investment may take place in 2004 rather than 2003.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 205 reflecting the capital goods needed for construction of the heavy crude pipeline.
Although broadly unchanged from their 2001 level, emigrant remittances, representing 5.9% of GDP, went a long way towards financing the deficit on the goods and services accounts.
Foreign direct investment (FDI) retreated from 6.3% to 5.2% of GDP, and overall balance-of-payments financing requirements amounted to a modest half point of GDP, which the authorities covered by drawing down reserves and incurring arrears.
The current account deficit has narrowed from US$ 276 million in the first quarter of 2002 to US$ 60 million in the first quarter of 2003, largely a result of a major reduction in the trade deficit over this period –itself attributable to a sharp rise in the prices of exported oil and a modest increase in imports.
In the first five months of 2003, the total value of exports was showing a 13.6% increase, of which 97.8% corresponded to just two products: crude oil and bananas (which accounted for 82.9% and 15%, respectively).
Ecuador’s export performance basically depends on the behavior of production and prices in a basket of commodities, among which petroleum, bananas, shrimp, flowers and, to a lesser extent, cacao are the most important items.
The total value of crude oil exports soared to US$ 863 million between January and May 2003, representing a 35.3% increase in relation to the same period in 2002.
This was due exclusively to a rise in the international price of crude oil: in February 2003 the price per barrel was double the figure recorded in the same month of 2002, as a result of the conflict in Iraq.
Although the price of exported crude oil rose by 41% on average with respect to the period January-May 2002, the volume dropped by 4.9%, reflecting a downturn in production during this period.
Exports can be expected to strengthen in the fourth quarter of 2003, once the heavy crude pipeline comes on stream.
Among other primary products, shrimp exports have not yet recovered from the recent drop in output caused by the outbreak of white spot virus.
Bananas continue to account for about a third of non-oil exports (and one fifth of the total).
Cacao has benefited from stronger international prices, although in 2003 the expansion of areas under cultivation is unlikely to increase output to any significant extent.
Between January and May 2003, the value of total imports was up slightly (1.1%) in relation to the same period of 2002.
This is wholly attributable to the performance of consumer goods imports, which expanded by 4.5%, while the value of raw material imports slipped by 0.3% (reflecting the production slowdown), and capital goods imports contracted by 10.5% (as the heavy crude pipeline neared completion).
It is interesting to note that the share of consumer goods in total imports has risen significantly over recent years.
This trend may be related to a shift in relative prices towards non-tradable goods, as a result of the effective exchange rate appreciation seen since dollarization. 206 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 207 Economic growth in El Salvador remained sluggish in 2002.
Gross domestic product (GDP) increased by 2.2%, which, while it represented a slight upturn with respect to the 1.9% growth recorded in 2001, resulted in the virtual stagnation of per capita GDP, for the third straight year, at just under US$ 2,000.
Family remittances edged slowly upward and continued to play an important role in bolstering private consumption and the external accounts.
The almost complete dollarization of the money supply helped to keep interest rates and inflation low.
Notwithstanding the relative abundance of liquidity and low interest rates, private investment was down for the second consecutive year as a result of factors such as fewer profit-making opportunities, the deterioration of the political climate owing to the resurgence of social conflict, and the uncertainty surrounding the elections scheduled for 2003 and 2004.
On the other hand, public investment expanded, owing in part to the rebuilding of infrastructure damaged by the earthquakes that struck in 2001.
Even so, the central government deficit shrank to 3.1% of GDP thanks to efforts to control current expenditure and an increase in tax revenue.
At the same time, the government had to cope with other public liabilities linked to the change in the pension system.
External public borrowing grew considerably, reflecting the policy of converting domestic debt into external debt to ease short-term financial pressures.
The Salvadoran economy’s short-term prospects are closely linked to the recovery of the United States economy.
Official estimates project a real 3% rise in GDP and annual inflation of 2%.
The fiscal deficit of the nonfinancial public sector is to be brought down to 1.6% of GDP and the central government deficit, to 1.5% of GDP.
Since reconstruction requirements have declined, public investment is expected to diminish and borrowing is to be kept below 45% of GDP.
In announcing the implementation of fiscal adjustment measures, the authorities also announced new measures for improving the economic situation of households.
In the first quarter of 2003 the economy grew by 1.7%, falling short of the 2% growth recorded in the same period of 2002.
This outcome was influenced by the flat growth in the industry which, in any event, was partially offset by the expansion of construction, agriculture and services.
In the fiscal sphere, some progress was made in the first four months.
The accounts of both the non-financial public sector and the consolidated central government (including grants) were virtually balanced.
These objectives were maintained in 2003, but higher priority was given to reducing the fiscal deficit.
As in the rest of the Central American countries, the negotiation of a free trade agreement with the United States will probably take centre stage on the economic agenda.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 209 Modest progress was made in controlling the fiscal deficit at a time of increased investment in economic and social infrastructure.
Slight reductions were achieved in the deficits of both the non-financial public sector (3.3% of GDP) and the central government (3.1% of GDP).
These advances resulted from the central government’s policy of reining in current expenditure and from an increase in tax revenue thanks to the implementation of monitoring and control measures throughout the year, which made up for the slow expansion of economic activity and imports.
Another factor that helped to improve fiscal income was the full implementation of the Road Maintenance Fund for the upkeep of the road network, which is financed through a special tax of US$ 0.20 per gallon paid by motorists on fuel purchases.
The tax burden amounted to 11.2% of GDP, which was higher that the previous year’s percentage (10.5%) but lower than the original target (12%).
However, since fuel consumption has gone down as a result of higher oil prices in recent months, the Fund’s receipts in 2003 may fall as much as US$ 2.2 million short of the amount originally projected.
The efforts to curb spending did not affect real investment by the non-financial public sector, which rose by 1.2% over the previous year’s level to reach US$ 610 million, equivalent to 4.3% of GDP.
Between January and May 2003 the non-financial public sector’s income, including grants, was 10.7% higher than it had been in the same period of 2002, thanks mainly to the increase in tax receipts.
On the other hand, its expenditure was 0.8% higher, owing mainly to increased outlays for consumption and interest payments.
Thus, the non-financial public sector posted a fiscal surplus (including grants) of US$ 36 million.
Since the central government cut back the amount of resources set aside for the National Reconstruction Programme, public investment between January and May 2003 totalled US$ 160 million, which was 6.4% less than the amount for the same period of 2002.
Total debt (external and domestic) in 2002 swelled to 45% of GDP owing to a sharp rise in external liabilities, which increased by 26.7% over the previous year’s level to reach US$ 3.99 billion, equivalent to 28% of GDP.
This was due in part to the aggressive policy of substituting external debt for domestic debt in order to reduce short-term pressure on public finances.
In 2002 the government placed US$ 1.25 billion in bonds on foreign markets under conditions that were favourable to the country.
Domestic public debt increased by 1.6% to stand at US$ 2.45 billion, or 17% of GDP.
The public sector’s borrowing requirements went down in the first few months of 2003.
Between January and May the government made use of US$ 366 million in net external financing; this figure was 27% lower than the one for the same period of 2002.
Domestic financing also declined (-25%), since it amounted to US$ 346 million in the same period.
The completion, without major setbacks, of the second year of the dollarization process improved El Salvador’s country risk and fortified its financial stability.
This, together with the significant drop in interest rates on international markets, helped to bring about a substantial reduction in local interest rates, both nominal and real.
With respect to average nominal rates, both the one-year lending rate and the 180-day deposit rate declined by more than two percentage points to stand at 7.1% and 3.4%, respectively.
With respect to real rates, both lending and deposit rates fell, given the slight increase in inflation.
The drop in interest rates stimulated the demand for credit, so that bank loans to the private sector expanded by 6% in real terms, in contrast to the 6% contraction recorded the previous year.
Increased competition from international banks that have managed to incorporate large companies into their loan portfolios seems to have slowed down the growth of domestic demand for credit.
Given this situation, and taking advantage of the benefits of dollarization, the banking system adapted by increasing its investments in external markets.
In fact, the buoyancy observed in the banking system stemmed from the intensification of transactions abroad through external debt, the issuance of bank debt instruments on international markets and investments and loan operations in other countries.
Meanwhile, deposit rates went up slightly, since the weighted average for 180day deposits rose from 3.4% in December to 3.5% in May. c) Structural reforms Trade policy focused on preparations for the negotiations on a possible free trade agreement between Central America and the United States.
Accordingly, the United States Senate’s decision to authorize the President to use trade promotion authority in negotiating the agreement and the commitment to begin negotiations have raised great expectations in government spheres and the business sector, since it is hoped that the startup of the process will make the country more attractive to foreign investors.
In mid-2003 the debate and negotiations on trade liberalization intensified with the presentation of two different proposals for negotiation, one prepared by Guatemala and the other by El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua and Costa Rica.
In June 2002 the free trade agreement with Chile entered into force and the negotiations with Canada made significant progress, although the process was not completed as scheduled owing to major differences between the Canadian and Central American parties concerning the maquila industry and agricultural products.
Nevertheless, negotiations are expected to be completed in the course of 2003.
In addition, the government sought to forge ahead with the structural reorganization of the health care sector by restructuring the social security system.
Its efforts were thwarted, however, by strong opposition from the doctors and workers of the Salvadoran Social Security Institute, who accused the government of seeking to privatize health care and maintained a prolonged strike that was backed by other social and political sectors.
In view of the growing strength of the strikers and the loss of political support in the Congress, the government had to adopt a more flexible position vis-à-vis the strike, abandon the social security reform, refrain from vetoing a draft law banning service concessions and create a follow-up commission to study changes in the Institute.
Different sectors in El Salvador more or less agree that the country has made progress over the last decade in terms of structural reform, but also that much remains to be done.
In particular, little has been achieved in terms of institutional reform to create a climate more conducive to foreign and national investment.
This is a cause for concern in view of the growing perception, in recent years, that El Salvador is plagued by waning respect for the law, an inefficient legal system and increasing legal and personal insecurity.
In this regard, another of the challenges faced by El Salvador is that of moving forward with the institutional reforms needed to resolve these problems.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 213 Output expanded by 2.2% in real terms, indicating that the country was having trouble returning to its high growth rates of the first half of the 1990s.
Domestic demand rose by 2.2%, boosted by a 10% increase in public investment, while private investment contracted for the second year in a row and consumption recorded a moderate upturn of 1.5%.
The most robust sectors were electricity, gas and water, which increased by 5.6%; housing development, which expanded by 5%; and construction, which advanced by 4.6%.
In El Salvador the most important engines of economic growth in 2002 were investment (especially public investment) and, to a lesser extent, private consumption.
Although private consumption rose slightly with respect to its 2001 level, its growth was constrained by the limited expansion of family remittances, which are an important component of national income and thus have a significant impact on consumption patterns.
The stagnation of agricultural output was due to a 1.3% decline in crop production as a result of the 15% contraction in coffee output, which in 2002 represented only 86% of the 1990 figure.
This fall in coffee production adversely affected agricultural employment and income, with an especially harmful impact on the poorest inhabitants of rural areas, who earn their livelihood from coffee harvesting activities.
By contrast, livestock production (together with forestry, hunting and fishing) expanded by 2.5% over the previous year’s level, maintaining the positive trend observed in recent years and increasing its share of agricultural GDP.
The best-performing segments were paper and paper products and rubber products, which increased by more than 10%.
The strong performance of these products was due to higher demand both domestically and within Central America.
Maquila manufacturing services increased by 3%, evincing a sharp slowdown from their rates of recent years.
El Salvador remains the country in Central America (apart from Panama) with the lowest rate of inflation.
In 2002 prices rose by just 2.8%, although this was more than one percentage point higher than the previous year’s rate.
This low inflation was due in part to the policy of dollarization and the existence of an ample supply of dollars, which made it possible to overcome sectoral bottlenecks by purchasing imported goods.
It also reflected the strong output of staple foods during the year, which caused their prices to fall considerably.
Between January and July 2003 annual inflation and cumulative inflation reached 1.5% and 1%, respectively.
The industrial price index recorded a rise of 1.4% for the 12-month period ending in June, whereas the 12month rate to December 2002 had been 4.7%.
The main reason for this decline in inflation was the downturn in international oil prices.
As part of the effort to reduce inflation to international levels, the authorities have made no nominal changes to official minimum wages in agriculture, industry, commerce or services since 1998, in sharp contrast to the active policy implemented in the first half of the 1990s.
Consequently, real minimum wages have fallen systematically (by 5.4% in the last two years), eroding domestic demand.
In particular, minimum wages in the construction sector –the only ones that increased in 2001– stayed frozen under a labour agreement signed between builders and unionized workers.
The employers belonging to the Salvadoran Chamber of Construction (CASALCO) and the construction workers’ union agreed in September 2002 that no increases would be introduced until June 2003, when a new labour agreement would be negotiated.
According to official data, open unemployment in 2002 reached 6.2%, which was slightly lower than the previous year’s 7.0%.
The rate for urban areas was very similar to the one for rural areas.
Underemployment rose by one percentage point to reach 29.1% owing to increases in both its visible and invisible components.
The total participation rate for the whole country declined from the previous year’s level to stand at 51.2%; the downturn was due basically to the slide in the male participation rate from 69.2% in 2001 to 65.8% in 2002.
The female participation rate showed a smaller decline (from 39.5% to 38.6%) over the same period.
These trends reflect the loss of job opportunities, especially for men, in rural areas. 214 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean In 2002 the external sector posted mixed results.
Exports performed well (up by 4.4%), boosted by an increase in non-traditional products (6.5%) in both the maquila and non-maquila sectors.
The maquila industry accounts for 59% of all merchandise exports and is therefore the country’s most important export sector.
Since imports showed only a small increase, the country’s trade deficit shrank slightly in relation to GDP to stand at 14.8%.
The current-account deficit swelled to twice its level of 2001, although it remained within manageable limits (2.7% of GDP).
Net international reserves contracted for the third consecutive year to stand at 11.2% of GDP, or 3.8 months’ worth of imports.
In the early months of 2003 both exports and remittances continued to trend upward.
Sugar and shrimp exports plummeted and coffee exports fell for the second year in a row, although, in terms of percentages, the decline recorded in 2002 (7.1%) was much less drastic than the 61.4% drop posted in 2001.
Exports to other Central American countries went up by only 2.3%, reflecting the slow growth of the subregion’s economies, while exports to the rest of the world, which accounted for 75.3% of total exports, were more buoyant and expanded by 5.2%.
Although maquila exports were up, total value added in the maquila industry was down from the previous year’s figure.
The higher maquila sales in 2002 were due basically to the increased use of imported inputs, largely because of the expansion of the benefits of the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI), which promotes the use of United States inputs.
Between January and May 2003 exports continued to post robust growth, totalling US$ 1.31 billion, which was 9% higher than the figure for the same period of 2002.
In the short term, the possibility of progress in the maquila industry will hinge on economic recovery in the United States and on the steps being taken by this business sector to include its products in the free trade agreements being negotiated with Canada and the United States.
On the other hand, imports of intermediate and capital goods dipped by 2% as a result of the country’s sluggish economic performance.
Purchases in all three main categories of goods (consumer, capital and intermediate) rose significantly.
Family remittances in 2002 amounted to US$ 1.935 billion, or 13.6% of GDP, but these flows grew more slowly than they had the previous year.
These resources were the country’s single most important source of foreign exchange, as they have been for the last decade, and became the cornerstone of financial and exchangerate stabilization.
On account of this situation, the future of Salvadorans residing illegally in the United States is now a constant concern for the authorities.
In this respect, one positive development was the United States government’s 18-month extension of the temporary protected status (TPS) previously granted to Salvadoran immigrants, which will, it is hoped, enable them to obtain better jobs and higher pay.
In the first five months of 2003 El Salvador received family remittances for a total of US$ 830 million, or 3.3% more than the amount received in the first five months of 2002.
The Federation of Credit Unions (Fedecrédito) intends to set up offices in the United States to attract some of the remittances that emigrants send back to their relatives in El Salvador, which could have a favourable effect on these flows.
In addition to reducing remittance costs by creating economies of scale, this measure also seeks to promote local investment in the recipient communities.
Foreign direct investment totalled US$ 234 million in 2002, which was US$ 26 million less than the amount received the previous year.
This investment was channelled primarily into telecommunications, manufacturing, commerce, electricity generation and, to a lesser extent, the maquila industry.
Capturing more of these flows, which in 2002 fell short of the authorities’ expectations, is one of the central aims of the economic reforms introduced by the Salvadoran government since the 1990s, as such investment is expected to become the principal engine of economic growth for the country.
Although developments in this area have not been promising, the authorities are still hoping that the opening of free-trade negotiations between Central America and the United States and the eventual entry into force of an agreement will help to bring in larger investment flows.
This cannot happen, however, unless the country’s investment climate improves significantly (through the strengthening of the rule of law and the improvement of legal and personal security, among other factors) and unless productivity increases, especially in those sectors and activities that are likely to be involved in international trade.
Significant macroeconomic imbalances were corrected as inflation went down and the fiscal deficit narrowed, but GDP growth, at 2.2%, slowed down for the fourth year running, while the trade deficit widened to 12% of GDP.
In addition, the influx of short-term capital and loan disbursements increased international reserves.
The drop in inflation (6.3% compared to 8.9% in 2001) and the decrease in the fiscal deficit to 1% of GDP were mainly due to the application of the stabilization programme agreed upon with IMF and the implementation of the tax reform adopted in 2001.
The loss of momentum in economic activity resulted from the sluggishness of external demand and of gross domestic investment, and, to some degree, from the procyclical fiscal policy.
Trade deteriorated as a consequence of the drop in exports and growing import penetration, in view of the real appreciation of the currency.
In 2003 the picture has been complicated by the slow growth of the United States economy, unfavourable changes in the terms of trade and the failure to include Guatemala on the list of countries cooperating with the United States to combat drug trafficking.
Also problematic are the uncertainty concerning the forthcoming presidential elections (in November) and the continuing conflict between certain business groups and the government.
These circumstances suggest that the growth rate will be lower (2%) than the official estimate.
In view of the particular political and electoral context of 2003 and the economic vulnerability that could result from the high trade deficit, the government hopes to consolidate the progress made in strengthening public finances and to continue to boost tax capacity.
One favourable development was the extension to 15 March 2004 of the stand-by arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) providing a credit line of US$ 120 million, of which US$ 75 million may be disbursed immediately.
The goals established for the current year under the agreement with IMF are GDP growth of 2.4%, annual inflation of between 4% and 6% and a fiscal deficit of 1.7% of GDP.
Efforts will also be made to strengthen the regulatory and prudential framework of the financial sector (especially its offshore segment) in order to help prevent money laundering.
The renewal of the agreement provides greater certainty of prudent economic policy management for the rest of the year.
The growth target for 2003 will be difficult to achieve unless a persistent real appreciation of the currency can be avoided and external demand makes a quick and significant recovery.
The targets included economic growth of 2.3%, inflation of between l d l g Overall bal nce b 4% and 6% and a fiscal deficit of 1.5% of GDP.
In practice, the authorities applied a very austere policy that enabled them to cut the public deficit beyond the target.
In May 2003 the government submitted a letter of intent to IMF requesting an extension of the agreement for another year.
The extension was approved in June Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 217 and included the following targets for 2003: inflation of between 4% and 6%, a fiscal deficit of 1.7% of GDP, tax revenue equivalent to 12% of GDP and GDP growth of 2.4%.
This economic programme included the placement of government bonds on the international financial market for a total of US$ 550 million, but as of June 2003 this operation had not yet taken place.
The fiscal deficit in 2002 (not including quasi-fiscal losses) was equivalent to 1% of GDP, compared to 1.9% in 2001.
This reduction was achieved by means of greater government saving, which was more than enough to cover the increase in capital expenditure made possible by the rise in revenue (14%) and the controlled growth of current expenditure (1.9%, compared to 19.3% in 2001).
External resources were sufficient not only to cover the deficit, but also to reduce domestic public debt for the first time in several years.
The application of the fiscal reform, and especially the two-point increase in the VAT rate (to 12%), resulted in a 21.1% rise in tax revenue, both direct (32%) and indirect (17.8%).
In contrast, non-tax revenues fell by 39% as payments for the privatization of the telephone company were completed and the corresponding interest payments accordingly ceased.
The containment of current expenditure was the result of a moderate wage increase (8.2%) and a cutback in government procurement (-18.7%) and interest payments (-1%).
The increase in capital expenditure (15.7%) reflected the settlement of outstanding expenses incurred in 2001.
In the first quarter of 2003 the fiscal deficit increased as the expansion of public spending (16.6%) far outpaced that of income (8%) in relation to the same period of 2002.
The increase was financed mainly from domestic resources, although loans were also received from the Central American Bank for Economic Integration and the Inter-American Development Bank, of US$ 13.5 and US$ 11.8 million, respectively.
In November 2002 the Congress adopted a budget for 2003 based on a fiscal deficit of 3% of GDP, which was three times the previous year’s level.
Soon afterwards, however, it decided on a more austere fiscal approach (a deficit of 1.7% of GDP) to control inflationary pressures and strengthen macroeconomic stability.
In principle, the target was increased over its 2002 level so that the authorities could meet certain commitments under the Peace Agreements, restructure public debt and cure the ills of the financial sector.
Part of the financing will depend on the placement of US$ 550 million in bonds on the international market; these instruments form part of a scheme known as the Peace Bonds, which, according to various analysts, face an uncertain future.
In September, when the certification is reviewed, a further attempt will probably be made to launch them on the international market.
If that proves to be the case, the authorities have announced that US$ 150 million out of the total amount will be used to meet commitments under the Peace Agreements, with the allocation of US$ 50 million to demobilize the army and the rest to advance the agenda for peace and reconciliation.
In 2002 monetary policy was again geared to promoting price stability and reducing money market volatility.
In addition, the Bank of Guatemala Organization Act, the Monetary Act, the Banks and Financial Groups Act and the Financial Supervision Act were passed in order to strengthen the central bank’s autonomy, broaden the power to impose penalties and conduct supervision and establish an acceptable risk profile for financial intermediation.
The central bank continued its efforts to control liquidity by participating in open-market operations, in view of the effects of flows from abroad and the fiscal deficit.
As local demand was strong, the average maturity of such instruments was extended and their yield was reduced.
As of 31 December 2002 the balance of securities placed in open-market operations in the private sector was 16% higher than it had been 12 months previously.
More than 80% of these instruments had maturities of more than 180 days (a year earlier 94% had had maturities of less than 30 days) and the weighted average annual interest rate had gone down from 10.27% to 7.9%.
This reduction in the domestic rate was mainly due to the large-scale repayment of domestic debt during the year, for which the government used resources from the placement of international bonds.
These central bank interventions kept money creation down to only 7.5% for the year (less than the 8% limit prescribed in the monetary programme).
Over that period, the basic aggregate (M1) grew by 13.9% in nominal terms, which was just under the 14.6% recorded in 2001, and broad money (M3) expanded by 11.2%, compared to 17.8% the year before.
Despite the slower expansion of liquidity, local interest rates continued to decline.
The real return on this rate was negative (-1.1%, compared to 2.2% the year before).
This persistently wide spread is 218 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Wholesale and retail commerce, restaurants Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 219 indicative of the local financial sector’s still-incipient development, which to some extent limits the provision of credit to the private sector.
In contrast to the situation the previous year, the central bank’s monetary balance showed a significant use of government deposits to finance its deficit.
At the same time, the central bank’s domestic credit to the private sector as a whole fell by 0.8% in nominal terms.
Accordingly, the banking sector cut by half the nominal rate of expansion of credit to the private sector (8% overall, 4.9% for local-currency loans and 21% for foreign-currency loans, although this last rate started from a very low level), so that such credit remained virtually stagnant in real terms.
Although credit demand is weak in view of the systematic slowdown of economic growth, supply is also limited by distortions caused by the banking system’s preference for government bonds, to the detriment of higher-risk productive activities.
Before 1997, top rate. m Average lending rate in the banking system.
As of 12 June 2003 money creation showed a yearon-year variation of 10.7% (exceeding the target of 8.7%); the broader aggregate M2 expanded by 11.8%, also exceeding the stipulated target.
Interest rates on deposits and loans continued to fall in the first half of 2003.
This was due to the reduction in the private sector’s demand for credit and to a change in the banks’ net position in relation to the government, and may have also been influenced by more prudent behaviour on the part of banks in the wake of the new banking law of 2002.
The intensity of open-market operations was maintained so that the reduction in credit demand and the high rate of money creation would not result in excess liquidity.
Guatemala continued to let its currency float, with occasional intervention by the central bank in the foreign-exchange market to moderate exchange-rate volatility.
The quetzal’s exchange rate against the dollar went down by 3.9% in nominal terms (7.5% in real terms) over the course of 2002.
This change reflected the extraordinary influx of remittances and short-term capital, as well as the improved expectations associated with the stabilization programme, in a context of limited intervention by the central bank in the foreign-exchange market.
In the first half of 2003 the exchange rate increased by 1.5% in nominal terms; this percentage was lower than domestic inflation over the same period. d) Structural reforms There were two policy objectives in this area.
The first was to support the process of establishing a regional customs union.
By the end of 2002 about 59% of the Central American common external tariff had already been harmonized, and some administrative procedures for intraregional trade had been simplified.
The second objective concerned the country’s current trade agreements (with Cuba, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Mexico and Venezuela) and the negotiation of new ones.
On the basis of preparatory work carried out in 2002, a round of negotiations began in January 2003 for a free trade agreement between Central America and the United States.
The first three rounds of negotiations proceeded smoothly; in the fourth, however, which was held in mid-March, Guatemala offered to liberalize its trade more extensively than the rest of the Central American countries.
As of mid2003 negotiations among the Central American parties were still geared to resolving those disparities.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 221 Guatemala’s macroeconomic situation in 2002 was affected by the weak recovery of the United States economy and the deterioration of the terms of trade, in addition to the application of tight fiscal and monetary policies.
Consequently, the expansion of productive activity lost momentum for the fourth straight year, owing in particular to the fall in exports and construction (-15.3%).
In May the authorities announced an economic recovery programme based on the private concession of airports, ports and power generating plants and on infrastructure works, including the expansion of various highways and the construction of a new international airport.
Owing in part to a shortage of resources, both components of the programme came up against difficulties that delayed their implementation.
The only component of demand that grew faster than in 2001 was fixed capital formation in the private sector, which achieved a notable 10.9% increase (in contrast to the 5.6% drop observed in 2001).
Its capacity to generate momentum in the rest of the economy was limited, however, in part because it was based more or less on imports of capital goods for power generation.
Its effect was also partially undermined by a 9.2% cutback in public investment, which limited the growth rate of total fixed capital formation to 5.1% (compared to 1.8% in Exports contracted again in real terms (-6.1%) and imports continued to expand significantly (8%), but at a slower rate than in 2001.
This performance was due in part to the sluggishness of external markets, but it also reflects, to some extent, the impact of the real appreciation of the currency.
Expenditure for private consumption rose by 4.7% (5.6% in 2001), while government consumption was down (-2.1%, compared to a 5.4% rise in 2001) as a result of fiscal belt-tightening.
This rate may be a bit too optimistic if the recovery of the United States economy is delayed and if domestic investment slows down because of uncertainty surrounding the presidential election.
Notable in this regard were the drop in construction value added (-15.3%) and the slowdown in manufacturing, which has continued for several years (0.8%, compared to 1.1% in 2001).
Agriculture expanded by 1.8% even though coffee production was still mired in the structural crisis created by the collapse of international prices.
The agricultural recovery was based on the higher output of sugar cane (with the use of additional land) and cardamom, partly owing to new production by former coffee growers.
Banana production grew at the same rate as in 2001 (8.1%), driven by the boom in external demand.
Throughout 2002 manufacturing production continued to lose momentum (with growth of only 0.8%) under the pressure of import penetration, financing difficulties, the real appreciation of the local currency and, to some extent, the credit squeeze.
Only two sectors had growth rates higher than population growth: clothing (2.7%) and miscellaneous manufactured articles (2.6%).
The slowdown was more pronounced in the other sectors, and some of them experienced a drop in output: the tobacco industry (-15.7%), wood (-1.2%), furniture and accessories (-1.2%), beverages (-0.6%) and non-metallic minerals (-2%).
Meanwhile, mining production increased by 6.6%, while the GDP for that activity was Basic services expanded by 6.6%, compared to 3.8% in 2001.
Particularly dynamic were electricity, gas and water (9.1%), as new generators in the cities of Guatemala and Baja Verapaz came on stream.
Transport, storage and communications rose by 5.7% (compared to 6.8% in 2001), despite lower growth in telephone line activation.
Production in other services rose by 2.3% (less than the 2001 rate of 2.4%), attesting to the slower growth of almost all its components.
Commerce was up by 2.8%, compared to 2.7% in 2001, as weaker domestic economic activity limited its growth.
Banking and insurance grew by a mere 1.8% as a result of the problems affecting bank intermediation.
Lastly, community, social and personal services increased by only 1.2% because of the cutback in government services (-0.6%) resulting from the rationalization of public spending.
The lack of updated employment statistics makes it hard to get an accurate idea of the current employment situation.
In May and June 2002, for the first time, the National Statistical Institute conducted a survey on employment and income.
According to the results, the open unemployment rate in 2002 was 3.1%, and 69% of the economically active population (EAP) worked in companies with fewer than six employees.
Given the listlessness of manufacturing and the slackening of economic growth in 2002, it seems certain that the generation of formal employment must have fallen once again.
The construction crisis supports this impression, as does the difficult situation in the production of coffee and non-traditional products.
The employment outlook for 2003 depends basically on the growth rate of the national economy.
In this connection, the steady decline in the monthly economic activity index from November 2002 to March 2003 is not encouraging.
In that last month, the index was only 2.6% higher than it had been 12 months earlier, which was less than the 3.4% recorded in the final months of 2002.
Unless productive activity steps up its growth in the remainder of the year, the generation of formal employment is likely to fall off even more and, in general, most of the population is unlikely to see a significant improvement in social conditions.
Minimum wages showed a nominal annual increase of 9% in nonagricultural activities and 8% in agricultural activities.
In real terms the increase was 3%, meaning that real wages are still on the rise.
Despite the persistent slowdown in economic activity in 2002, the trade deficit as a percentage of GDP widened for the sixth successive year, exceeding by 32% the level recorded in 2001 and more than quadrupling the figure for 1996.
This extraordinary increase was due to both the contraction in merchandise exports (-8.2%) and the constant expansion of imports (8.5%).
In the course of 2002 the value of exports to Central America fell substantially (-17.5%).
This contrasts markedly with their performance the previous year, when the subregion was the fastest-growing market for Guatemalan exports.
The 1.7% contraction in Guatemala’s exports to the rest of the world was much less acute than the 2001 downturn (-20.8%); the decline in sales of traditional products (-5.4%) could not be offset by the slight increase in maquila exports (2.5%) and in exports of non-traditional products (1.2%).
The drop in the value of traditional exports was due primarily to the contraction in exports of sugar (-19.8%) and coffee (-10.6%).
The 55% decline in exports of these two products over the past three years is a symptom of the structural crisis in the sector that has not yet been resolved.
Among non-traditional products, the only increases were in petroleum (54.6%), sesame seed (11.4%), natural rubber (18%) and food products (17.6%).
Exports of the other items diminished, with particularly sharp declines in the case of shrimp, fish and lobster (-67.9%), clothing (-43%) and leaf tobacco Merchandise imports from the rest of the world increased substantially in 2002 (by 12.3%, compared to 6% in 2001), while those from Central America diminished (-15.6%).
With the recovery of private investment after a two-year slump, imports of capital goods for updating equipment, and especially for power generation, rebounded strongly (16.7%).
Imports of consumer goods rose by 10.7% and those of intermediate goods, by 3.1%, influenced by the 8.6% rise in the oil bill.
In the first three months of 2003 the trade deficit widened by 18.8% compared to its level in the same period of 2002, owing to the fall in exports (-3.3%) and the rise in imports (9.6%).
Sales to Central America grew by 5.9%, while the vast majority of traditional exports were down.
The exception was coffee, which experienced an upturn of 23.6%, while petroleum exports surged by 61%.
The pronounced year-on-year variation in imports in the first quarter of 2003 reflects increased purchases of consumer durables (20.9%) and fuels and lubricants (101.2%), as purchases of consumer non-durables contracted (-4.3%) with regard to the same period of 2002.
In 2002 the income balance deteriorated owing to reduced receipts of interest payments associated with the outstanding debt for the privatization of the telephone company.
The increase in the trade and factor income deficits was more than offset by the extraordinary flow of external transfers (US$ 1.942 billion) from the one million Guatemalans residing in the United States.
The deficit was financed to some extent with short-term private capital, attracted mainly by the favourable differential in yields.
Foreign direct investment fell dramatically, amounting to US$ 110 million, as against the US$ 456 million received in 2001, largely as a result of the privatization of the telephone company.
This rise was due to the government policy of changing the composition of public-sector borrowing, giving priority to external sources in order to reduce financing costs.
Over the first four months of 2003 external debt rose slightly (0.4%) in relation to its level at the close of 2002, while domestic debt increased by 13.8%.
The balance of net international reserves grew by US$ 21.7 million, and at the end of 2002 amounted to US$ 2,369,600,000 which met the commitment made in the agreement with IMF.
Under the extension of the agreement granted in June 2003, remittances are projected to show a net increase of US$ 250 million in the coming year.
The public accounts were increasingly fragile and the fiscal deficit was equivalent to 2.5% of GDP.
The value of both exports and imports of goods was sharply down, by 10% and 7%, respectively.
This poor performance could only worsen an already delicate economic situation, in a country in which per capita GDP is a meagre US$ 417 at 1995 prices.
The economic situation has a massive negative social impact and a number of international institutions have even cited the possibility of an imminent humanitarian crisis, as larger and larger segments of the population have reached critical levels of vulnerability.
Accordingly, Haiti is the only country in the region to have been classified as a least developed country (LDC), and as such it is eligible for significant amounts of international assistance on very favourable terms.
Substantial flows of remittances, which reached US$ 676 million in fiscal year 2002,1 averted an even steeper downturn in the current account (-1.4% of GDP).
The deficit on the overall balance (US$ 80 million) was covered by reserves, which accordingly shrank by US$ 49 million, and by US$ 28 million in exceptional financing, interest arrears and refinancing.
The government was forced to take these measures by an almost complete absence of external financing, despite its efforts in 2001 and 2002 to secure the signature of a new IMF staff-monitored programme, which was not finalized until May 2003.
Under this programme, the authorities made a commitment to reduce inflation and narrow the public deficit, stabilize the exchange rate and create a political environment that will help to restore the confidence of both local economic agents and the international financial community.
Only three months before the close of fiscal year 2003, there is little sign of a solution to the country’s political conflict and little prospect of economic recovery.
What has been observed, instead, is a growing polarization that has led to the emergence of other sectors of civil society, in particular what is known as the Group of 184, on the political scene, in addition to the longer-established Lavalas Family party (currently in power) and Democratic Convergence (a coalition of different opposition organizations).
On the economic front, since the beginning of fiscal year 2003 –i.e., October 2002– there has been worrying evidence of instability, with persistent rumours that dollar deposits may be converted into local currency.
This speeded the devaluation of the gourde and triggered a flight of foreign currency estimated at US$ 90 million in the first quarter.
Domestic prices for hydrocarbon derivatives began to rise in January 2003 (by 52%) and accumulated hikes of over 100% by the end of June.
This generated an inflationary surge (an annualized rate of 41.7% in June 2003), which was exacerbated by a rise in the nominal exchange rate (an annualized 41% in June 2003) and by monetary financing of the public sector, which at the end of January represented 75% of the sum accumulated over the entire previous fiscal year.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 227 In an unstable political and institutional context and with very little manoeuvring room, the few measures the authorities were able to take in 2002 were not enough to prevent a worsening of the macroeconomic situation.
Economic policy, in particular, consisted mainly of conservative measures intended to mitigate the expected consequences of both the persistent economic stagnation and a harsh external environment.
Faced with a lack of external financing, the central bank (Banque de la République d’Haïti) had to fund the fiscal deficit, which amounted to 2.5% of GDP, while external debt servicing fell heavily into arrears.
In fiscal year 2002 the central government’s total income went up by 12.2% in real terms thanks to a significant upturn in external trade taxes (7%), VAT receipts (17%) and direct taxes (17%); the first two accounted for almost 60% of total tax receipts.
Despite this improvement, the central government’s income level was still 10% lower than it had been in 1999, given the prolonged stagnation of the economy.
The increase in income was insufficient to offset a rise in total real spending, which was up by 11%, owing chiefly to sharp increases in real operating expenditure and investment, since social spending –which was limited to begin with, at just 3% of GDP– went down by 3.5% in real terms.
It envisages a reduction in financing by the central bank, on the assumption that new external contributions of around US$ 60 million will be received and that total income will increase by 25% in nominal terms.
Most external financing remains frozen and, although a solution to the political and institutional conflict would help to secure new disbursements, most of their effects would not be felt until the next fiscal year.
By February 2003 outstanding payments amounted to US$ 65 million, owed mainly to the World Bank (US$ 23 million) and IDB (US$ 28 million).
The country’s payment arrears with IDB could lead to the cancellation of loans that have been approved (US$ 300 million), but whose disbursement is subject to the payment of outstanding loan instalments.
If this situation in particular could be resolved, the Haitian authorities could secure nearly US$ 50 million in additional resources almost immediately through policy-based lending (PBL) procedures.
This largely accounts for the authorities’ discussions with the domestic private banking sector in June to secure bridging loans to pay off arrears owed to IDB.
Monetary policy took a looser stance in order to counter recessionary pressures in the economy.
Interest rates on the central bank’s 91-day bonds –the reference rate– came down significantly (from 20.1% in October 2001 to 10.3% in September 2002) and the money supply expanded by 6.4% in real terms over that period.
This generated a slight upturn in private credit (4.3%) –after a sharp contraction the preceding year (-18%)– which was, however, much smaller than the expansion of public credit (13.9%) and was not enough to jump-start the productive sectors of the economy, given the poor expectations arising from the general political instability and high real lending rates (16.3%).
Nevertheless, in the fourth quarter of 2002 monetary policy had to change course in order to contain inflationary pressures and slow the devaluation of the currency.
The central bank thus increased the yield on its 91-day bonds three times (to February and March 2003, respectively).
The closure in July 2002 of the last of the savings and loan cooperatives –which lost depositors an amount estimated at close to US$ 200 million– and the establishment of institutional mechanisms for the oversight of parafinancial enterprises seem to have staved off the worst risks of this particular period.
However, the financial effects of this crisis (not to mention the social effects, which have been evidenced by the continued claims of depositors) were manifested by a downturn in local-currency time deposits, the only monetary liability to record a real decrease (-5.3%).
Without a doubt, the whole banking system was affected –in its indicators of profitability and, especially, of asset quality– by the deterioration in the economic environment in general and the financial sphere in particular.
Net bank earnings fell by 24% in real terms, while loan loss provisions as a percentage of loans outstanding rose to 84.4% (compared to 66.3% in 2001).
The monetary authorities remained flexible on exchange-rate policy but intervened to avoid large fluctuations.
At the end of September foreign currency deposits represented 37% of broad money (M3) and 45% of all deposits in the system.
The prevailing economic, political and social uncertainty, however, altered the portfolio composition of these deposits in favour of more liquid instruments.
This was apparent in the fact that time deposits in dollars decreased from 43% of total foreign currency deposits in 2001 to 37% in 2002.
Another factor contributing to this phenomenon was the downturn in levels of activity and income, which made it harder for depositors to tie up their monetary assets for longer periods.
It had participated in CARICOM since 1997 with provisional membership status, subject to ratification by the Haitian Parliament.
Although it may be premature to attempt an analysis of the possible effects of this step on the country’s economy, it should be mentioned that, unlike its CARICOM partners, Haiti began to open its economy to the world market almost unilaterally from 1995 onward, so that its tariffs are already among the lowest in the region.
In fact, the highest tariff level is 15%, barring a few exceptions for products such as gasoline (57.8%).
In its negotiations with CARICOM, Haiti was able to benefit from a number of safeguards, particularly its status as the region’s only LDC and renewable tariff truces on almost 500 products, in view of the common external tariffs applicable under the CARICOM regime.
Disposable national income grew by a meagre 1.3% and per capita GDP was negative for the third year running, at -2.5%, owing to a further downturn in output (-0.5%), which was accompanied by a 6.4% decline in imports of goods and services.
Even so, as a result of the meagre development of GDP over that five-year period (1.3% a year), the volume of imports had risen by 62%.
Owing to the structural conditions underlying these phenomena, the country is able to meet only half its domestic demand.
Meanwhile, on the demand side, the negative trend in private consumption (-1% in 2002) and in exports of goods and services (-2.9%), as well as the negligible rise in investment (1.3%), confirmed that the country was experiencing another economic recession.
The domestic supply of goods and services declined largely because of a downward trend in the agricultural sector (-3.7%) that resulted from poor weather conditions (droughts and floods), and especially because of a combination of adverse effects associated with structural failings in the sector.
Though it lacks both productive and financial resources, the domestic agricultural sector has to compete with external agricultural supply in very unfavourable conditions.
This was compounded by the negative effects of another downturn (-11%) in the international price of coffee, which is one of Haiti’s main cash crops.
Manufacturing stood still at 0.3%, undoubtedly as a result of a weakening of the maquila industry, which is its largest component.
In turn, almost all the other sectors of local activity stalled or declined outright, in part because of a sharp drop in private consumption.
In addition, local demand has shifted strongly towards Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 231 imported goods.
For example, imports of “worn clothing” (Harmonized System code 6309) and “edible offal” (code 0206) from the United States amounted to over US$ 10 million.
Within the category of “other services” (49.4% of GDP), the largest segment –commerce, restaurants and hotels (26.5% of GDP)– showed no variation, which seems to reflect a considerable downturn even in the informal activities that dominate this subsector.
The stagnation of construction (0.9%) also illustrated the economy’s overall trend towards recession, in view of the procyclical nature of this activity.
The downswing was offset by public works, which accounted for over a third of public investment.
The main construction inputs rose in price (cement, 21%; rods, 9%; and bricks, 5%), however, which largely explains the recessionary tendency of private construction.
Its modest climb of 1.4% was not enough to cover unmet demand either in the commercial and industrial sector or in households, even though these two sectors’ consumption still represents only 80% and 75%, respectively, of the figure recorded in 1998.
The closure for several months of the country’s largest hydroelectric plant forced the authorities to resort to private suppliers and to extend a special subsidy to the State company to enable it to import additional hydrocarbons.
This upsurge began in the second half of the year and worsened in 2003, with the 12-month rate reaching 42% in June.
This state of affairs was mainly a result of currency devaluation and fuel price adjustments.
What is more, a breakdown of more specific segments that have a major impact on Haiti’s consumption patterns, particularly agricultural goods, reveals much sharper increases.
The prices of domestic agricultural goods rose considerably faster than the overall price index.
The nominal minimum wage (36 gourdes a day) remained unchanged until February 2003, when it was increased to 70 gourdes (which is less than US$ 2).
The purchasing power of the minimum wage had already dropped by over 50% with respect to its level of 1996, when the last adjustment took place.
The recent increase therefore falls far short of making up the decline in the general population’s standards of living, which deteriorated even more quickly following the widespread price increases that began to be observed in January 2003.
In a country whose population consists for the most part of “non-wage earners”, this indicator, though it does not reflect actual average income, illustrates the sort of shortfall in resource availability that large segments of the population may face.
Although they refer to 2001, the preliminary findings of a survey on living conditions conducted by the Haitian Institute of Statistics bear out this hypothesis.
The data show that 57% of urban households and 82.5% of rural households are poor (meaning that their income does not exceed US$ 2 a day in terms of purchasing power parity).
Households defined as living in extreme poverty (US$ 1 a day) accounted for 38% of urban households and 64% of rural ones.
According to the Haitian Association of Industry (ADIH), employment in the maquila industry saw an upturn, with almost 5,000 workers hired in 2002.
At the same time, the magnitude of unemployment, which borders on 40% in urban areas, together with the absence of any specific policies to deal with it and the persistent economic crisis, have set the country back yet again in this area, which undoubtedly constitutes one of the Haitian economy’s most dramatic structural lags.
Haiti’s economy has traditionally been weak in respect of external merchandise trade and –unlike other Caribbean economies in which tourism activity helps to redress the imbalance– has not been able to offset this with strong trade in services.
The worsening of domestic production conditions and the slowdown in the United States economy in 2002 have also contributed to the external sector’s recessionary performance.
Exports, whose performance declined perilously for the third year running (down by 10% in both value and volume), were not enough to offset the trade deficit, since they financed barely a third of imports.
Although imports trended downward, they still accounted for a substantial share of overall supply (53%).
Of course, certain categories of imports are highly inelastic, in particular hydrocarbons and food.
Haiti’s external trade with the United States, its main export market (91%) and the main origin of its imports (55%), trended downward in keeping with the decline in merchandise exports and imports overall.
The depressed state of United States demand hurt maquila activity in the area of textiles and clothing, which recorded a significant drop in value and volume (7.8% and 8.7%, respectively).
Mango exports, by contrast, displayed a large upturn (63% in value and 48% in volume).
Cocoa exports were also up (by 164% in value and 48% in volume) as a result of a 57% jump in international prices. 232 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Large inflows of remittances from abroad kept the current account from showing an even bigger deficit.
Remittances –mainly from the United States– are an essential feature of Haiti’s socio-economic situation, since their contribution to GDP (25%) is much larger than in any other country in the region (compared to 13% in El Salvador and 8% in the Dominican Republic, for example).
They represent by far the country’s most important source of foreign exchange, providing almost twice the amount brought in by goods and services exports.
In fiscal year 2002 Haiti’s accumulated arrears totalled US$ 49 million, but the country received disbursements of only US$ 13 million, which fell far short of meeting its need for fresh resources.
The overall debt balance therefore remained almost unchanged at US$ 1.212 billion, but rose to 38% as a proportion of In the framework of the bicentenary of Haiti’s independence, which will be celebrated next year, a number of plans have been made for foreign direct investment in the tourism segment in fiscal year 2003.
These investments, which involve United States and French partners, would total close to US$ 75 million.
Almost all of these plans are still at a preliminary stage, but if investments in the course of the year bring in some US$ 25 million, Haiti will record a level of FDI not seen for the last 20 years.
Between October 2002 and April 2003 external trade with the United States displayed an upswing in both exports (22%) and imports (31%).
The increase in exports was attributable chiefly to higher sales of maquila-produced textiles (which were up by 14% in volume and 12% in value at annualized rates to April) and cocoa (whose volume and value soared by 81% and 197%, respectively).
Higher agricultural imports were largely a reflection of the performance of a small group of consumer commodities (rice, wheat, chicken and legumes), which account for over 50% of the rise.
Rice imports, which alone represent 12% of agricultural supply, showed a volume increase of 50%.
Main trends In 2002 the performance of the Honduran economy was hampered for the second year in a row by the slow growth of the world economy, whose effects were compounded by a number of domestic factors that conspired against an economic recovery.
The result was a meagre growth rate of 2.4%, which was similar to the previous year’s rate.
Inflation continued to trend downward to reach 8.1%, while the rate of unemployment and the real exchange rate varied little.
The central government and balance-of-payments current-account deficits were lower than in 2001, at 5.5% and 3.7% of GDP, respectively.
The prices of traditional export products remained low and there was a sharp decline in external cooperation resources to rebuild the infrastructure devastated by hurricane Mitch in late 1998.
A number of adverse domestic factors came into play during the year.
First, the after-effects of the hurricane were still making themselves felt, especially in the agricultural sector and in small and medium-sized firms.
Second, the economy suffered as a result of the uncertainty associated with the country’s difficulties in implementing its agreement with IMF.
Lastly, the new government which took office in January delayed the implementation of public investment projects, opting instead to give top priority to the improvement of fiscal affairs.
This decision on the government’s part stemmed from the objective of complying with the conditions required to benefit from the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
One of these conditions was to arrive at a new agreement with IMF, since the previous one was not completed satisfactorily, especially with regard to fiscal affairs.
Under the HIPC Initiative the country would obtain external debt relief worth more than US$ 900 million over the next 15 years, which would be used to carry forward the poverty reduction strategy begun in 2002.
This combination of factors, which carried over into the first half of 2003, was compounded by the failure to reach a new agreement with IMF as planned.
Uncertainty, which is one of the factors that weigh most heavily in investment decisions, will therefore continue to dog the Honduran economy.
The country’s sluggish economic growth was a reflection of several worrying trends, the first of which was a slide in gross fixed investment for the third year running.
This was accompanied by feeble growth in the maquila industry and a decline in exports, both of which resulted from slack external demand and the appreciation of the lempira, which has continued uninterrupted for the last six years.
In addition, the downturn in both external aid and foreign direct investment suggests that net transfers of external resources will continue to shrink.
Lastly, indirect tax receipts, which account for three quarters of tax revenue, weakened for the third year in a row.
The central bank’s monetary programme estimates growth at between 3% and 3.5% in 2003, based on the supposition of an economic upturn in the United States, which is Honduras’s main trading partner.
Other goals are to bring the annual rate of inflation to between 7.5% 234 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and 8% and to reduce the central government’s fiscal deficit to the equivalent of 3.5% of GDP.
If the economy were to see an upswing, the balance-of-payments current-account deficit would widen to 6.6% of GDP.
The tax reform adopted in April 2003, which could bring in additional revenues in excess of 1% of GDP during the year, together with the restructuring of the public sector planned for the second half, should make it possible to reduce the fiscal deficit faster than in 2002.
Within this framework, the administration’s policy mix continues to be based on fiscal adjustment as a route towards a looser monetary policy.
The government also hopes to conclude the negotiations on a free trade agreement between the Central American countries and the United States, and to move forward with the formation of the Central American Customs Union.
A number of the indicators now available for the first quarter of 2003 suggest that growth for the year will be slightly higher than in 2002.
The economic reactivation is proceeding very slowly, since external demand has yet to pick up significantly from its level of the past two years.
A little propulsion has been provided by domestic demand, which is displaying an incipient upswing in investment and a modest rate of consumption.
Exchange rate against the dol Ov rall bal nce b a December-to-December variation. b Includes interest.
Donations, by contrast, fell by almost 40%, since foreign assistance in the wake of hurricane Mitch is coming to an end.
Total expenditure shrank in real terms (-3.1%) for the first time since 1997.
The fiscal adjustment primarily affected capital expenditure, which fell by 23%, while current expenditure was up by 4.9%.
Current saving was negative for the second year running and came to represent only 0.9% of GDP.
Spending on wages and salaries rose by 8.3% in real terms, despite such measures as the elimination of duplicated posts and of two thirds of all vacant posts.
Another item to see a rise was transfers (17%), owing to the expansion of contributions to decentralized institutions.
By contrast, interest payments contracted by almost 11% as a result of debt rescheduling, debt forgiveness and lower interest rates.
Two fifths of the financing for the deficit came from external sources and the rest from domestic sources.
The non-financial public-sector deficit also shrank, from Apart from tax reforms, activities to carry forward structural reforms included the adoption of measures to strengthen the legal system and combat corruption, and the adoption of the Administrative Simplification Act.
By setting the inflation target at 8% (after the country had posted inflation of 8.8% in 2001), the central bank allowed itself room for a looser monetary policy.
The main policy instrument consisted of open-market operations, in both the longer-established local-currency form and the new modality of dollar-denominated monetary absorption certificates, which were introduced in 2001.
Monetary absorption by means of these two modalities reached 3 billion lempiras, which was 600 million less than in 2001.
The goals of the economic programme were to achieve a central government deficit of 5% of GDP, an inflation rate of 8% and exchange-rate stability.
The early months of 2003 saw no change in economic policy objectives and instruments, with the exception of the fiscal deficit target, which was reduced to 3.5% of GDP.
The authorities sought to improve the country’s fiscal health because the size of the deficit, at 6% of GDP in 2001, was blocking progress in the negotiations with IMF.
The steps they took in this direction included the adoption of austerity measures and the reining-in of current expenditure, the negotiation of statutory wage increases and tax reform under the Financial Balance and Social Protection Act.
This legislation includes measures to increase tax revenues, such as the widening of the base of contributors liable to pay taxes, stricter controls on exemptions and penalties for tax evasion.
At the same time, import taxes were lowered to harmonize tariffs with those of the other Central American countries.
In April 2003 the authorities adopted a new reform aimed at enhancing tax equity, broadening the tax base and stabilizing State revenues.
Current income expanded by 2.2% in real terms, thanks to a 23% increase in non-tax revenues.
By contrast, tax revenues were down (0.3%) because of the weakness of the economy.
These revenues rose by just over 2% in real terms in the first quarter of 2003, however, as a result of the reform and of tighter controls.
Receipts from direct taxes fell by 0.9%, after having risen by almost 8% in 2001.
Sales taxes were up by 1.6% in real terms, in keeping with the performance of the economy in general, while taxes on services rose by 10.5%.
Lastly, receipts from external trade taxes plunged by 18%, partly as a result of tariff reductions.
The expansion of non-tax income, which represented one eighth of current income in 2002, was a result of a non-recurring 32% increase in current transfers to the central government.
Net international reserves expanded even faster in the financial system overall, at a rate of 20%, and current-account deposits also increased.
As a result, monetary aggregates in general expanded at faster rates than in 2001.
Narrow money (M1) was up by 14.6%, which was almost three times the rate recorded in 2001.
The money supply (M2) grew by 11.3%, which was three percentage points higher than the 2001 rate, while broad money (M3) increased by 13.2%, which was slightly lower than the previous year’s rate.
Monetary aggregates expanded at a similar pace in the first quarter of 2003.
Although liquidity was more abundant than planned, credit to the private sector was lower for the fifth year running, since it grew by only 7.6% in 2002, which was below the rate of inflation.
The abundance of liquidity did, however, have a slight effect on interest rates, which have been descending steadily for several years.
Refers to net credit to the public and private sectors extended by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. 238 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean The interest-rate spread therefore broadened to 1,208 basis points, which made it one of the widest in the region.
To prevent similar problems from occurring in the future, the central bank raised the minimum capital requirement for institutions in the financial system and limited total credit to related parties to no more than 30% of an institution’s capital and reserves (whereas that proportion had previously been as high as 120%).
In addition, financial institutions were barred from participating directly or indirectly in offshore operations by taking deposits or channelling resources from the public, and legislation was passed to combat asset laundering.
In May 2003 an early warning system was launched with a view to reducing the time between the detection of a banking problem and the adoption of suitable measures to correct it.
Exchange-rate policy continued to be based on a crawling-band regime involving a system of public auctions of foreign exchange, known by the Spanish acronym SAPDI, and the government attempted to strike a balance between keeping the exchange rate competitive and minimizing the volatility of the real exchange rate.
The lempira exchange rate rose to 16.9, representing a nominal depreciation of 6.3%, which was slightly above the rate of 5.1% recorded in 2001.
In real terms this represented a slight appreciation, however, in a continuation of the pattern that began six years ago and carried over into the first half of 2003, when nominal depreciation was less than 3%. c) Trade policy The new government continued to pursue a trade policy geared to opening up new markets and consolidating earlier gains.
Progress was made with the other Central American countries in standardizing tariffs on imports from third countries.
Moreover, tariff rates on imports of final and intermediate goods were changed to a flat 15% under the Financial Balance and Social Protection Act.
A plan of action was adopted for the elimination of barriers to intraregional trade and to the formation of the Central American Customs Union.
In addition, the Treaty on Investment and Trade in Services was adopted, and progress was made in the negotiations on a Central American agreement on government procurement and in other discussions.
The negotiations on a free trade agreement between the United States and the Central American countries moved ahead quickly, thanks to the United States government’s political will to conclude them by the end of 2003.
One positive development in early 2003 was Nicaragua’s temporary suspension of the 35% tariff it had imposed on imports from Honduras.
Domestic demand, which increased at a similar pace, was undermined for the third year running by a drop in gross fixed investment (5.7%).
Within this category, private investment showed a degree of vitality, with a rise of 3.8%, but this was more than offset by a 27% downturn in public investment.
Total consumption was up by 2.1%, which was less than half the expansion posted the year before.
This was attributable to the sluggish growth of government consumption (0.5%), which had recorded double-digit increases in the preceding four years as a result of the reconstruction process.
The growth rate of private consumption declined from 4.4% in 2001 to 2.4% in 2002, despite a copious inflow of family remittances.
Exports and imports followed a similar pattern, with volume increases of 2.1%, compared to 5.1% and 4%, respectively, in 2001.
Performance was fairly even across all the main sectors of activity except construction, which contracted for the second year running, this time by 14.6%.
By contrast, agriculture saw an upswing of 4.8% after having stagnated in 2001.
This reflected the strong performance of products for domestic consumption such as maize, rice and plantains, whose production expanded by more than a fifth, and beans, which expanded by more than two fifths.
Cotton production surged by an extraordinary 85%, while banana production shrank by 8% after two years of brisk growth.
Coffee showed a small upturn in 2002, livestock production stagnated and poultry production performed well again after several years of rapid expansion.
In the first quarter of 2003 the agricultural production index showed an increase of 5%.
Output of textiles and clothing was up by 7.7% in a continuation of its positive performance in recent years.
By contrast, non-metallic minerals, base metal industries and metal products, machinery and equipment dropped from relatively high positive growth rates in 2001 to negative rates in 2002.
This was not the case of the mining sector, however, which expanded by 5%.
In 2003 the construction industry has shown signs of reversing its contractionary trend of 2001-2002, with growth of 27% in the first quarter.
Output of electricity, gas and water made up the downturn observed in 2001, increasing by 5.6%.
Tourism maintained the buoyancy it has shown in recent years, with an expansion of 12%.
After having retreated slightly in 2001, maquila activity made a half-hearted recovery in 2002 (1.5%).
The slow growth of the United States economy, which is the main destination for maquila exports, was to blame for this poor performance.
The number of people employed in the maquila industry dipped to 107,000, which represented a decrease of 2.4%.
These trends were reversed in the first quarter of 2003, however, when maquila exports and employment jumped by about 13%.
This was attributable to an excellent trend in food prices, which rose by only 1.6%.
Meanwhile, upward pressure was exerted by the costs of education (16.4%) and housing, water, electricity, gas and other fuels (14.8%).
Cumulative inflation amounted to 3.6% in the first six months of 2003 and 7.2% over the 12 months ending in June.
The average annual variation in the wholesale price index moved from 5.4% in 2001 to 2%, which was the lowest figure recorded in the last 15 years.
This was, admittedly, the result of slack domestic demand, which limited the increase in wholesale prices for locallyproduced goods to 1.4%, while agricultural products posted almost no variation (0.1%).
The prices of imported goods rose by 3.2%, which was half the increase recorded in 2001.
The nominal minimum wage increased by an average of 9% beginning in May, compared to 15.9% the year before.
The public-sector payroll expanded by 16.3%, which represented a real rise of 7.6%.
This reflected the adjustment of statutory wages for teachers and medical and paramedical staff.
Household survey data show that the economically active population grew by 4.5% and employment, by 2.3%.
The difference between the two figures was 240 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean explained by an increase in invisible underemployment, indicating that the majority of new entrants to the labour market found employment in the informal sector.
The rate of open unemployment decreased from 4.1% to 3.9% nationwide, but increased in the two largest cities, Tegucigalpa and San Pedro Sula.
External demand remained weak in 2002, especially in the United States, which is the target market for half of Honduras’s exports, and the terms of trade deteriorated for the fourth consecutive year.
Current transfers continued to rise, and the balance-of-payments current account ended the year at US$ -240 million.
Goods exports declined for the second year in a row, this time by 0.6%, which reflected a slide in traditional exports (7.7%) and an increase in non-traditional and maquila exports (3.2% and 1.5%, respectively).
With the exception of coffee, practically all traditional exports recorded declines in both unit value and the volume exported.
This resulted in double-digit slumps in the export values of sugar, silver, zinc, bananas, lead and tobacco.
In the case of coffee, the expansion of exports was attributable to an increase in volume, since its international price continued to be depressed.
In the first quarter of 2003 coffee exports were up by 11%, which heralds a good year for this product.
Shrimp and soap and detergent recorded decreases, while the export value of all the other products went up.
Maquila exports, which were strong performers throughout the 1990s, showed little growth in 2002.
Goods imports came to a virtual standstill (-0.1%) and imports of raw materials and intermediate goods were down by 3%, despite an increase in purchases of petroleum and fuels.
The value of imports of construction materials tumbled by a third, as the period of reconstruction in the wake of hurricane Mitch drew to a close.
By contrast, the value of imports of consumer and capital goods climbed slightly.
The services balance posted an upturn of US$ 50 million, mainly on the strength of the tourism sector’s performance.
The factor income balance worsened, with a downturn of US$ 20 million, while the balance of current transfers rose by US$ 30 million.
This reflected the trend in family remittances, which continued to expand, reaching the equivalent of 11% of GDP.
The capital and financial account posted a balance of US$ 190 million, which was US$ 40 million less than the 2001 figure.
Long-term capital inflows were less abundant, but this downturn was partially offset by flows of short-term capital.
Credit to the public sector moved from an inflow of US$ 124 million in 2001 to an outflow of US$ 10 million.
Net international reserves expanded by US$ 214 million, bringing the total to US$ 1.85 billion, of which two thirds, or the equivalent of 4.3 months’ worth of imports, are held by the central bank.
Gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 0.8% in 2002 –barely half the government’s target– and an expansion of around 1.5% is forecast for 2003.
This lacklustre performance is insufficient to avert fresh job losses or to halt the slide in per capita income.
The 2002 result reflected a combination of sluggish consumption, a slide in investment for the second year running and a weak performance by non-oil exports, which had been the engine of Mexican economic growth in recent years.
A robust upswing in oil exports and lower international interest rates gave contrast to an otherwise largely negative external panorama.
Although external trade was virtually flat in 2002, exports grew faster than imports, and this helped narrow the balance-of-payments current account deficit to 2.3% of GDP.
Maquila exports (50% of the total) slumped, causing plant closures and numerous redundancies, as a knock-on effect of anaemic demand in the United States and the transfer of operations to other countries able to offer lower production costs.
In contrast, oil exports benefited from the high price of crude on the international market.
The transfers account revealed a steep rise in remittances from Mexicans living abroad (1.6% of output); and foreign direct investment (FDI) totalling US$ 13.6 billion was sufficient to finance almost the entire current account deficit on its own.
Economic policy was geared towards keeping economic fundamentals in balance by maintaining fiscal discipline and targeting public spending on social development and job creation.
The sluggish performance of the productive sector stymied the government’s efforts in this direction, however.
The 2002 public-sector deficit, at 1.2% of GDP, exceeded the official target of 0.7%, largely because of the cost of reforming the rural credit system, which alone represented 0.6% of GDP.
Once again, the core objective of monetary policy was to keep inflation in check; nonetheless the rate rose to 5.7% in 2002, overshooting its target by 1.2 percentage points.
During the first seven months of 2003 prices rose by only 1.4%, however, which suggests that the annual target of 3% announced for this year is within reach.
The government’s monetary policy stance shifted several times in 2002, in response to changing economic conditions.
The downturn that occurred in the early months of 2002 led to a loosening of monetary policy in April, but as exchange- and interest-rate volatility began to threaten the authorities’ grip on inflation, Banco de México increased liquidity requirements and maintained this tighter monetary policy into 2003.
Within the floating exchange-rate regime, the peso fluctuated in response to international economic and financial conditions during 2002, although its real parity 242 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean for the year as a whole remained unchanged.
This represented a break in the real appreciation of the peso which had been taking place since 1996.
Nominal currency depreciation, compounded by the impact of bad weather on the prices of a number of foodstuffs, were responsible for pushing the overall price index more than one percentage point above the government’s Overall demand rose by a modest 1.1% in 2002.
This was driven mainly by private consumption, whose buoyancy reflected a 1.5% real increase in wages, further encouraged by consumer credit schemes implemented by banks and non-bank institutions.
The informal sector absorbed some of the labour not employed in formal activities, which translated into a high level of underemployment.
Employment in the maquila industry contracted by 10% with the loss of In 2003 the Government has targeted economic policy on reviving production and employment, while ensuring prudence and economic discipline in order to maintain a stable and predictable environment.
Fiscal policy has again been geared towards strengthening public finances and invigorating production, with a new focus on boosting the domestic market.
Public spending has been aimed at redressing social deficits and restructuring security systems, together with the modernization and upkeep of the country’s physical infrastructure.
Economic activity continued to crawl along in the early months of 2003, basically reflecting modest growth in external demand and a slow increase in investment.
This has further perpetuated the torpid growth rates that have persisted for three years now.
The uncertain path of recovery in the United States continues to conspire against the Mexican economy, even though the conclusion of the conflict in Iraq helped to calm financial volatility and removed a factor of uncertainty from the international panorama.
These developments, in conjunction with the approach of mid-year parliamentary elections in Mexico, have strengthened doubts over the future course of the domestic economy and are weighing on production and investment decisions.
The official growth target of 3% announced at the beginning of the year now looks difficult to attain; growth of 1.5% would be more feasible, driven mainly by private consumer spending.
Although this muted performance will make it hard for the Government to meet its fiscal deficit target of 0.6% of GDP, it should ease pressure on the balance of payments, and the current account deficit is now forecast at around 2% of output.
Against a backdrop of slack external demand and volatile economic expectations, monetary and foreign-exchange policies played a key role in preserving financial stability.
The tonic was fiscal discipline and monetary austerity, but the structural reforms proposed by the Government –especially the fiscal component– failed to gain support.
In 2003 economic policy continues to face a panorama of external vulnerability, dominated by uncertainty as to the course of the economic upswing in the United States, which largely determines the fate of any recovery in Mexico, at least in the short term.
Fiscal policy remained tight throughout 2002, with the level of economic activity acting as a drag on receipts, although non-recurrent revenues received by Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) helped to narrow the deficit and facilitated an upturn in public investment, following its sharp contraction in 2001.
In 2003 the Government has kept public spending on a tight rein and has pursued a cautious borrowing policy, while persisting in its efforts to increase receipts.
A fiscal deficit of 0.6% of GDP is forecast for the year as a whole.
The public-sector deficit amounted to 1.2% of GDP in 2002, which was half a percentage point over target, partly because of the cost of winding up the rural credit institution Banrural and putting Financiera Rural in its place.
Expenditure expanded by 6% in real terms, and income, by 4%; the higher spending was financed mainly by a 38% real increase in PEMEX revenues.
Public-sector budgetary income came in at around 22.6% of GDP, slightly below the level forecast early in the year.
Tax revenues expanded by 6.1% in real terms and represented 11.8% of GDP; PEMEX revenues were up by 45%, accounting for 7.2% of GDP.
The best revenue earners were income tax, thanks to administrative simplification measures; and levies on production and services, reflecting a higher rate of gasoline tax.
This offset more modest expansions in VAT receipts (due to slacker growth in domestic sales) and in import duties (reflecting lower imports, and the implementation of tariff reductions as free trade agreements came into effect).
Non-tax revenues contracted by 13% in real terms, reflecting a downturn in petroleum duties in the wake of smaller export volumes and weaker domestic sales by PEMEX.
Net budgetary expenditure in 2002 rose by 6% in real terms to absorb 23.7% of GDP –1% higher than budgeted at the start of the year.
Excluding the Banrural- Financiera Rural operation, the real increase in spending would have been just 2.4%.
The public-sector borrowing requirement (PSBR) which uses the main public finance categories to measure the effect of government activity on financial markets, amounted to 2.6% of GDP at the end of 2002 (1.3 percentage points less than in 2001, and 0.4% below the government’s forecast).
In addition to the public-sector economic balance, PSBR takes account of financial intermediation and a number of contingent programmes.
In 2002 the bulk of public-sector financing came from the domestic market.
Total public debt amounted to 25% of GDP, 1.6 percentage points more than in 2001, while external debt expanded by 0.7 percentage points to reach 12.5% of GDP, owing entirely to the nominal depreciation of the peso.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 247 issues of US$ 4.066 billion provided the main source of external financing, which totalled US$ 9.4 billion.
Monetary prudence and liquidity constraints have been maintained in the first few months of 2003.
During the course of 2002, the monetary authority took successive steps to tighten liquidity.
In February it announced a first increase of 60 million pesos per day in the “corto” mechanism, raising this to a level of 360 million pesos.
This was intended to prevent inflationary expectations being stoked and prices in general being pushed up by the partial elimination of subsidies on residential electricity rates announced in January.
In April, as the economic outlook brightened and no significant inflationary pressures had materialized, the Bank eased its monetary stance and restored the liquidity-constraint mechanism to its position at the start of the year, namely 300 million pesos.
In the second semester, international economic prospects took a turn for the worse, however, particularly in the United States.
This had a negative impact on expectations throughout the Mexican economy, and was reflected in both the exchange rate and rates of interest on Mexican bonds on the international market.
With exchange- and interest-rate volatility now threatening to jeopardize its control of inflation, Banco de México adjusted policy once more by tightening liquidity requirements, from 300 million to 400 million pesos from September onwards, and then again to 475 million pesos in December.
Prices on the Mexican Stock Exchange (BMV) also fluctuated around a generally falling trend, taking their cue from the New York Stock Exchange.
Total lending to the private sector by banks and non-bank institutions rose by 3.4% in real terms, thereby breaking the downward trend that had persisted since 1995.
This upturn was attributable to an increase in non-bank credit (7.7%), since commercial bank loans fell once more (-2%), in keeping with the pattern prevailing since the crisis of the mid-1990s.
In real terms, the exchange rate held steady at its 2001 level, thereby halting the real appreciation that had been proceeding inexorably since 1996, apart from a pause in 1998.
The local currency appreciated during the first few months of 2002, to reach nine pesos to the dollar in April, before starting a gradual depreciation which took it to 10.2 pesos per dollar by the end of the year.
The exchange rate continued to rise during the first half of 2003, reaching the 11 peso mark by May. c) Structural reform The Government persevered with its trade diversification and liberalization strategy, and held negotiations aimed at signing free trade agreements with Japan, Singapore, Panama and the members of MERCOSUR.
Following its debate in Congress in late 2001, the government’s integrated fiscal reform proposal ended up as measures that were too diluted to boost receipts and which, moreover, encountered an unfavourable economic environment on implementation.
Other important measures, including reforms in the energy, telecommunications, labour and fiscal domains are awaiting approval or submission to Congress. 248 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Sluggish output growth in 2002 reflected very similar performances from the different components of aggregate supply and demand, forming a macroeconomic panorama that was generally weak.
As in 2001, but in contrast to the 1995-2000 period, the economy patently lacked a dynamic component to drive growth forward.
In 1995-2000 external demand and occasionally consumption and investment alternated in this role, but in the most recent biennium growth rates have dropped across the board.
Following a 2.8% downturn in aggregate demand in the first three months of 2002, the second quarter saw an upswing that held out the prospect of recovery.
Nonetheless, demand sagged again at the end of the year –mainly because international pessimism restrained investment– and output was up by only 0.8% at the year’s end.
Exports and consumption posted meagre increases of 1.4% and 0.9%, respectively, while gross fixed capital formation declined for the second year in a row (-1.3%).
The modest consumption growth was driven by private consumer spending (up by 1.2%), which offset a decline in public consumption (-1.3%).
Private consumption was impaired by job losses in the formal sector of the economy and the low purchasing power generated by informal employment; but it also benefited in 2002 and 2003 from a real increase in average wages in some sectors, and from medium- and long-term bank and non-bank financing schemes at low interest rates, mainly for durable goods purchases.
Bank and non-bank consumer lending to the private sector thus increased in real terms for the third straight year at double-digit rates (14% and 23%, respectively).
Non-bank credit played a major part in this, accounting for almost half of all consumer lending at the end of 2002, compared to just Investment growth in construction (1.7%) was not enough to offset a decline in the machinery and equipment segment (-3.7%).
Gross fixed capital formation continued to trend downwards into the early months of 2003, thereby highlighting the obstacles facing economic revival in the medium term.
Private investment contracted by 2.8%, while its public-sector counterpart expanded by 7.3%.
The decline in private investment –for the second year running– was attributable to uncertain economic expectations and negligible growth in corporate profits.
Public investment, meanwhile, was directed at energy, roads, education and potable water supply.
Activities targeting the external market saw slower growth in some cases and even negative rates in others, especially in the second half of 2002, compared to activities that are more dependent on domestic demand.
Following an upturn in the first three quarters, agriculture declined by 4.5% in the final period, resulting in an average downturn of 0.4% for the year overall, which carried over into the first quarter of 2003 (-0.2%).
This result reflected a combination of climatic factors that came into play at the end of the year and affected a wide range of products including maize, wheat, oranges, sorghum, rice, soya and avocados.
Dragged down by the effects of the slowdown in the United States, mining and manufacturing declined by 0.3% and 0.6%, respectively, while non-tradable production sectors, such as construction, and electricity, gas and water, expanded by 1.7% and 3.8%, respectively.
Growth in construction largely represented public works, mainly in the petroleum, petrochemicals, electricity and communications sectors, which persisted into the first quarter of 2003 generating a further expansion of 1.8%.
In 2002, manufacturing output contracted in 26 of its 49 segments, of which the hardest hit were textiles (-6.2%), metallic products and machinery (-1.7%) and miscellaneous manufactures (-2%), although there has been a slight rebound in 2003 (0.9% in the first quarter).
In contrast to the previous year, the automotive industry slumped badly in the early months of 2003, with production down by 14% in the wake of 11.6% and 21% reductions in domestic and foreign sales, respectively.
Plant closures generally reflected lacklustre demand in the United States market, although several operations transferred production to locations that were more attractive in terms of labour cost, productivity and local linkages.
The wave of closures appears to have died down in 2003, and the number of establishments recorded in April was practically unchanged from the December 2002 figure.
In 2002 the commerce, restaurants and hotels segment Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 249 declined by 0.4%, reflecting its reliance on the external sector; but transport and communications grew by 2.2% thanks to demand for telephone services and rail, maritime and road transport.
Financial services, insurance and real estate expanded by 4.4%, on the back of an increase in financial intermediation and housing rental.
In 2002 Banco de México reiterated its long-term objective of achieving convergence between domestic inflation and price increases in the United States and Canada.
The rate of inflation posted in 2002 was 1.2 percentage points above the forecast issued by the Government at the end the previous year, following three straight years in which targets had been achieved.
The factors that prevented the target from being met in 2002 included the large rises in residential electricity and domestic gas charges, and price rises in the fruit and vegetable category.
Electricity charges fell in the northern cities at the start of the 2003 warm season; and the prices of certain goods, especially agricultural products, declined.
Inflation was negative in May and very slightly positive in the following months, thereby lowering the annualized rate from 5.7% in December 2002 to 4.1% in July 2003.
As firms had to adjust their production levels in response to slacker demand (especially externally) large numbers of workers were laid off, particularly in the export sector.
The average number of workers registered with the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) declined in 2002 for the second year running, from an average of meant an additional loss of 0.8%, or over 100,000 jobs, following a 0.5% decrease in 2001.
This was due entirely to a reduction in the number of permanent workers registered, since the number of temporary workers actually increased slightly.
Labour demand contracted in the formal sector, although informal activities appear to have absorbed large numbers of workers.
This would account for the relatively small increase in the rate of open unemployment, from 2.5% in 2001 to 2.7% in 2002.
Workers employed for less than 35 hours per week, together with the openly unemployed, accounted for 18.6% of the economically active population (EAP), as was the case in 2001.
According to the National Institute of Statistics, Geography and Information (INEGI), 200,000 workers joined the informal economy in the first quarter of 2003, making a total of 10.6 million or 26.2% of the total employed population.
The working population not receiving social-security benefit of any kind grew by 2.1% in the same period.
Employment in the maquila sector –which has been the leader in terms of job creation for the last two decades– slipped for the second year running.
Hours worked and employment declined by 10%, and the average number of maquila workers dropped from just over 1.2 million to under 1.1 million.
For a several years now, the economy has been unable to generate quality jobs in sufficient numbers, and job creation is falling ever further behind the rate of over one million new jobs per year needed to absorb workers joining the labour market.
Informal activities can act as a social cushion, but they create low-paid, low-productivity jobs with no access to social security.
Real average wages continued to trend upwards, which, in conjunction with the low rate of economic activity, resulted in higher unit labour costs.
Real wages rose by 1.5% in manufacturing, and by 4.2% in the maquila sector.
The latter partly reflected severance payments to workers laid-off, which are included in wage calculations.
Labour productivity expanded by 5.4% and 1.4% in manufacturing and maquila activities, respectively, but slipped back by 2.3% in the commerce sector.
Taken in conjunction with wage trends, these figures meant lower unit labour costs in manufacturing (-3,6%) but higher costs in maquila and commerce (2.8% and 6%, respectively).
In 2002 the balance-of-payments current account deficit came in at US$ 14.1 billion, which was almost US$ 4 billion less than the figure for 2001 and equivalent to 2.3% of GDP.
The merchandise balance recorded a deficit of US$ 8 billion in 2002 –20% less than in the previous year, thanks to an increase in the value of oil exports (13%).
The latter benefited from a US$ 3 rise in the 250 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean average price per barrel, to US$ 21.58, which surpassed the government’s estimates for 2002 by US$ 4.28.
The total value of merchandise exports amounted to almost US$ 161 billion.
Agricultural exports fell by 1.9%, due to reduced sales of fresh vegetables and produce, coffee and garbanzo beans, while tomatoes, maize, melons and watermelons, and some fresh fruits posted larger sales.
Low growth in the value of manufacturing exports (1.1%) can be blamed on weak demand in the United States, which absorbs 89% of all shipments.
A small rise in the value of imports (0.2%) was attributable to modest growth in production, domestic demand and manufacturing exports.
The latter’s large imported input component, together with a high level of intra-firm exchange, are characteristic of Mexico’s external manufacturing trade.
Imports totalled almost US$ 169 billion, of which three quarters corresponded to intermediate inputs, and the rest to capital and consumer goods in equal proportions.
Intermediate and consumer goods imports expanded by 0.3% and 7.2%, respectively, while capital goods purchases fell by 6.7%, in the wake of faltering investment.
Imports of intermediate goods by the maquila sector expanded by 2.9%, but those destined for the manufacturing sector retreated by 2%.
In the first four months the trade deficit narrowed by 51%, thanks chiefly to the persistently high prices obtained for crude oil (US$ 24.60 per barrel on average during the first five months of the year) and the slow pace of capital goods imports.
Total exports grew by 3.7% and imports, by 1.5% between January and April.
The price of crude oil trended downwards (from US$ 27.86 per barrel in January to US$ 22.40 in May), as a result of higher stocks in the United States and the possibility production in Nigeria, Iraq and Venezuela being put on a more regular footing.
Net remittances from Mexicans living abroad totalled about US$ 10.3 billion in 2002, equivalent to 1.7% of GDP and over three quarters of the value of crude oil exports.
This trend has carried over into 2003, with family remittances reaching a level of US$ 2.7 billion in the first quarter – 26% more than in the same period a year earlier.
The capital account turned in a surplus of just over US$ 20 billion in 2002, which was a similar figure to the average for the last five-year period, although US$ 4 billion less than in 2001.
This was barely more than half the figure recorded in 2001, which had been inflated by the exceptional revenue received that year from the sale of the Banamex group to CitiCorp.
Average annual FDI over the last five years (not counting the Banamex sale) was almost US$ 13.5 billion.
New investment accounted for 49% of all investment received, reinvestment of earnings 16%, imports of fixed assets by maquila firms 15%, and borrowing by firms from their parent companies abroad, the remaining 20%.
A sectoral breakdown shows that 42% was channelled to manufacturing, 30% to financial services, 12% to commerce and 8% to transport and communications.
As much as 73% of all FDI came from the United States.
During the first quarter of 2003, FDI decreased by 2.7% with respect to the same period in 2002, dropping to US$ 2.6 billion.
More than half of this went to manufacturing industry; a total of US$ 13 billion is expected for the year overall.
Exceptional revenues from oil exports drove up international reserves by US$ 7 billion in 2002, making a total of US$ 48 billion.
By May 2003 the figure had reached a record of almost US$ 55 billion.
In view of the rising cost of carrying these reserves, Banco de México introduced a mechanism to slow the rate of accumulation.
This came into effect on 2 May 2003 and consists of the daily auction of a fixed amount of dollars to domestic lending institutions.
The daily amount to be sold is preestablished every three months; for the first period of operation the figure was set at US$ 32 million.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 251 For the third consecutive year, the Nicaraguan economy experienced a slowdown.
In 2002, GDP increased by a mere 0.7%, which represented a decrease of more than two percentage points with respect to the previous year.
This translated into a further reduction of the country’s already very low per capita GDP (-1.9%) and an increase in open urban unemployment from The smaller increase in GDP was linked to the deterioration in the terms of trade, the slow growth of the global economy and world trade, and the fiscal adjustment process, which mainly affected public-sector investment.
Another factor that contributed to this poor economic performance was the political uncertainty resulting from the lack of parliamentary support for initiatives developed by the executive branch, which in turn marred the investment climate and delayed the conclusion of a new agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
In December 2002, the government signed a threeyear agreement with IMF that will permit Nicaragua to regain access to international financial cooperation and reach what is known as the “completion point” in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative, which will allow it to reduce its external debt considerably.
The programme is designed to promote economic growth and poverty relief in a climate of low inflation and fiscal sustainability.
The proposed strategy involves combining a smaller fiscal deficit with increased and more effective social expenditure aimed at combating poverty.
Monetary policy is directed towards stabilizing prices, improving the financial position of the central bank and boosting international reserves.
This poor performance marked the end of eight years of economic growth, during which an average annual growth rate of 4.8% had raised per capita GDP from US$ 420 to US$ 479 (at 1995 prices).
This constituted a partial recovery from the sharp declines caused by the serious political and economic crisis that had disrupted all production activity during the 1980s.
Much of this recovery was attributable to voluminous inflows of external resources in the form of grants and donations, family remittances and soft loans.
A further fall in inflation brought the level down to 4% in 2002.
The slope of the currency band remained at 6% for the year, which resulted in an increase in the real exchange rate.
Unlike the previous year, fiscal policy was tight, and this helped the country to achieve its monetary policy objectives in terms of stabilizing prices and the exchange rate.
The total public-sector deficit decreased from 16.4% to 9.2% of GDP and the balance-of-payments current account deficit shrank.
Official and private capital and disbursements earmarked for balance-of-payments support under the IMF agreement covered the current account deficit and contributed to a build-up in net international reserves, thus providing stronger foreign-exchange backing for the monetary base.
Under the government’s economic programme for 2003, GDP is projected to increase by 3% in real terms, inflation is expected to be 6% and the slope of the currency band is to remain the same.
During the first 252 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean semester of 2003, prices rose by 4.3%.
However, the virtual stagnation of economic activity in the first quarter suggests that the annual growth rate will be 1.5% lower than government projections.
Macroeconomic policy was quite austere, and policy measures were focused on scaling back the fiscal deficit and building up international reserves to pave the way for a gradual decrease in the domestic public debt.
In 2002, a tax reform bill was passed that is designed to expand the tax base by cutting down on tax exemptions and special tax regimes, make the tax structure less regressive and combat tax evasion.
Steps were also taken to align budgetary expenditure with the level of available resources and the country’s poverty reduction strategy.
It should also be pointed out that government savings and the easing of fiscal pressure facilitated the management of monetary policy and, to a certain degree, helped to improve the financial position of the central bank.
The new Administration that took office at the beginning of the year adopted measures to narrow the fiscal deficit.
In particular, the authorities curbed public expenditure and, in July 2002, the National Assembly cut that year’s budget by 1.5% of GDP.
In August, the National Assembly also approved a tax package aimed at significantly reducing tariff and income tax exemptions and at raising corporate and withholding tax rates.
Although the National Assembly added new items that are exempt from the general sales tax to the basket of staple goods, the tax reform bill still had a positive effect on revenues.
The central government’s current revenues were up by 19.2%, the tax burden represented 22.7% of GDP, and grants and donations rose to 7.2% of GDP.
The sources of revenue that showed the sharpest increases were income tax collections (25.1%) and tariffs (18.8%), whereas revenues from the general sales tax dropped by 1.8%.
In addition, total central government expenditure was down from 38.8% to 33.1% of GDP.
The main cause of this was the substantial cutback in investment expenditure (-23%), since current expenditure decreased by only 2.6% owing to the sizeable increase in interest payments (32.1%) occasioned by the external debt service and the cost of bailing out the banking system following the crisis in 2000-2001.
Even excluding donations, the deficit still dropped from 16.4% to 9.2% of GDP.
Unlike what occurred in 2001, the current account surplus and proceeds from privatizations reduced the need for external financing.
In addition, the government transferred the equivalent of 3.9% of GDP to the central bank, i.e. half the amount of financing that the latter had extended to the government the year before.
After several bilateral creditors agreed to forgive portions of the country’s financial obligations, the balance of the external public debt dipped slightly to US$ 6.363 billion (252% of GDP).
In order to permit fiscal targets to be reached and to reinforce the poverty reduction strategy, in February 2003 the National Assembly approved an amendment to the law providing for the expansion of the tax base.
At the end of April, reforms of the tax system and general budget for 2003 were approved, in accordance with the commitments made with IMF.
The object of this tax reform –the sixth in seven years– was to boost tax collections by 1.7% of GDP, promote exports and secure the forgiveness of 80% of the country’s external debt.
Higher budget allocations for various social sectors and an upturn in investment in infrastructure are also expected.
The fiscal adjustment policy was designed in conjunction with a looser monetary policy.
The main aims were to ensure that international reserves remained at a level conducive to the maintenance of exchangerate stability as an anchor against inflation, and to reduce domestic debt with a view to increasing liquidity in the banking sector and thus narrowing interest-rate spreads.
This coincided with the beginning of the process of recovering the assets of commercial banks that had been liquidated in previous years.
The central bank maintained the reserve requirement rate of 19.25% that had been established in September 254 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 255 2001.
The decline in the fiscal deficit facilitated the achievement of the targets set for the exchange rate and price stability.
Credit extended by the financial system to the non-financial public sector (NFPS), which had increased by 30% in 2001, shrank by 2.5%.
Credit did not begin to expand until the second half of the year, and an analysis of loan portfolios reveals a trend towards higher levels of consumer, commercial and housing loans.
A slight contraction in the production sectors’ share of credit was observed.
The increase in the money supply resulted in lower nominal interest rates.
Unemployed as a percentage of the economically active population, nationwide total. m Thirty-day deposits in commercial banks.
Eighteeen-month loans from commerical banks. o Rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the dollar exchange rate.
Average annual values used for monetary figures. q Net credit to the public and private sectors extended by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. 256 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean yields.
The increase was partly offset by larger NFPS deposits in the central bank and issues of securities.
At the same time, economic agents were shifting financial assets out of demand deposits and into dollardenominated time deposits, which have now come to account for more than 75% of total deposits.
The system of pre-announced daily minidevaluations continued to operate at the annual rate of 6% that has applied since November 1999.
In this context, the real effective exchange rate against the United States dollar depreciated by 3.9%. d) Trade policy The key items on the trade policy agenda were the continuation of the trade liberalization process and the reduction of trade barriers with the country’s main trade partners.
These measures included the opening of negotiations for a free trade agreement with the United States and progress in the creation of a customs union with the other countries of Central America. e) Structural reforms Structural reforms have progressed slowly, but a great deal of headway has been made in strengthening the prudential regulation and supervision of the banking system.
As part of the privatization of the generating units of the Nicaraguan electricity company, Empresa Nicaragüense de Electricidad (ENEL), one of these units, the Generadora Eléctrica Occidental, S.A. (GEOSA), was sold to the United States company, Coastal Power.
This process continued to be hampered by a series of legal and administrative obstacles, however.
Delays in restructuring the Nicaraguan Social Security Institute and in establishing a superintendency for the pension system also held back the start-up of private pension fund administrators.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 257 Economic activity was dampened by the sluggishness of the external market, the further deterioration of the terms of trade, the fiscal adjustment process and the delay in signing another three-year agreement with IMF.
The decline in economic activity was also due to the fact that producers and investors were slow to regain confidence following the political uncertainty caused by disagreements between the government and the National Assembly.
In a context of lower exports and cuts in public expenditure, the 0.7% increase in GDP was attributable to higher private-sector investment.
This upswing was associated with rising real wages, the high level of family remittances and greater foreign direct investment in the EPZs, the food industry, electrical energy generation and distribution, and telecommunications (especially mobile telephones).
The marked increase in gross fixed investment (6.3%) offset the downturn of the last two years, which had been triggered by political and financial uncertainty fueled by the elections and the banking crisis.
On the supply side, GDP expanded more slowly owing to the slippage of the goods production sector, which reflected the contraction in agriculture and fisheries and the near-stagnation of construction.
Services, on the other hand, showed growth rates similar to those of the previous year.
The performance of the agricultural sector was hurt by a combination of adverse factors, including unfavourable weather conditions, low international prices for some of its principal exports and problems with respect to financing.
Although the output of staple grains increased (except for rice and soybeans), agricultural activity was down by 7.2%, which was attributable to a slump in export crops, especially coffee.
Despite the fact that most producers’ debts were rescheduled, the abandonment of low-productivity areas, lower investment (particularly in maintenance) and the muted recovery of international grain prices following their collapse in 2000-2001 combined to drive down coffee output (-32%).
This result was largely a reflection of increases in the slaughtering of cattle, since exports of stock on the hoof were hurt by marketing problems and poultry production was up by a smaller amount.
This was mostly because of the decline in the lobster catch triggered by over-fishing in recent years and a downturn in the cultivation of shrimp as a glut on the international market caused export prices to sink.
The main sources of growth were the EPZs and, to a lesser extent, higher output of foodstuffs, beverages, furniture, clothing, footwear and transport equipment.
The production of petroleum products contracted as economic activity slackened and international petroleum prices rose.
Construction activity has been slowing over the last three years, primarily as a result of the lower amounts of public financial resources being allocated for the reconstruction programme that was launched in the aftermath of Hurricane Mitch in 1998.
Although private investment in residential and industrial construction picked up slightly, especially in the EPZs, overall construction activity declined even further in 2002 owing to the intensive fiscal adjustment, which dampened public investment considerably.
One important development was the recovery of the mining sector (16.8%), where activity was spurred by higher international prices for precious metals.
Services, which accounted for 43% of GDP, expanded by 2.9%, a rate similar to the previous year’s.
This was attributable to the sluggish growth of domestic demand, tight fiscal and monetary policies, the relative abundance of farm produce for domestic consumption, more stable public utility rates and charges, and the National Assembly’s decision to apply a zero tax rate to the 53 products included in the basket of staple goods.
This decision fuelled a slight increase in the price of foodstuffs and beverages (1.2%), which make up the largest category of items in the shopping basket used to calculate the consumer price index.
The real average wage improved substantially (by 4%), thanks to an 8.8% increase in the minimum wage, pay adjustments in the public sector and wage hikes in a number of other sectors.
Nonetheless, the economy’s 258 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean growth rate has remained below the level it needs to reach in order to bring down the country’s high unemployment rate over the long term and improve the substandard conditions in which a large portion of the population lives.
Formal urban employment shrank by 7.3%, with much of the decrease being in construction, transport and public utilities.
In contrast, the number of people working in the informal economy swelled by 8.3% and thus came to represent nearly 60% of total employment.
The rate of open unemployment consequently rose from The sluggish pace of economic activity was reflected in a reduction of the external imbalance.
The current account deficit amounted to US$ 888 million, which represented a decrease of 6.1%.
The deficit therefore shrank from 37% to 35.2% of GDP as a result of lower interest, profit and dividend remittances and an increase in current transfers, especially family remittances, which remained on the upward trend seen in preceding years.
Interest payments were lower thanks to the forgiveness of debts by various bilateral creditors and the temporary relief afforded by the HIPC Debt Initiative.
This was attributable to the reduction in the current account deficit, since the balance on the capital and financial accounts remained constant.
In this context, disbursements for balance-of-payments support and project loans that were granted after the agreement with IMF was signed in December helped to finance the current account deficit and contributed to the build-up of net international reserves to US$ 275 million (the equivalent of 1.7 months’ worth of merchandise imports).
In 2002, foreign direct investment picked up (15.6%) thanks to the sale of State assets and the increase in the number of firms operating under the export processing zone (EPZ) regime.
The merchandise trade deficit remained very high at 37% of GDP, especially in view of the lower level of economic activity.
Imports rose slightly (1%), while exports (including those produced in the EPZs) remained virtually the same as in 2001.
Traditional goods exports (f.o.b.) fell sharply (-12%) in 2002 as a consequence of the steep drop in coffee exports (-29%), plummeting sugar sales (-42%), a slump in banana exports (-5.2%) and the virtual stagnation of lobster and shrimp exports.
Because of the smaller volume of export shipments, earnings from the sale of these products were down by 21%.
Only beef and gold exports trended upward, thanks to sales on the Central American and Mexican markets and the upswing in gold mining that came in response to higher international prices.
Exports of non-traditional products expanded once again, this time by 15%, with particularly good performances being turned in by tropical fruits, peanuts, fish and manufactures (especially of food products for other Central American countries).
Net EPZ sales (with a notable component being maquila textile production) climbed by 11.6% to US$ 105 million (4.2% of GDP).
The slow growth of output and of domestic demand was reflected in the small size of the increase in imports, which represented slightly less than US$ 1.8 billion (71% of GDP).
Imports of intermediate and consumer goods were down owing to the reduction in public investment expenditure, but imports of capital goods exhibited a robust increase (8.6%), mainly as a result of the expansion of the manufacturing sector (and the EPZs, in particular).
This reversed the contraction of capital goods imports seen in the two preceding years.
This was a consequence of the 4.5% slump in exports, which was the net effect of downturns in sales of both traditional products (-1.6%) and non-traditional products (-8.1%).
The current account deficit increased by only 1.7%, however, thanks to the 11% rise in family remittances that offset most of the increase in the trade gap.
Even so, the reductions posted on the capital and financial accounts resulted in a drop in international reserves.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 259 Panama Already faltering external demand weakened still further in 2002, with serious repercussions for the economy as a whole.
Productive activity expanded by 0.8%, which was slightly higher than the previous year’s growth rate of 0.4%, but per capita GDP diminished again.
Growth was driven by an upturn in consumption, as investment retreated for the third year in a row.
Inflation at 1.9% remained low, while the labour market registered a slight improvement.
The public-sector deficit came in at 2.3% of GDP, compared to 0.8% in 2001, while the balanceof-payments current account deficit held steady at 1.5% of GDP.
The international economic environment was exceptionally unfavourable, causing downturns in three of the four sectors that rely on external demand, namely the International Banking Centre, the Colón Free Zone and national exports; only the Panama Canal reported positive figures.
In addition to this, debates in the framework of the national dialogue on public administration had a negative impact in the short term.
Although headway was made in defining a legal framework for fiscal policy, the process added a further element of uncertainty to the private-sector investment process.
For 2003, the authorities are forecasting a growth rate of between 2% and 2.5%, low inflation and a nonfinancial public-sector (NFPS) deficit of under 2%.
These projections are largely based on an expected rebound in domestic demand, especially investment; but they also assume some improvement in the South American economies, which are important trading partners for Panama.
First-quarter results bore out these projections in terms of GDP growth, which expanded by 2.4%, but not in respect of external demand; and the Colón Free Zone and the International Banking Centre both posted further declines.
The Government plans to strengthen public investment by drawing US$ 200 million from the Development Trust Fund, and bringing into use part of the 2,541 hectares of reverted areas from the former Canal Zone.
This is in addition to a number of private projects that can be expected to boost domestic demand.
Despite a considerable delay, the first objective was achieved with the passage of a tax reform package in December; but the fragile state of public accounts hindered achievement of the second.
Structural reform figured further down the Government’s list of priorities, which were rearranged in 2003 to concentrate on economic recovery.
Three pieces of legislation were approved during the year: one on the transparency of public administration; a second on economic recovery and fiscal responsibility, and a third on restructuring and simplification of the tax system.
Under this legislation public borrowing was restricted in order to reduce the debt/GDP ratio to 50% and the external debt/GDP ratio to 35% in the medium term; and a ceiling of 2% of GDP was established for the fiscal deficit.
This latter target was met, since the NFPS posted a smaller deficit.
The central government deficit, including the surpluses generated by the Panama Canal Authority, came in at 1.9% of GDP, slightly higher than the previous year’s 0.7%.
Total revenues were down by 1.1% in nominal terms, as also occurred in 2001, in contrast to the double-digit growth rates recorded a few years ago.
The results for the first quarter of 2003 herald a stronger performance from fiscal revenues and expenditures alike.
NFPS revenues rose by 18% during the period, and spending by 13%, to produce a deficit of 1.4% of GDP compared to 1.6% a year earlier.
Capital expenditure, in particular, grew strongly (40%), reflecting the start-up of a number of public infrastructure projects.
Current fiscal income decreased by 2.6% in 2002, as a result of a 6.5% fall in non-tax revenues, which, in turn, reflected a smaller contribution by the Development Trust Fund to central government coffers.
Current spending remained stable, despite a 3.6% wage hike, since operational expenditures, transfers and debt interest payments all declined.
Capital spending grew by 4.1% (a modest figure in comparison to the two preceding years) since the Government cur expenditure on three separate occasions in 2002, and only 60% of programmed investments were actually accomplished.
A development that gave cause for concern was the operational deficit registered by the Social Security Fund (CSS) in 2002.
This stemmed mainly from its old-age, survivor and disability pension programme, which reported an actuarial shortfall of between US$ 2.2 and US$ 2.5 billion.
The Government set up a dialogue mechanism in 2001 to tackle the gradual deterioration of the programme, but this failed to reach a solution acceptable to all parties.
To hasten the process, the Government itself put forward a proposal that combines contributions from the State, workers and employers, with improvements to CSS administration.
The Government continued with its active publicdebt management policy, seeking to extend the profile of the debt, reduce the outstanding balance on Brady bonds, partly anticipate funding requirements for the coming year, diversify its sources and develop the secondary market.
External debt was reduced by US$ 546 million through amortization payments, including a US$ 342 million payment in respect of Eurobonds falling due in 2002.
Brady bonds were also redeemed at a cost of US$ 488 million.
Amortization and interest payments amounted to US$ 1.395 billion, up from US$ 950 million the year before.
The result of these operations was an increase in the net balance of external debt to US$ 6.349 billion, equivalent to 62% of GDP.
However, US$ 151 million of this corresponded to advance funding for Medium-term domestic bonds –Treasury Notes– were also issued in 2002, in the amount of US$ 160 million.
This was the first issue of fixed-income securities of this type, since only short-term Treasury Bills had been issued previously.
The balance of domestic debt was US$ 2.172 billion, or 21% of GDP.
External factors included crises in several South American countries and stagnation in the developed economies.
Domestic factors included the fact that the Panamanian economy entered a recessionary phase, as domestic demand adjusted following several years of burgeoning expenditure financed mainly by consumer loans.
Other domestic factors included implementation of the Basel standards, which imply a more conservative banking policy; and efforts to combat moneylaundering, which assumed new proportions in the wake of the attacks of 11 September 2001.
Assets held by the International Banking Centre shrank by 10.6% with respect to the previous year, to stand at US$ 34.022 billion in late 2002.
This trend carried over into the first quarter of 2003, but the fall was less steep (-7.4%).
Includes hidden unemployment. l Six-month deposits in local banks. m One to five-year loans for corporate activities.
From 2000 on, local banks. n Rate on deposits, deflated by the variation in the dollar exchange rate. o Average annual values used for monetary figures. p Net credit extended to the public and private sectors by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions. 264 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean counterparts (20.7% compared to –2.4%, respectively).
Conversely, assets held by official banks grew by 1.5%, in the wake of stronger corporate lending and housing loans.
In response to this situation, the banks adopted a more conservative stance, prioritizing portfolio quality and liquidity over expansion.
The ratio of capital to riskweighted assets was 16.5%, and the financial liquidity ratio reached 33%.
Net profits in the banking sector were down by 44% owing to losses incurred by Banco Latinoamericano de Exportaciones, S.A., (BLADEX); but when this bank’s results are excluded from the calculations, net profits rise by 29%.
In 2002 the lending portfolio to the domestic private sector registered its first decrease (6.8%) for 13 years.
This came on top of a much sharper contraction of 31.8% in foreign loans, which meant that national bank lending operations declined by 15.7%, concentrated especially in corporate and personal loans, while mortgage lending was up slightly.
Investments in national bank securities expanded by 7.7% thanks to a 15.4% increase in investment in foreign instruments.
Sight deposits rose by 5.2%, while time and savings deposits dropped by 7.6%.
Lastly, the non-performing portfolio continued to account for a small proportion of total lending (3.1%), with overdue loan provisions covering 137% of this amount.
The loan portfolio continued to contract in early 2003, albeit at the slower rate of 11.7%; domestic credit retreated by 2% and external credit by 21% in the first quarter.
In contrast to the previous year, interest rates moved lower during 2002 in line with international trends.
The rate on loans with maturities of under a year fell by much less, however: the rate on credits to commerce and industry dropped by 140 and 53 basis points, respectively, while interest rates on consumer loans actually rose by 90 points.
As a result the intermediation spread widened, which helped to perpetuate the listlessness of the economy. c) Trade policy Trade negotiations made progress in 2002.
A free trade agreement was signed with El Salvador, which applies a zero tariff to around 80% of traded goods in the framework of an understanding regarding the signing of a similar agreement with the other Central American countries.
In addition, Panama entered into a dialogue with the United States on a possible bilateral agreement, and opened discussions with the Dominican Republic and Taiwan Province of China with a view to opening these markets to Panamanian products.
Also worthy of mention was the fact that Panama hosted the Secretariat of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) from March 2001 to early 2003.
Lastly, in 2002 import tariffs on some products rose to the ceiling level of 15% permitted by the World Trade Organization (WTO), but declined for a number of intermediate goods.
Domestic credit f (change from a Preliminary figures. b Quarterly average, weighted by the value of exports and imports of goods. c Six-month deposits in local banks. d One-year loans for corporate activities, local banks. e Thirty-day interbank deposits. f Net credit to the public and private sectors extended by commercial banks and other financial and banking institutions.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 265 The slight growth in activity recorded in 2002 reflected domestic expansionary factors, since external demand contracted.
In early 2003, external demand recovered somewhat and domestic demand gathered momentum, producing GDP growth of 2.4% for the first quarter.
Exports weakened by 1.8% in 2002, in contrast to 5% growth during the previous year.
Conversely, domestic demand expanded by 2.4% following a contraction of 5.4% in 2001.
Investment dropped for the third straight year, particularly private investment, but improved in early 2003.
In 2002, capital formation receded by 5% in the construction sector and by 3% in the machinery and equipment category.
The strongest performing sectors were basic services and “other services”, which expanded by 4.4% and 1.4%, respectively.
In contrast, goods-producing activities shrank by 4.8%, the steepest fall occurring in construction (10%) while mining declined by 6%, manufacturing by 4.9% and agriculture by 1.9%.
The banana segment has been fraught with various difficulties, which in 2002 included labour disputes, weather problems, worsening health conditions and a downturn in productivity.
Coffee production has encountered similar problems, compounded by three straight years of low prices on the international market.
Fishing activity dropped by 5.7%, because of problems with the shrimp harvest (white spot virus) and stiff international competition in the fish meal and fish oil markets.
Manufacturing, which contracted for the fourth year in a row, is going through a lengthy process of adaptation to trade liberalization.
With a few exceptions, including food production, most segments either stagnated or contracted.
The output of electricity, gas and water, however, expanded by a robust 7.7%, on the back of an upturn in hydroelectric power generation, thanks to abundant rains.
But industrial electricity consumption was down by a fifth, thereby giving another indication of hard times in manufacturing industry.
Activity on the Panama Canal was 3% up on the year before, even though it was a difficult period for international trade.
Toll rates were increased by an average of 6.5% in October, and are scheduled to rise by a further 8% in July 2003.
Commerce, restaurants and hotels enjoyed an upturn of 3.9% following their 1.8% contraction in 2001.
Domestic commerce benefited from higher consumption, while activity in the Colón Free Zone slipped by 8.8%.
Financial services, insurance and real estate contracted by 1%, owing to difficulties in the banking sector, while domestic, social and health services expanded by 9%.
Data for the first quarter of 2003 point to a recovery in economic activity, except in agriculture, financial services and the Colón Free Zone.
Expansion has been particularly strong in the secondary sector (5.8%), thanks to headway made in construction (15%) and port activity (14.3%).
Industry ventured a small upturn (0.6%); while tourism and commerce also performed well, (7% and 6.5%, respectively).
Government and personal services advanced at a slower pace than in previous years.
Inflation remained low in 2002, with prices rising by 1.9% over the year, and this trend has continued up to mid-2003.
The rise in the consumer price index is attributable to the unification of urban transport fares and higher gasoline prices.
Clothing prices dropped by 0.3%, and food, by 0.5%, the latter for the second year running.
The price of the basic household shopping basket fell by 0.6% with respect to 2001.
The household survey conducted in August 2002 shows that the rate of unemployment dropped from 14% in 2001 to 13.2%, while the employed population expanded by 6.8%, and the labour force participation rate rose from 60.5% to 62.4%.
It is highly likely that the increase in employment took place in the informal sector, since activity in labour-intensive sectors, such as construction and manufacturing, contracted sharply.
Real income slipped slightly, according to partial data, while the nominal minimum wage was unchanged and average wages fell in segments such as manufacturing, hotels and restaurants and retail commerce.
In contrast, there were small increases in the public sector, wholesale trade and “other services”. 266 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean The sluggishness of the world economy, and particularly the weakened state of productive activity in Latin America, made themselves felt in the Panamanian economy.
Merchandise exports sagged, but more robust services exports partly offset the negative effect on the balance-of-payments current account, which again posted a deficit of US$ 154 million, or 1.5% of GDP.
Excluding errors and omissions, flows on the financial account slumped to half the previous year’s figure, mainly because of low levels of FDI.
Merchandise exports declined by 11.9%, as their largest component –re-exports from the Colón Free Zone– contracted by 12%.
Admittedly, this is part of a longer-term decline in the attractiveness of the Free Zone caused by the trade liberalization now underway in other Latin American countries; but in 2002 and the first half of 2003 the Free Zone also felt the backwash from problems beleaguering its main clients.
The remainder of merchandise exports, classified as “national exports”, also lost ground and turned in a very mixed performance.
Certain traditional export products such as bananas and coffee maintained their downward trend, contracting by 10.4% and 16.2%, respectively.
Exports of shrimp and shrimp larvae were also down, as were fishmeal, fish oil and other marine products.
Conversely, exports of melon and watermelon held up well, with increases of 77% and 30% respectively, more than tripling the amount of foreign exchange earned by these products during the last three years.
Beef exports also surged by a quarter, and sugar exports rose by almost 9%.
In the first four months of 2003, national exports dropped by 4.3%, broadly repeating the previous year’s pattern.
Merchandise imports shrank by 3.2%, mainly because of a drop of nearly 7% in imports into the Colón Free Zone.
Other imports strengthened by 3.6%, thanks to stronger purchases of food products (11%) and other consumer and intermediate goods (18%).
Capital goods imports, by contrast, slipped by 5%, closely reflecting the weakened state of investment.
Thanks to the economic upturn, imports rebounded by 2.5% in the first four months of 2003, driven mainly by a 26% rise in capital goods imports, as the slide in the Free Zone became steeper (-20%).
The surplus on trade in services grew by US$ 160 million to over US$ 1 billion.
The value of services exports expanded strongly, with a 9% increase in receipts of the Panama Canal Authority making for a rise of almost 10% in transport revenues.
Income from tourism also grew by a healthy 8.6%, reflecting new opportunities in the field of recreational tourism and the arrival of cruise liners in Panamanian ports.
The capital and financial account, excluding errors and omissions, registered practically half the earnings received in 2001.
This was partly attributable to a sharp decline in FDI, which dwindled to US$ 57 million –just one tenth of the 2001 figure.
Other capital movements registered a positive balance as a result of public debt floatations on the international market.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 267 While debate over economic reform raged, severe economic crisis, compounded by poor crop harvests due mainly to inclement weather conditions, conspired in 2002 to produce the sharpest contraction since 1983, in which output shrank by 2.3%.
Given Parguay’s rate of population growth, per capita GDP declined by 4.7%, falling back to the level recorded in the early 1990s.
Domestic demand sagged (-6%), although total demand decreased by only half that figure thanks to more buoyant exports.
Both private and public consumption weakened by around 5%, while gross domestic investment declined for the sixth year running.
The performance of the Paraguayan economy in 2002 revealed the country’s external vulnerability and domestic instability.
On the external front, the authorities had to cope with the impact of devaluations in Argentina and Brazil, in addition to dwindling capital inflows and reduced family remittances.
At home, public finances steadily worsened, and the banking and financial sector was buffeted by backwash from the liquidation of one of the country’s most solvent banks, in the wake of losses suffered in Argentina and an evaporation of confidence among its depositors.
Although the central government deficit widened from 1.1% of GDP in 2001 to 3.3% in 2002, this partly reflected a recovery in capital expenditure.
Foreignexchange policy in general remained flexible, despite episodes of intervention aimed at absorbing the sharp volatility of the guaraní, especially in mid-2002 and again late in the year.
Monetary policy remained tight; the Central Bank of Paraguay raised the rates on its monetary regulation instruments, which pushed up interest rates sharply especially towards the end of the year.
The steep depreciation of the guaraní sent inflation soaring to 14.6% per year, twice the 2001 rate.
Official projections for 2003 point to a recovery in output equivalent to the fall recorded in 2002, with GDP growth of around 2% forecast for the year as a whole.
This figure is based on projections of an excellent crop year boosted by favourable weather conditions and supported by depreciation of the guaraní.
Soybean production is expected to reach a record level of 4.2 million tons, but cattle-rearing is set to contract following the closure of a number of markets in the early months of the year because of an outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in late 2002.
In contrast, non-agricultural sectors as a whole are unlikely to recover from the sharp falls recorded in the 2001-2002 biennium.
Although substantial deficits had emerged in 1999-2000 (4% of GDP), at that time there were abundant external resources available to bridge the gap between income and expenditure.
In 2001, the deficit narrowed thanks to significant cutbacks in capital expenditure, but in 2002 it widened once more.
In the second half of that year, failure to reach an agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) led to a shortage of external funding and made it increasingly difficult to close the fiscal deficit.
Consequently, the payment of domestic and external commitments was deferred, and this remained the situation in mid-2003.
The authorities redoubled their efforts to secure an accord with IMF in 2002.
Early in the year, progress was made towards an initial agreement, with privatization of the telephone company COPACO being added to reforms in the fiscal and banking sectors.
Nonetheless, the fierce controversy that arose over the transparency with which this enterprise was to be sold, and the advisability of privatization in general, led Congress to suspend the measure indefinitely.
Since the middle of the year, a second agreement has been negotiated without privatizations; this involves a bill to increase fiscal revenue, together with a bank restructuring law to deal with liquidation proceedings among financial institutions.
These initiatives proved unsuccessful and, by mid-2003 a very watered-down version of the first bill was all that had reached the final phase of legislative process.
The subregional crisis had a major impact on the Paraguayan economy, with contagion occurring through commercial and financial channels.
Exports to Argentina, one of Paraguay’s main trading partners, plummeted in the first few months of 2002 following the drastic currency devaluation in that country.
In terms of the financial channel, the Argentine devaluation caused a substantial drop in family remittances from Paraguayans living in Argentina.
Moreover, in June 2002, the authorities took emergency action by intervening in one of the country’s most solvent banks which had sustained losses in Argentina and suffered a run on deposits by its savers.
The 2002 deficit is larger because total revenue declined by 1.6 percentage points of GDP, while expenditure continued to grow.
Maintaining the trend that had begun in 1997, tax pressure eased to 9.5% of GDP, this time aggravated by the fact that the economy was in recession.
Capital expenditure was increased substantially in the 2002 budget, following cutbacks in the previous year.
The authorities were hoping to finance the increased expenditure with part of the resources generated by privatization of the telephone company, COPACO, which was expected to generate exceptional revenue of some US$ 100 million.
Nonetheless, these funds never materialized since Congress decided to halt the privatization process altogether in June.
In this context, the authorities attempted to curb the fiscal deficit by applying new regulations whose main objective was to bolster government revenue.
The main proposals involved increasing the rate of value added tax (VAT) from 10% to 12%, raising public-sector utility charges, and cutting wages in public administration and a number of other sectors –all this with a view to boosting tax collection.
These legislative proposals failed to gain approval in the pre-electoral context prevailing in 2002, however, and their discussion had to be delayed until mid-2003.
This made it even harder to close the fiscal shortfall, and towards the end of the year the Government was forced to default on some of its domestic and external obligations.
In June 2003, overdue but unpaid government debt amounted to US$ 33 million.
This development was the outcome of similar falls in tax and non-tax revenue (0.7% of GDP in each case).
In recent years, the trend of total income has been determined by a steady deterioration in tax revenues, offset until 2001 by growing non-tax income mostly deriving from binational entities.
In 2002, however, the latter also 270 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 271 diminished owing to the slower flow of royalties and energy compensations from Itaipú (US$ 100 million), and to a longer delay in remittances from Yaciretá.
Nevertheless, non-tax revenues continued to contribute almost seven percentage points of GDP to total revenues, and in practice made it possible to defer measures to improve tax administration and increase tax collection.
In real terms, tax revenues declined on a broad front (11.5% on average), the steepest falls occurring in income tax (-14.5%) and excise duty (-25%), while VAT revenues declined by the average mentioned above.
Although these problems on the income side had been foreseen, spending could not be adjusted and remained at the same average in relation to GDP as in the 20002001 biennium.
Over half of the government deficit is generated by the Caja Fiscal –an institution responsible for social security for pensioners.
The upheavals in Brazil and the worsening crisis in Argentina put strong pressure on the guaraní exchange rate in 2002.
The first few months of the year saw little variation in the parity, which hovered around 5,000 guaraníes to the dollar.
In June, however, faced with the intense debate over privatization and intervention in Paraguay’s third largest bank, the exchange rate began to shoot up and by the end of the year it had passed the 7,000 mark.
Nonetheless, in view of the sharp devaluation of neighbouring currencies, the real effective exchange-rate variation was no more than 5%.
In the first few months of 2003, thanks to currency appreciations in neighbouring countries, the exchange rate dropped back to 6,800 guaraníes to the dollar in April.
Then a sizable inflow of foreign currency pushed the rate down further, and by June it stood at 6,200, implying a real depreciation of just 2% for the first halfyear.
In keeping with its policy of avoiding major exchange-rate fluctuations, the Central Bank intervened in July 2002 with measures designed to reduce commercial-bank activity in the foreign-exchange market.
As a result, the banks’ overbought position in the spot market was reduced from 7% to 4% of riskweighted assets and contingencies, while the legal cash reserve in guaraníes was increased (5% for short-term deposits), and the legal cash reserve in foreign exchange was also raised (1.5% for deposits of all kinds).
In the fourth quarter, a mechanism was designed to repeal this measure, which has made it possible to free up additional liquidity.
Monetary policy was kept tight throughout 2002 in response to foreign-exchange market volatility.
The authorities made intensive use of monetary regulation instruments, the balance of which grew by 128% during the year, while the average yield on these instruments climbed from 21% in late 2001 to an average of 30% in the third quarter of 2002.
Local currency liquidity contracted by 3.8%, while total liquidity, which includes deposits in foreign currency, diminished slightly.
However, given the acceleration of inflation since the middle of the year, the growth rates of these monetary aggregates in real terms were clearly negative, a trend which was reversed in March 2003.
The difficulties being faced by the banking sector are revealed in the corresponding arrears indices; nonperforming loans rose from 11.1% of the total portfolio in 2001 to almost 14% in late 2002.
This deterioration became clearly evident from the middle of the year and stemmed from the growth of non-performing loans in foreign currency (attributable to the sharp depreciation of the guaraní).
As a result of the regional and domestic factors mentioned above, private-sector deposits in the banking system declined by US$ 385 million during the first half of 2002.
During the second half of the year, however, a slow and moderate recovery in these deposits began to be discernable, which was still in evidence in mid-2003. c) Structural reforms The State has implemented reforms in a number of areas in recent years.
Tax reform, in particular, has served to rationalize the tax system, which nonetheless continues to pose serious management problems, as reflected in the high rate of evasion and the consequently reduced level of revenue collection.
The new authorities due to take office in August 2003 have announced their intention to take aggressive steps to reduce evasion, with intervention by the Office of the Under-Secretary of Taxation and Customs.
Another problem being faced by the fiscal sector is the proliferation of tax exemptions adopted since the tax reform, which in some sectors have become relatively widespread; the loss of potential revenue as a result of these exemptions is estimated at some US$ 150 million.
In order to raise tax pressure, initiatives for improving tax management need to be supplemented by measures to remove exemptions.
As this involves legislation, however, the effects are unlikely to be felt until 2004.
As regards public enterprises, the new authorities have stated that they will not promote privatization; but they will support the establishment of mixed management enterprises with participation from private capital to make them profitable.
The new administration, whose mandate begins in August 2003, attaches high priority to social security reform.
The current structure, based on the Caja Fiscal, generates almost half of the government deficit –a situation which is unsustainable in both the short and medium term.
In the banking sector, following the demise of the country’s third most solvent private bank (as a direct effect of the Argentine crisis), a bill designed to safeguard savers’ deposits at times of crisis is now before Congress.
During the past year, the banking authorities have given priority to supporting viable financial entities; three banks and one other financial institution were wound up during the early months of 2003.
Given Argentina’s rapid population growth of nearly 2.2%, per capita GDP returned to levels similar to those seen at the start of the 1990s.1 Agricultural performance was lacklustre in 2002, with production down by 0.6% following the previous year’s record growth of almost 10%.
The reduction affected all the main crops but was particularly acute in the case of cotton (-58%) and to a lesser extent in two other major products: soybeans (-6%) and maize The steep fall in cotton output reflected areas taken out of cultivation following the slump in prices in 2001.
In the case of soybeans, bad weather conditions and pests, especially in the Itapúa and Paraná regions, led to 1 The Central Bank of Paraguay is reviewing estimates of the system of national accounts, and the current version in constant 1982 prices is to be replaced by another series based on 1994 prices.
This entails changes in weightings which may have an effect on the GDP calculation. 274 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean poorer yields.
By contrast, the production of other crops increased substantially, including wheat (63%) and sesame (54%), thanks mainly to larger areas under cultivation; the boom in sugar cane (25%) was attributable to higher yields.
In the merchandise sector, there were widespread output reductions, averaging 5% overall.
Manufacturing output dropped by a further 3% to complete half a decade of poor performance.
Against the recessionary backdrop, commerce contracted by 3.5%, while the services sector declined by 3%.
Inflation almost doubled, with the consumer price This upsurge began in June and continued until April 2003, when the increase over 12 months reached as high as 21%.
In July, the 12-month variation fell back to 12%, reflecting deflation for the first time in two years over three consecutive months.
The trend of inflation between June 2002 and April 2003 reflected steep depreciation in the guaraní: during this period, in which the exchange rate rose by close to 40%.
Nonetheless, inflationary pressures in 2002 were mitigated by the sharp fall-off in domestic demand.
Predictably, the effects of devaluation during this period were seen more in the prices of tradable goods than in those of non-tradables.
The net effect of faster inflation and small nominal pay increases was a 6.4% loss in the purchasing power of manual workers’ wages, thereby entirely wiping out the 1.4% recovery recorded in 2001.
In addition, the minimum wage fell in real terms (-0.7%) interrupting the recovery staged in 2000-2001.
Although the minimum wage set by the Government is equivalent to about US$ 120, in practice this is often ignored.
Total open unemployment climbed from 7.6% in 2001 to 10.8% in 2002, continuing the deterioration that had begun in 1998, and coinciding with the period of stalled economic growth.
Sluggish economic activity caused a significant rise in urban unemployment, from 10.8% to 14.7%, together with a slight decline in the participation rate.
As in 2001, construction was one of the sectors hit hardest by unemployment.
The greater competitiveness of the Paraguayan economy (the real effective exchange rate rose by more than 10%) was reflected in a near 20% expansion in total exports, while total imports were down by 5%.
As a result, the merchandise deficit narrowed significantly and, given the traditional surplus in services, the total goods and services position improved from a deficit of US$ 400 million in 2001 to a surplus of US$ 150 million in 2002.
Current transfers were smaller, in the wake of reduced family remittances from Argentina, while net interest payments doubled.
Nonetheless, there was a substantial outflow of foreign capital estimated at some US$ 400 million, which meant the authorities had to draw down international reserves by nearly US$ 100 million to cover the overall deficit.
Steep devaluations in neighbouring countries led to a fall in registered exports (which account for only 40% of the total) in the early months of 2002.
In the second half-year, however, and particularly in the first six months of 2003, they picked up again briskly.
Soya exports were down slightly, although in 2003 they are projected to attain record levels.
In the fourth quarter of 2002, meat exports were hit by an outbreak of foot and mouth disease and the closure of markets in the European Union and Chile, but this situation should be overcome by mid-2003.
Registered imports (equivalent to 70% of the total) contracted by about 20%, although half of this had been recovered in the first quarter of 2003.
The steepest slide (33%) occurred in imports of consumer goods, while purchases of intermediate and capital goods declined more moderately.
In a year beset by major difficulties in obtaining external financing, Paraguay’s external debt remained virtually unchanged at approximately US$ 2.7 billion.
Private-sector debt decreased, but public debt maintained its upward trend of the last five years, during which time it has virtually doubled.
External debt service amounted to US$ 190 million in 2002 (US$ 115 million in amortization payments and US$ 75 million in interest).
As of December 2002, overdue payments on the external debt stood at US$ 69 million, of which US$ 44 million was principal and US$ 25 million represented financial costs.
This level of arrears represents approximately 3% of Paraguay’s external public debt.
The external debt burden was equivalent to 117% of the country’s exports (an improvement on the previous year’s figure), but 49% of GDP (a sharp deterioration).
Of total external commitments, only 6.2% has a maturity of five years or less, while 60% of the external debt will only fall due in over 15 years’ time.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 275 Notwithstanding the unfavourable regional environment and the sluggish pace of the global economy, the Peruvian economy rallied strongly in 2002 and, in a move that ran counter to regional trends, growth projections were revised upward in the course of the year.
The 5.3% economic growth rate was based initially on mining exports, but increasingly on an upturn in domestic demand, which was boosted by a moderately expansionary monetary policy and some degree of recovery in the labour market.
Regional economic instability in the third quarter pushed up the exchange rate and interest rates and accentuated the volatility of both indicators, but these phenomena began to subside in the fourth quarter.
For 2003 a growth rate of 3.5% is predicted, based on good export prospects and the increase in domestic demand.
A slight resurgence in inflation at the beginning of the year, caused by the increase in international oil prices, was later overcome and price rises have remained within the range established by the monetary authorities.
In the early months of the year tax collection remained brisk, but pressures to increase current expenditure are making the fiscal target (reduction of the non-financial public-sector deficit to 1.9% of GDP) harder to achieve.
Markets reacted favourably to these developments and to the positive variation in the trade balance, as shown by the narrow spreads for Peru’s sovereign bonds in relation to the regional average and by a further significant narrowing of spreads in the fourth quarter and into the first few months of 2003.
This reduction in spreads was halted in the second quarter, when political conflicts put increasing pressure on fiscal policy.
The exchange rate nevertheless remained relatively stable, and with inflation under control, interest rates fell further.
One of the objectives for 2002 was to reduce the consolidated public-sector deficit from 2.5% of GDP in 2001 to 1.9%, with a view to guaranteeing the sustainability of public debt.
Over the first six months, however, the central government’s revenue fell considerably owing to the lowering of the rate of the special solidarity tax starting in the second half of 2001, the reduction of tariffs and a plan for the settlement of back taxes.
In the second half of the year these losses were offset by an upturn in economic activity, the steps taken to expand the tax base and an increase in the marginal rate of personal income tax from 20% to 27%.
Capital expenditure therefore bore the brunt of the adjustment, dropping from 2.3% to 2% of GDP.
The central government deficit shrank substantially, but that of the non-financial public sector as a whole only dipped from 2.5% to 2.3% of GDP owing to a downturn in the performance of other public entities.
In any event, fiscal policy did not have significant expansionary effects, although certain initiatives such as the “A trabajar” employment programme had a direct impact on domestic demand.
Most of the deficit (2.1% of GDP) was financed from external resources, especially sovereign bonds, while privatizations and concessions contributed 0.7% of GDP; the rest of net domestic financing was negative.
For 2003 the target for the consolidated public-sector deficit was set at 1.9% of GDP.
The economic programme also provided for a steady reduction of the deficit and a primary surplus in the coming years in order to deal with the voluminous public debt of more than 46% of GDP.
Deficit reduction is expected to be based primarily on an expansion of the tax base.
In fact, in the first half of 2003 current income grew by 11% in real terms.
Despite the intention to give priority to its recovery, investment fell by 5% in real terms over the same period, while current expenditure grew by 6%.
Thanks to the revenue increase, in those six months the central government deficit declined to just over half the level recorded in the same period of 2002.
However, in the second quarter, strong pressures arose for an increase in current expenditure, despite the executive branch’s difficulties in generating the necessary additional revenues; this situation jeopardizes the chances of achieving the established target.
To cover these higher outlays, the general sales tax was temporarily increased.
The fiscal deficit is expected to be financed mainly through new international issues (in the first six months of the year a bond issue totalling US$ 750 million was launched), multilateral financing and, to a lesser degree, domestic debt.
A new system was established for resuming bond issues on the domestic market following their suspension in the third quarter of 2002 owing to an unstable regional context and more demanding market requirements in terms of maturities and rates.
The exchange rate was generally allowed to float freely, with intervention only in situations of volatility.
Negative growth in the consumer price index at the start of the year and the very low inflation posted subsequently prompted the authorities to apply an expansionary monetary policy in the first half of the year.
The interbank rate accordingly fell to 2.5% in the second quarter, from an average of 8.6% in 2001.
With regional markets more volatile in the third quarter, the authorities opted to defend the exchange rate, which led to an increase in the interbank rate (up to a monthly average of 5.4% in September) and a real depreciation of the local currency against the dollar.
Once the volatility of regional markets had passed, the nuevo sol strenghtened; at the end of 2002 the year-on-year decline in the bilateral real exchange rate was only 3.2%, while the multilateral real exchange rate was up by 1.8%.
Given the calm prevailing on the markets, the authorities again cautiously eased monetary policy, although the interbank rate did not return to its former low levels and in December reached a monthly average of 3.8%.
For 2003 the authorities again set an inflation target of 2.5% with a one-point margin in each direction, and explicitly established that the interbank rate should stay within a range defined by the lending and deposit rates of the central bank’s monetary operations with the banking system; they also agreed to curb the interbank rate’s volatility.
In fact, with international rates low and regional markets relatively calm, the interbank rate hovered around 3.8% for the first few months.
Taking advantage of the degrees of freedom afforded by the decline in inflation, the authorities decided in mid-year to lower the rates.
The nuevo sol remained relatively stable and, between December 2002 and June 2003, appreciated by 1.2% against the dollar in real terms.
The credit bubble created by the 1998 crisis had left the financial sector and many debtors in a difficult situation.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 281 continued to improve slowly throughout 2002, however, and the percentage of delinquent loans declined from 9% to 7.6%.
Despite lower interest rates, credit from the banking system to the private sector did not pick up and, at the end of the year, showed year-on-year growth of only 0.3%.
Mortgage and consumer loans were the most dynamic, increasing their share of bank loans from 9.6% to 10.7% and from 8.6% to 9.4%, respectively.
At the aggregate level, in the first few months of 2003 the demand for credit remained weak and bank loans to the private sector actually showed negative year-on-year growth.
However, mortgage and consumer loans continued to expand. c) Structural reforms In order to foster the recovery of growth, tariffs on a series of capital goods were lowered from 12% to 7% and then, in some cases, to 4%.
Within the framework of the Andean Community, discussions have been continuing on the common external tariff (CET) and on the definition of a starting point for negotiations concerning the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA).
Peru adopted the CET in respect of 62% of its tariff items, which represent between 30% and 40% of its foreign trade.
Because of these changes, the average tariff rate declined, although tariff dispersion increased.
In the interests of intensifying trade integration, the authorities also hope to conclude bilateral agreements with Brazil, Canada, Mexico and the United States.
In 2002 the authorities planned to pursue the privatization and concession programme and expected to raise US$ 700 million this way.
However, strong opposition to the privatization of two power generation companies in the southern part of the country prevented this operation from being completed.
Thus, only US$ 418 million was collected, most of which came from the concession of two power transmission companies.
In addition, the process of regionalization began with a constitutional reform and a basic law on the subject, as well as the election of regional presidents.
After four years of stagnation, economic activity rallied in 2002, with a moderately positive effect on the labour market.
At the same time, inflation stayed low and the balance-of-payments current-account deficit was stable and manageable, although the problem of high external debt and its financing remained.
Output increased faster than had been projected at the beginning of the year owing to a surge in domestic demand in the second half, while exports showed the expected buoyancy.
Extraction from the Antamina deposit, the world’s largest combined copper and zinc mine, which had come on stream in 2001, contributed significantly to this performance.
Towards the end of the year private investment also showed greater dynamism, but its annual rate was only 0.7%.
As the control of fiscal expenditure caused public investment to contract by 8.9%, gross fixed capital formation fell from 18.2% to 17.2% of GDP.
Nevertheless, there was a major buildup of inventories (especially of fish meal), which accounted for a quarter of the increase in GDP and pushed gross domestic investment up by 7.9%.
Overall domestic demand grew by 4.8%, which was similar to the rate of GDP growth.
As mentioned above, export growth was driven by the buoyancy of the mining industry, which posted double-digit growth for the second year in a row; there were particularly noteworthy increases in copper, zinc and gold output.
Oil and gas production was flat owing to the exhaustion of the oilfields being exploited.
However, the exploitation of the Camisea gas field beginning in 2004 will give new impetus to this sector.
In addition to the outstanding performance of the mining industry, the other primary sectors –agriculture (5.8%) 282 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean and fisheries (3.1%)– posted good results and grew faster than they had in 2001.
While raw materials-processing industries as a whole stagnated, non-primary manufacturing, with an expansion of 5.3%, clearly reflected the strengthening of domestic demand in the second half and the opportunities opened up by the ATPDEA in the last quarter.
Branches such as textiles, leather and footwear, paper and printing, non-metallic minerals and metal products picked up smartly beginning in mid-year.
After mining, construction showed the highest growth rate (8.3%), continuing the expansion it had begun in the last quarter of 2001.
Contributing factors included an upturn in residential construction –boosted by two government programmes aimed at the middleand low-income sectors of the population, respectively, and by the increase in mortgage loans–, construction work for the Camisea gas fields and other public works on roads and highways, and reconstruction in the region affected by the earthquake that struck in 2001.
Commerce and other services expanded at belowaverage rates (by 3.8% and 4.9%, respectively), but both sectors grew faster in the second half of the year, which coincided with the boom in domestic demand.
In 2003 external demand has remained relatively buoyant, especially for mining exports, while increases in the wage bill and consumer credit continue to fuel private consumption.
In view of the high level of idle capacity in many areas, private investors continue to take a cautious approach, although the Camisea project, other mining projects, residential and commercial construction, telecommunications and the expansion of productive capacity in the textile industry are expected to generate the first increase in gross fixed capital formation since 1997.
Over the first five months of 2003 GDP expanded by 4.3%, albeit from a relatively low basis for comparison.
Mining output (especially gold and silver) continued to grow, although the rates are no longer in the double digits, and non-primary manufacturing maintained the dynamism seen at the end of 2002.
Agricultural production expanded more slowly and the fisheries sector experienced negative growth.
For the year as a whole, growth of 3.5% is projected, starting from higher levels of comparison.
The year 2002 began with slight deflation, but the level of consumer prices rose slowly as the months went on.
By the end of the year inflation had reached the floor of the band which the authorities had established as a target (1.5%).
The wholesale price index reflected deflation of 3.1% in February, but the economic upturn reversed this trend, and in December an increase similar to that of the CPI was recorded (1.7%).
At the beginning of 2003 international tension and conflict continued to push up oil prices.
Owing largely to higher fuel and transport costs, in March inflation rose to 3.4%, nearly reaching the ceiling of the inflation target band.
However, with the end of major combat operations in Iraq, oil prices trended downward and annual inflation abated to 2.2% in June; thus, it is perfectly feasible that the inflation target for this year will be met.
In previous years economic crisis and stagnation had dragged down real wages in the formal sector, reducing them by almost 10% between 1995 and 2001.
In 2002 the brief period of deflation and the subsequent period of low inflation partially restored the purchasing power of wages and salaries in the formal sector, which experienced real increases of 4.7% and 0.9%, respectively.
By contrast, the nominal minimum wage was maintained, with the result that the annual average suffered a small loss of 0.2% in real terms.
Many of the new jobs were based on informal activities and on emergency employment programmes, so that visible underemployment increased.
Since the labour supply expanded substantially because of the perception of more work opportunities (with an increase in the participation rate from 66.7% to 68.5%), open unemployment scarcely changed remaining at an annual average of 9.4%.
While new jobs were concentrated in the informal sector, employment in the formal sector did not pick up until the second half of the year, with the result that the annual average level of employment remained unchanged.
At the start of 2003 the expansion of formal employment, which had begun in late 2002, was still continuing and the generation of new jobs was becoming more concentrated in large commercial and service establishments.
Over the first six months the rise in the level of employment resulted in a moderate reduction in the unemployment rate.
In 2002 Peru posted an unusual merchandise trade surplus of US$ 260 million as its brisk export growth outpaced the increase in imports, which, for their part, started to reflect the upturn in economic activity.
Gold alone represented 19% of the country’s exports and accounted for 54% of the increase posted in 2002.
Non-traditional products increased slightly (3.9%), with strong growth in exports of vegetables, fruit and wood and, beginning in the last quarter, textiles.
The value of imports of goods and services rose by 3.1%; consumer goods imports were particularly strong from the second quarter onward, growing by 11.3% over the year as a whole.
Input purchases increased by 4.3%, while capital goods did not record positive growth rates until the last few months, netting a 3.6% decline for the whole year.
With this improvement in the merchandise trade balance and a stable deficit in non-factor services, the trade deficit declined from 1.7% to 0.9% of GDP.
Factor income transfers showed a wider deficit and current transfers declined, reflecting both the difficult situation in some neighbouring countries and the depreciation of their currencies, which eroded remittances from Peruvians working in those countries.
Consequently, the current-account deficit remained at the previous year’s level of 2% of GDP.
By contrast, the surplus on the financial and capital account increased markedly, from 2.8% to 3.4% of GDP.
The main contributing factors were foreign direct investment (especially the purchase of a beer company and new investments in copper) and public-sector borrowing; on the other hand, there was an outflow of short- and long-term capital from the private sector (due to both loan amortizations and bond purchases), and income from privatizations declined.
The overall result was a surplus equivalent to 1.4% of GDP, which boosted the central bank’s international reserves by US$ 985 million.
This trend continued in the first few months of 2003, causing reserves to exceed US$ 10 billion.
Foreign trade continued to expand in the first five months of 2003.
The increase in export value (22%) was attributable mainly to commodities, and the increase in import value (13%), to fuels, but with significant increases in other items as well.
In 2002 the Peruvian authorities returned to international markets with two sovereign bond issues.
At the beginning of the year global bonds were issued for an amount of US$ 500 million plus US$ 930 million for a Brady bond swap, while another US$ 500-million bond issue was launched in November.
The expansionary fiscal policy applied at the beginning of the year to compensate for the weakness of external demand had to be abandoned in later months because of macroeconomic imbalances.
In contrast with the modest results achieved in the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean, activity in the Dominican Republic increased by 4.3% in 2002 and per capita GDP rose once again, despite the weakness of external demand on account of the poor performance of the United States economy.
The central factor behind this development was domestic demand, which was boosted by increases in public spending and private consumption; the latter, in turn, was buoyed by a larger inflow of family remittances from abroad, which amounted to over 11% of private consumption.
For the second consecutive year, increased public spending compensated for the lack of dynamism in exports, and was financed in part with resources still available from the sovereign bonds issued in 2001.
In view of the worrying signs of macroeconomic instability, the authorities curbed spending and tightened monetary restrictions.
Moreover, at the end of the year the government and the business sector, in an effort to support stabilization, signed a Pact for Stability and Economic Development that involved extending fiscal and monetary austerity into 2003.
The most significant adjustments were undoubtedly in the areas of foreign exchange and interest rates for local-currency transactions.
The increased perception of uncertainty and risk accelerated the dollarization of loans and deposits, thereby increasing exposure to foreign-currency risk.
Employment expanded in 2002, but real wages were down slightly and inflation more than doubled (10.5%).
The central government accounts closed the year with a small surplus, and the balance-of-payments currentaccount deficit rose marginally.
Net capital inflows from abroad slackened and there was a significant loss of international reserves, owing to the currency stabilization efforts and the outflow of private capital.
In the first half of 2003 the export sector continued the recovery it had begun in the final months of 2002 with regard to both exports from the free zones and tourist arrivals, due in part to the substantial currency depreciation.
The economic picture became more complicated, however, when a crisis broke out in the banking system, requiring administrative intervention in a major bank and the allocation of financial resources in an amount that could reach 15% of GDP, while exchange-rate volatility became more acute.
Interest rates increased, the inflation rate went up and further capital flight appears to have taken place.
Accordingly, the economic uncertainty triggered by the war in Iraq in the first quarter grew stronger in the second quarter. 286 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean In the face of financial and institutional fragility, the authorities redoubled their efforts to stabilize the economy by applying significant monetary restrictions and fiscal austerity measures.
Negotiations with international financial institutions (the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank) to obtain about US$ 1.5 billion to alleviate the crisis culminated at the end of June with the submission of a letter of intent to the International Monetary Fund, linked to a two-year stand-by arrangement.
The announcement that the country would soon enter into such an arrangement, which would impose greater fiscal and monetary discipline, in addition to banking supervision and regulation, helped to stabilize the foreign-exchange market and reduce uncertainty.
The severity of the austerity measures, however, makes it unlikely that the country will meet the goal, established early in the year, of increasing GDP growth from 2.5% to 3%.
The annual inflation target, meanwhile, was already overshot in the first half of the year. ció Current ac unt balance Balanc of goods and ervices Overall bal nce b Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 287 Economic policy went through two clearly differentiated stages in 2002.
At the beginning of the year public expenditure was increased to compensate for the drop in external demand.
However, as external demand failed to recover to the extent hoped, income from abroad remained low and oil became more expensive, signs of unsustainable macroeconomic imbalances emerged and prompted the authorities to switch from an expansionary monetary policy to a restrictive one, with a consequent hike in interest rates.
The authorities also modified their exchange-rate policy, substituting indirect measures for direct intervention in the foreign-exchange market.
Moreover, an adjustment of electricity and fuel prices had a considerable impact on the rate of consumer price increases.
The adoption of the Monetary and Financial Act and the introduction of a pension fund system represented significant progress in modernizing the financial sector.
In the first half of 2003, in the face of exchangerate volatility and the banking crisis, the authorities intensified the stabilization measures by placing more severe restrictions on monetary liquidity.
They also increased fiscal austerity in the context of the negotiations with the International Monetary Fund for a US$ 1.5-billion stand-by arrangement to shore up the banking system, which the crisis in one of the country’s major banks had seriously damaged.
The most striking aspect of fiscal policy was the considerable real increase in public spending in the first half of the year, financed in part with resources still available from the sovereign bond issue of 2001.
In any case, the central government’s financial accounts were practically balanced at the end of the year, while the consolidated public sector showed a deficit of nearly 1.5% of GDP, compared to 2% the previous year.
The fiscal reform proposal submitted by the executive branch to the Congress, which included various tax adjustments, will be reconsidered in the context of the Pact for Stability and Economic Development.
In real terms, central government receipts rose by 6.6% thanks to the expansion of domestic demand and the reforms introduced the previous year.
Tax revenues were up by 5.1% owing to the increase in indirect tax receipts.
The amount contributed by the tax on the transfer of goods and services increased by 11.2%, in view of higher receipts from internal and external trade and specific taxes, but income tax receipts, which account for 26% of the government’s tax revenue, remained virtually stagnant.
Public expenditure rose by 8.8% in real terms as a result of increases in both operating costs and investment.
Payroll expenses grew by 10.2% as new employees were hired, partly because of the establishment of three new secretariats of State.
In addition, adjustments were made to real wages, in particular for lower-income employees.
The elimination of the subsidy for liquefied petroleum gas and the focusing of the electricity consumption subsidy on low-income families in mid2001 brought about a welcome reduction in current contributions to decentralized institutions in 2002.
In contrast, there was an increase in costs associated with public debt, namely the payment of internal liabilities (especially bank loans and amounts owed to suppliers) and external liabilities stemming from the 2001 sovereign bond issue.
In early 2003 the government launched a second sovereign bond issue for US$ 600 million, which it used to pay short-term domestic debt and to build up international reserves.
In the first half of the year capital expenditure rose by more than 50% in nominal terms, but the annual average increase was 16.9% in real terms, owing to cutbacks in the second half.
The year-end balance of public and publicly guaranteed external debt was US$ 4.459 billion, which was US$ 282 million more than the year before, while the debt ratio was 21% of GDP, or one and a half percentage points higher than in 2001.
Larger increases were observed in official liabilities, both with governments and with multilateral institutions.
In mid-2002 the Congress took up the tax reform proposal, which includes fiscal changes such as corrections to the tax on the transfer of services deducted by companies, the reduction of the inheritance tax from 7% to 3%, an extension of the period of fiscal amnesty for individuals and the exemption of housing loans from tax.
In line with the commitments made in the Pact concluded with the business sector, however, the government postponed the fiscal reform proposal, introduced an austere spending policy and agreed to produce a fiscal surplus and to keep a tight rein on public borrowing.
The fiscal reform proposal was taken up again in the first few months of 2003, but by mid-year had not 288 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Net interest and earnings Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 289 yet been adopted by the Congress.
In the first four months tax revenue stagnated in real terms, partly because of the reduction in imports on account of new taxes on imported luxury goods and a decline in fuel consumption.
Public spending was also more tightly controlled to help stabilize the foreign-exchange market and the banking system.
In view of the export sector’s continued weakness and the rise in oil prices, monetary policy in 2002 tended to be restrictive and oriented towards stabilization, especially of the foreign-exchange market, which came under intense pressure.
The variation in parity from December to December reached 25.3%, which represented a significant depreciation in real terms.
At the close of the year the Central Bank’s net international reserves amounted to US$ 376 million, or US$ 586 million less than the amount posted on the same date in 2001.
As the currency continued to depreciate, in the last quarter of the year significant complementary measures were taken.
Economic Development, limits were placed on commercial bank loans and on securities investments by financial institutions.
The central bank suspended its direct intervention in the foreign-currency market in November, and international reserves recovered somewhat.
In December lending rates stood at 28.6% and deposit rates, at 19.4%; both rates were 7 points higher than they had been a year earlier.
In contrast, rates on dollar transactions rose only slightly, to 10.3% and 6.6% for loans and deposits, respectively.
The money supply (M1) grew by only 3.1% in 2002 in real terms, but broad money (M3) increased by 14%.
Credit to the private sector, which represents almost 90% of all bank loans, rose by 15% in real terms and was used mainly for commercial and service activities and for other purposes, as shown by the increase in personal loans.
Meanwhile, the growth of credit to the central government sped up considerably.
Lastly, international reserves contracted significantly owing to the outflow of private capital as a result of exchange-rate volatility.
In May 2003, in view of the continuing instability of the foreign-exchange market and the banking crisis, the Monetary Board decided to tighten monetary restrictions.
The reserve requirement for local-currency deposits was gradually raised to 20% over an eight-month period and an additional 5% reserve requirement was established for foreign-currency deposits.
The central bank substantially increased its issuance of certificates of investment (by 5 billion pesos).
Interest rates, which had already risen in the second half of 2002, went up by a further two percentage points in the first quarter of 2003 for local-currency transactions.
Progress was also made in the negotiations for a free trade agreement with Panama, with the signing of a 10-year partial-scope agreement, renewable for another 10-year period, covering 204 products.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 291 Production activity went through two very distinct phases.
In the first six months it grew briskly (by 6%), driven largely by the increase in public spending, while in the second half of the year its growth rate slowed considerably, amounting to only 2.4%.
Consumption increased by 5.6%, with substantial upturns in both public and private consumption.
Private consumption was influenced by the steady increase in family remittances, which represented 11.3% of that expenditure.
Private investment, which had grown rapidly until 2000, contracted significantly for the second year in a row.
The deterioration in the international environment, the interest-rate hike and the changes in fiscal policy dissuaded private investors from making new outlays.
Although foreign direct investment was down slightly, it remained at its average level of recent years.
In contrast, public investment rose substantially (27.6%) for the second year in a row, more than offsetting the decline in private investment, even though it was sharply reduced in the second half of the year as part of the macroeconomic stabilization effort.
At the sectoral level, basic services expanded steadily (by 10%) in the areas of both electric power and communications and transport.
Telecommunications continued to show robust growth (17.4%) as the expansion of mobile telephone services picked up speed.
Electric power generation was up by 6.7%, with increases in both thermal and hydroelectric generation, in the latter case because of higher water levels in the reservoirs.
The goods-producing sectors and the “other services” category showed a modest increase of close to 3%.
The expansion of agriculture was moderate (2.5%) in comparison to the excellent 8.1% posted the previous year.
Agricultural output retreated by 2% after correcting for the excess supply of some products in 2001.
The cultivation of rice and sweet potatoes stalled, while that of corn, beans, tomatoes and bananas went down and that of pigeon peas, peanuts and some other products increased.
There was a steady upturn in production for export, especially of leaf tobacco, coffee beans, cocoa beans and sugar cane.
There were significant increases in the production of fresh milk (23%), eggs (5.3%), beef and pork, and a decrease in that of chicken (7.1%) for the second straight year.
Forestry production jumped by 33% owing to the increased consumption of firewood and coal, especially in low-income households.
Mining output shrank for the second year running (3.2%) as a result of reduced salt and limestone production.
Nickel production rose by 1.9% after having slid sharply the previous year, and construction inputs also increased.
The sugar subsector increased by 6.6% thanks to the advance production of raw sugar and molasses, which also increased the output of refined sugar.
At the same time, public investment gave a strong impetus to construction and its primary inputs.
In addition, there was an upturn in the production of food and beverages, including evaporated milk, rum, cigarettes and beer.
Activity in the free zones contracted for the second year in a row, although at a more moderate rate in the second half of the year.
The slump was concentrated mainly in the footwear, tobacco and textile segments, while jewellery, electronics and pharmaceuticals, among others, showed positive results.
The services included under the heading restaurants and hotels increased by scarcely 1% as the number of tourist arrivals remained low.
The hotel occupancy rate went down by an annual average of 3.5%, although it made a significant recovery towards the end of the year.
As a result of the significant currency devaluation and the increase in fuel prices, by the end of the first half of 2003 prices had already risen by 16.6%, far exceeding the inflation target established under the monetary programme for 2003.
In 2002 increases were observed in housing (34.3%), health care and transport.
The elimination of the subsidy for electric power consumption for all but the poorest sectors raised electricity rates considerably.
Domestic gas also became more expensive (36.5%) owing to an increase in international prices, while rents went up by 10.4%.
Transport showed an increase of 13.8% in 2002, mainly because of the currency depreciation; transport 292 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean charges rose by an annual average of scarcely 5.1%, which reflected part of the 25% increase in gasoline prices.
Health care costs (11.1%) also rose faster than the average price increase, while food, beverages and tobacco together showed an increase of 9% due to the higher cost of imports.
The sectors that generated the most employment were services and agriculture, which accounted for 86% of the increase, and to a lesser extent commerce, the financial sector and public administration.
However, the increase in the overall rate of participation from 54.3% to 55.1% had the effect of raising the unemployment rate from 15.4% to 16.1%.
In the final quarter the remaining private firms agreed to a two-stage wage hike: an 8% increase in October followed by a 5% increase in March 2003.
The deficit was offset by the rising tide of private transfers from abroad, mainly family remittances, which were equivalent to 11.6% of GDP.
As a result, gross national disposable income was 9% higher than GDP.
These resources covered a large proportion of the merchandise trade deficit and payments of interest and dividends, although net financial capital inflows were down from the previous year owing to the reduction in net public borrowing and the slight drop in foreign direct investment.
Moreover, the errors and omissions account showed a large negative balance as a result of capital flight, which translated into a substantial loss of reserves.
Free-zone sales, which represent 84% of the total, declined by 3.3%, although they began to rebound in the final months of the year, partly because of the currency depreciation, and continued to grow in 2003.
Exports from outside the free zones performed better, expanding by 6.6%, after having slid steeply the previous year (-17.7%).
Increases were seen in exports of traditional products, including raw sugar and molasses, coffee, cocoa and cocoa products and nickeliron, whose international price went up.
The greater buoyancy of the domestic market drove imports up by 4.8%.
Growth was observed in purchases of consumer goods (7.3%) and raw materials (4%).
Sharp upturns were seen in imports of certain products, including transport vehicles (58.5%), cereals (37.5%) and fats and vegetable oils (23.3%).
Imports of inputs for maquila activity, however, shrank by 6.4%, so that the total value of imports was US$ 8.883 billion, which is just 1.2% higher than the previous year’s figure.
Although international oil prices rose sharply in the final quarter of 2002, the annual average increase was close to 3%.
Accordingly, the oil bill, which represents 20.8% of the country’s imports, reached US$ 1.297 billion, exceeding the previous year’s figure by only Tourist arrivals increased in the last quarter, but the total for the year as a whole was 2.8 million, representing a 2.5% decline from the 2001 figure, while tourism revenues amounted to US$ 2.736 billion.
As usual, the services account posted a surplus (of US$ 1.771 billion), but the amount was down by US$ 55 million in comparison to the 2001 surplus.
Consequently, the goods and services trade deficit was 15% higher than A key factor that continued to shore up the external accounts was the inflow of family remittances, which contrasted with the weakness of goods and services exports.
Although the faltering United States economy kept remittances from growing as quickly as they had in the past, they nonetheless totalled US$ 1.939 billion, exceeding by 7.3% the amount received in 2001.
Net capital inflows, excluding errors and omissions, fell by 24.3% in comparison to their 2001 level, but were still more than enough to offset the current-account deficit.
Foreign direct investment was down by 10.9%, to US$ 961 million, approximately 30% of which consisted of reinvestments.
The balance of medium- and long-term loans was positive and exceeded the previous year’s figure.
However, the abundant outflow of capital recorded in the errors and omissions account –on the order of US$ 997 million– brought the overall total down to US$ 553 million.
To a large extent, these outflows reflected private capital movements and portfolio adjustments triggered by the currency instability that became more pronounced in the second half of the year.
In the initial months of 2003 the improvement in external demand observed in the final quarter of the previous year seemed to gain strength, as earnings from the free zones and tourism continued to climb.
Textile exports from the free zones increased by 7.6% in the first four months, while tourist arrivals (non-resident travellers), which had slid by 14% in the first five months of 2001, surged by 18% over the same period of 2002.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 293 Following three years of recession and in the midst of a serious economic and financial crisis, economic activity dropped sharply.
In 2002, gross domestic product (GDP) fell by 12% and was 17% lower than the maximum reached in 1998, thereby pulling per capita GDP back down to its 1991 level.
Such a dramatic decrease resulted in an unemployment rate of 17% of the economically active population, while inflation, after several years of low figures, rose to an annual rate of around 26%.
Despite the reduction in real expenditure, the loss of income resulting from the recession thwarted the authorities’ efforts to reduce the public-sector deficit to less than 4% of GDP.
Meanwhile a steep downturn in imports, owing to a sharp fall in domestic demand, helped to narrow the trade gap.
In the first half of the year, a persistently high level of deposit withdrawals sparked a serious financial crisis.
The crisis affected first the banking system –which had long been a recipient of financial flows from other countries in the region, mainly Argentina– and subsequently the State’s ability to pay.
The resulting domestic and external credit squeeze was such that the effects were still resonating in mid-2003.
This grave situation followed several years of recession and coincided with a sudden fall in external demand, particularly demand from other MERCOSUR countries.
The severe shrinkage of domestic demand that went hand in hand with the financial crisis reduced GDP and imports even further.
Against this backdrop of deep recession, tax revenues declined significantly, and the public deficit consequently remained at the same high level as in previous years.
The great uncertainty that prevailed throughout the year prompted caution on the part of the private sector, which registered a savings rate equivalent to five percentage points of GDP.
Following several years of deficits, the country posted a balance-of-payments current account surplus of over 1% of GDP.
Given the economy’s degree of dollarization, the steep depreciation of the Uruguayan peso in the third quarter weakened the equity position of the public and private sectors to such an extent that the State was forced to reschedule its debt and deposits in official banks.
In mid-2003, the financial and economic situation was showing some signs of a recovery in production activity, mainly thanks to increased exports and production in import-substitution sectors.
GDP was expected to fall by 2.5%, but to trend upward as the year progressed, and inflation is likely to be considerably lower than in 2002.
The public-sector debt was refinanced, thereby improving its maturity profile, but the interest burden, which poses a major problem in terms of fiscal policy, remained unchanged.
The fact that the situation in 2002 had little in common with that of previous years led institutions to act very differently, however.
In 2002, Uruguay’s economy was highly exposed to Argentina’s financial and trade risk.
The proportion of deposits made by nonresidents (chiefly Argentines) in Uruguay’s main commercial banks, which have close ties to Argentine banking institutions in terms of both their assets and credit risk, rose to 45%.
In early 2002, international credit rating agencies withdrew the investment-grade sovereign debt rating they had assigned to the country several years previously.
This immediately prompted a major sell-off of Uruguayan securities, whose value plummeted on the secondary market.
The high dollarization of public and private liabilities markedly increased the perceived exchange risk in corporate balance sheets, while the rate of devaluation quickened under the sliding-band system and factors such as the sudden termination of Argentina’s convertibility regime dealt a blow to the real bilateral exchange rate.
During the first seven months of 2002, foreigncurrency deposits (almost 60% of which were made by non-residents) were therefore reduced by US$ 6.4 billion, thus falling to 45% of the total as it stood at the end of 2001.
The central bank’s international reserves were seriously depleted by the continued flight of deposits as banks continued to withdraw their funds and as the central bank was repeatedly called upon to provide financial assistance to official and private banking institutions.
The first consequences were the closure of the Uruguayan branch of one of the main Argentine banks in February and the recapitalization of the country’s largest commercial bank on an emergency basis.
In June, two other commercial banks that had formed a financial group had their licences suspended owing to the fraudulent actions of their owners.
The exchange rate was floated in late June following several years under a sliding-band system.
There was also a change in senior staff at the Ministry of Economic Affairs and in the board of directors of the central bank.
Towards the end of July, the bank run and the decrease in international reserves became so severe that a bank holiday was declared and the operations of two other locally-owned banks were suspended.
Following intense negotiations with the relevant international organizations, a new financial programme was agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The package, which was designed to restore confidence in the banking system, included US$ 1.5 billion in loans from IMF, the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and the World Bank.
As part of this programme, a fund to help stabilize the banking system was also set up.
This fund has paved the way for the adoption of measures for maintaining the payment chain through return of all sight and savings deposits held in official and suspended banks.
Given the urgent need to normalize banking activity, the United States Treasury Department granted a bridge loan of US$ 1.5 billion pending finalization of the arrangements with these international lending institutions.
The four-day bank holiday was terminated following the adoption of a law extending the maturity date of time deposits in dollars in official bank by three years.
Under this provision, 25% of the deposit can be redeemed the first year, 35% the second and the remaining 40% the third; periodic interest payments are to be made on the established dates.
The suspended banks did not reopen their doors, but foreign banks continued to operate as normal.
In 2002, Uruguay and IMF concluded three agreements that gave the country access to financing from IMF itself, the World Bank and IDB.
However, those agreements lapsed as a result of the country’s inability to meet the agreed objectives.
It was not until February 2002 that a new agreement was reached on a financial programme for the biennium starting in April.
The programme projects a 2% fall in GDP in 2003, but economic activity is expected to pick up during the year, thus improving upon the low levels recorded at the end of 2002.
The programme is intended to increase the primary public-sector surplus to 3.2% of GDP.
This would reduce the overall deficit to just over three percentage points of GDP, taking into account the fact that interest on the public debt represented 6.3% of GDP.
As part of the exchange-rate float instituted the year before, the aim of the monetary programme is to maintain inflation at its 2002 level.
In addition, the balance-of-payments current account surplus is expected to amount to 2.4% of GDP.
That year also marked the beginning of a recession, however, which, given the close link between the tax system and the business cycle, hurt fiscal revenues.
Yet spending continued to increase, especially social security expenditure, which came to represent 16% of GDP in 2001, i.e., half of total operating expenditure.
As a result of both these factors, and despite an increase in the tax burden, the public-sector deficit exceeded 4% of GDP during 1999-2001.
The deficit was financed through external borrowing at the low interest rates made possible by the country’s investment-grade sovereign debt rating during that period.
The first semester saw the adoption of fiscal adjustment measures, including the introduction of new taxes and a reduction in expenditure.
However, revenues continued to fall as a result of the deepening financial crisis and recession, while the effects of devaluation on the debt service were to increase outgoing interest payments.
Over the year as a whole, the central government’s revenues fell by 5% in real terms.
The increased tax burden on wages and the introduction of new taxes failed to offset the downturn in VAT receipts (a 12% drop, in large part due to reduced imports) and in revenues from excise taxes and from the tax on industrial and commercial profits caused by the lengthy recession.
Government expenditure, including social security transfers, fell by 4% in real terms.
Almost all outlays showed considerable real reductions, particularly investment (down 65%) and wages (down 26%).
However, those spending cuts coincided with a considerable increase in interest on the public debt (48% in real terms), which thus came to represent 14% of total expenditure.
The larger deficit of the central government was counterbalanced by the increased contribution of State-owned enterprises, however, and the consolidated publicsector deficit for 2002 (4.2% of GDP) was therefore equal to that of 2001.
In the first few months of 2003, fiscal performance was as planned, thanks to this very tight policy, which provided for a nominal 3% wage hike and an increase of less than 2% in pension payments in the first four months of the year.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 299 Until June 2002, the sliding-band exchange rate system had given priority to foreign-exchange policy over monetary policy.
Under the floating exchange-rate system, however, monetary policy took on a vital role, a fortiori because the lack of access to external credit placed very strong financing constraints on the public sector.
It was in this new context that the government introduced a policy for keeping monetary aggregates in alignment with inflation targets.
From September on, the government sought to use monetary policy to absorb excess liquidity by issuing peso-denominated securities bearing high interest rates.
This goal was attained over the following months; in fact, liquidity was 9% lower at the end of 2002 than at the end of the previous year.
One decision was to transform the Banco Hipotecario de Uruguay (Mortgage Bank of Uruguay) into a nonbanking institution specialized in the financing of housing.
Its dollar deposits were transferred to the Banco de la República, which was then capitalized.
As previously stated, the deposits of both official banks were rescheduled over three years, with payments to be made annually.
The Uruguayan branch of the Argentine bank whose operations had been suspended early in the year reached a private agreement with its creditors.
The four locally-owned commercial banks that had also been suspended went into administrative closure.
The assets of three of them were used to set up a new bank, a business corporation whose State-owned shares were to be opened for sale in due course.
These institutions’ depositors are to receive six-year certificates of deposit with quarterly payouts.
Foreign commercial banks, with the support of their parent companies, operated as normal during the entire process.
As a result of the high level of foreign-currency borrowing in the public sector and the considerable depreciation of the local currency, the official debt of US$ 11.4 billion was equivalent to 90% of GDP.
Under such conditions, debt servicing was a great burden on the country, particularly as there was a bunching of maturities in 2003-2005.
In early 2003, with IMF support, the authorities proposed a “friendly” swap to sovereign creditors, consisting of a five-year extension of maturity, with the original currency of the debt being maintained and no reduction in capital or interest.
The proposal was put to those creditors that were not multilateral lending agencies and that held debt paper having a nominal value of US$ 5.2 billion.
By mid-May, 90% of creditors had accepted the offer, thereby considerably reducing the pressure of debt servicing for the next few years.
The steep depreciation of the Argentine peso and the great uncertainty affecting the Uruguayan economy during the first half of 2002 prompted the economic authorities to increase the monthly rate of devaluation to 2.4% and the width of the band to 12% in January.
Then, at the end of June, the authorities floated the exchange rate after 12 years under the sliding-band system.
The price of the dollar shot up in the volatile financial market of the third quarter.
Towards the end of the year, however, strict monetary and public expenditure policies slowed the depreciation of the Uruguayan peso, and the exchange rate stabilized at around 28 pesos per dollar, which was double the rate recorded at the start of the year.
In mid-2003, as the Argentine and Brazilian currencies appreciated in relation to the dollar, the Uruguayan peso’s exchange rate had been even lower.
Domestic demand fell by 18% as a result of a severe reduction in investment (30%) and private consumption (15%).
The volume of exports was also down sharply (14%), for a total reduction of 20% over the last four years.
Imports, which were hurt by a sudden rise in the exchange rate, decreased by 33% in constant values, while GDP shrank by around 12%.
This will seriously affect output for 2003, since the year thus started out with a decrease of 7% carried over from 2002.
Economic activity contracted across the board, with the sole exception of agriculture.
The two most badly affected sectors were construction and commerce, restaurant and hotel services.
Construction activity was down by 21% as the flow of financing came to a virtual standstill and public investment dropped off sharply, while commerce, restaurant and hotel services slumped by 25% as a result of weak domestic demand and the severe slowdown in tourism.
Manufacturing declined sharply once again in 2002 (14%) for a cumulative decline of 30% over the past four years.
Agricultural output, which was the only item to show an increase, returned to the levels of 2002 thanks to an upturn in beef production and good soybean and sunflower harvests, although it remained significantly lower (10%) than its 1998 peak.
The sharp hike in the price of the dollar in 2002 prompted a rapid change in relative prices and a rise in the price of tradable goods and services.
Given the deep recession in the domestic market, there was less of a rise in the price of non-tradables.
Under such conditions, consumer prices went up by 25% in 2002, which was a major increase compared to previous years, when the increases had generally been about 4%.
In 2003, the stable exchange rate has resulted in a fall in inflation, which is expected to have dropped to below 2002 levels by the end of the year.
Inflation accelerated mainly during the second and third quarters of 2002 amidst the prevailing uncertainty and a rapid depreciation of the peso.
The fact that the price of the dollar doubled between January and August 2002 had a knock-on effect on domestic prices, which increased by an annual rate of 70% in the third quarter.
Domestic demand faltered as a result of a lack of adjustments in nominal wages in the public and private sectors and pensions, plus increased unemployment.
This, in conjunction with a strict monetary policy, brought about a rapid change in relative prices.
This was radically different from what had happened in previous periods, when indexing mechanisms linked to the price of the dollar had exerted a strong influence.
Given that nominal wages were not adjusted in 2002 (due to the financial squeeze on the public sector and the sharp contraction of private production), wage earners’ purchasing power dropped by an average of 11% during the year.
The economic crisis also aggravated unemployment, which reached an annual average of 17% of the economically active population, or two points higher than the previous year and much higher (seven points) than in 1998.
During the third quarter, at the height of the financial crisis, the rate of unemployment was nearly 20% (the highest level ever recorded) and job losses were also very high.
In mid-2003, unemployment was still above 18% and there was considerable emigration.
The sudden halt of voluntary external financing (mostly offset by exceptional IMF financing) and the deep recession brought about a rapid turnaround in the main variables of the balance of payments.
Following several years of successive gains, reserves fell by US$ 2.3 billion in 2002, which was the equivalent of almost one fifth of GDP or 87% of the year’s total export value.
These heavy losses coincided with the capital flight discussed above and occurred despite the fact that the current account had a positive balance of almost US$ 200 million for the first time since 1991.
There was a copious outflow of private capital, as may be seen from the negative balance of US$ 2 billion recorded under errors and omissions.
The financial account, which measures the flow of public and private capital, also had a negative balance of over US$ 2 billion, which was a major turnaround after last year’s positive balance.
The balance-of-payments current account surplus reflected the significant fall in the value of imported Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 301 goods (34%), which decreased even more significantly than merchandise exports (10%).
In 2002, signs of recovery in meat exports and increased external competitiveness due to the devaluation of the Uruguayan peso in real terms failed to offset shrinking Argentine demand and the credit difficulties resulting from the banking crisis.
The net result of the abovementioned factors was a further fall in goods exports, which slipped to a level almost one third lower the level recorded in 1998.
Beef exports increased by more than 20% as sales resumed to countries that accepted the new health standard for Uruguayan livestock, since the country has not been declared free of foot and mouth disease but had no outbreaks for over a year.
However, the sharp fall in sales to Argentina (a third of last year’s figure) resulted in another reduction in total goods exports.
The recession and devaluation in Argentina brought down tourism revenues by 30%.
In addition, almost all imports dipped considerably, purchases of consumer and capital goods were almost halved, and intermediate goods were down by more than a quarter.
Exports of goods trended upward in the first few months of 2003 in response to increased demand from non-MERCOSUR countries.
Although sales to Argentina rose from the extremely low levels of the preceding year, sales to Brazil slumped. 302 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 303 The Venezuelan economy faltered in 2002, as gross domestic product (GDP) shrank by 9%, and gross fixed investment receded by 22%.
Output is set to shrink by a further 12%-14% in 2003, depending on how quickly and thoroughly it manages to bounce back from the 27.6% slump posted in the first quarter, when oil output plummeted by 47.3% and non-oil production plunged by 19%, compared to their 2002 levels.
Firstly, the severe ongoing political crisis took a dramatic turn in April 2002 when the Government was overthrown for two days before being reinstated.
Then, towards the end of the year, opposition political parties joined forces with employers’ and workers’ institutions to convene a general strike that lasted from December 2002 until January 2003, causing a steep drop in oil output and exports.
These events, both of which had a major impact on productive activity, unfolded in the midst of tensions that have been steadily rising since late 2001.
Against this backdrop, not only did investment decline in 2002, but there was a major capital outflow during the year, estimated at US$ 12 billion.
Polarization and uncertainties continued unabated in mid-2003, given the possibility of a referendum being called before the end of the year to revoke the mandate of the President of the Republic.
From 1999 until late 2001 these were aimed at generating a climate of macroeconomic stability that would stimulate private investment and elicit an increase in productive activity and employment.
One of the key features was the currency band system, which it was hoped would achieve a steady reduction in inflation.
Monetary policy was generally kept tight to discourage persistent outflows of capital, while public expenditure was used to prop up the level of activity.
In early 2002, the Government decided to face down pressures in the foreign-exchange market by raising interest rates; and at the same time it reacted to the fall in the oil price (a trend that would subsequently be reversed) by implementing a package of fiscal adjustment measures.
As these failed to staunch the capital outflow, the currency-band system was replaced by a floating exchange-rate regime.
This produced a rapid depreciation of the local currency and a rise in consumer prices.
The consequent erosion of real wages further weakened domestic demand, while the strike at the end of the year aggravated tensions in the foreign-exchange market, reducing reserves and depreciating the local currency once again.
In January 2003, the flotation system was replaced by a fixed exchange-rate regime, backed by strict currency controls that were still in force as of June 2003.
Through greater government intervention in the economy, including control of prices and foreign-currency transactions, it is been possible to 304 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean slow down the loss of reserves.
The aim now is to move towards normalization in an economy that has been hard hit by recession and instability.
Scarcity of foreignexchange may afford protection to tradable goods producing sectors, but it could also hinder economic recovery by causing a shortage of imported inputs.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 305 The period 2002-2003 has witnessed major changes in macroeconomic policy, reacting to different stages in the crisis that has been afflicting the country.
As mentioned above, exchange-rate policy was adapted to the short-term needs arising from massive capital flight in early 2002 and then the strike of December 2002January 2003.
On the fiscal front, use was made of the slack generated in 1999 through creation of the Macroeconomic Stabilization Investment Fund (FIEM); and successive fiscal adjustment measures were implemented mainly on the revenue side.
Difficulties in containing inflationary pressures and capital outflows led to the adoption of administrative provisions to control capital movements and the prices of goods making up the basic consumption basket.
In 2002, the deficit of the non-financial public sector (NFPS) came in at 1% of GDP, compared to the 4.5% recorded in 2001.
This reduction is particularly remarkable since it was achieved during a period of sharp economic slowdown.
The explanation for this apparent paradox lies mainly in the fiscal revenue domain.
Incomes from oil, which include taxes and, first and foremost, dividends paid by Petróleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), were significantly higher than in 2001 (10%).
Growth in these revenues, despite lower oil production, mainly reflected the devaluation of the bolívar; most hydrocarbon sales are sent to export markets, and their value grew in localcurrency terms even after being eroded by inflation.
This more than offset the reduction in taxable income imposed by the new Hydrocarbon Statute (Ley Orgánica de Hidrocarburos), which reduced the rate of income tax levied on oil activity from 66.6% to 50%, while raising the rate levied on royalties from 16.6% to 30%.
The new tax on bank debits, together with a rise in the VAT rate from 14.5% to 16%, made up for the decline in other tax-revenue categories.
In addition, the Central Bank of Venezuela (BCV) transferred foreign exchange profits in large amounts to the National Treasury.
This increase was compensated by a reduction in current transfers, equivalent to 1.8% of GDP.
The Government drew on FIEM as a funding source in an amount equivalent to 1.6% of GDP, while making payments in bonds amounting to 2.9% of GDP.
The strike called in December caused oil production in that month and the following January to slump to around one fifth of the volumes produced in the three preceding months.
Nonetheless, production and export levels subsequently rebounded more quickly than had been expected.
For 2003 as a whole, PDVSA forecasts output of 2.5 million barrels per day (MBD) with exports of 2.3 MBD.
This would require production on the order of 3 MBD as from May –an level that is consistent in principle with the 2.9 MBD production quota agreed by Venezuela with the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) on 24 April.
Assuming an average price of US$ 22 per barrel for Venezuelan crude over the next few months, export earnings are expected to total US$ 18 billion– in other words 15% less than in 2002.
The impact of this reduction on fiscal revenues could either be aggravated or moderated by the behaviour of oil industry profits and the exchange rate.
In view of this situation, in early 2003 the national budget was adjusted by extending the period of validity of the tax on bank debits (IDB), and raising the VAT rate.
At the same time, expenditure cuts totalling 4 billion bolívares were agreed, affecting capital expenditure in particular.
In May, the Government announced a 30% rise in the minimum wage, part of which would take effect in July, and the rest in September, financed with IDB revenues and BCV foreign-exchange profits.
In order to reduce expenditures during 2003, part of the domestic debt was refinanced by swapping bonds that matured during the year for others payable in 2004 and 2005.
The authorities have announced their intention to seek funding from multilateral agencies and international markets, but no operations have yet been carried out on any significant scale.
The fund is not expected to receive any new inflows during 2003.
These withdrawals were made possible by legal amendments approved in early 2003. b) Monetary and exchange-rate policies Monetary policy in 2002 was determined by events in the foreign-exchange domain.
This enabled the Central Bank to control foreign-exchange supply; and market adjustment thenceforth operated mainly through the price.
The result was that the exchange rate depreciated sharply and became highly volatile –factors that led to a resurgence of inflationary pressures.
As a counterpart to this, the drain on international reserves was halted, partly thanks to the upswing in oil prices that began in the second quarter of the year.
Before the flotation band system was replaced, monetary tightening measures had been adopted that pushed interest rates to levels above 50%.
The aim of this was to strengthen the viability of the exchange-rate system and to conserve international reserves; nonetheless, the measures were insufficient to contain the demand for foreign currency in the weeks leading up to the replacement of the band system.
With the introduction of managed floating, the inflation control strategy centred on using monetary policy to achieve price stability in the medium-term, for which purpose BCV began to engage in open-market operations.
This allowed for a steady decline in interest rates, which by September had fallen to around 30%.
In the face of inflationary pressures that exceeded the target set by the monetary authority, towards the end of the year interest rates were pushed progressively higher through the rates applied in BCV operations.
The non-preferential lending rate of the country’s six leading banks stood at 33.9% by the end of 2002, with the rate on 90-day deposits at 27.9%.
This was accompanied by a system of currency controls that remain in place today, which have enabled international reserves to be replenished.
In addition, a non-authorized parallel market emerged in which the exchange rate is about 50% above the official level.
As a complement to currency controls, controlled prices were set for basic consumption goods and services, encompassing over half of the items making up the consumer price index.
As some productive sectors consider that the established prices make it impossible to supply the market on a profitable basis, the Government has been forced to engage in direct importation and distribution of certain basic products, in order to avoid shortages.
After adopting these measures, the authorities attempted to generate sharply lower interest rates in order to boost economic activity.
The national government explicitly stated its preference for the BCV to set maximum rates, but the initiative of negotiating an agreement with private banks prevailed.
Within this framework, BCV lowered its rediscount rate, and on 30 April 2003 the National Executive, BCV and the banking sector signed an economic stability pact.
This includes a commitment by financial institutions to channel at least 500 billion bolívares (US$ 312.5 million) to the private sector at an average interest rate corresponding to 85% of the average lending rate of the six leading banks.
The banking sector also undertakes to maintain its publicsector bond holdings at their 31 December 2002 level until the end of the year.
The establishment of an interest rate ceiling would have helped ease the financial burden of the central government’s domestic debt, since a considerable portion of this uses the lending rate charged by the country’s main banks as a benchmark.
Nonetheless, given the reluctance of the financial sector to accept new government bonds, administratively determined interest rates would make it harder for the Treasury to obtain new funding on the domestic market.
In 2002 and during the first quarter of 2003, the behaviour of the main economic variables was recessionary.
On the external front, imports dwindled and there was a heavy capital outflow.
The oil sector cut back production in compliance with OPEC agreements, and, from December onwards, because of the strike.
As a result, oil output slumped by 12.5% while production in the non-oil sector contracted by 6.5%.
The steepest declines occurred in the second and fourth quarters, reflecting the most critical moments in the ongoing political crisis.
Aggregate demand sagged by 12.2%, with each of its components posting reductions.
In 2001, increased public expenditure aimed at reactivating the economy, in conjunction with the fall in 310 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean the oil price late in the year, produced a fiscal deficit of 4.7% of GDP.
This, along with the capital outflow, signified a change in the policies that had been adopted during the three previous years and largely explains the sharp retraction in aggregate demand during 2002.
All sectors suffered activity slowdowns in 2002, except for electricity and communications which have little weight in total output.
Among the key sectors, manufacturing contracted by 11%; construction fell by 20%, following 13.5% growth in 2001; and commerce decreased by 10.9%.
Economic activity continued to decline in the first quarter of 2003 –GDP shrank by 27.6%, with oil activities slumping by 47.3% and non-oil activities plunging by 19.0%.
Oil exports, which in late 2002 attained a level of about 3 million barrels per day, came in at 0.6 MBD in January, 0.9 in February and 1.93 in March.
These export volumes mean that Venezuela largely failed to benefit from the high oil prices prevailing in the first quarter of the year.
To encourage normalization of productive activities, the Government announced the adoption of policies to protect domestic production.
The effect of these policies in the short run is constrained by weaknesses in the infrastructure of production for domestic markets that have developed over several years.
Investment would therefore need a major boost, having been clearly neglected since 1999.
In the short term, the recovery of oil production and progressive normalization that followed the strike herald significant improvements from the very depressed first quarter of this year.
Nonetheless, it is too late to prevent a negative rate of activity growth for the year as a whole compared to 2002, probably at a two-digit level.
The behaviour of prices in 2002 reflected the impact of the bolívar depreciation during the year, compounded by the rise in the VAT rate and elimination of a number of exemptions.
The wholesale price index jumped by 51.3%, following a rise of just 10.2% in the previous year.
The sharp downturn in economic activity pushed the unemployment rate up to 15.8% in late 2002 –its highest level since 1967; official figures for 2003 show unemployment at 19.1% in April.
In 2002, the trade surplus widened to nearly US$ 14 billion, thanks largely to a 29.4% drop in imports associated with the economic slowdown, while exports declined by 6.4% in the wake of production cutbacks agreed with OPEC and the oil-industry standstill during the strike.
The current account balance was also positive, to the tune of US$ 7.7 billion, but a capital outflow of some US$ 12 billion resulted in an overall balance-ofpayments deficit of US$ 4.3 billion.
The financial and capital account has been in deficit since 1999; and this, together with the heavy outflows recorded as errors and omissions, reveals an exceptional and growing haemorrhage of capital from the domestic economy: US$ 26 billion between 2000 and 2002.
In the latter year, foreign direct investment (FDI) dwindled to just US$ 475 million (down from US$ 4.4 billion in 2000), a level that could do little to offset the outflow of capital from the private sector.
The financial and capital account posted a net deficit of US$ 8.905 billion, which, together with errors and omissions (a further US$ 3.145 billion), resulted in a total capital outflow in excess of US$ 12.050 billion.
Total international reserves ended 2002 at US$ 14.755 billion, which was US$ 4.342 billion lower than previous year’s level, largely (78%) corresponding to FIEM drawings.
The country’s international reserves continued to decline in January 2003, reflecting the lack of oil income and further capital outflows.
By the end of that month, reserves had fallen to US$ 13.669 billion, their lowest level in the last four years.
This situation, compounded by fiscal needs, made it necessary to draw further on FIEM resources.
Subsequently, following the closure of the foreign-currency market, introduction of currency controls and suspension or reduction of foreign-currency sales to the private sector, total reserves recovered to US$ 18 billion by early July 2003.
This is a temporary situation, however, since oil sales can be expected to regain normal volumes during the rest of the year.
In terms of capital movements, suspension of the supply of foreign currency by the Central Bank and the use of accumulated funds by certain productive sectors have helped to staunch the capital haemorrhage.
States members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States In 2002 the OECS economies registered negative growth (-0.3%) as key productive sectors stagnated.
The manufacturing sector remained uncompetitive by international standards and construction suffered from a reduction in the rate of implementation of investment projects.
The analysis here presented covers all member States with the exception of the British Virgin Islands.
These States form a currency union and fall under the monetary authority of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB).
The rest of the economies have a fiscal year spanning from April to March.
ECCB reports the fiscal accounts on a calendar-year basis to make them comparable.
In terms of individual member States, Antigua and Barbuda, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines recorded positive growth rates others saw their economies contract (-4.2% and -1.2%, for Anguilla and Grenada, respectively) or stagnate (Saint Lucia).
Dominica witnessed by far the deepest trough (-6.7%) as a result of an impending economic crisis that severely curtailed the functions of the government.
Dominica’s situation drew the attention of regional organizations and national institutions to the fiscal vulnerability and general macroeconomic situation in the OECS economies.
The OECS countries have recorded steadily declining rates of growth since the 1970s and, at the same time, have accumulated significant fiscal and external gaps, creating debt sustainability problems and making the countries more dependent on foreign financing, which in some cases 314 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean has tended to decline.
The Caribbean governments decided to create a stabilization fund to deal with this situation and enable the countries of the sub region to meet the institutional and economic challenges posed by the current international trends towards globalization and market liberalization.
The downturn in growth translated into a decline in productive sectors, demand for credit and rising levels of liquidity in the financial system.
However, commercial banks did not systematically lower the cost of borrowing, opting instead to bear the opportunity costs of holding funds idle and thereby reinforcing a declining trend in their profitability.
At the same time, tax revenues were unable, in the majority of cases, to compensate for the expansion of current expenditure, forcing most member States to balance their fiscal accounts by constraining capital expenditures.
These imbalances were reflected in member States’ external accounts, which at the aggregate level reveal the importance of portfolio investment as a source of financing and show a reduction in foreign direct investment flows.
The development of member States’ productive sectors is hampered by technical difficulties and the lack of profitable outlets.
Most States are thus relying on an increase in the implementation rate of public sector programmes and on external stimuli to revive their economic activity.
Member States project a recovery of the tourism and construction sectors, while agriculture is expected to maintain its current overall performance. 2.
Other Caribbean countries The economic performance of the other Caribbean countries was varied.
Nonetheless, with the exception of Trinidad and Tobago and Belize (3.2% and 3.7%), these countries share some of the features characterizing the economic performance of OECS.
In Jamaica, in spite of concerted efforts to keep the exchange rate stable, the nominal rate followed an unstable path that turned into a free fall in the early months of 2003 before it finally stabilized.
In Suriname, direct intervention by the 2 Bahamas does not report current GDP figures. authorities, including an increase in the reserve requirement ratio and the establishment of a trading band, did not stop the currency from depreciating.
In Trinidad and Tobago, phases of foreign exchange shortage alternated with phases of relative abundance.
In the case of the fixed exchange rate systems, the authorities’ response depended on the specifics of each case.
In Barbados and Bahamas the authorities sought to engineer a decline in interest rates, in part to alleviate the domestic debt burden.
Meanwhile, Belize was also exposed to devaluation pressures, forcing the authorities to adopt a strict monetary stance.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 315 The fiscal accounts improved in Belize and Guyana and worsened in the rest of the Caribbean countries.
The reasons for the deterioration of the fiscal accounts do not have a common denominator and can only be analysed on a case-by-case basis.
Given the countries’ low growth, inflation was not a priority for most of them.
The rate of inflation rose in Guyana and settled at the two-digit level in Suriname.
Trinidad and Tobago registered a surplus, and Bahamas and Guyana improved their current-account position, while the rest of the countries widened their imbalances.
For 2003 most of the countries except Jamaica expect improved growth prospects.
Trinidad and Tobago is expecting higher foreign exchange flows as a result of its large endowment of oil resources.
After changing its tourism legislation and approving the construction of a hotel by a major chain, Barbados is likely to record positive growth in 2003.
Belize plans to stabilize its economy as its fiscal deficit narrows and becomes sustainable over time.
Guyana is counting on the government’s efforts to rationalize and improve the productivity of its agricultural sector.
Suriname will benefit from a number of investments by foreign companies in the agricultural and mining sectors.
On the external front, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) countries signed a free trade agreement with Costa Rica in March 2003 as part of their broader regional integration efforts.
This resulted, in turn, from an increase in capital revenue (from EC$ 11 million in 2001 to EC$ 42 million in 2002) and, most importantly, a contraction in capital expenditure (-14%).
The reduction in capital expenditure reflected the completion of investment projects and also, in some countries, low rates of implementation of public-sector investment programmes.
The current account balance deteriorated (from a deficit of EC$ 127 million in 2001 to EC$ 160 million in 2002) because of the expansion of current expenditure (6.6%), which amply offset the increase in current revenue (5.3%).
Current revenue was driven by the taxes collected on international trade and transactions (7.2%), and current expenditure, by all of its components.
In terms of individual member countries, Anguilla and Montserrat registered surpluses on their overall fiscal balance.
Anguilla’s performance is explained by the containment of current expenditure despite the settlement of wage arrears that took place in the second quarter of the year and the contraction in capital outlays due to the completion of public-sector investment projects.
In Antigua and Barbuda, current revenues rose thanks to an increase in the customs service charge (from 5% to 10%) and the widening of the base of the environmental levy.
However, rising current expenditure led to deterioration in the current account deficit owing to an increase in the wage bill and maintenance outlays.
The contraction in capital expenditure was due mainly to the completion of projects as the government undertook the task of rehabilitating road infrastructure and health facilities and expanding the Heritage Quay.
In July 2002 Dominica implemented an IMF standby arrangement which contemplated measures to increase fiscal revenues, including a stabilization levy and a broadened sales tax incorporating telecommunications services.
In practice, fiscal revenues remained at the previous year’s level and the required adjustment was brought about through the containment of current expenditure and a drop-off in the rate of capital project implementation.
Grenada witnessed a decline in its current account surplus as revenue failed to keep pace with expenditure.
While tax revenues reflected the slow pace of economic activity, the potential of non-tax revenues was constrained by a reduction in the number of offshore financial companies.
Current expenditure reflected interest payments on the external debt and transfers and subsidies.
Capital expenditure rose significantly as public works were undertaken on a major hospital.
Montserrat’s current account deficit widened owing to an increase in transfers and subsidies, which is 318 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean explained by the operational and maintenance costs of the helicopter and ferry services transferred to the government at the beginning of 2002.
In Saint Lucia saw its current account surplus rise in relation to the previous year because of a marginal increase in tax revenue and the successful containment of expenditure.
The government thus found itself with greater leverage to carry out capital expenditure projects to revitalize the economy.
Ongoing projects included road and water infrastructure, the improvement of security services and a fish-landing complex.
Fiscal management was facilitated by a rise in capital grants due to a fisheries project.
The capital account balance reflected a 50% increase in expenditure due to the construction of a fisheries complex and a hospitality center, hospital rehabilitation and the enhancement of road and building infrastructure.
In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the fiscal accounts showed a bigger current account surplus as a result of an increase in the rate of the consumption tax, a widening of the tax base of the interest levy and the introduction of licences.
At the same time, capital expenditure more than offset the revenue effects of these tax measures, and included equity investment in the Caribbean airline LIAT, the Grenadines Multi-Project Phase and outlays on human capital development and physical infrastructure.
In 2003 most of the countries are expected to resume their normal rates of public project implementation, although their fiscal situation is likely to remain unchanged unless growth prospects improve.
Its monetary unit, the Eastern Caribbean dollar, is pegged to the United States dollar at EC$ 2.70 per US$ 1.
The union’s monetary authority, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, acts as a quasi-currency board and is required by statute to back up 60% of its monetary liabilities.
Since the formation of the union, the Central Bank has maintained a neutral monetary stance and has hardly changed its reference rate of interest.
On the one hand, the monetary authority’s management of its foreign assets and liabilities has guaranteed a backing ratio that greatly exceeds the statutory levels.
On the other hand, the commercial banking system forms a closed circuit that follows the banking principle, namely the maintenance of equality between assets and liabilities.
In 2002, the expansion of the broad money supply (7%) resulted from the accumulation of net foreign assets by commercial banks (23%).
This is explained by the slowdown in economic growth, which negatively affected the demand for credit (1.2%), leading the commercial banking system to accumulate liquidity (the deposit-loan ratio rose from 1.24 to 1.30) and to channel that liquidity into the acquisition of external assets.
The prime lending rate moved from 9% to 8.5% in September 2002, but did not decrease sufficiently to offset the effect of falling inflation.
As has been usual in the past, personal loans represent close to half of total lending (46%).
Agriculture, tourism and manufacturing registered the largest increases in credit (12%, 9% and 8%, respectively).
Professional services, financial institutions, entertainment and transport reduced their Monetary trends in the individual countries mirrored those of the ECCB area in the aggregate.
In all the countries, the banking system accumulated net foreign assets, with the biggest increases being registered in Dominica and Grenada (2% and 11.2%, representing 3.3% and 7.8% of the financial system’s total net assets).
The respective commercial banking systems increased their levels of liquidity, but this was scarcely reflected in their lending policy, as interest rates remained constant (in Anguilla, Montserrat, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines) or decreased by one percentage point in nominal terms (in Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, Grenada and Saint Kitts and Nevis).
In 2003 the situation has not changed, and the factor that will ultimately determine the behaviour of the demand for credit is GDP growth.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 319 The OECS economies registered negative growth (-0.3%) as a result of the contraction in construction Agriculture proved to be the exception to this trend, making a robust recovery from the previous year’s underperformance (from -9.2% in 2001 to 6.6% in 2002).
Agriculture rebounded mainly because of a 19% increase in the volume of banana production, as Saint Lucia’s output, representing 73% of the total, rose by 16%, while that of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines was up by 10.9%.
This was due to favourable weather conditions, improved irrigation and, in the specific case of Saint Lucia, the effects of an emergency recovery programme.
In the other Windward Islands, banana output contracted (-3.4% and -9.4% in Dominica and Grenada, respectively) as a result of drought conditions and a decrease in total acreage.
The production of other crops (cocoa, nutmeg and mace), which rose by 27%, 41% and 10%, respectively, benefited from greater productivity, improved supply prices, extensive cultivation and more efficient pest control.
Construction reflected the contraction in government capital expenditure due to the completion of public and private investment projects and also to a reduction in their implementation rate.
In Grenada construction expanded in response to an increase in public capital expenditure.
In Montserrat public and private investment rose, and in Antigua and Barbuda the increase in construction was led by the expansion of hotel capacity.
Manufacturing reflected the slow growth of external demand and local industries’ lack of competitiveness.
The languishing tourism sector did not fully recover from the effects of the 11 September attacks and was also hurt by the discontinuation of weekly cruise-ship routes to some of the OECS countries.
The number of stay-over arrivals and yacht passengers increased marginally (by 1% and 0.4%), while that of cruise-ship passengers and cruise-ship calls declined (by 24% in both cases).
The net result for OECS as a whole and also at the individual country level was a contraction in the number of total visitor arrivals (-14%) and in visitor expenditure (-1%).
The price level decreased in most OECS member States, reflecting continued stagnant growth and stable international and agricultural prices.
On average, the growth in the consumer price index decreased from 0.27% to -0.40%.
At the country level, Anguilla registered the most pronounced drop-off (-1.75%) owing to lower prices for accommodations, which, in turn, reflected an incentive policy designed to maintain the competitiveness of the tourism industry.
Saint Lucia was the only country in which prices trended upward in the last quarter of the year with respect to the same period of the previous year (0.29% and 0.35% in 2001 and 2002) because of increases in fuel and electricity (1.06%), transport and communications (1.13%) and medical care and expenses (2.71%).
A comparative examination of the components of the price index by member State reveals that food prices (which have the highest weight in the price index of all the economies) declined on average from 0.12% to -0.60% between the last quarter of 2001 and the same period of 2002.
Housing, which is second in importance for most economies, exhibited a trend similar to that of most of the other components of the consumer price index, with one or two minor exceptions.
Labour market information on the OECS economies indicates that Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines registered increases in employment among civil servants and nurses.
The overall balance-of-payments outcome was positive, as the current account deficit (US$ -481 million, or 16% of GDP) was amply financed by the surplus on the capital and financial account.
The current account out-turn is explained by the mixed performance reflected in the merchandise trade balance (US$ -1.016 billion) and the fall-off in tourism earnings (-1% in gross visitor expenditure), which reduced the service account surplus from US$ 658 million to US$ 627 million.
At the country level, the 320 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean merchandise trade deficit narrowed in Dominica, Anguilla and Saint Lucia (-17%, -12% and -7%, respectively) and widened significantly in Montserrat and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (47% and 10% respectively).
Dominica and Grenada registered reductions in their merchandise exports (-4% and -2%, respectively) that were more than offset by the decline in imports (-12% and -3%, respectively).
Saint Lucia benefited from a rise in banana exports (44%) and a negligible expansion of total imports (less than 1%).
For its part, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines recorded a drop in exports (-13%) and an increase in imports (3.5%).
Lastly, in Montserrat imports are bound to outpace exports merely by virtue of the economy’s small size.
The country’s total merchandise import bill amounts to 17 times its export earnings.
The capital and financial account surplus (US$ 566 million), reflected official transfers to the OECS economies.
The financial surplus (US$ 450 million) reflected an upsurge in portfolio investment, since foreign direct investment, which went mainly to the tourism sectors, declined (-6%).
These revenues were negatively affected by the events of 11 September, which translated into lower receipts from international trade and transactions taxes.
Import taxes, which account for 46% of total tax revenues, declined by 12%.
In the same vein, tax receipts from tourism-related gaming and hotel occupancy were also affected (-10%).
Finally, lower-than-expected non-tax revenues from fines, forfeits and administrative fees aggravated the problem.
Meanwhile, expenditure was determined by transfer payments to public corporations (29%), as emoluments remained within the authorities’ target range and capital expenditure fell short (5%) of the amount budgeted.
The deficit was financed from domestic and external sources (52% and 48% of the total).
This included 80% of the total supplementary borrowing approved by the legislature in June to pay accumulated arrears due to the negative effects of the 11 September events on government revenues.
In fiscal year 2002/2003 tax revenues are reflecting a recovery in the tourism and trade sectors.
In the first six months of the fiscal year, tax receipts increased by 5% as a result of the improved performance of import duties and stamp taxes on imports and of departure taxes (6% and 13%, respectively).
The gaming and hotel occupancy taxes are also expected to rise, but their tax contribution has remained stable in the first six months of the fiscal year.
Other taxes (property and motor vehicle taxes and business and professional licence fees) also increased (by 21%, 26% and 47%, respectively) despite the recent measures focusing on tax incentives and exemptions.
These measures include the creation of duty-free economic enterprise zones to revive activity in depressed areas.
They also contemplate higher levels of exemptions, lower property tax rates and the waiver of the stamp tax for first homebuyers to boost the construction sector.
Expenditure reflected salary adjustments (7%), outlays for the promotion of tourism and property rental agreements (9%) and subsidies to improve health and education (6%).
Capital expenditure (7% of total expenditure) contracted as a result of the reduction in government capital investment.
The deficit for fiscal year 2002/2003 was financed mostly by domestic borrowing, which, together with an increase in public transfers to the national airline and to education, increased the national debt by 11%.
The government’s domestic debt is held by public corporations (37% of the total) and commercial banks and private institutions (25% of the total for each).
The foreign-currency debt rose by 32% owing to the domestic operations of the government and public corporations (25% and 14% of the total, respectively), increasing the debt-service ratio from 3.1% in 2001 to 4.1% in 2002.
Pressure on international reserves, which intensified following the 11 September events, forced the Central Bank of the Bahamas into a restrictive monetary stance that took the form of quantitative limits.
The monetary institution kept the discount rate at 6% and, at the same time, imposed a credit ceiling on the commercial banking system in September 2001 that remained in place throughout 2002.
The monetary policy stance constrained the growth of credit in the commercial banking system and limited the Central Bank’s freedom to carry out foreign exchange operations.
Net foreign exchange purchases helped to build a prudent stock of foreign currency.
As a result, the overall growth of the money supply (M3) declined with respect to the previous year (from 4.6% in 2001 to 3.4% in 2002).
Likewise, domestic credit to private productive activities contracted (-4%) except in the tourism sector (4.5%).
Conversely, personal loans and credit to the public sector expanded (by 6% and 49%, respectively).
The growth in personal loans is explained by that of home mortgages (15.2%).
The disaggregation of total arrivals into air and sea arrivals shows that the latter was the more dynamic component (1.8% and 8.9%, respectively).
Nassau/Paradise Island recorded the biggest market share of tourist arrivals, followed by the rest of the Family Islands (59% and 27%, respectively).
Among the domestic factors that will help to generate a positive outcome for this sector are the expansion of hotel room capacity in the Family Islands, airlift support for Grand Bahamas and improved port infrastructure.
Construction remained at the previous year’s level and showed mixed signals, making the outcome for 2003 uncertain.
On the one hand, the number of building permits declined (-3.6%) and their value fell by half On the other hand, the number of building starts increased (by 12%), mainly reflecting residential projects facilitated an increase in housing loans from financial institutions and, to a lesser extent, commercial starts, which reflected the completion of hotel projects in Grand Bahamas.
Fisheries registered increases in volume (17%) and price (30%), mostly attributable to crayfish tails.
With the exception of food and beverages, which showed the same rate of inflation as in the previous year (0.5%), all the categories registered declines in their rates of price variation.
The overall balance-of-payments outcome was positive (US$ 60 million) as the current account deficit (US$ 188.3 million) was amply offset by the capital and financial account surplus (US$ 249 million net of errors and omissions).
The current account deficit narrowed from the previous year as a result of lower import growth and the recovery of the tourism sector.
Merchandise import behaviour followed the contractionary stance of the monetary authorities and reflected moderate economic activity, especially in the construction sector.
Export earnings reflected the improved catch of crayfish, which boosted external sales of this product by 39%.
The net negative balance of the merchandise account was partly offset by the performance of services (4.8%), particularly travel (3.8%).
However, this result was moderated by the increased risk premium for casualty coverage, as reflected by the increase in payments to foreign insurance services (4.3%).
The net income gap is largely explained by profit remittances from the banking system.
Lastly, current net transfers remained at the previous year’s level (US$ 42 million) on account of the government’s receipts (US$ 49 million).
This resulted from an increase in expenditure (from 42% to 44% of GDP between the two periods), since the tax/GDP ratio remained constant at 32%.
In an effort to avoid increasing in its external debt stock (19% of GDP at the end of 2002), the government financed its deficit from domestic sources, particularly through the ways and means accounts and by drawing on government deposits held at the Central Bank.
At the same time, the imposition of a 60% tariff on selected agricultural products boosted revenues from the international trade tax.
The increase in total expenditure resulted mainly from the increase in wages and the payment of arrears in September and October 2002.
Capital expenditure rose in 2002 in response to the government’s countercyclical policy strategy, reflected in ongoing public works such as airport, highway and sewerage infrastructure.
In 2003, partly as a result of the completion of these projects and partly owing to a conscious policy decision to reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio, which reached 19% in 2002, the government scaled back its capital expenditure.
In order to reduce the future impact of its investment programme on the fiscal accounts, the government plans to rely on public-private partnerships.
For the fiscal year 2003/2004, the government plans to increase revenues and expenditure by 4.7% and 5.5%, respectively, yielding a fiscal deficit of 10.5% of nominal GDP, or 4.4% when corrected for amortization and net enterprises.
This will result from a combination of lower planned capital expenditure and new tax measures.
The measures are conceived, in part, as a step towards structuring the tax system in order to accommodate the eventual tariff phase-out required in the framework of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) in 2005.
They are also meant to enhance the country’s competitiveness within the Common Single Market and Economy, which is expected to enter into force in 2004.
Specifically, these measures include the widening of the reverse tax credit base, which replaces tax concessions in the low-income bracket.
The package also seeks to stimulate growth by eliminating the tax differential between domestic and foreign companies and reducing the small business tax (from 25% to 20%), property taxes and the property transfer tax.
Finally, the package envisages the extension of tax concessions to selected geographical areas.
The monetary authority grappled with the excess liquidity caused initially by the domestic financing of the fiscal deficit, the meagre growth of demand for bank loans to the private sector as a result of the contraction in economic activity, and the injection of liquidity caused by share transactions.
Over this period, the share of excess reserves rose from 44% to 67%.
The monetary base and the money supply increased by 40% between December 2001 and the same month of 2002.
In line with the fiscal stance that prevailed in 2002, the monetary authority modified its policy and, in October 2002, reduced the minimum interest rate payable on deposits by half a percentage point (from 3% to 2.5% per annum).
In the same vein, the Central Bank’s weighted average lending rate of interest on loans declined from 8.5% to 8% and total reserve requirements for commercial bank deposits and government securities were reduced by a full percentage point.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 333 that this would benefit the final consumer.
Most importantly, they sought to reduce the debt burden of entrepreneurs at a time when growth was faltering.
The measures were not completely successful, however, as nominal interest rates barely declined, and actually increased in real terms.
The nominal prime lending rate remained at 8.5% throughout the year and the weighted average rate dipped slightly from 10.97% in January to 10.35% in December, which translated into a decrease of 0.7% in real terms.
The demand for loans expanded by 6% overall between December 2001 and December The sectoral distribution of credit shows that only distribution and tourism increased their demand for credit (by 15% and 14%, respectively, between December 2001 and December 2002).
The sluggish demand for loans helped to channel the excess liquidity of banks to the government’s treasury bills (banks account for 96% of the total).
In turn, the greater demand for treasury bills translated into lower interest rates on government issuances (1.09% in January 2003, as compared to 2.86% in May 2002), which eased the government’s debt burden.
In 2003, credit demand is expected to recover and expand by 11%, while liabilities to the private sector will increase by around 5%.
Also, the Central Bank will remove restrictions on interest rates as a step towards the gradual liberalization of the money market.
In 2002 Barbados partially recovered from the economic contraction it had suffered the previous year (-2.8%), and it registered positive growth in 2003.
GDP growth was -0.4% in 2002 and is expected to be 1.5% in Agriculture (-0.6%) reflected a decline in sugar production (-10%), which is explained by the late start in the sugar crop and adverse weather conditions that impeded the fulfilment of the European Union sugar quota (9,000 tons short of the quota).
Concomitantly, and also because of lower international sugar prices and higher domestic costs, sugar exports fell from 48,900 to 39,500 tons.
Some branches benefited from the imposition of a 60% tariff on selected imports, and a “buy local” campaign.
For 2003, the government plans to maintain that tariff and expand the “buy local” campaign to cover the full range of goods and services.
In the initial months of 2003, growth in the manufacturing sector stalled, and most of its subsectors contracted.
However, the food and beverages and tobacco subsectors expanded by 2.3% and 11.5%, respectively.
The construction sector (3%) was boosted by the start of public-sector projects and the construction of a new hotel belonging to a leading chain, despite the decline in residential building activity.
Public-sector projects included those corresponding to the national housing corporation, the home mortgage scheme and road works.
The construction sector is expected to maintain its dynamism in 2003 and to expand by 4%, reflecting the recovery of the tourism sector.
Mining and quarrying fell by 6.5% as a result of the natural depletion of oil wells.
Consequently, crude oil and gas production decreased by 15.8% and 16.1%, respectively.
Tourism contracted for the second year in a row (-5.9% and -2.3%).
The number of tourist arrivals, and within this group, the number of long-stay visitors and cruise-ship arrivals declined (-1.8% and -0.8%, respectively).
The average length of stay, hotel room occupancy rates and tourist expenditure followed accordingly (-7%, -5.6% and -20%, respectively).
During the year the government announced measures to revitalize and strengthen the tourism sector.
Key to this effort is the Tourism Development Act (2002), which went to effect in 2003 and replaces the Hotel Aids Act promulgated more than 40 years ago.
In addition, the new package of tourism incentives includes the duty-free import of materials and supplies for hotel construction and of inputs for hotel operations.
Tax concessions of up to 150% are also granted for interest paid on loans for the purpose of refurbishment, with a 15-year period to write off capital expenditures.
In consonance with the decline in economic activity, lower import prices and stagnant credit growth, inflation reached one of its lowest levels of the past 10 years (0.2%).
In terms of the components of the price index, medical and personal care showed the biggest average increase (0.35%), followed by food (0.22%), which has the highest weight in the index, and housing and household operations (0.08% and -0.21%, respectively).
The rate was higher for women than for men (11.8% and 10.2%, respectively, in the last quarter of 2002), who account for equal shares of the labour force.
Employment increased in wholesale and retail trade, government services, agriculture, fisheries and construction, and declined in manufacturing, in transport, storage and communications and in the general service sector.
The wage bill rose owing to wage increases and the payment of arrears in the third quarter of 2002.
The current account deficit widened (from 3.7% of GDP in 2001 to 5.6% in 2002) because of the underperformance of exports, while imports also declined.
The overall balance was positive (US$ 16 million), owing to the outcome of the financial and capital account (US$ 159 million), but significantly smaller than it had been the previous year (US$ 321 million).
Merchandise exports reflected the general stagnation of the main sectors of the economy.
Sugar, electrical components, chemicals and food and beverages, which account for 61% of total external merchandise sales, respectively.
On the debit side of the external accounts, merchandise imports (-0.9%) reflected the contraction in income and, at the level of their components, a fall-off in capital goods imports (-1.8%).
The services balance was positive (US$ 586.7 million and US$ 554.1 million in 2001 and 2002), but indicated a clear lack of recovery in the tourism sector owing to adverse external conditions.
The capital and financial account surplus fell in comparison to the previous year (from US$ 26.5 million in 2002 to US$ 1.4 million in 2003).
In the remaining months of 2003, import growth is projected to moderate and conform to the trend of the economy, while the expected partial recovery of the tourism sector may offset the poor performance of merchandise exports.
For 2003 the current account deficit is expected to narrow to an amount representing 4.5% to 5% of GDP as the services balance improves.
Official estimates also indicate that the financial account is likely to worsen and that, as a result, the net international reserve position will deteriorate.
As a result, the external debt increased from The behaviour of revenue partly reflected the expansion of indirect taxes, particularly the one on international trade and transactions (8.9% and 9.6% of GDP in 2001 and 2002), and the contribution of the revenue replacement duty on oil.
Receipts from this tax resulted from the difference between international exrefinery oil prices (which declined in the first half of the calendar year) and the domestic prices charged to the consumer at the pump (which were not adjusted to reflect current conditions in the petroleum market).
The capital expenditure out-turn corresponded to an increase in locally-financed capital expenditure that was partly offset by a decline in foreign-financed capital expenditure.
For 2003 the government plans to reduce the fiscal deficit further and is targeting deficit levels of about 2% of GDP.
Two major stumbling blocks stand in its way: the recent wage increase, which will boost recurrent expenditure, and the ballooning debt.
Capital expenditure adjustment will provide part of the required adjustment leverage, but additional fiscal measures may be needed to stabilize public finances.
In 2002 the authorities implemented a series of measures in response to the devaluation pressures felt in the foreign exchange market.
These included direct intervention in the money market through sterilization operations facilitated by the increase in the legal limit on the issuance of treasury bills.
The Central Bank also constrained the credit creation potential of the commercial banking system by raising the cash reserve requirement for all deposits by two percentage points.
Finally, the government proceeded to legalize the existing parallel foreign exchange market in an effort to provide an outlet for foreign currency trading.
In the same vein, commercial banks’ ratio of approved liquid assets to required liquid assets decreased from 52% to 25% in the same period.
Banks attempted to increase their liquidity by raising deposit rates, which narrowed the interest rate spread (from 11% in 2001 to 10% in 2002).
In 2003, the authorities are not expected to alter their domestic policy stance, as inflation and exchangerate pressures remain subdued and as the fiscal deficit narrows to sustainable levels.
GDP growth moderated (from 4.6% in 2001 to 3.7% in 2002) as the agricultural and manufacturing sectors registered a mixed performance and tourism rebounded from the effects of the 11 September attacks.
In the agricultural sector, the increase in sugar cane production, as measured by sugar cane deliveries (12.4%), was offset by a contraction in citrus fruit output (-26%).
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 337 declining prices in the international market.
The fisheries subsector made a notable recovery from the effects of hurricane Iris.
Manufacturing was boosted by the growth of sugar and molasses production (7% and 19%) as a result of improved efficiency and favourable trends in international prices.
An additional contributing factor was the increase in factory efficiency from 88.6% to 93.3%.
The sector’s performance was marred, however, by the downturn in citrus juices and pulp (-29%) and the lack of competitiveness of the apparel sector.
Tourism recorded a marginal increase in total stayover visitors (1%) and an unprecedented rise in total cruise-ship visitors (from 40,898 in 2001 to 271,737 in Inflation, as measured by the consumer price index, increased from 1.1% in 2001 to 2.3% in 2002, reflecting higher fuel costs for the consumer and a rate adjustment in January for basic telephone services.
At the component level, the biggest increase was registered by transport and communications (9%, representing a 17% share of the consumer price index), followed by medical care (3%, representing a 2% share).
These increases were partly offset by small movements in their opposite direction by other components of the price index, particularly clothing and footwear; rent and water; and household foods and household goods and 16%, and 8.5% of the consumer price index).
The unemployment rate rose marginally from 9.5% to 10.6%, reflecting declines in the labour force in agriculture and manufacturing (-10% and -19%, respectively).
Public-sector wages increased in 2003 as part of a labour agreement to increase wages for civil servants, nurses, police officers and teachers by 8% in three successive steps between 2003 and 2005.
Imports responded mainly to the authorities’ restrictive policy stance and the slowdown in economic growth.
Conversely, the factor income subaccount recorded a deficit due to the repatriation of profits.
The capital account balance (US$ 1 million in 2001 and US$ 10 million in 2002) reflected governmental loan disbursements.
The deficit was financed by external borrowing and net domestic credit (44% and 56% of the total).
The levels of current revenues reflected the performance of personal and corporate income tax respectively).
These results were attributable to government efforts to improve the administrative capacity of the Guyana Revenue Authority, the public wage hike (which was implemented in the last quarter of 2001 and thus made its effects felt in 2002), and the increase in the travel voucher tax and purchase tax on motor vehicles.
Revenues from production, consumption and international trade taxes maintained their share of Personal emoluments (35% of total current expenditure), which reflected the payment of wage increases, drove current expenditures.
The other major component of expenditure, debt charges, contracted (10.4% and 9% of GDP in 2001 and 2002, respectively) due to the decline in domestic and external interest payments.
The former reflected decreases in the discount rate and in the volume of treasury bill redemption.
Guyana’s non-financial enterprises saw their balance sheet position deteriorate as their overall positive balance shrank from G$ 3.456 billion to G$ 665 million.
This was caused by an unexpected decrease in the operating balance with respect to the previous year.
In turn, the operating out-turn was due to the higher employment costs registered by a major public corporation and larger-than-planned outlays on freight, repairs and maintenance.
Guyana’s public domestic debt stock (3%) reflected the sterilization operations of the central bank.
The outstanding debt increased from 169% to 172% of GDP as a result of the disbursement of existing loans from multilateral organizations (67% of the total).
In 2003 the fiscal deficit is expected to widen to 13% of GDP.
Revenues are projected to remain at 32% of GDP while expenditures will increase from 46% to 50% of GDP.
This increase reflects the expansion of capital expenditures (11% and 16% of GDP in 2002 and 2003, respectively) due to a loan transfer to Guysuco.
Grants under the HIPC scheme will also decline significantly (-58%) due to a change in the debt relief accounting methodology.
The government has announced the implementation of a series of measures to broaden the tax base, whose full impact was to begin to be felt in April 2003.
These measures include a consumption tax on local telephone calls and an increase in the withholding tax on interest income from 15% to 20%.
The government also plans to introduce a value added tax in 2006 and has announced additional measures to improve tax administration and collection.
These measures entail amendments to the customs act, financial administration and auditing procedures, and the tax act.
The revenue effect of these measures will be partly offset by the decision to increase wages over the next three years and raise the income tax threshold from Monetary policy in Guyana was geared to maintaining price stability.
Narrow and broad money expanded by 6% (December 2001-2002), reflecting the combination of an increase in foreign net assets (7%) and a contraction in domestic credit (8%).
The performance of credit is mainly attributable to a decrease in net public-sector deposits, since demand for credit to the private sector remained stagnant throughout the year.
In turn, the government’s higher financing needs reflected the deficit of public firms, which was incurred because of higher employment and input costs and lower-than-expected sales of some of the country’s main export products.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 341 Slack demand for credit by the private sector reflected the conservative lending policies adopted by the banking system and the slowdown in economic growth with respect to the previous year.
The largest decline was registered in agriculture (-16%), followed by manufacturing (-9%).
The services sector, which is the largest credit recipient (34% of the total), recorded the smallest drop (-5%).
The decrease in nominal and real rates of interest did nothing to reverse this trend.
The commercial banks’ weighted average lending rate followed suit, decreasing from 17.6% to 16.8% in the same period (15% and 10%, respectively, in real terms).
As a result, the commercial banks’ excess reserves rose, peaking in August 2002 (33% of the total).
In response, the banks increased their demand for Treasury bills, at the same time as they shifted the composition of their portfolios, substituting foreign for domestic assets.
This provided an outlet for bank funds and helped to relieve the government’s debt burden by pushing down interest rates on government securities.
Also, to a lesser extent, it increased the pressure on the foreign-exchange market, which forced the central bank to engage in moderate interventions without altering the international reserve position of the financial system or the behaviour of the exchange rate (G$ 189.6 and G$ 191.8 in January and December 2002, respectively).
GDP (1.1%) dropped below its target level (2%), as most sectors, with the exception of agriculture, experienced low levels of growth.
The performance of agriculture (6%) was driven by the sugar industry (16%), which benefited from the restructuring and modernization efforts undertaken in the framework of the Agriculture Improvement Plan, good weather conditions and higher levels of productivity.
Rice production contracted (-11.1%) due, in part, to financial and technical setbacks.
Livestock gained (5%) thanks to an expansion in capacity and domestic protection measures.
In 2003 agriculture will expand by 2.9% as different crops continue to benefit from the Agricultural Improvement Plan.
Rice output will increase by 2%, while the poultry meat and livestock sector is set to expand by 5%.
The performance of the mining and quarrying sector (-7%) reflected trends in the bauxite industry.
Bauxite was hit by adverse weather conditions (flooding), declining international prices, a credit squeeze, rising production costs and consequently lower levels of profitability.
By contrast, diamond and gold production rose, thanks to technology improvements and larger flows of foreign direct investment.
The overall output of the mining sector will contract (-7.1%) due to lowerthan-expected gold production and continued stagnation in the bauxite industry.
The rate of growth of the manufacturing sector (2.3%) was in keeping with its historical average and reflected the mixed performance of its components.
Agro-based manufacturing was up in the sugar segment but shrank in the rice segment.
Within the services sector (0.4%), transport and communications showed the strongest growth (4.5%), which was attributable to a greater volume of inbound communication and cellular traffic.
Construction (-4%) failed to reap the full benefits of ongoing public-sector investment programmes due to a sluggish performance by the private sector.
The rate of inflation increased from 1.9% to 6.1%, which was mainly a reflection of domestic factors, since international prices remained stable and exchange-rate movements were minimal throughout the year.
Increases were recorded in the cost of utilities, petroleum, housing accessories and food.
Members of the police force, fire service and prison department also received additional income rises.
Lastly, certain unskilled workers in the private sector also received wage increases. 342 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean The balance-of-payments current account deficit narrowed (from 22% of GDP in 2001 to 17% in 2002) thanks to a decline in imports, which was attributable in turn to lower domestic growth.
The capital account surplus was not sufficient to offset the current account imbalance, which led to a deficitary balance-ofpayments position (2% and 4% of GDP in 2001 and 2002).
Total external sales, mainly merchandise exports, grew only marginally (1%), although sales of most commodities rose.
Sugar exports (9.4%) rose in volume (12%) even though international prices fell (2%), thanks to the government’s Agriculture Improvement Plan and good weather conditions.
Gold and timber exports were also up by 7.3% and 9%, respectively.
These gains were undermined, however, by a significant drop in bauxite exports (-42%) and a smaller downturn in rice (-9.5%) caused by the low levels of profitability prevailing in the two industries.
Imports of consumer goods, intermediate goods and capital goods recorded contractions of 4.4%, 3.35% and 1.6%, respectively.
The capital account (US$ 95 and US$ 63 million in 2001 and 2002, respectively) reflected a delay in the disbursement of HIPC assistance.
Private foreign direct investment inflows shrank (from US$ 56 million in 2001 to US$ 43.6 million in 2002) as a result of the economic slowdown, but expanded in the telecommunications and fisheries industries.
In 2003, the current account deficit will widen to 20% of GDP, mainly as a result of a higher import bill following the oil price hike.
With the exception of gold and timber, traditional exports will record strong growth underpinned by a series of measures geared towards developing and modernizing the product on sectors.
Higher disbursements for public-sector projects and the increase in private foreign direct investment which is expected to result from better growth prospects will offset only part of the current account deficit.
The overall imbalance in external accounts will rise from 4% to 8.5% of GDP and will be financed through debt relief assistance.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 343 Jamaica The budget deficit increased from 3.8% of GDP in as a result of lower-than-budgeted fiscal revenues and a lax fiscal stance.
The poor performance of fiscal revenues was mainly attributable to shortfalls in earnings from taxes on interest and, to a lesser extent, on dividends, the self-employment tax, corporate taxes, the bauxite/ alumina tax and international trade taxes.
The out-turn of interest and international trade taxes reflected a delay in the implementation of fiscal measures to improve the tax system by widening its base and by closing loopholes.
Among the most important of these measures was the removal of the withholding tax exemption for public firms, an increase in fees and fines, amendments to the General Consumption Tax Act and the Customs Act, and the tightening of the link between tax compliance and the granting of licences and professional certification.
Despite the fact that production levels were higher than the previous fiscal year, revenues from the bauxite/alumina tax were hurt by the decline in the international price of alumina and the slow growth of the United States economy.
By contrast, and despite the delay in implementation of the reforms, the yield on production and consumption taxes exceeded expectations thanks to increased compliance efforts and higher levels of activity at the PETROJAM (Petroleum Company of Jamaica) public refinery.
Government expenditures reflected an increase in the wage bill, larger interest payments and recurrent public programmes (up 21%, 22% and 37%, respectively, with respect to fiscal year 2002-2003).
Wage settlements, the adjustment of public pay packages and a rise in the minimum wage accounted for the increase in wages and salaries.
Interest payments on domestic debt (up by 16% with respect to fiscal year 2001-2002), which represent 75% of total interest payments, were driven by the depreciation of the exchange rate.
This, in turn, raised the cost of servicing domestic debt denominated in United States dollars (which accounts for 20% of the total).
In addition, stringent monetary measures geared to avoiding exchange-rate depreciation –including interest rate hikes– increased the burden of debt denominated in the local currency.
Lastly, recurrent programmes included the provision of basic services and utilities, pensions and spending on relief in the wake of flood damage.
For fiscal year 2003-2004 the authorities plan to reduce the deficit from 7.7% to 5.8% of GDP by constraining expenditure and, even more importantly, increasing revenue by means of a set of measures intended to broaden the tax base.
The main tax measures, which were announced in April 2003, include a levy on imports and the expansion of the general consumption tax base.
These two measures alone will account for 90% of the revenues expected from the entire package.
The first imposes a levy of 4% on all imports, including capital goods and raw materials.
The second widens the tax base by eliminating exempt and zero-rated goods and services and increasing the rate on telephone calls to 20%.
It also proposes to do away with the refund granted to manufacturers supplying tax-exempt goods and to include sporting goods in the tax base.
The biggest increases are expected in production and consumption (34%) and international trade (39%).
Revenues from income and profit taxes are projected to expand by 23%.
The results for the first quarter of 2003-2004 show that the revenue out-turn was 15% higher than budgeted.
As a result, the difference between the budgeted and actual fiscal result was about J$ 2.953 billion.
Spending constraints will be reflected in a decline in real wages (7%), since capital expenditures and interest payments are expected to rise with respect to fiscal year 2001-2002 (by 28% and 27%, respectively).
Debt management strategy will be key to the achievement of fiscal policy goals during the current fiscal year.
At the start of the present fiscal year, the domestic debt stock represented 92% of GDP.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 345 increased external financing constraints and the depreciation of the exchange rate.
The stock of external debt increased by only 1% in foreign currency but 19% in the local currency, due to exchange-rate depreciation, to stand at 59% of GDP at the end of March 2003.
Since fiscal year 1998-1999 the authorities’ debt management strategy has been based on keeping borrowing costs to a minimum.
The main elements of the strategy have a twofold purpose: to isolate the debt stock from movements in interest and exchange rates and to develop a domestic securities market to facilitate the use of market-based instruments to trade debt issues.
The first will be achieved by means of an increase in the proportion of fixed-rate instruments (which accounted for 48% of outstanding domestic debt in March 2003, with a target of 60% for fiscal year 2003-2004), restrictions on dollardenominated and dollar-indexed bonds (which represented 20% of domestic debt in March 2003) and the extension of debt maturities.
The second goal will be achieved by maintaining the government’s leeway to issue its securities on the domestic market and by anchoring traded securities to benchmark securities with higher liquidity premiums and lower carrying costs.
Ultimately, the government’s success in trimming the deficit will depend on growth, stability in the foreignexchange market and monetary strategy.
In Jamaica the management of monetary policy has had to deal with a changing environment.
Early in the year, the monetary authorities maintained the policy begun in 1998, which consisted of reducing the costs paid to financial intermediaries, and lowered the cash reserve ratio from 10% to 9% (March 2003).
At the same time, the central bank lowered the rate of interest on its open-market instruments in order to transfer this reduced cost to consumers.
From June on, however, as the foreign-exchange market came under devaluation pressures, the authorities focused their policy goals on keeping Jamaica’s exchange rate stable.
The average depreciation of the nominal exchange rate was 0.4% between January and June, increasing to 1% in August.
It peaked at 2% in December 2002, which coincided with the government’s admission that the fiscal deficit target of 4% of GDP could not be met and that the deficit would, in fact, be double that figure.
The nominal exchange rate continued to depreciate in 2003, declining by 13%.
The monetary authorities used three tools to reduce the instability in the foreign-exchange market in 2003: international reserves, open-market operations and temporary direct controls.
The decline in international reserves (-14% between December and January and -12% between January and March 2003) and the openmarket operations absorbed liquidity, thereby reducing agents’ scope for switching to United States dollardenominated assets, and helped to keep the money base within the targeted range.
In addition, these measures reduced the supply of foreign exchange and, by widening the interest-rate spread, made the domestic economy more attractive to investors.
The limited success of these measures prompted the authorities to introduce temporary direct controls at the beginning of 2003.
These controls included a special deposit requirement of 5% on financial institutions’ liabilities with the Bank of Jamaica and a 120-day reverse repurchase instrument which carried a 30% interest rate.
By the end of the quarter, however, the short-lived effect of these new measures forced the authorities to revert to open-market operations and interest-rate hikes (on both short- and long-term instruments) and intervention in the foreign-exchange market.
The exchange rate finally stabilized at the end of May 2003, when the government announced that the Bank of Jamaica would intervene heavily in the market and that it would issue an indexed bond denominated in United States dollars to mop up liquidity.
In addition, it announced measures to reduce the fiscal deficit by cutting expenditure and, even more importantly, increasing the tax base.
The official interpretation of the exchange rate’s behaviour lies in the disequilibrium of fiscal accounts.
Starting from an investment/savings balance macroeconomic accounting framework, an increase in the fiscal deficit implies that either external savings must rise or the current account must be in deficit.
In the absence of any counteracting fiscal measures on the expenditure or revenue side, financing the deficit increases the government’s debt.
In the financial systems’ balances, government debt (assets) can be matched by greater money creation (a liability).
In the absence of restr ictions on foreign-exchange transactions and given a favourable interest-rate spread (enhanced by the fact that the exchange-rate depreciation risk is low), as in the case of Jamaica, the increase in liquidity can find an outlet in domestic and/ or foreign goods and services and domestic assets.
Independently of time and liquidity preferences, the most likely outcome is an increase in prices, which can translate into exchange-rate appreciation and an increase in imports. 346 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean Both these results can widen the current account deficit and erode international reserves.
In turn, a decline in international reserves and expectations of a persistent fiscal deficit can lead agents to anticipate currency depreciation and to act accordingly.
The consequent exchange-rate depreciation feeds back into prices through a cost mechanism and puts further pressure on the current account and international reserves.
As mentioned above, the authorities can intervene to defend the local currency using international reserves or interest rate-hikes.
This will only exacerbate the situation, however, until the root of the problem –the fiscal deficit– is tackled. reflected an expansion in the services sector (2%), since the goods-producing sector contracted by 0.4%.
The agricultural sector’s underperformance (-8.3%) is explained largely by climatic factors, including the droughts that affected some parishes in the first quarter of 2002 and flood damage in May and September 2002.
Domestic crop production was down by 12%, with fruits, condiments and legumes experiencing the largest declines (-36%, -34% and -26%, respectively).
Within this group, citrus fruits, cocoa and bananas recorded the largest contractions in external sales (-27%, -25% and -7%, respectively).
In 2003 the agricultural sector is expected to reverse this trend, as production recovers from the effects of the floods, and turn in positive rates of growth.
In the first quarter of 2003, the agricultural sector grew by close to 5%, with domestic and export crop production rising by 6.5% and 6.3%, respectively.
Mining output (3%) reflected the interruptions in production caused by flood rains and by technical and industrial difficulties, the expansion of capacity in bauxite plants and the growth of the construction sector.
The notable surge in bauxite and alumina production (34% and 28%, respectively) in the final quarter was mainly attributable to the fact that JAMALCO (Jamaica Alumina Company) plant, which had been closed for the greater part of the year, began to operate at full capacity.
Domestic bauxite and alumina production expanded by 12% and 13%, respectively, while exports of both minerals expanded at only 2% and 6%, due to lower international prices.
Mining performance in 2003 will capitalize on the expansion of capacity and turn in a solid growth rate of 6%.
In the first quarter of 2003 the growth of the mining sector was 5%.
Manufacturing stagnated (-0.1%) due to the flood rains, which had a negative impact on food, beverage and tobacco production and on sugar-cane output.
In addition, the clothing sector maintained the downward trend that has been evident since at least 1997.
In 2003, the manufacturing sector is expected to continue to record zero growth, as petroleum refining (which is one of the sector’s most dynamic activities) is interrupted for maintenance purposes.
Construction (2.2%) performed better than in 2001 (-0.2%) thanks to residential and non-residential private construction and public-sector projects.
Public-sector activity included housing completions by the national housing trust, public infrastructure projects such as the Northern Coastal Highway and Highway 2000, and installations by the light and power company.
Construction is expected to maintain its present rate of growth in 2003, after expanding by 2.2% in the first quarter.
The tourism sector posted a decline (-0.4%), as it strained to recover in the wake of the events of 11 September.
The number of stopover passengers fell by 1% and tourism earnings were down by 4.0%.
The number of cruise-ship passengers increased (3%), however, and is expected to continue to rise, leading to positive growth for the whole sector in 2003.
During the first quarter of 2003, stopover and cruise arrivals increased by 7% and 47%, respectively.
Tourist expenditure rose by 12% and the GDP of the sector as a whole rose by 7%.
The main factors underlying the behaviour of inflation were the tight policy pursued by the monetary authorities, the disruption in the supply of agricultural products caused by flooding, the increase in the price of Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 347 crude oil and, to a lesser extent, exchange-rate depreciation.
In 2003, the depreciation of the exchange rate is expected to be the single most important factor determining inflation trends.
Depreciation did not affect prices during the first three months of 2003, since inflation was negative (-0.4%) but kicked in with full force in April as the monthly inflation rate reached 1.6%, which may push the annual rate of inflation up to 11%.
An examination of the major categories of the price index shows that vegetables and fruit were the main contributors to the overall increase in prices, followed by other household expenses and meat, poultry and fish, baked products, cereals and breakfast drinks (23.1%, 14.2%, 10.3% and 10.5% of the total, respectively).
Following a proposal from the National Minimum Wage Advisory Commission, the House of Representatives approved a 50% rise in the minimum wage in November 2001 which became effective in January 2002.
A survey of employment and earnings in large establishments also revealed that the average weekly earnings of all employees and of wage earners increased by 7.6% and 10%, respectively, for all major industrial sectors with the exception of construction.
Employment increased by 1.6% and the rate of unemployment remained stable at 15%.
The rate of female unemployment, which is twice as high as the male unemployment rate (21% and 11%, respectively), represented 61% of the unemployed labour force.
The current account deficit, which deteriorated in the course of the year (10.2% and 11.8% of GDP in 2001 and 2002, respectively), was not fully offset by the surplus in the capital and financial account.
As a consequence, the stock of net international reserves The trade deficit widened due to a contraction in the major categories of commodity exports, including Bauxite (13%) was the exception to the rule, thanks to restored production capacity following the re-opening of a major refinery.
Its export volume increased below potential due to adverse weather conditions and labour stoppages, and was thus not enough to offset a decline in international prices (-12.6%).
As in the case of alumina and sugar, banana production felt the impact of the May and September flooding.
The performance of non-traditional exports (-17%) reflected the clothing industry’s lack of competitiveness.
Goods imports were up by 2%, thanks mainly to the results for food products (5%), consumer durables (16%) and, within this group, imports of automobiles and other machinery and equipment (36%), including telephones and gas generators.
The services balance reflected a fall-off in the travel account and particularly in gross estimated visitor expenditure (-4.4%) as a result of the price reductions granted by the industry in order to maintain its competitive edge.
The deficits on the income account and current transfers (-US$ 471 million and -US$ 1,028,400,000, respectively) are associated with higher levels of profit repatriation and debt payments, in the first case, and a rise in the level of private remittances (18%), in the second.
The deficit was partly covered by financial development assistance and funds from the central bank, though central bank financing of the fiscal deficit is limited to 10% of government revenues.
Expenditure performance largely reflected a rise in public sector wages (which represented 46% of the total in 2002) that came into effect in March and was compounded by a one-time bonus payment in July (73%).
Interest payments expanded from 2% of GDP in 2001 to 3% in 2002, and spending on goods and services, Trends in tax revenues mainly reflected a drop-off in bauxite earnings (from 5% of GDP in 2001 to 2% in 2002).
Indirect taxes held steady as a proportion of GDP despite the stagnation of economic activity (at 14.5% and 14% of GDP in 2001 and 2002, respectively).
Between December 2002 and January 2003 the authorities passed a series of tax measures to deal with the fiscal imbalance and the negative effects of the implementation of the third and fourth phases of the CARICOM common external tariff, which went into effect in January 2003.
The measures implemented in 2003 included an increase in the threshold of the wealth tax and the introduction of a threshold in the rental value tax and a casino tax consisting of the payment of a set amount per table and per machine.
Changes were also made to the threshold income brackets, and the rates of income and sales taxes (effective in December 2002) went up.
Sales taxes rose from 5% to 8% for services and from 7% to 10% for goods.
These measures geared to narrowing the budget deficit are expected to raise 100 billion guilders in tax revenues.
The revenue-enhancing effects were felt in the first three months of 2003 as direct and indirect tax receipts expanded by 81% and 16%, respectively.
Estimated revenues (including grants) for 2003 are equivalent to 34% of GDP (with current revenue standing at 32% of GDP).
Current and capital expenditure are projected to reach 31% and 4% of GDP, respectively.
In an attempt to curb inflation, which started to trend upward in February, the monetary authorities used direct controls to limit the creation of credit by the commercial banking system and to moderate the depreciation of the nominal exchange rate.
After the exchange rate peaked at 3,000 guilders to the dollar in August (which represented a depreciation of 27% since January), in September a band system was introduced for foreign-exchange sales and purchases (2,540-2,800 guilders for the sale of United States dollars and 2,4902,750 guilders for purchases).
These stabilization efforts were partly offset by a significant increase in net credit to the government (from -55% in 2001 to 147% in 2002) to finance its fiscal gap, which boosted the expansion of the narrow and broad money supply (43% and 41% for M1 and M2, respectively).
Credit to the private sector was also up (by 27%), in response to a decline in real rates of interest brought about by the rise in prices and by decreases in the nominal lending rate (from 23.4% in December 2001 to 21.3% in December 2002) as economic activity stalled.
Also, some non-official sources indicate that currency traders are increasingly avoiding government regulation of the foreign-exchange market as foreign exchange has become more scarce.
Agricultural output faced cash constraints, adverse weather conditions and lower international prices for some of its major export products.
Banana output was curtailed as one of the major State companies suspended production, unable to finance variable costs.
The company, which is undergoing a rehabilitation and privatization process, is expected to resume production and exports in 2004.
Rice production was also constrained by debt, lack of irrigation due to dry weather conditions and technical difficulties.
Fisheries suffered as a result of lower prices for shrimp, caused by an increase in supply due to illegal fishing.
Export volumes of bauxite fell by 1.2%, while oil export volumes were down by 73%.
The contraction in bauxite production reflected lower international prices (11%) and low levels of government capital investment.
In October 2002 the government agreed to a joint venture development with an international bauxite company, which is expected to increase the industry’s capacity and production.
In the first three months of 2003 the volume of alumina increased (2.5%), responding to a recovery of international prices.
Gold production is expected to expand owing to investments by a foreign company in an open pit mine.
The rate of inflation rose from 4.9% to 28.3% on a point-to-point basis for December 2001-December 2002, as a result of the steady depreciation of the exchange rate, which increased costs and led to price adjustments, wage increases and higher liquidity in the economy.
The official exchange rate, which was anchored at 2,200 guilders to the dollar at the beginning of 2002, was adjusted several times and ended the year at 2,545.79 guilders to the dollar (an increase of 16%).
In the parallel free market the exchange rate rose above the 3,000guilder barrier in September and reached an average of 2,638 guilders for the year, thereby exceeding the quantitative limits which the monetary authorities had imposed on the purchase and sale of foreign exchange.
In 2003 inflation continued its upward trend to reach 36% in April, reflecting price hikes in the gasoline (40%) and food segments.
A breakdown of the consumer price index shows that at the component level, food and non-alcoholic beverages, alcoholic beverages and tobacco displayed the largest increases, followed by household furnishings and utilities (35%, 34% and 33%, respectively).
The unemployment rate remained at 16%, reflecting the sluggishness of the economy.
The overall balance of payments turned negative in 2002 as both the current account and the capital account ran deficits (the first recording US$ -84 million and US$ -60 million in 2001 and 2002, respectively, and the second recording US$ 105 million and US$ -40 million in 2001 and 2002, respectively).
As a result, the authorities’ net international reserve position deteriorated from US$ 108 million to US$ 92 million.
All the major traditional exports saw marked declines, which were mainly attributable to volume considerations.
Alumina exports fell by 13% and external oil sales were down by 73%.
The capital-account balance reflects intercompany balances (US$ -64 million in 2002) and loan disbursements by the government (US$ -27 million In 2003 export volumes saw an upswing.
In the first quarter of the year alumina export volumes were up by 27%, while crude petroleum exports and refinery products rose by 66%.
If exports maintain this trend and imports respond to the recovery in economic activity, the current account deficit will widen to US$ 107 million.
The capital account will offset this imbalance, however, as different investment projects in key sectors of the economy (bananas, bauxite and gold) come on stream.
As a result, the authorities are likely to increase the import coverage ratio.
The oil sector’s tax potential was undermined by the fall in the price of crude oil during the fiscal year (-15%).
The price slump affected profits and, therefore, corporate tax revenues (4.9% and 3.1% of GDP in fiscal are the largest contributor of oil-sector taxes (56% of the total).
An upturn in the price of oil towards the end of the year had a positive effect on the country’s public finances as the corporation tax intake (measured on a calendar-year basis) increased.
Tax receipts from the non-oil sector were boosted by the performance of the value added tax (13%) and, to a lesser extent, international trade taxes (5%).
In turn, the value added tax flows reflected an increase in efficiency and a lower level of tax refunds.
Income tax recorded a marginal drop (from 8% of GDP in 2001 to 7.5% in 2002) as a downturn in the corporation tax intake was not fully offset by the performance of personal income taxes, owing in part to the payment of public-sector wage arrears.
Lastly, nontax revenues were boosted by the higher profits of public firms and administrative fees.
Expenditure patterns (21% of GDP in 2002 and 22% in 2002) reflected the settlement of public-sector wage arrears, as mentioned above (12%), and transfers and subsidies to households (24%), including pension outlays.
The deficit was financed from domestic sources and external borrowing was avoided, which enabled the authorities to reduce the external debt-to-GDP ratio from 21% in 2000 to 17% in 2002.
As the government used existing lines of credit from contracted external loans to develop the country’s infrastructure, however, the service-to-debt ratio rose from 3.7% to 4.3%.
The budget for the new fiscal year 2002/2003, which was submitted and adopted in October, is estimated to yield a deficit of 1% of GDP due to payments to settle wage arrears.
On the revenue side, the main features of the budget include a reduction in the top marginal rate of income and corporation tax (from 35% to 30%), the elimination of taxes on medication and export allowances to comply with WTO agreements.
On the expenditure side, the government is planning to increase spending on health care and education by 10% and 12%, respectively.
The out-turn for the first half of fiscal year 2002/2003 shows the accounts in balance.
This resulted in part from the delay in the implementation of the capital expenditure programme.
Monetary policy went through three phases in the course of the year.
In the first, which lasted for the first three quarters, the financial system was marked by excess liquidity caused in part by a climate of uncertainty surrounding the political stalemate prevailing throughout the year, the continued slowdown in the United States economy and, most importantly, the government’s fiscal operations.
The monetary authorities responded with sterilization operations, which were facilitated by the extension of the limit on central bank note issues in March 2002 (125%).
The central bank also intervened in the foreignexchange market to offset the excess demand for United States dollars in the first part of the year (the bilateral exchange rate was quoted at 6.23553 in January and at 6.27260 in April), which helped to further dampen the excess liquidity in the financial system.
Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2002-2003 355 In August, the combination of low growth, excess liquidity and a stable exchange rate prompted the authorities to lower the benchmark repo rate from 5.75% to 5.25%.
The repo rate was introduced in May 2002 and refers to the overnight borrowing rate charged by the central bank to commercial banks.
This financial option comes with the possibility of repurchase by the central bank at a rate of interest known as the reverse repo rate.
Funds are repurchased by the central bank at a 50-basispoint discount over the repo rate.
The repo rate was set at 5.75% and the reverse rate, at 5.25%.
The repo rate also constitutes the reference point for other rates such as the discount rate (charged on borrowing from the central bank to cover temporary liquidity shortages) and the special deposit rate (the rate at which excess reserves are remunerated when held at the central bank).
The structure of interest rates followed a downward trend over the period.
The weighted average interbank lending rate decreased from 5.25% to 3.8% in September and settled at 4.47% at the end of the year.
The effect of the reduction of lending rates on banks’ profitability was mitigated by a similar and (in some instances) greater decline in deposit rates.
Towards the last two months of the year, the monetary authorities moved to prevent a spending surge aggravated by seasonal factors, reverting to a restrictive stance on liquidity through open-market operations.
At the same time, they intervened again in the foreignexchange market to stave off devaluation pressures.
The exchange rate ended the year at 6.29965 Trinidad and Tobago dollars to the United States dollar, which represented a depreciation of 6% since the beginning of the year.
Demand for credit stalled (7.2% and 6.4%), reflecting the general sluggishness of the economy and the change in monetary policy objectives.
Manufacturing, finance, insurance and communications and consumer loans, which account for 60% of commercial banks’ loan portfolio, grew by a mere 0.5%.
The behaviour of money-supply aggregates reflected the interest rate and exchange rate objectives.
Narrow money and broad money expanded by 10% and GDP growth decreased for the third consecutive respectively), reflecting a significant drop in the performance of the non-energy sector (4.9% and 1% in 2001 and 2002, respectively), particularly manufacturing.
In 2003 GDP is expected to increase The performance of the energy sector was accounted for by an increase in crude oil production (15% in thousands of barrels per day) and an expansion of production capacity in ammonia and liquefied natural gas.
The production of crude oil rose, thanks to the positive effects of natural gas on condensate output.
Exploration declined (-17%), refining operations stagnated (-2%) and natural gas output expanded by 230 cubic feet per day.
Natural gas liquids (14%) responded to the start-up of operations by the Atlantic LNG Company’s Train 2.
Atlantic LNG Train 3 is expected to be operational in 2003 and output is thus forecast to grow by an extra 3.3 million tons.
In 2003 the energy sector will continue to post strong growth as the different projects come on stream.
Methanol expanded by a mere 1.4% in spite of favourable international prices, but this performance is expected to improve with the construction of two new plants.
The fertilizer subsector (11%) was positively affected by the arrival of a new company.
The recovery of the agricultural sector (up by 2.5% in 2002, after having declined by 2.8% in 2001) was associated with upturns in sugar, cocoa and citrus (30% and 8.5% for cane and raw sugar, respectively, and 75% and 92% for cocoa and citrus, respectively), which are the major agricultural commodities.
The performance of sugar masked the financial difficulties of the 356 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean government’s sugar company and poor weather conditions that undermined its productivity, however.
Manufacturing contracted by 2.9% in response to unfavourable external conditions, including the weakness of the region’s economies, which constitute the industry’s main export market.
Additional explanatory factors include a shifting policy environment, an uncertain political future and the lack of a definite strategy to deal with the future challenges posed by Trinidad and Tobago’s full integration into the regional and multilateral trading regimes.
The rate of inflation (5.5% in 2001 and 4.2% in 2002) reflected the slowdown in growth and the concomitantly low spending levels in the economy, together with policy interventions to absorb liquidity and maintain a stable exchange rate.
A breakdown of the price index shows that all the components recorded lower growth rates relative to the previous year.
It also indicates that food posted the biggest price increase (10%) and clothing, the biggest drop (-2.5%).
The distribution of employment among economic sectors reveals that the services sector (representing 40% of the total) created 14,000 jobs.
Textiles and clothing saw the largest downturn (-21%) and the water sector, the biggest rise (27%).
The performance of the current account (1% of GDP) was largely influenced by lower-than-expected export earnings from mineral fuels and lubricants (-28%), which represent 60% of total merchandise exports, notwithstanding the upward trend in the international price of petroleum.
Chemicals and manufacturing also recorded declines (-39% and -17%, respectively, accounting for 28% of the total).
Demand for imports (2.6%) was driven by machinery and transport equipment and, to a lesser extent, capital goods.
The services balance (US$ 204 million in 2001 and US$ 222 million in 2002) was largely attributable to the transport and insurance components (US$ 84.5 million and US$ 99.6 million, respectively), while the income account reflected profit repatriation.
The reduction in the capital account surplus was due to lower foreign direct investment (US$ 684.9 million in 2001 and US$ 586.5 million in 2002) following the completion of infrastructure projects, Trinidad and Tobago intraregional investment and foreign currency outflows from domestic banks.
In 2003 the current-account surplus will expand as a result of higher volumes of energy-sector exports (3.6% of GDP).
This result will be partly offset by a decline in the capital account as energy projects reach completion. 3 The capital account figures refer to net capital movements.
The first part examines the recent performance of the economies of the region and the outlook for the current year, and the second part discusses long-term aspects of the economic development of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Part one highlights the volatile global economic climate facing the region during 2013 owing to slow debt-crisis recovery in a number of eurozone countries, heightened uncertainty as the situation in some of them worsened, the policy response on the part of developed economies that sent global liquidity soaring, and a slowdown in major Asian economies.
And despite some signs of improvement in the United States, the recovery there has yet to gain traction.
During 2013 Latin America and the Caribbean will continue to face a challenging external environment that will cool demand for exports, act as a drag on rising export prices and even, in some cases, drive them down.
This part also analyses the consequences of this external context for the region, as well as its macroeconomic policy response seeking to buffer the impact of the global economic slowdown.
Net exports are no longer the main driver of demand; for the second year in a row, consumption has played this role, on the strength of rising employment rates, real wages and lending, followed by investment.
Real currency appreciation, fuelled by high global liquidity, has eroded tradable-sector competitiveness even more and encouraged spending on imported goods, thereby widening the current account deficit.
Since late 2012 and in 2013 to date, sagging exports and the outlook for a global economic slowdown have progressively dampened economic activity and slowed growth in key variables such as export volume, investment and employment.
In short, from 2013 the Latin American and Caribbean countries have been facing a stagnant external environment calling for macroeconomic policy adjustments that should be cautious so as to avoid exacerbating potential imbalances, in particular in the current account.
The region, with certain exceptions, can draw on substantial strengths to address these challenges: high international reserves, little external public debt and low inflation.
While this provides some monetary and fiscal policy space for mitigating temporary external shocks, the expected slow global growth scenario also requires measures geared towards structural change that will boost competitiveness and enhance long-term growth factors.
The second part of this edition of the Economic Survey approaches this issue by looking at how macroeconomic policy contributes to growth.
It starts by examining stylized patterns of growth during the past three decades, from the debt crisis of the 1980s to the present.
Except in a few cases, per capita GDP has grown very slowly and there has been little convergence towards the levels seen in more developed countries.
Emphasis is placed on the low investment rate and the degree of dependence on external saving, whose fluctuations have contributed a good deal to the swings in growth.
But the region has seen significant changes over the past three decades in terms of external integration and macroeconomic regimes, reflected in sounder public finances, lower inflation and unemployment, and progress against poverty and in income distribution.
These improvements provide a good basis for stepping up investment, which is the main channel for structural change and productivity gains.
The requirements for this are multidimensional, involving production and institutional development beyond the scope of macroeconomic policy.
By preventing the accumulation of imbalances leading to crises, it creates the necessary conditions for deploying countercyclical measures to sustain the growth of output and employment and result in real interest rates that support investment and a real exchange rate that is conducive to tradable-sector competitiveness.
These notes are published along with a statistical annex, which tracks the main economic indicators.
The tables in the statistical annex show, at a glance, data for recent years and can be used to create spreadsheets.
Foreword The deadline for updating the statistical information in this publication was 30 June 2013. 1.
Region-wide, this performance is due in part to slow growth in Brazil and Mexico.
Economic activity has eased off in a number of countries that had been posting high rates of growth (Chile, Panama and Peru).
With external demand slackening, the main source of growth is still rising consumption, although the pace in 2013 will be slower than in 2012.
The contribution of investment is expected to drop even more; the negative contribution of net exports (that is, minus import value) is expected to be larger.
These trends highlight problems arising from low growth in most of the economies of the region and point to the need to broaden and diversify their sources of growth, as proposed in the second part of this issue of the Economic Survey.
The region’s modest performance is linked to a global economic growth rate in 2013 that is expected to be similar to the 2.3% recorded in 2012, although the outlook for next year is for economic growth to pick up speed.
Although the recession in eurozone economies has carried over into 2013, the developing countries will continue to drive global economic growth; it is believed that the policies adopted by the United States and Japan will help these two economies rally and boost economic growth worldwide.
The forecast is for uneven weakening of the terms of trade, modest export growth and a larger current account deficit The first half of 2013 saw a drop in the prices of some of the region’s export commodities (minerals and metals, oil and some food items).
While this trend is linked to the eurozone recession, the main contributing factor is slightly slower growth in China as it transitions to a growth path that depends more on the expansion of consumption and less on the expansion of investment, unlike in the recent past.
For Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole, projections are that the terms of trade will hover near the 2012 level.
But the impact will vary among countries depending on their export structure.
The terms of trade are likely to worsen the most in the mineral- and metal-exporting countries (Chile, Peru and Suriname).
Net importers of food and fuel, which are concentrated in Central America and the Caribbean, could see improving terms of trade.
No significant changes in this regard are expected in Mexico and Brazil, due in part to their more diversified export structure.
Remittances from Europe continue to decline, unlike those from the United States (except in Mexico, possibly because of a reversal of its migration flows).
Tourism flows are slackening due to the combined impact of slower economic growth in the developed countries and the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean themselves, since intraregional tourism has soared in the past few years.
These factors together are likely to worsen the region’s goods and services trade balance as well as the current account balance.
One of the more direct consequences of moderate global economic growth has been slower growth of exports from Latin America and the Caribbean.
Import value is forecast to rise more, by 6% for the year.
The lacklustre export performance expected for the region in 2013 after growth rates upwards of 20% in 2010 and 2011 is heavily influenced by declining exports from some countries of South America —in particular, Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Peru— during the first few months of 2013.
The main reason is the recession in eurozone countries, which are a major destination for their exports, coupled with a downtick in the prices of products that make up a high proportion of their total exports.
Access to external financing remains open despite financial volatility International financial volatility increased in 2013 as well, as reflected in wide exchange-rate swings in several countries of the region.
Recent unemployment rate trends and positive signs of economic growth in the United States led to the June announcement by United States Federal Reserve System Chairman Ben Bernanke that the monetary stimulus programme might be terminated in mid-2014.
The announcement sent the value of the dollar up, pushed major stock exchanges down (both worldwide and in Latin America) and triggered a market sell-off, especially for fixed-income securities, and drove up the sovereign debt risk premium for many of the countries of the world.
This suggests that withdrawing the monetary stimulus measures will spark money- and equity-market volatility, which poses a serious challenge to the authorities of the region.
Nevertheless, the region still has access to external financing to cover the wider current account deficit despite international financial volatility and a risk-perception pattern influenced by short-term reactions from financial investors that are very sensitive to announcements of possible changes in United States monetary policy and to reports on the outlook for global economic growth.
Net foreign direct investment and portfolio investment flows continued to climb during the first few months of 2013, as did short-term flows of cross-border deposits and bank loans.
Corporate bond issues were substantial during the first five months of 2013 (well above half the figure for all of 2012), as were sovereign bond issues by countries of the region and placements by those that are more integrated into international financial markets.
Employment and wage growth slows As a result of the slowdown of economic growth in the region, no significant increase in the demand for labour is expected in 2013.
Unemployment inched down from 6.9% to 6.7% during the first quarter of 2013, owing mainly to a lower labour-market participation rate in keeping with the drop in labour supply.
The unemployment rate would not have shrunk had the labour supply trend been similar to the previous year.
With regional consumption expanding at a slower pace in 2013, real wages in the countries of the region have not grown as much as in 2012, except in Chile and Colombia, where wages rose more.
Inflation edges up In the first five months of 2013 the regional inflation rate edged up from the December 2012 level, although there were substantial differences among countries.
Double-digit price growth in countries such as Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, along with more recent increases in other countries of the region, indicates that in a number of cases the scope for implementing (countercyclical) monetary measures geared towards boosting growth will shrink or vanish.
As a result, in 2013 some countries of the region have taken a more restrictive monetary policy stance (Brazil, Guatemala and Uruguay) while others (Dominican Republic, Colombia, Costa Rica, Guyana and Mexico) have followed a more robust stimulus policy.
But in most of the countries the monetary policy orientation has not changed significantly.
Lending has slid in Latin America and the Caribbean overall, although consumer lending is still growing and, in general, there have been no abrupt changes in the level of international reserves held by the countries of the region.
Tax receipts are likely to fall off in most of the countries in 2013, mainly as a result of cooling consumption and the slide in the price of export commodities, which are a source of public revenues.
Some countries have moderated spending and others have stepped it up, within certain limits.
On the one hand there are countries that have structural rules or are taking countercyclical or neutral steps (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru).
On the other hand, there are countries whose policies are geared more towards achieving annual fiscal targets, regardless of the macroeconomic cycle.
Lastly, a number of countries have decreased their public debt in recent years and have access to funding for their deficits, giving them fiscal space for countercyclical policies. 2.
Three decades of uneven and unstable growth Profound economic transformations have taken place Over the past three decades Latin America and the Caribbean saw uneven economic growth, reflected in a generally slow expansion of per capita GDP despite a speed-up during the third decade, and in the fact that few countries managed to narrow their gap with more developed countries.
Even in these cases, performance was significantly weaker than in the countries of Asia, where growth picked up significantly.
During the 1980s, inequality and poverty indicators deteriorated —quite sharply in some cases.
It was not for some time (the 2000s) that they began to improve, on the back of stronger growth, labour-market improvements and the launch of social policies.
But high levels of inequality and poverty remain in a number of cases.
The changes taking place in the region have included substantial changes in external macroeconomic integration.
The vast majority of countries now have higher ratios of foreign trade and foreign direct investment, revealing a greater degree of productive interaction with the rest of the world than 30 years ago.
These changes and external deleveraging have lightened the interest payment burden and increased the rents from foreign investment, although a significant proportion is reinvested.
Remittances have become a major source of resources for the region —initially for the countries of the Caribbean and subsequently for the countries of Central and South America.
These three decades have also seen, to varying degrees among countries, profound changes in macroeconomic regimes and, especially, a strengthening of monetary and fiscal policies that helped to reduce inflation and improve the fiscal accounts, thereby improving performance in the face of the global financial crisis.
But not all of the changes have contributed to growth, and three sources of weakness can be identified in the region.
They are the potential end of the key export commodity price boom, an insufficient increase in investment, and, linked to it, an uneven and still precarious rise in labour productivity.
Despite the favourable terms-of-trade trend, capital accumulation has been insufficient and there has been little progress in labour productivity Net exports are total exports are less total imports.
When the goods and services import volume is greater than the goods and services export volume, part of the growth of domestic demand is being supplied by imports, slowing GDP growth.
In the first place, the terms-of-trade contribution to income growth has been particularly large during the last decade, but it is at risk of diminishing.
This contribution, while negative in the 1980s, partially recovered during the 1990s and has been rising sharply since 2003, more so in those economies that are more specialized in the production and export of raw materials, where they account for at least one third of the growth of national disposable income in recent years.
Income growth also fed a significant expansion of domestic demand in the past decade.
Three factors contributed to this: the greater contribution of public and private consumption, procyclical investment trends, and the persistent negative contribution of net exports.1 Indeed, the contribution to non-export GDP growth (that is, the sum of consumption and investment, referred to as absorption) was slightly greater over the past decade than in the previous period.
Consumption became the component of demand that contributed the most to growth, especially in the slowdown scenario over the past few years.
The growing importance of consumption as a driver of growth is associated with increases in the wage bill resulting from labour-market improvements, redistribution policies (chiefly over the past decade) and expanding consumer credit.
The operating surplus component of GDP (which can be associated with the concept of enterprise savings) has increased gradually (more markedly during the past decade) and, in most countries, eroded the compensation of employees component as well as, in some cases, the tax component.
However, in a number of countries of the region, the growing operating surplus has boosted public savings as government revenues rose on the strength of higher international prices for raw materials.
These countries have therefore been able to implement redistributive public policies that have tended to partially offset the concentrator effect of the higher operating surplus share.
This is one of the reasons why the Gini index of income concentration tended to improve in most of the countries during the past decade.
Investment held at less than 20% of GDP for long periods, owing to the decline in public investment in the wake of the adjustment programmes of the 1980s and insufficient stimulus for private investment stemming from instability during the 1990s despite partial recovery from the lows of the so-called lost decade.
The 2000s brought an increase in investment and savings, fuelled by rising national disposable income (thanks, in some cases, to higher export prices), brighter growth expectations that spurred an expansion of spending in developed countries, and growth in China.
National savings grew faster than investment, pushing external savings down and mitigating the external vulnerability of a number of countries of the region to the shocks that would come from the international financial crisis.
However, as noted above, investment did not match the levels seen in other emerging countries, such as those in Asia.
Through what is known as the accelerator effect, investment trends are to a large measure driven by aggregate demand and economic growth itself.
The negative correlation between GDP gap and investment growth in the region, and the positive correlation between the GDP growth rate and the investment rate point to a close link between investment, utilized capacity and growth expectations.
The findings of a causality analysis indicate that acceleration of the GDP growth rate precedes changes in investment rates, confirming that increases in the investment rate have been linked to aggregate demand pressures.
Thirdly, labour productivity has increased over the past decade, albeit unevenly, as investment and labour-force skill levels rose.
The most recent surge in labour productivity stands in contrast to the decline during the 1980s (when investment slumped) and the lacklustre showing in the following decade (when investment grew very little).
Productivity trends have been shaped by investment patterns Two related factors were behind the contribution of investment to productivity.
On the one hand, in several countries exchange-rate appreciation and high raw materials prices, among other variables, likely boosted investment in the non-tradable sectors and in the exploitation of natural resources, with no equivalent or higher growth in the rest of the tradable sectors.
And labour productivity grew less in the non-tradable sectors than in the rest of the tradable sectors.
This helped to keep productivity increases from being lower than the levels that could have been achieved with a more balanced process and a higher investment rate.
Moreover, this investment orientation meant that labour productivity gains in the past decade were chiefly the result of greater reallocation of resources within branches of activity, compared with productivity gains stemming from shifting resources from lower-productivity branches of activity towards higher-productivity ones.
And the participation of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in international value chains, especially in higher-productivity and more learning-intensive stages, while on the rise, is still limited.
Strengthening macroeconomic policies boosts their potential for contributing to economic growth in the future The gradual strengthening of fiscal, monetary and exchange-rate policies in recent decades suggests that these macroeconomic policies can be instrumental in boosting growth with equality in the future.
After the debt crisis of the 1980s, the region managed to lower its debt burden and stabilize production agents’ expectations, although some Caribbean countries are still very highly indebted.
Progress was also made in implementing countercyclical fiscal policies during economic cycle contractions, especially in 2009, although for a number of countries applying such policies during booms remains a challenge.
Public investment has partially recovered, and social spending and fiscal policy support for growth with equality has been enhanced.
In a number of countries, flexible exchangerate regimes, with varying degrees of regulation, provided more room for monetary policy action, as did the build-up of international reserves, which became an insurance mechanism in the face of international financial instability.
Macroeconomic policy should provide strategic support for investment in tradable sectors Investment and a skilled workforce are key for productivity and growth, and macroeconomic policy enhancement is still uneven in the region.
This calls for a strategic focus on investment promotion and workforce training, as well as on helping to create the conditions for diversifying the production structure.
This would help to promote more balanced structural change with more linkages, where the production of goods and services, by generating net exports, would mitigate the risk of potential external constraints on growth.
Investment promotion needs sound institutions: towards social compacts for investment Favouring the tradable sectors by means of special stimulus measures would mean prioritizing exportable and importable sectors over non-tradable ones.
But the former include natural resource-producing sectors that, because they have absolute advantages and generate rents, are unlike other sectors in that they do not need policy instruments such as subsidies to encourage investment in them.
They should instead be the focus of other kinds of policies, including tax policies aimed at rent capture.
That is why the proposal herein is for using subsidies to foster investment in the tradable sectors in a more limited sense that takes account of their forward and backward linkages and does not include natural resource-producing sectors.
The role of macroeconomic policy in promoting growth and productivity by encouraging investment and enhancing workforce skills has an institutional dimension and a short- and long-term policy dimension.
On the one hand is the need for an institutional framework that fosters macroeconomic, industrial, environmental and labour policy synergies to ensure that government action is on a consistent, sustained course and includes tacit or explicit compacts between the State, the business community, workers and social organizations in general in order to move in the same direction.
Boosting private investment generally requires a set of economic, institutional and social conditions that provide an attractive outlook for long-term returns; social compacts for investment could contribute to this.
In general, this is helped by a political and institutional framework that enjoys broad legitimacy and provides space for expressing views and interests and for channeling social, environmental or other conflicts towards a solution.
In the first place, bearing in mind that idle capacity disincentivizes investment, it would be necessary to achieve and maintain levels of activity in keeping with high, sustainable use of production capacities by means of proper management of aggregate demand.
Secondly, the negative impacts that economic downturns have on investment call for developing countercyclical capacities in order to counteract or mitigate downswings triggered by external and internal shocks.
The economies of Latin America and the Caribbean have a long history of such shocks set off by economic, social or political factors, extreme events or natural disasters, causing wide fluctuations and declines in activity that have negatively impacted investment and, therefore, growth.
Achieving a high degree of production capacity use therefore justifies the implementation of temporary countercyclical policies to smooth the fluctuations resulting from such shocks.
Thirdly, beyond the fluctuations caused by temporary shocks, macroeconomic policy should, by promoting internal and external balances that are sustainable over time, help to prevent national crises that lead to recessions, slow growth and idle production capacity.
Over the past few decades, Latin America and the Caribbean has gone through crises sparked by the long-term unsustainability of finances (public and private, domestic and external) together with a serious loss of tradable-sector competitiveness.
To ensure consistency over the long run by seeking debt reduction during upswings and accepting larger deficits during periods of slower growth so as to help stabilize GDP and investment growth, second-generation macro-fiscal rules should have a medium-term structural balance target, exception and transitory clauses and some room for manoeuvre to deal with catastrophic events or persistent recessionary conditions.
Second-generation macro-fiscal rules also require substantial institutional development, especially the ability to transform sensitivity analyses and prospective scenarios into budgeting procedures so as to ensure appropriate multi-year budget programming, clauses of exception and explicit treatment of major “windfall revenues”.
As part of a broader institutional framework, countercyclical policies, in order to be effective, should encompass actions on multiple fronts, including monetary, macroprudential, labour (including wages) and production policies.
In principle, investment in the tradable sectors can be encouraged by means of high and stable real exchange rates, financial mechanisms that allow exchange-rate hedges, market intervention to reduce exchange-rate volatility or facilitating pension-fund or sovereign wealth-fund investment abroad.
However, the ability of exchange-rate policy to promote investment in tradable sectors can be constrained by the malleability of financial flows, making it difficult to achieve full, lasting control over them, and by the quasi-fiscal costs (opportunity costs of building up international reserves and sterilization costs, in particular).
Any relative price bias against investment in tradable (non-primary) sectors resulting from overvalued exchange rates that are hard to level warrant the application of other, non-contractionary, policy instruments in order to address this issue.
Fiscal policy, and financial policy in particular, should foster this structural change, driven by investments in the tradable sectors, along three fronts.
First, public or public-private partnerships should target infrastructure (complementary non-tradable sector) with the aim of reducing the logistical and transport costs associated with the delivery of tradable goods and services, thereby offsetting what could be an unfavourable relative price ratio resulting from an overvalued exchange rate (or to enhance a more favourable relative price ratio stemming from exchange-rate undervaluation).
Second, subsidies could be channeled (including by means of budgets, in order to facilitate evaluation and transparency) to promote complementarities (externalities) between private investment projects as well as structural change associated with investments in the tradable sectors with greater linkages, taking account of their environmental sustainability.
Thirdly, designing appropriate incentives is just as important as improving public capacities to implement these measures and coordinate public and private investment.
Fiscal transparency, which should especially be extended to encompass all subsidies, must play a key role as a deterrent against possible abuses in the use of these instruments.
National systems of vocational education and training should be strengthened to favor structural change Long-term employment policies should include fostering investment in higher value-added tradable sectors.
Training poses challenges that are often related to information and communication technologies, which make up a growing share of many investments.
National systems of vocational education and training must take account of the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises, which often run into difficulties in finding skilled labour that can block their expansion through new investment.
The outlook for 2013 is for the global economy to grow at much the same rate as in 2012, with the prospect of a gradual upturn In 2013, world GDP growth is projected to be similar to that of 2012, while 2014 should see economic growth pick up speed (see table I.1).
Notwithstanding the persistent recession in the eurozone in 2013, the developing countries are expected to continue to drive growth in the world economy, while policies adopted by the United States and Japan should help to revitalize their own economies and boost growth worldwide.
In the first half of 2013, sluggish private lending in the eurozone and record high unemployment rates (above all in Greece, Portugal and Spain), together with persistent uncertainty and a contractionary fiscal policy, were part and parcel of an already entrenched recession.
The fragile financial system has curbed credit expansion and limited the scope for an economic recovery.
A robust economic recovery in the United States and a return to strong, sustainable growth in China would do much to revive the eurozone’s trade performance.
The announcement of the programme of direct monetary transfers (DMT) for purchasing short-term public debt from countries with economic problems has yielded positive results although so far the option has not been drawn on.
The very existence of this programme has reduced and stabilized swap risk premiums in eurozone countries (see figure I.1).
This programme, together with a change in policy in some countries, including Portugal and Spain, designed to avoid such extreme austerity policies as those applied in Greece, has provided temporary stability within the zone.
In 2013, authorities maintained the policy that consisted in prioritizing fiscal adjustment, stabilizing public debt and easing the financial system.
Consequently, forecasts for the second half of 2013 point to a slighter contraction in the eurozone.
In 2013, the Chinese economy is expected to maintain a similar growth rate to that of 2012 with a possible downtrend.
This is attributable mainly to falling exports, as a result of the eurozone crisis, and a contraction in foreign direct investment (FDI).
Moreover, the Government of China is in transition as it reorients the economy towards consumption, although it has not yet succeeded in consolidating this effort.
Rising housing prices in 2013 have raised questions about the possibility of an overheating real-estate market.
If these prices continue to soar, it would put a damper on expectations that interest rates would be cut soon in order to revive economic growth.
This suggests that a withdrawal of monetary stimulus would feed money market and stock market volatility, posing a serious challenge to monetary authorities worldwide.
In 2013, an unemployment rate downtrend and an improvement in the credit and real estate markets in the United States have helped to boost private demand.
Recent economic indicators show that economic activity in the United States seems to be posting a moderate recovery in tandem with a decrease in unemployment.
However, unemployment rates remain high when compared with historical rates and their reduction is partly due to a lower labour-force participation rate and not to a stronger job market.
In April 2013 the Central Bank of Japan decided on a policy shift geared to monetary stimulus in an effort to boost the national economy.
It set an inflation target of 2%, which could have a positive outcome in the short term.
The rebound in Japanese exports, triggered by the depreciation of the yen, and the growth in manufacturing output are signs of a recovery.
However, the sustainability of the medium- and long-term public debt in the face of high fiscal deficits poses complex economic policy challenges. 2.
World trade continues to grow slowly With a year-on-year variation of 2.1% during the first four months of 2013, slightly higher than the figure (1.8%) recorded in 2012, world export volume continues to show signs of a sustained upturn (see figure I.2).
The sluggish growth in world trade flows is due mainly to the recession in the eurozone, the slowdown in the Chinese economy and the still tentative economic revival in the United States.
While exports from the emerging economies in Asia have shown more robust growth since the start of 2013 than in 2012, the rate remains significantly below 2011 levels.
While United States exports recorded a very modest expansion up to April, shipments from the eurozone countries and Japan contracted.
Import volume into the industrialized countries has followed a similar pattern to exports.
No increase in imports into the United States or Japan was observed in the first few months of 2013, representing a downturn from the moderate increase in 2012.
The emerging economies of both Asia and Latin America saw a more robust rally in their imports than in 2012.
The region’s terms of trade weakened, albeit with differences from one country to the next The fall in price of several of the region’s export commodities in 2012 and so far in 2013 may be viewed as part of a medium- to long-term stagnation and even a gradual decline in the prices of these goods.
This may be caused, on the one hand, by the outlook for more moderate growth in China, the principal destination for several of the region’s primary products, and, on the other, by an increase in the supply of these products worldwide.
While no sharp slump in these commodity prices is expected and no firm predictions can be made given their current volatility, price levels are expected to remain relatively high albeit less so than in the past decade.
As discussed in part II of this Survey, more than a third of the growth in disposable national income in most South American countries over the past decade was attributable to the improved terms of trade.
This deterioration may well have negative implications unless countries succeed in diversifying their production structure, especially in the region’s tradable sectors.
However, in comparison with the figures for January 2013, the prices of these two products were down by prices as a whole fell moderately compared with the 2012 level.
Forecasts for weak growth in the global economy and the subsequent slowdown in demand, above all in the however, partly due to the fact that oil prices had remained relatively high during the first months of 2012, prior to sustaining a significant slide in the second quarter of the year.
On average, the oil price is projected to decline slightly in 2013 owing to the forecast of relatively low growth in the global economy in 2013. sugar.
This drop was due to the expected rebound of the sugar cane crop in Brazil (the leading exporter of this product conditions and delays in crop planting in the United States stemmed the fall in food prices overall.
While coffee consumption continued to increase globally, growth in demand was outstripped by the expansion in world production.
Prices thus continued to decline: by 28% during the first half of 2013 compared with the same period a year earlier.
Oil and oilseed prices rose by 2.2% in the first half of 2013, but this trend is likely to be reversed during the rest of the year, as favourable weather conditions in South America will boost output, in particular in Argentina and Paraguay.
These variations will have different impacts on the terms of trade of the countries of the region, depending on their export mix.
In the region as a whole, the terms of trade are projected to remain at much the same level as in 2012, thanks in part to the performance of Brazil and Mexico, the two leading exporting countries in the region.
In the case of Brazil, the main factor behind this result was the good price being fetched for the country’s iron ore exports, which offset the modest rise in the price of its imports.
In the case of Mexico, the pattern of the terms of trade reflects its export structure, which is based mainly on manufactured goods.
The prospect of a marked fall in the price of oil and oilseeds triggered by the recovery in soybean production in 2013 thanks to favourable weather conditions will be reflected in a slight deterioration in the terms of trade of the subgroup of countries that export agro-industrial goods (Argentina and Paraguay).
The ore- and metal-exporting countries (Chile and Peru) can expect a worsening of their terms of trade in 2013.
The hydrocarbon-exporting countries (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Plurinational State of Bolivia and Trinidad and Tobago) will also see little improvement in their terms of trade, with results that vary from one country to another.
Earlier estimates are based on the region’s weaker export performance starting in the second quarter of 2012 and continuing into the first few months of 2013.3 Total exports from the region dropped by 1.2% year on year4 in the period January-April, although they rallied slightly in the course of the month (see table I.2).
The decline in shipments from the region was due for the most part to a 2.5% decrease in exports from the South American countries.
The unfavourable context, characterized by persistent uncertainty, and weak external demand, especially from the industrialized countries, continued to have a negative impact on trade flows from Latin America in the early months of 2013.
The fall-off in exports from the South American countries (in particular, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru) was due mainly to the situation in the eurozone countries, a major destination for the exports from the South American economies, since shipments to that region have plummeted since the beginning of 2013 (see table I.4).
This decline is attributable in part to the fact that the fall in exports from the region started in the second quarter of 2012, making the year-on-year fall in the first quarter of 2013 look sharper.
As explained below in the analysis of monetary, exchange-rate and macroprudential policies, the trend towards appreciation was halted and reversed after May 2013.
Imports into the region continued to expand in the first few months of 2013, but at moderate rates compared with recent years.
In the period January-April, a 6.4% expansion year-on-year was recorded, driven by an 8.5% increase in imports into the South American countries (see table I.3).
This reflects the resilience of consumption growth and exchange-rate appreciation in the first quarter of the year.5 Thus, in April, the region recorded a yearon-year 1.2% contraction in exports and a 6.4% year-on-year expansion in imports.
Remittances from Europe continue to shrink In the first few months of 2013, trends in remittance inflows from migrant workers varied significantly from one country to the next (see figure I.8).
Significant increases were recorded in inflows into Guatemala (6.9%), prospects in the United States, the principal host country of migrants from Guatemala and Honduras.
In the case of Nicaragua, economic growth in Costa Rica was another factor along with growth in the United States, as both of these economies are major destinations for migrants from this country.
The low growth in remittance flows to Colombia reflects the still difficult labour situation in Spain, the main destination for Colombian migrants, with the unemployment rate continuing to soar to over 27% in the early months of 2013.
Mexico (the top remittance-receiving country in Latin America) saw its inflows drop by 9.3% in the first four months of the year.
The reversal of migration flows from Mexico to the United States seems to be one of the factors contributing to trend in remittances to Mexico.
No data were available for 2013 for Ecuador or the Dominican Republic. 4.
Overall international tourist flows to the region as well as all subregions —South America, Central America, the Caribbean and Mexico— (see figure I.9) fell in the early months of 2013 compared with the year-earlier period.
The drop in tourist arrivals reflects the uncertainty and low economic growth prevailing in the external context.
While Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean —subregions where tourism is a critical source of income for their economies— recorded falls of 1.1%, 1.3% and 2.2%, respectively, the decline in South America was just 0.2%.
However, this last figure contrasts sharply with the surge in tourist arrivals in the countries of South America since 2010.
The recent fall-off in tourist arrivals is believed to reflect the slowdown in economic activity within the region itself, which has had an impact on intraregional tourism and business travel.
The current account shows a slight deterioration With imports expected to outstrip exports in 2013, the goods trade balance will weaken, with the surplus falling from 0.9% of GDP in 2012 to 0.6 of GDP in 2013.
The gloomy outlook for tourism in the region will mean that the service balance slightly to a surplus equivalent to 1% of GDP in 2013, down from a surplus of 1.1% of GDP in 2012.
This outcome is due in large part to the downward trend in remittances sent to Mexico by migrant workers.
A slight improvement is for various export commodities stagnate or fall; this trend will have a negative impact on the performance of the foreign companies that operate or invest in the region, with a resulting reduction in repatriated profits.
The deterioration in the trade balance, due to the steeper increase in imports than in exports, will drive the changes in the current account in 2013.
Access to external financing is maintained notwithstanding the financial volatility External financing trends for Latin America have held in 2013 to date.
As in 2012, net inflows of FDI and portfolio investments have been steady and there has been a build-up, albeit less significant, of international reserves (see figure I.11).
In terms of gross flows, inward FDI has picked up since the fourth quarter of 2010 and has maintained investment, with investment outflows to other countries of the region growing each quarter by between US$ 9 trillion 7 since the end of 2011.
No quarterly balance-of-payments data are available for the countries of the Caribbean.
In 2012, Latin America continued to easily weather global financial market variability and had ready access to funding.
The current account deficit, which averaged 1.8% of regional GDP, was easily offset by net FDI inflows (2.2% of GDP) and portfolio investments (1.7%), although there were net outflows of other more volatile financial flows in an amount equivalent to 1% of GDP, or slightly above the rate recorded in previous years.
This set of factors has led to a fresh rise in international reserves equivalent to 1% of GDP in 2012, the smallest increase in reserves since 2009, at the peak of the global financial crisis.
In the first quarter of 2013, net inflows of FDI and portfolio which corresponded to short-term cross-border deposit flows and bank lending, were positive for the first time in several quarters standing at the equivalent of 1% of regional GDP, attributable almost exclusively to inflows into Brazil.
In 2012, Continued access to external financial flows in 2013 is linked to a long-term improvement in the levels of external debt, international reserves and other factors, which have resulted in steady debt upgrades for many countries in Latin America.
Nevertheless, risk premiums as measured by sovereign bond spreads have fluctuated in line with the uncertainty generated mainly by the situation in some of the European economies.
In the first half of 2012, there was some degree of volatility and an uptrend in sovereign risk, which was eventually reined in once the European Central Bank (ECB) reframed its policy in support of debt sustainability among the eurozone governments.
Since then and throughout the first half of 2013, various spreads in the region have trended downward slightly.
This risk perception dynamic has been continually shaken by financial investors’ short-term response to different announcements of possible changes in United States monetary policy and global growth trends.
However, some countries in the region continue to show wide spreads, linked to factors specific to each (see table I.5).
The external financing mix has changed and more countries have gained access to it External bond issues continued at a brisk pace in 2012 and in the first six months of 2013, but with significant changes in their composition.
In the first half of 2012, sovereign and quasi-sovereign bond issues remained buoyant.
Since then, it is banks and private companies that have taken advantage of the low cost of borrowing and the region’s risk rating to obtain funds abroad, stepping up their bond issues.
In 2012 and 2013, a new group of countries have also been taking advantage of these resources: Honduras corporate and bank issues totalling US$ 2.2 billion.
From January to May 2013, the main countries issuing external bonds were Brazil (due mainly to Petrobras bonds), Mexico and Peru.
The picture in the Caribbean is markedly different, even more so when the figures for Trinidad and Tobago are not included, since the size of its economy and its export profile (which differs from the rest of the region) affect the aggregate results.
Thus, without Trinidad and Tobago, the current account deficit stood at 11% of subregional equivalent to 6% of subregional GDP.
As a result, international reserves contracted by the equivalent of 1% of subregional GDP in 2012.
Inflationary pressures have increased slightly Some countries of the region have adopted a contractionary monetary policy stance in response to higher inflationary pressures.
In the first five months of 2013, regional inflation rose slightly in comparison with December 2012.
Regional posted for the twelve months to May 2012. and 7.3%, respectively, while the lowest inflation rates were recorded in El Salvador (0.1%), Chile (0.9%), Paraguay (0.9%), Colombia (2%) and some economies of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union.
Of the different subregions, The regional situation masks significant differences between countries.
In May 2013, the two countries of the region with double-digit inflation were Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Argentina.
In the former, the significant increase in consumer prices was due largely to the impact on domestic prices of the devaluation of the local currency in February 2013 and the fact that certain goods were becoming increasingly scarce.
In the latter, estimates released by statistical institutes in the provinces indicate high rates of inflation.
In Saint Lucia, for example, food inflation is 7.2 percentage points higher than general consumer-price inflation.
To this end, data from recent household expenditure surveys, where available, and disaggregated data on prices of goods and services included in the consumer price indices of this set of countries, were used to work out the consumption structure of each decile.
As a synthetic indicator of the differential effect of inflation based on differences in the composition of the consumer baskets per decile, the ratio of the average price increases for the baskets of the first four income distribution deciles (lowest average income) to those for the baskets of the two last deciles (highest average income) was calculated.
In cumulative terms, the greatest differentials are observed in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and, to a lesser extent, in Guatemala, Nicaragua and Costa Rica, where food inflation was the highest in the period under consideration, as shown in the figure below.
Irrespective of their status as net exporters or importers of raw materials, the countries of the region have to deal with the impact of the higher international prices for these products on domestic prices.
It indicates a steeper increase in prices since 2002 for the lower income distribution strata than for the upper strata.
This is the case in the South American countries as well as in the group consisting of Mexico and the countries of Central America.
In Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Panama it even approached 3.5% percentage points (in 2008 in the latter two).
Following a reversal in this trend in 2009 when commodity prices fell as a result of the international crisis, in 2010, the same regressive bias was observed in the variation in the consumer price indices, although it was more muted and more mixed.
In South America, the average differentials hovered around 0.6 percentage points between 2010 and 2012.
In Central America and Mexico, the average trended downward (by between 0.7 percentage points and 0.3 percentage points).
When prices spiked, especially in 2008, the governments of the region implemented a series of measures to cushion the cost of some basic foods and other goods and services, for example, public passenger transport, which account for a large share of the consumer basket of the relatively low-income population.
These measures included consumption subsidies and a reduction in the tax burden, including, in some cases, lower import duties on specific food products, inventory management through State-owned distribution channels, and food production incentives, especially in countries where the supply depends more on imports.
Gradually, these measures have tended to be integrated into the strategies that are part of a country’s social policies.c Unlike its experience in the past, the region was thus able to ride out the international crisis, and the repercussions were milder as far as can be gleaned from its social indicators.
Nevertheless, although poverty rates have been diminishing continuously since 2002, the pressure of steadily rising food prices has pushed up the threshold quite high and it is becoming increasingly difficult to reduce indigence rates, which now stand at more than 11% of the population.
This problem must be closely monitored, especially since international demand for food may continue to increase in the next few years.
For an analysis of the specific cases of Brazil, Mexico and Peru, see BCRA/ECLAC (2013).
Monetary policy strategies in the region have been diverse Recent variations in monetary policy benchmark rates in Latin America and the Caribbean (contrary to their behaviour over the past two years, which may be described as stable) point to the dilemmas faced by authorities in the countries of the region.
The priority assigned to each of these issues by policy managers has varied and depends on specific aspects of each economy; this priority determines the way policy rates and other monetary and exchange-rate policy instruments are handled in the region.
As a result, a more restrictive policy direction has been adopted in some countries (Brazil, Guatemala and Uruguay), in contrast with stronger stimulus measures elsewhere (Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Guyana and Mexico), although there are a number of countries in which the monetary policy stance has not changed significantly.
In Uruguay, where the main challenge for monetary authorities in recent times has been to avoid more intense inflationary spikes, the monetary policy rate has risen steadily since 2012 and at the beginning of 2013 increased further.
In the first half of 2013, authorities in Brazil and Guatemala decided to change their policy direction.
After implementing a rate-reduction policy in 2012 in an attempt to boost aggregate demand, the central banks in both these countries raised the benchmark rate.
Similarly, this rate reduction shows that monetary authorities in these countries have a certain amount of leeway seeing that inflation rates are in line with established targets (see figure I.18).10 This upward trend in rates in Brazil coincides with a relaxation of some measures designed to discourage capital inflows.
Mexico appears to be an exception since the decline in rates occurred at a time when inflation exceeded the target set for the year.
While growth of the base has gathered momentum in economies such as Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Peru, a slowdown has been seen in Brazil and Chile.
The Bahamas has also experienced a slowdown, and during the first quarter of the year, growth in the monetary aggregate M1 slowed only in the Central American economies.
As in the case of the monetary base, Argentina and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela were the economies that recorded the strongest annualized growth in M1, with average rates of over 30% in the former and over 60% in the latter (see figure I.19).
The pace of lending has slowed overall, except for consumer credit In the first half of 2013, domestic lending in some economies in the region, such as Brazil and Chile, and to a lesser extent Colombia and Peru, has slowed sharply in comparison with 2012 (see figure I.20).
By contrast, domestic lending picked up in Nicaragua and Panama in the first few months of 2013.
The most recent data available for the Caribbean indicate that domestic lending has recovered except in Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Kitts and Nevis, where it has been contracting since mid-2011, and in Bahamas, Belize and Trinidad and Tobago, where it expanded more slowly and then contracted in the first quarter of 2013.
This is attributable to slower growth in domestic aggregate demand in the region, especially in demand related to capital accumulation.
An exception to this regional trend can be seen in the economies of the English-speaking Caribbean, where lending has picked up and growth is in the double digits.
Much of this regional trend was due to the pattern observed in the Central American countries, where growth in consumer lending accelerated and exceeded 20% in some countries (Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua).
Similarly, in some economies of the English-speaking Caribbean, such as Guyana and Jamaica, financing for consumption grew at rates in excess of 20%.
Among the countries of South America, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was the first quarter of the year.
The ratio of non-performing portfolio to total portfolio in the region, which remained stable except for small increases in Colombia, Mexico and Peru, is a useful indicator in this regard. 4.
Exchange rates have been under considerable external pressure The economic and social scenario in many developed economies and the economic authorities’ efforts to improve the situation did much to shape the performance of the currencies of the region in 2012 and the first half of 2013.
During the first quarter of 2012, the high level of uncertainty as to the resolution of the crisis in Europe (in particular in Greece) and investor expectations of contagion in other countries contributed to the depreciation, to a greater or lesser extent, of the currencies of the region.
This, amid abundant international liquidity, spurred the inflow of capital along with currency appreciation in Chile, Mexico and Peru during the third quarter of 2012.
However, the Colombian peso and, to a greater extent, the Brazilian real behaved differently and depreciated somewhat instead of appreciating.
Among the contributing factors were announcements in both countries of measures to avoid currency appreciation; these were, at least temporarily, successful.
Between the announcement of quantitative easing (QE3) measures in September 2012 and the middle of the first quarter of 2013, the factors driving the appreciation of the Chilean peso, the Mexican peso and the Peruvian sol grew stronger and fuelled an appreciation trend for the Colombian peso and the Brazilian real as well.
Recent United States Federal Reserve announcements concerning the scale-back of asset purchases point to a gradual decrease in liquidity moving forward.
And increasing signs of a slowing Chinese economy have dulled the prospects for further increases in commodity prices.
In Argentina, the nominal exchange rate depreciated throughout 2012-2013 against a backdrop of high inflation and rapid growth in monetary aggregates, which translated into a wide gap between the official rate of exchange and the parallel exchange rate during the entire period.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the exchange rate for currency obtained through throughout 2012, and the Transaction System for Foreign-Currency Denominated Securities (SITME) was removed.
In Jamaica, the Jamaican dollar depreciated by an average 11.2% during the first six months of the year amid fiscal and balance-of-payments problems.
The currencies of Paraguay and Uruguay followed a pattern (which could be regarded as volatile) similar to the one described for those economies that are more fully integrated financially.
However, specific factors, such as agricultural export trends in Paraguay and the flow of capital from Argentina to Uruguay, also contributed to exchange-rate movements in the period under review (see figure I.23).
Overall, international reserves have not fluctuated as widely During the first four months of 2013, a significant number of countries of the region built up international reserves Plurinational State of Bolivia and Trinidad and Tobago recorded increases in reserves of less than 3%; in Belize, Honduras, Panama and Paraguay, reserves grew by more than 16%; Ecuador topped 90%.
But reserves shrank in some countries —by less than 3% in Chile and El Salvador and more than 9% in Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Jamaica and Suriname.
The movement of reserves in some countries reflected the decision by monetary or exchange-rate authorities to intervene in the market to reduce exchange-rate volatility; the central banks of Colombia, Costa Rica and Uruguay increased the average amounts of intervention (purchases) to curb volatility.
While Brazil and Peru continued to conduct interventions (purchases) in the foreign exchange market, they were smaller than in 2012.
Some macroprudential policies became more flexible Increasing uncertainty in the international financial markets, especially in the context of recent announcements by United States Federal Reserve authorities, led the relevant authorities in some countries of the region to introduce changes in the regulatory frameworks that govern investment by foreign nationals in domestic bonds.
Brazil announced more flexible measures to stimulate the flow of resources to its economy and eliminated the tax on financial transactions by foreign investors.
Peru took a number of measures to facilitate long-term financing, raising the amount of long-term deposits in national currency subject to reserve requirements according to each institution’s degree of foreign-currency exposure.
This step was taken in a context in which reserve requirements for foreign-currency deposits had been increased (mid-February 2013). 7.
Tax receipts are expected to slow A slight cooldown in some of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and the prolonged lack of growth in others in the fourth quarter of 2012 and early months of 2013 were reflected in limited growth of the components of domestic demand, including private consumption.
This, plus falling commodity prices, resulted in a contraction or a moderate expansion of tax bases, which has had similar consequences for tax receipts in several countries of the region.
In some countries, tax revenues increased very little (Colombia, Mexico and Peru) or declined (Brazil, Chile and Ecuador) during the first four months of 2013, perhaps linked to the drop in prices for some of their export commodities or to slower economic growth (see table I.7).
Some countries saw receipts increase thanks to a rise in resources captured by State-owned enterprises (Plurinational State of Bolivia, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay), tax reforms (Dominican Republic and Guatemala) or a broadening of certain tax bases (Argentina and Costa Rica).
Expenditures include representational expenditures. c Income and expenditure data for 2013 cover up to March. d Includes the federal government and the central bank.
The expenditure includes transfers to subnational states and municipalities. e Income and expenditure for 2013 data cover up to February. f Refers to quarterly figures and does not include non-recurrent income and expenditure.
Brazil announced a number of fiscal measures for promoting economic growth, such as lowering the federal tax on automobiles, household appliances and construction materials, along with other exemptions, which could total as much as 5% of the tax take in 2014.
These measures and the economic slowdown in the last few quarters have driven revenue down, especially from taxes linked to production sectors.
Among the countries to see a modest increase in public revenues was Peru.
After quarterly year-on-year real growth in excess of 10% over the past few years, the trend moderated to an increase of only 1.3% in the first four months of 2013.
In Colombia, total revenue increased at a steady pace during the first months of the year compared with the same period in 2012.
But in the closing quarters of 2012 tax revenues declined in real terms in comparison with the previous year (the first decline in nine quarters).
The 2012 tax reform entered into force on 1 January, which should have a favourable impact on receipts and total revenue.
In Mexico the modest increase in total revenue (a cumulative 2.1% from January to April 2013) reflects two opposing trends: federal government oil rights fell by more than 16% while non-oil revenue rose by 6.4%.
The latter includes an increase in income tax receipts, especially the flat-rate business tax (IETU).
Among the countries recording the largest increases in revenue are the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay, as a result of surpluses generated by public enterprises.
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, total non-financial public sector revenue, in real terms, jumped 20.1% as oil revenues soared 21.5%.
Taxes increased 5.0%, slower than the 12%-to-16% year-on-year growth posted over the past few years.
In Trinidad and Tobago, the energy sector accounts for about 60% of the total treasury revenue intake.
Thanks to a sharp increase in investment and in the output of natural gas and its by-products starting in 2012, receipts have recovered substantially following a period of stagnation owing to maintenance work.
In Uruguay, revenue growth was due mainly to a higher current primary balance at public enterprises owing to lower power generation costs.
But tax revenue fell in real terms, because higher income tax revenues (owing in particular to the favourable personal income tax trend) were nevertheless insufficient to offset fall in the excise tax take.
Several countries saw revenue increase as a result of fiscal reforms or a broadening of their tax bases.
In the Dominican Republic, tax reforms in late 2012 pushed receipts up, owing especially to the VAT hike (from 16% to 18%) and the elimination of a number of exemptions, despite a marked decline in private consumption.
The impact of the tax reform put in place in Guatemala was positive but less striking because of tax administration issues at customs offices and the reversal of some of the measures initially approved.
In Argentina, the increase in revenue was due mainly to a year-on-year rise in social security contributions and tax revenue, in particular as a result of higher taxes on profits and VAT receipts that offset the substantial decline in export duties (triggered by a lower export tax rate on crude oil and the decline in exports).
In Costa Rica, as of April 2013 revenues were 5.8% higher than for the same period the previous year because of a personal income tax hike and good fuel, property and tobacco product tax performance. 8.
Fiscal balances will depend on differentiated public expenditure policies In some countries, such as Mexico and Ecuador, expenditure is expected to grow at a slower pace as revenue increases slightly or declines.
Mexico has set a target of returning to a balanced budget this year (according to a definition of deficit that does not include State-owned oil company investment as part of expenditure), boosting expenditure efficiency and increasing revenue by postponing the planned lowering of the top income tax rate.
In Ecuador, expenditure grew more slowly than in previous years; the public investment programme was kept, but the amounts were adjusted in view of declining revenue from the oil sector.
In other countries public spending is expected to rise somewhat; in some cases this could lead to higher fiscal deficits.
In Brazil, the recent Budget Guidelines Law (LDO) authorizes smaller primary surpluses for this year; a few priority investment projects and temporary tax exemptions do not figure into the targets.
Given the uncertainty as to the economic activity trend, the main fiscal policy goal seems to be to play a countercyclical role by aligning balance targets with economic performance.
Expenditure has increased in Colombia too, mainly as a result of transfers to disadvantaged groups and the marked increase in the cost of capital in the energy sector and for infrastructure in general.
In Argentina, the growth of expenditures is mainly attributable to the increase in social security benefits (owing to social security moratoria and automatic adjustments required by law) and higher wages and current transfers.
The rebound of public spending in Guatemala is attributable to improved investment execution, with the investment is also expected to rally in other countries, such as Brazil, Costa Rica, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Yet to be discussed is the kind of tax rules that would provide space for this, even when receipts are lower than anticipated.
Countries may be grouped into those that have structural rules or are implementing countercyclical or neutral measures (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru) and those whose policies are aimed at fiscal targets regardless of the macroeconomic cycle.
Even so, national budget data (in some cases, updated in the first few months of the year) indicate that in 2013 the region as a whole will post a deficit similar to that of the previous year (see figure I.26).
This projection could have something of an optimism bias, considering the economic slowdown over the past few months.
Fiscal vulnerability will remain a concern in the Caribbean, primarily in the service-exporting countries As explained below, some Caribbean countries (especially those that export raw materials, such as Belize, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago) have kept their fiscal deficit and public debt at sustainable levels.
But a number of service-providing economies (such as Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados and Jamaica) whose growth rates have sagged since the onset of the international financial crisis have, in some cases, seen public revenues drop sharply and posted acute fiscal deficits since 2009 (see table I.8).
The English-speaking Caribbean, on average for 13 countries, recorded a deficit of 3.4% of GDP for fiscal 2012.
While some countries have narrowed their negative balances, indebtedness still exceeds 100% of GDP in Jamaica and Saint Kitts and Nevis, whose interest payments equate to 9% of GDP and 6% of GDP, respectively.
In view of the budgets submitted for fiscal 2013, this scenario is not expected to change much because there are no signs of a pickup in domestic demand.
With mineral and energy prices trending down, receipts are not expected to improve.
Economic growth is slowing in most of the countries Available indicators for the first few months of 2013 suggest that GDP growth will slow in most of the region’s economies, with some posting growth close to or below 3%.
As in 2012, rising consumption is expected to be the primary driver of aggregate demand and GDP growth during 2013, albeit at a slower pace than in the previous year.
The contribution of investment will likely decline further and the negative contribution of net exports will widen, revealing the growth sustainability challenges faced by most of the economies of the region.
During the first quarter of 2013, regional growth slackened in comparison with the quarterly pace in 2012 and fell to 1.9% versus an average year-on-year quarterly GDP growth of 2.8% for the last three quarters of 2012 (see figure I.27).
The slowdown has been particularly sharp in the case of Mexico, the Dominican Republic and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela: in the previous two quarters these Paraguay was the country in the region that posted the highest rate of growth in the first quarter, as agricultural activity rebounded and the construction sector expanded.
Consumption is still the main driver of growth, although it has lost some steam Indices of activity in the commerce sector, which in part reflect consumption trends and soared throughout 2012, slowed in the first quarter of 2013.
They even contracted in some cases, falling off in Mexico, Panama and the Dominican Republic by 1.1%, 0.9% and 1.8%, respectively (see table I.10).
Commerce sector activity trends in the region reflect the fact that private consumption —which in 2012 accounted for the greater part of regional GDP growth— weakened in several countries.
However, in Chile and Argentina the sector expanded at a pace similar the one posted in 2012.
But some countries (Argentina, Brazil and Chile) saw partial recoveries in April (see figure I.28).
This cooldown over the same period of the previous year is a result of slower growth in employment, real wages and lending to families.
The trend was the same for general government consumption, which rose by a quarterly year-on-year rate of 2%.
The trend in domestic demand was reflected in higher goods and services volume for the region fell 2.8%.
This was the pattern in all of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean: goods and services export volume slid in seven of the nine economies for which aggregate quarterly national account information is available, with the drop ranging from 0.3% in Mexico to 11.1% in Peru.
Latin America and the Caribbean is expected to see the same rate of growth in 2013 as in 2012, around 3% impacted goods and services exports of several of the economies of the region.
Domestic demand is expected to lose momentum compared with previous years as employment and real wages post weaker growth, the unemployment rate does not improve as much and lending to the private sector cools.
The outcome for the region as a whole is due in part to the slackening economic recovery in Brazil and low growth in Mexico.
In addition, economic activity is slowing in a number of countries that had been growing at high rates (Chile, Panama and Peru).
The exception to this trend is the Paraguay, where the economy is expected to recover nicely in comparison with the figures for 2012, on the back of surging agricultural output. 3.
This could, in particular, be the result of weaker job growth despite a meagre 0.9% economic growth figure (see figure I.30).
The year-on-year increase in the employment rate in the closing quarter of the year and 0.1 percentage points in the first quarter of 2013.
Several countries (Argentina, Ecuador, Mexico and Uruguay) even posted a year-on-year decline in the employment rate.
The partial data for the second quarter point to a deepening trend and a slight year-on-year decline in the employment rate.
Like the employment rate, the overall labour-force participation rate (which reflects the labour supply) slowed in the first quarter.
While in these 10 countries as a whole the global participation rate increased by an average of some 0.2 percentage points in 2012, it flattened in the first quarter of 2013.
This labour supply slowdown pushed the unemployment rate down again, to 6.7% in the first quarter against 6.9% for the same period of 2012.
If the labour supply trend has been similar to the previous year’s, the unemployment rate would not have decreased.
In the first quarter, the slight year-on-year decline in unemployment was once again concentrated among women.
However, unlike 2012, this is due mainly to a reduction in labour-force participation rather than rising demand and employment.
While job creation has slowed, it is still concentrated in wage employment.
In five of the seven countries with information available for the first quarter or for the period between January and April 2013 (the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru) wage employment outpaced employment overall and increased its share of total employment.
The exceptions were Brazil (where both rates were very similar in the first four-month periods of 2012 and 2013) and Argentina, where there was half-percentage-point drop in the ratio of wage workers to total workers.
The fact that other occupation categories did not grow much overall despite weaker wage employment creation suggests that supply pressure in the countries (for which updated employment data are available) is relatively limited because of buoyant job creation in previous years. 4.
Formal employment continues to grow, albeit more slowly, and real wages post modest gains The slowdown in job creation is seen in formal wage employment too.
With few exceptions, all of the countries with available data show year-on-year growth rates that are significantly lower than in the first quarters of 2011 and 2012.
But these rates continue to be positive in all of the countries, except for Argentina (see figure I.31), where formal private employment declined throughout 2012 and inched up in the first quarter of 2013 compared with the last quarter of 2012.
Nevertheless, this increase does not offset the previous decline, so the year-on-year rate remains negative.
The slowdown affected real wages as well, which rose less than the previous year.
In the first few months of or higher inflation in some cases (see figure I.32).
The main exceptions were Chile and Colombia, where real wages grew more than in 2012 as inflation eased.
Latin America and the Caribbean still face serious risks in an adverse global economic climate The world economy could gradually start to recover but remains vulnerable to a range of factors.
The outlook for 2014 is for overall growth of 3.1% as the pace of global economic growth rallies, with the exception of China.
But there are still risks that could impact growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.
One of the factors that could destabilize the economies, especially in the eurozone, is the case brought before Germany’s Constitutional Court in June 2013 concerning the authority of the European Central Bank in financial matters.
If the appeal is won, the German court could impose conditions on German participation in the outright monetary transactions programme.
This could spark uncertainty, not only in the German markets but also in the other eurozone markets and the rest of the world.
Moreover, the eurozone continues to show signs of vulnerability in view of political uncertainty in Italy and the recent bailout of Cyprus.
One of the main consequences of slower growth has been high unemployment rates in the eurozone, particularly in Spain and Portugal.
With banks not boosting their capital levels and continuing to have weak balance sheets, the supply of credit will continue to be tight and will in some way act as a drag on consumption and investment.
Meanwhile, consumption will remain constrained by fiscal adjustments and high levels of unemployment.
Looking ahead, different forecasts point to a drop in commodity prices, although there is still room for them to remain at record high levels.
Among the factors are the prospects for a protracted easing of the rate of growth of the Chinese economy, in addition to a greater shift of spending in China towards consumption and away from investment.
In the coming years, this could slow China’s demand for raw materials and boost demand for semi- or finished products.
The short- and medium-term risk that the United States economy could pose to the world hinges primarily on its fiscal and monetary policies.
On the one hand, fiscal adjustments continue to be an issue and have held back the expansion of consumption in the United States.
On the other hand, monetary policy has helped to mitigate the contraction of demand and contributed to the expansion of liquidity in the world, although it has been a source of instability in the international financial markets and a factor in exchange rate-volatility in the region.
The economic slowdown in the eurozone and China affected trade in several countries of the region, widening their current account deficits.
But expansionary policies in the developed countries that held interest rates very low sent foreign capital flooding into some Latin American countries, enabling them to easily fund their deficits.
Countries rich in natural resources also benefited from higher raw materials prices starting in 2003.
However, this also depends on the magnitude of capital outflows and the current account deficit to be funded.
A lingering recession in the eurozone would curb the growth of exports from several countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
As table I.12 shows, the countries less exposed to the economic slowdown in the eurozone would be the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, because their share of exports to that market is smaller than the regional average of 12.6%.
As table I.12 shows, faster economic growth in Japan would bring the most trade benefits for Chile and Peru.
Another way to analyze the countries’ exposure to an uncertain external scenario is by means of the weighted average of GDP growth rates of their trading partners as a proxy indicator for a country’s external demand.
The fiscal space for facing the threat of a negative international economic scenario has expanded in many countries As ECLAC has documented, during the 2008 crisis Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole announced an expansion of public spending, especially social spending and public investment.
The available data show that the timing and scope of these announcements were different (see table I.14).
In 2009, on average, the spread between primary public expenditure and GDP growth rates was very positive (6.5 basis points) but varied widely.
Although the countries have withdrawn fiscal stimulus measures in different ways and to different extents, the pace of growth in expenditure began to slow in 2010 as the economies of the region recovered.
The still-moderate decline in commodity prices presages very negative effects on public revenues in some countries.
Three kinds of measures have been implemented to address this situation: (a) counteract by cutting spending (in a zero-deficit approach); (b) increase certain domestic tax rates; and (c) accept the resulting deficit (allowing automatic stabilizers to operate freely).
So far, and considering that these fluctuations are rather modest, the countries have responded with a combination of measures that could potentially work against primary balance targets, tax activism in several countries and expenditure containment in others.
In countries where growth has slackened the most, there has been a fourth kind of measure involving announcements of increased public spending in investment and tax exemptions aimed at stimulating economic growth.
The capacity to respond to a negative scenario depends critically on whether the downturn is considered temporary or permanent and on the available fiscal space.
In other words, if the lower prices are permanent there would be little room for countercyclical policies such as increasing the deficit and public debt for a limited period.
There would be much more fiscal space, though, if the slowdown is considered temporary.
In this regard, it is useful to examine the current fiscal situation taking 2007 (the last year of the previous terms-of-trade boom) as the baseline.
It is often said that fiscal space has shrunk since then, but as table I.15 shows, the situation varies depending on the country.
In South America and Mexico, total revenue rose by an average of one percentage point between 2007 and 2012 while total expenditure increased by an average of 3.3 percentage points.
In Argentina, Ecuador, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia there has been a significant increase in both revenue and expenditure.
The pattern has been different in other countries, with revenue falling (sharply in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile and less so in Peru and Uruguay) or inching up (Brazil, Colombia, Mexico).
In several countries, the jump in expenditure in 2009 was followed by periods of withdrawal of fiscal stimulus measures.
While the overall balance decreased by 2.3 percentage points between 2007 and 2012, public debt decreased by 3.4 percentage points.
This apparent contradiction is due primarily to a positive spread between the economic growth rate and interest rates paid on the public debt (which lightens the debt burden), as well as national-currency appreciation during the period (which reduces the local-currency value of external public debt and its ratio to GDP).
The picture is different in Central America, where total revenue slid 0.8 percentage points and expenditure rose by 1 percentage point, with the overall balance deteriorating by 1.9 percentage points.
This subregion saw a modest increase in public debt as a percentage of GDP.
In the Caribbean revenue fell slightly, by an average 0.2 percentage points, although the situation varied widely among the 13 countries (revenue rose in seven countries and fell in the rest).
As a result, the deficit widened by 1.6 percentage points and the overall balance was equivalent to 3.4% of GDP in 2012.
In general (except in Belize and Dominica), the debt-to-GDP ratio rose, although debt remains low in some countries (such as Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago).
Although few countries have information on the net financial asset (debt) position of the public sector, in Brazil it rose from 45% GDP in 2007 to 34% of GDP in 2012.
These and other countries have significant financial assets deposited in the central bank in Brazil and sovereign wealth funds in Chile.
In Peru, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund has built up considerably in recent years to stand at more than US$ 7 billion as of December 2012, or the equivalent to 3.4% of GDP.
It would seem that the ability to fund these deficits and debts is more important than their absolute values; this is where the largest differences between countries (and compared with 2007) lie.
This ability depends, in part, on the extent of financial integration of the economies, which has benefitted new countries.
In a number of countries the rates paid on bond issues have fallen drastically, and some have reached record lows (in others, sovereign bonds have been issued for the first time).
In view of all of this it can be said that, in a number of economies, the starting point is better than in the 2008 crisis and the fiscal space has expanded.
Between 1980 and 2012: gains —though uneven and insufficient— in economic growth and equality B.
A dramatic change in the region’s international macroeconomic position Conclusions Introduction This chapter gives an account of the main stylized facts regarding growth and inequality over the past three decades (1980-2012) in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Dramatic changes have occurred in policies, institutions and economic and social performance over this period.
The changing patterns of GDP and inequality are examined, contrasting the more favourable performance over the past decade with that of the two before, and changes in the way external constraints or variables have shaped growth are analysed.
Attention is given, as well, to the region’s inadequate capital formation and sources of financing, especially public and private domestic saving, again with an emphasis on developments over the past decade.
Next, progress in reducing inflation and strengthening the fiscal accounts is reviewed, along with the main changes in the way the region’s economies engage with the global economy, through trade, remittances, finance and investment.
Between 1980 and 2012: gains —though uneven and insufficient— in economic growth and equality The region’s external environment began to change rapidly in the first decade of the 2000s, producing periods of sustained growth for a number of countries.
Taking a long-term view, however, the growth performance of the Latin American and Caribbean region in the past 32 years has not been so encouraging.
The first observation is that the region has performed very poorly in these three decades, at least from the perspective of much of the Latin American and Caribbean population, since the average annual gain in per capita GDP during these 32 years has been less than 2% for 91.7% of the population, and less than 1% for 32.0%.
Chapter I The second observation is that for a large number of countries (those shaded in table I.1) —in fact, representing 76.7% of the region’s population in 2010— economic growth was insufficient to produce convergence with the per capita GDP of the developed countries (see table I.2).
The countries representing the remaining 23.3% of the population did manage to narrow the gap with the developed countries, but even the fastest-growing were unable to match the per capita GDP growth rates seen in emerging Asia.
During much of the period 1980-2010, Latin America’s per capita GDP fell as a percentage of that of the United States.
And although it began to pick up slightly in 2002, the region’s per capita GDP still represented less of the United States figure than it had in the early twentieth century.
By contrast, China and the Republic of Korea have seen much more rapid convergence in recent decades.
The third observation is that there is no common pattern, a priori, in terms of production of export specialization, size or geographical location by which to identify types of countries that achieve a better long-term performance.
The better- and worse- performing economies include the full range of exporters: of natural resources, manufactures, services and agricultural goods.
None of the larger and more diversified economies is among the fastest-growing, but this does not amount to a systematic pattern in itself because many other major differences exist between these economies.
The coefficient of variation for GDP growth is used here as a measure of growth variability.
It is estimated by measuring the absolute value of the ratio between the standard deviation of growth rates for 1980-2012 and the average of these rates.
Fourth, the coefficient of variation for GDP growth1 throughout the period 1980-2012 throws up another stylized fact: as the coefficient falls (that is, the less variable growth is) the better the long-term performance.
This holds even for those countries which achieved greater convergence with the developed countries (see table I.2).
This would seem to suggest that, since structural factors act as key determinants of economic performance, other factors, like institutionality and policy style, are involved in explaining differences between countries.
The fifth observation is that the growth rates of the region’s countries initially became more disparate, then converged somewhat in the last decade.
The various critical episodes the region has traversed in these three decades affected the countries in very different ways.
The great disparity between countries in terms of per capita GDP in the 1980s began to ease only with the onset of the hesitant recovery in the early 1990s.
This process was then cut short 2000, especially during the commodity price booms which supported higher growth rates for several years running in a number of countries, the disparity narrowed significantly (see figure I.2).
Sixth, income inequality —measured by the Gini coefficient— and poverty first rose but then began to improve in most of the countries in the last decade.
Although the information is not uniformly available for the whole period, there are certain patterns.
Distribution worsened overall in the 1980s and 1990s, when income concentration rose in 12 countries, including in the region’s three largest economies.
As will be discussed in the next section, this was a period of crisis, unstable growth and high inflation and unemployment.
Over this period several of the region’s countries enjoyed surges in disposable national income, thanks to terms-of-trade gains (as discussed in chapter II), steadily higher rates of growth and employment, and falling inflation.
The potential of terms-of-trade gains to improve income distribution by generating higher income is illustrated by the downtrend in the Gini coefficient in hydrocarbons-exporting countries starting in 2000 (see figure I.3).
Colombia and Chile, whose terms of trade rose considerably, enjoyed high rates of economic growth and single-digit inflation, but showed no clear improvement in income concentration over that period.
Lastly, trends in income distribution and poverty reduction in 2003-2011 were shaped, albeit with variations between countries, by developments in the labour market, transfers to households and institutional changes.
In particular, quality employment increased, as did average wages, and these two things benefited lower-income households more, proportionally, than higher-income households.
A breakdown of income by ECLAC shows that in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua, labour income variations to distributive changes in non-labour income (ECLAC, 2011a).
Wage trends per employee in this period may have reflected the increasing supply of skilled workers and the rising demand for unskilled workers associated with the expansion of the non-tradables sector (Gasparini and others, 2011; Lustig and others, 2011).
This, together with policies of transfers to low-income households and institutional changes such as minimum wage policies and promotion of labour formalization, contributed to improvements in income distribution (Cornia, 2011).
In Latin America, the richest 10% levels are lower in the Caribbean, however (Rosado, 2013).
Distributive improvements contributed to one of the more important recent achievements in Latin America and the Caribbean: the fall in poverty rates, which occurred across the board in the region, although not to the same extent in all the countries.
Poverty trends have fluctuated in the region over the past few decades, heavily tracking the business cycle.
As well as the impact of the business cycle on poverty rates, this reflects the varying scopes of policies adopted during those cycles.
The 1980s was the lost decade in the region not only in economic terms, but also as regards poverty.
The indigence rate rose from 18.6% to 22.6% in that period (see table I.3).
In absolute declining well-being, the policy of fiscal restraint adopted in response to the debt crisis worsened the social situation.
Much of the reduction in poverty and indigence in this period occurred in urban areas, reversing the rise in urban poverty of earlier periods.
But growth was unstable and buffeted by severe crises in the region’s larger countries.
In 2002-2008, with disposable national income rising on the back of a boom on export prices, poverty and indigence levels fell in most of the region’s countries.
The economic growth in this period boosted employment levels and this, together with a slight rise in real labour income, helped to reduce poverty and indigence, aided further by policies of transfers to the poorest households.
Economic growth was the most important factor in reducing poverty in Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador (urban areas), Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and Nicaragua, which also achieved the largest reductions in poverty and indigence in the period analysed.
Distributive improvements played their part too, however, accounting for over half of the fall in poverty and indigence in Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, El Salvador, Panama and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (ECLAC, 2013).
The 1980s: debt crisis The 1980s, often referred to as the lost decade in terms of the region’s growth, were marked by the outbreak of the debt crisis that began in Mexico in 1982.
Several of the region’s countries had run up large public and private external debts with international banks, especially in the United States, within a short period of time.
This had been preceded by growing financial account liberalization in the framework of fixed or managed exchange-rate regimes, which facilitated overindebtedness by creating implicit guarantees.
What was, in retrospect, over-exposure of international commercial banks, particularly those of the United States, to Latin American debt, led to several of the region’s countries being unable to service their debt when United States interest rates rose amid international recession (1979) and the region’s terms of trade deteriorated (Devlin 1989).
Changing global financial conditions following the interest rate rise in the United States triggered a sharp capital flow reversal, and thus the solvency crisis which several countries were already experiencing was compounded by an external liquidity crisis.
The sudden dry-up of voluntary external financing, the conditionalities associated with external debt negotiations —reflected in stabilization and structural adjustment processes— and the liabilities arising from temporary payment suspensions and renegotiations of external debt led to massive devaluations, with the resulting impact on inflation and real income.
Around 6% of the region’s GDP per year was transferred outside the region for much of the decade.
The reduction in imports needed to generate a trade surplus, together with the general uncertainty caused by these adjustment processes, led to a drop in public and private investment, and even in consumption, and productivity and much longer-term growth capacity (potential GDP) deteriorated seriously in most of the countries.
In Central America net resource flows remained positive, thanks to official bilateral or multilateral financial cooperation.3 Other countries, including Chile and Colombia, also had access to such flows, and in the latter case this helped to prevent macroeconomic performance from turning as negative as in other cases.
The English-speaking, services-exporting Caribbean countries experienced slow growth owing to the global recession, although they suffered no setbacks as regards terms of trade or access to external financing.
The second part of the 1980s was slightly more benign than the critical first part, thanks in part to a relative upturn in the United States and other developed regions, which contributed to a slight, albeit hesitant, recovery in Latin America and the Caribbean.
As a result of these shocks, in the 1980s annual GDP growth averaged just 1.8% in Latin America, and 1.5% in the Caribbean. 2.
The 1990s: unstable growth amid external financial shocks and internal disequilibria The region regained access to voluntary financing starting with the implementation of the Brady Plan in 1989.
This aided economic recovery, but also set in motion a new expansionary financial cycle which lasted from 1990 until the outbreak of the Asian crisis in 1997.
Between 1993 and 1997 the region also benefited from improving terms of trade, and it began to receive increasing investment flows in the form of both portfolio investment and foreign direct investment (FDI), both associated with the privatization of State enterprises, external debt securitization and, in some countries, the onset of a new cycle of investment in commodity-exporting sectors.
But the region’s growth from the second half of the 1990s up to 2002 was buffeted by powerful external and internal shocks.
On the external front, the Asian crisis of 1997 was followed, in 1998, by the Russian moratorium and the Turkish crisis.
These all affected the region heavily, through the channels of finance (Brazil was badly hit by the Russian and Turkish crises) and trade (the Asian crisis affected South America).
The effects of these inflows were compounded by procyclical monetary and fiscal policies which sharpened the boom and bust phases of the cycle (Ffrench-Davis, 2005, pp. 75 and 83; Frenkel and Rapetti 2009).
Debt levels fell under the Brady Plan, but in most cases not enough to steadily reduce the debt-to-GDP ratio.
Starting in the mid-1990s, the crises mentioned above and the resulting sluggish growth increased the burden of debt servicing and pushed up the debt-to-GDP ratio in some countries.
However, civil wars in several Central American countries in the 1980s severely limited economic growth possibilities.
This was in addition, in the case of Ecuador, to deteriorating prices for its main export products, the climatic effects of the El Niño phenomenon, high inflation and a deep domestic political crisis, which led to the first default on Brady bonds in 1998.
Unlike in the case of other countries which had faced difficulties previously (Mexico, Brazil and Argentina, for example), this time neither the International Monetary Fund (IMF) not the United States Treasury Department put forward any scheme to avert default.
Ecuador’s default was followed in 2001 by that of Argentina, which was rooted in earlier crises.
Price cycles have lasted longer than previous cycles, on average, thanks mainly to greater demand from Asia and supply side constraints, while prices have risen more sharply, on average, as well.
In addition, prices have risen simultaneously in a larger number of markets.
These terms-of-trade gains and growing remittances from migrant workers have been reflected in a surge in disposable income in the region, which has boosted saving, as will be discussed later.
Looking at GDP growth by countries’ size and export composition,4 the group which grew the most in the period from 2003 to 2012, and especially during the boom of 2003-2008, were the exporters of hydrocarbons (6.1%) and of minerals and metals (5.6%).
These were precisely the categories of goods for which prices rose the most during this period.
As a group, they grew 4.9% between 2003 and 2008, driven especially by exports of food-related agricultural products and tropical beverages and grains, whose prices rose considerably.
In some cases, being net food importers (especially of grains) offset the impact of the terms-of-trade gain or even reversed it outright (especially in 2008), but this is not to deny the favourable impact of rising export prices.
The deterioration was worse in countries with a limited range of agricultural exports, and those with serious environmental sustainability problems, such as El Salvador and Haiti, which were among the slowest-growing countries.
Growth in services-exporting economies —mainly the Caribbean islands— was driven largely by shifts in demand from the developed countries, which by the end of the first decade of the 2000s were experiencing sharp contractions in the wake of the global financial crisis.
The mixed performance of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, which are classified here as large, diversified economies, may be attributed in large part to their export structure.
The GDP performance of Argentina (with growth of 8.5%, the highest in the region between 2003 and 2008) was partly associated with the export of foodstuffs (soybeans) and other products that benefited from the currency devaluation of 2002.
Brazil, with slightly slower growth (4.2%) in that period, also benefited from high prices for its exports of agricultural goods and minerals, while Mexico, which exports mostly manufactures, expanded only 3.1%.
The surge in the region’s output growth between 2003 and mid-2008 was cut short by the outbreak of the global financial crisis originating in the financial systems of the developed countries.
Growth in Latin America and the Caribbean averaged 4.6% per year between 2003-2008, then dropped sharply to -1.9% in 2009, that is, a slide of 6 GDP percentage points in a single year.
In the two years following, the region recovered significantly, showing notable resilience to the crisis and expanding 5.9% in 2010 and 4.3% in 2011.
The harsh external conditions also contributed to a slowdown in some of the region’s major external markets, such as China, which also began to feel the need for structural adjustments in its sources of growth.
So Latin America’s growth remained positive, though clearly slowing, between 2010 and 2012, while in the Caribbean, especially in the services-exporting countries (given the impact of the developed countries on their exports, in addition to domestic problems in some of the region’s larger economies) GDP contractions were even sharper.
Another driver of economic growth volatility in the region, and one that has become more significant in recent decades, is natural disasters.
The countries of Central America and the Caribbean have suffered many hurricanes and other natural phenomena that have destroyed large chunks of their production capacity, often setting back growth and undermining living standards (see box I.1).
Much depends on specific national and local conditions and on how the short-, medium- and long-term impacts are classified.
However, generally speaking, natural disasters are agreed to have a negative and basically short-term effect on well-being, but not necessarily a direct impact on GDP trends.
There is also evidence that regions such as Central America and the Caribbean are especially vulnerable to natural disasters (Martine and Guzman, 2002).
Medium-term effects are weak or difficult to identify, and higher levels of activity can even be expected in this period.a These impacts depend on factors that include the severity and type of disaster, the specific sector affected,b the structure and make-up of the economy, and levels of per capita income.
In this last instance, evidence indicates that developing countries are worse impacted by natural disasters than developed countries.
Natural disasters tend to reduce fiscal revenues and increase public spending, which has a bearing on the public deficit and short-term public debt.
They also affect infrastructure, cause loss of property and changes to ways of living, and disrupt transport and international trade.
Natural disasters affect social conditions, as well, with vulnerable populations normally feeling the biggest impact.
This is because the poor usually depend on a single source of income, have a lower level of training, have no assets or savings to use as a cushion, and lack credit and insurance, among other factors.
In addition, children and the elderly are more vulnerable to disasters and even to weather events.
The available evidence on the impact of disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean remains complex and highly uncertain (see the figure below).
These results contrast with those seen in other emerging economies, as in Asia, which have posted high growth rates in recent decades.
China and India stand out among the Asian economies for their high rates of investment in this period: around 45% and 35% of GDP, respectively.
They are followed by the Republic of Korea and Thailand with rates of around 25%.
Except for the last two years, Latin America’s investment levels are systematically lower.
Tables I.5 and I.6 and show rates of investment5 for 19 Latin American and Caribbean countries for which information is available for the period 1980-2010, including its public and private components.
Manuelito and L.F Jiménez, “Rasgos estilizados de la relación entre inversión y crecimiento en América Latina y el Caribe 1980-2012” Santiago, Chile, ECLAC, 2013, unpublished. a Simple average for the countries included.
Four stylized facts arise from the analysis of tables I.5 and I.6.
An upturn in investment began to take shape starting in 2003 in some countries (8 of 19).6 However, in 13 of them, public investment remained below 1980s levels in GDP terms.
Third, by contrast with the performance of public investment, in the 1990s private investment rose in most of the countries (14 of 19).
Investment boosted by higher national saving, as conditions became less vulnerable in the past decade By the second half of 2003, several countries were reporting a large rise in gross national disposable income, which boosted national saving, public and private alike (see table I.7).
In most cases, this was attributable to steeply climbing terms of trade on the back of rising international prices for raw materials.
Although the data are not available evenly throughout the period,7 table I.8 shows that in both periods in which investment rates rose, so did public saving, both in relation to the previous period and compared to 1980-1989.
Public saving rose most in the second period, especially in countries whose public revenues come in large proportion from natural resources (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Ecuador, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia), with the exception of Mexico.8 There are a number of reasons for this pattern in public saving.
One common factor is a rise in national income from steadily improving terms of trade.
Public investment refers to investment by the general government, i.e. it excludes investment by State enterprises, which is included in private investment.
A breakdown of variation in national saving into its public and private components reveals certain comparability issues, because some countries calculate saving in net terms (i.e. net of capital consumption) and others in gross terms.
Comparisons between the two types of data are imprecise, but their performance over time nevertheless sheds light on macroeconomic aspects of investment financing.
Tables I.8 and I.9 show variations in public and private savings as reported by the countries.
See ECLAC (2013), which illustrates the growing proportion of income from primary goods in fiscal revenue.
But, as well, during this period governments gradually began to adopt fiscal policies aimed at building up public finance sustainability over the entire commodity price cycle, even as these prices were climbing strongly.9 In other cases, the rise in public savings had to do with restricted access to external financing, as fallout from the balance-of-payments crisis.
Manuelito and L.F Jiménez, “Rasgos estilizados de la relación entre inversión y crecimiento en América Latina y el Caribe 1980-2012” Santiago, Chile, ECLAC, 2013, unpublished. a The information is presented as gross saving or net saving (i.e. net of capital consumption), depending on the way the various countries calculate saving. b Simple average for the countries included.
Private saving, too, increased considerably as a percentage of GDP (see table I.9), most intensively during the second investment surge.
Equivalent data are not available to compare private and public saving but, given the sharp rise in domestic private saving, the demand response of private investment may be supposed to have lagged somewhat.
To this must be added business expectations or perceptions regarding investment opportunities in each country at that time.
Trends in public and private saving help to explain the rise in national saving seen in 1990-1997 and especially in 2003-2008, the years in which the investment ratio rose.
In several countries, national savings increased at a higher rate than investment, which substantially reduced external saving in more than half of the countries examined (see table I.10).
Manuelito and F Jiménez, “Rasgos estilizados de la relación entre inversión y crecimiento en América Latina y el Caribe 1980-2012” Santiago, Chile, ECLAC, 2013, unpublished. a The information is presented as gross saving or net saving (i.e. net of capital consumption), depending on the way the various countries calculate saving. b Simple average for the countries included.
It may be concluded, then, that as well as exogenous factors boosting gross disposable national income in the most recent period (higher commodity export prices, increasing migrant remittances, smaller debt servicing burdens), policies geared towards public finance sustainability and sound international reserve management also played a role in the lesser recourse to external saving.
As a counterpart to this lesser use of external saving, external indebtedness decreased as a proportion of GDP, net international reserve accumulated considerably and public savings build up in sovereign funds.13 What most set the period 2003-2010 apart from 1990-1998 was, therefore, the larger proportion of national saving in financing regional investment in the more recent of the two periods.
This represented a shift towards more sustainable growth and a lessening of vulnerability to the vicissitudes of the external financial markets.
In the case of the Caribbean, the analysis is somewhat limited by the availability of data, and comparison with the Latin America countries is difficult.14 Nevertheless, some patterns can be discerned.
As shown in table I.11, investment rates in the Caribbean subregion were fairly stable throughout the period examined, which is likely related to the large amounts of FDI (in GDP terms) going to sectors exporting services and natural resources (see figure I.10).
This type of investment is often found to be fairly stable, because it is directed towards long-term growth prospects and is not limited by the availability of funding from the financial systems of destination countries.
It will also be recalled that during this period Argentina and Brazil prepaid their liabilities to the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Chile also prepaid loans owed to multilateral institutions between 2004 and 2006 and, like other countries redeemed some of its external bonds.
As a counterpart to this situation, both national and external saving are relatively unstable (see table I.12).
The Caribbean economies are, with few exceptions, highly reliant on external financing and national saving can be very low.
And with the developed countries, the Caribbean subregion’s main trading partners, still returning low rates of growth in the wake of the global financial crisis of 2008, national saving has plummeted in some cases, increasing dependence on external saving and therefore vulnerability.
Gradual strengthening of the fiscal accounts A gradual shift came about in the macroeconomic regimes of many countries in the region after the turn of the century.
These increases in public savings, in turn, boosted public investment, thereby helping to sustain growth.
The conditionalities imposed on some Asian countries in 1997 as part of their crisis exit strategy provoked sharp criticism and were instrumental in prompting an internal review at the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (Frankel, 2002; Grenville, 2004).
See box I.1 in the second part of Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean 2010-2011 (ECLAC, 2011b), which outlines the progressive adoption of fiscal rules in the region since 2000.
However, this positive overall picture is primarily a reflection of the situation in South America because fiscal fragility persists in Central America and especially in the Caribbean, where unfavourable terms of trade and the global economic cycle have taken a toll.
Lower inflation and flexible exchange-rate regimes Countries in the region have adopted very different monetary and exchange-rate policies over the years, in response to the internal and external crises that have occurred during each decade; nevertheless, overall, there has been a gradual move towards stronger monetary policy.
Countries have taken different approaches to achieving that end, as discussed in more detail in chapter IV.
Thus, from the mid-1990s, and to an even greater extent from the year 2000, exchange-rate and monetary policies have shifted noticeably towards a greater emphasis on inflation control, with explicit inflation targets or objectives in some cases.
This has helped to bring inflation down over the course of the three decades under consideration, and especially since the 2000s (see table I.13).
Between 1980 and 1999, several countries, including Argentina, Brazil, Nicaragua, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, endured extremely high inflation amid economic and political crises.
In both groups this was due to the heavy exchange-rate adjustments required to correct previous imbalances caused by a spending overheat supported, in turn, by borrowing abroad and spurred by real currency appreciations under fixed exchange-rate regimes.
In short, the region, and especially Latin America, transitioned from a scenario of high inflation and nominal variability in the 1980s, to one of greater stability at the start of this century.
At the same time, monetary policy has increasingly focused on inflation and several countries have adopted regimes with explicit inflation targets.
This is not to say that other variables, such as growth and unemployment, are not taken into account in policy decisions.
In the recent period (2009-2012), monetary authorities have tended to incorporate a larger number of variables, such as the two mentioned, in their policies, as they explain in the statements issued to enumerate the criteria underpinning their decisions.
Furthermore, with the exception of several Caribbean countries, Honduras and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, exchange-rate regimes have been made more flexible, with fewer interventions by the authorities.
However, these changes have not occurred uniformly across the region and in 2012 cases of high inflation persisted.
In the other countries in the region, inflation held steady at lower levels during those years, in large part because they did not experience exchange-rate crises.
In the 2000s, bouts of high inflation became less frequent and more economies were able to keep inflation in single digits.
Along with the reorientation of monetary policy, more countries opted for relatively flexible exchange-rate regimes, although in several the monetary authority intervenes frequently, as discussed in chapter IV.
A dramatic change in the region’s international macroeconomic position The engagement of Latin America and the Caribbean, especially the larger economies, in the world markets has evolved considerably from a macroeconomic point of view since the crisis of the 1980s.
As the evidence amply demonstrates, the larger economies tend to have a more diversified production structure.
Consequently, larger economies tend to achieve lower scores in relation to one commonly used indicator of trade openness —the sum of exports and imports of goods and services as a proportion of GDP— than smaller economies, which rely more heavily on international trade to meet their needs for consumer goods, capital and inputs for production.
As shown in table I.14, the sum of exports and imports of goods and services as a percentage of GDP has risen significantly over the last three decades, particularly among the larger economies, which were relatively closed in the early 1980s.
In all the large and several of the midsize economies, the impact of trade on GDP has at least doubled in the last three decades.
This may be attributed to the conditionalities attached to the financial support packages provided to help countries in the region to exit the crises they suffered between 1980 and 1995, and to the development strategies adopted by countries actively seeking greater integration into these markets.
In particular, in the context of limited variations in international prices for manufactures, higher export prices and larger export volumes, exports gained greater purchasing power in 2003-2010 (see figure I.7).
This occurred particularly in the South American economies, owing to their greater specialization in producing and exporting raw materials. b Simple average for the countries included.
Remittance flows account for a large proportion of income in several of the region’s countries, particularly some of those with lower per capita GDP (see table I.16).
In the early 1980s, only a few countries, mainly in the Caribbean, received remittances representing more than 2% of GDP; but thereafter the number of countries in that bracket and the amounts remitted shot up.
At first, the sharpest rise was seen in the amounts coming to the Caribbean, but over the past decade remittances began to decline in relation to GDP in several countries of that subregion.
At the same time, in Central America and in some South American countries remittances rose significantly, reaching about 10% of GDP in some cases in 2011.
In the countries that receive larger amounts, remittances have driven up consumption (including spending on health and education) and have helped to bring down poverty and extreme poverty.
Data are obtained from the balance of payments, in current dollars each year.
A third significant change has occurred in the composition of income flows.
In particular, the external debt burden eased as the economies resumed growth after the crisis in the early 1980s and also as a result of the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Debt Initiative.
This, in turn, lowered debt servicing in relation to GDP over the long term.
The subregions did not experience this improvement in equal measure, however, and the Caribbean (except for Trinidad and Tobago), still shouldered a significant burden until almost the end of the first decade of the twenty-first century (see figure I.8).
The Caribbean subregion (excluding Trinidad and Tobago) was an exception, paying out fewer earnings than the rest of the region, despite experiencing a significant rise in FDI inflows.17 The prices for South American exports, which have risen substantially since 2003, are associated with higher returns and payments abroad (see figure I.9).
As privatization schemes advanced and the region opened up to external markets as part of the deleveraging process, foreign investment in the region, both FDI and portfolio investment, expanded considerably.
While in absolute terms net FDI flows go mainly towards large and midsize countries, their impact on financing as a proportion of GDP has been greater in Central America and the Caribbean (see figure I.10).
While both inward and outward portfolio investment flows have risen in global markets, in the region that form of investment was initially concentrated in a small number of countries, which has expanded more recently.
Two types of country have experienced significant portfolio investment flows in both directions: those with a fairly developed domestic financial market (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru) and those that have issued sovereign bonds in the international markets (Argentina, Jamaica, Uruguay in the first wave and later some Central American countries and the Plurinational State of Bolivia) (see table I.17).
Improvements in financial regulation and macroeconomic policy in the region helped to propel these changes in external financing and improved access to the international capital markets.
These changes began in the 1990s when FDI replaced commercial banks as the primary source of net capital flows in Latin America and the Caribbean, and continued during the 2000s, when bond issues (sovereign and corporate) overtook commercial bank loans as the second most common source of financing.
Although the region’s integration into external capital markets has been quite recent (see table I.17), as bonds gradually gained ground as a funding source, institutional investors (pension funds and insurance firms) also became increasingly important buyers of bonds, substituting the short-term or highly leveraged investors of the recent past.
Corporate bonds, too, have gained ground, and exceeded sovereign bonds in value in 2011.
Meanwhile, the terms and issue conditions of sovereign bonds have also improved, as exemplified by the issue of bonds in national currency and corporate bonds, albeit still on an unequal footing and in less favourable conditions than other countries (Bustillo and Velloso, 2013).
Conclusions The region’s countries have experienced uneven growth in per capita GDP over the past 32 years and, despite higher growth rates in the last decade, overall growth rates have been generally low, with only a few countries managing to reduce the gap with more developed countries.
And even the best performing countries fell far short of the rapid growth achieved by the Asian countries.
The differences cannot be attributed a priori to specialization, geography or size, since both the high-performance and low-growth countries include cases of a very diverse nature.
The inequality both between and within countries, as well as the incidence of poverty, reflect the ups and downs that the region has experienced over the last 32 years.
During the lost decade of the 1980s inequality and poverty indicators deteriorated, in some cases sharply.
It was only after many years that, in the 2000s, these indicators began to improve, on the back of higher growth, a better labour market and the implementation of social policies.
A look at growth in each decade has highlighted the impact of external constraints on performance.
In the 1980s, adjustment programmes were adopted to reduce internal and external imbalances that had become unsustainable amid limited access to external resources.
Debt reduction efforts were undertaken in the 1990s, starting with the Brady Plan, but the shortcomings of this approach and the adoption of macroeconomic strategies that perpetuated imbalances, coupled with shocks from outside the region, resulted in low and unstable growth.
The third period analysed (the 2000s) showed the impact of rising commodity prices, which boosted disposable income and growth in several countries in the region.
In this period, external growth constraints lost their impact or ceased to apply in many countries.
This stood the region in good stead when the financial crisis hit at the end of the decade, and many countries were able to draw upon countercyclical policy capabilities to restore growth more quickly.
Major changes have been made to macroeconomic regimes in the region over the past three decades, with the scope of the changes varying from one country to another.
In particular, countries have strengthened monetary and fiscal policies (this is discussed in more detail in chapter IV), which has helped to reduce inflation and improve the fiscal accounts.
Coupled with other factors, such as the policies adopted by third countries, especially the United States, these measures helped the region to recover relatively quickly in the wake of the global financial crisis.
With regard to investment and saving, gross fixed capital formation languished at below 20% of GDP for long periods.
This reflected the limited public investment following the adjustment programmes of the 1980s as well as weak private investment stimulus amid the instability of the 1990s, although private investment did pick up somewhat from the low levels of the 1980s.
After 2000, rising national disposable income, in some cases thanks to higher export prices, and improved growth expectations fuelled by higher spending in developed countries and China’s growth, helped drive up investment and saving.
In particular, national saving outpaced investment, thereby reducing external saving and significantly mitigating several countries’ vulnerability to external shocks associated with the global financial crisis.
Along with these domestic changes, the external macroeconomic position has shifted significantly.
Foreign trade and FDI have risen for most of the region’s countries, evidencing greater production exchanges with the rest of the world than 30 years ago.
Those changes, together with the external deleveraging process, have lowered the debt servicing burden and led to higher FDI income payments, although much of FDI income is reinvested.
Remittances have also become an important source of income for the region, first for the countries of the Caribbean and later for Central and South America.
By the end of the three decades under review, portfolio investment flows accounted for a smaller degree of financial integration, overall, than trade or FDI.
In short, following low growth for the first two decades under review and a more robust performance in the third, the region has seen some major shifts in its macroeconomic regime.
These changes have not been as far-reaching in all countries and in many cases are too recent to judge their long-term effectiveness.
However, to gauge by the region’s response to the 2008 financial crisis and the aftermath of global instability, it would appear that some countries have succeeded in modifying the macroeconomic strategies that led to recurring crises in the past.
The challenge remains of boosting growth by increasing investment and embedding technological progress, supported by higher domestic savings and sustainable use of natural resources, while advancing towards greater equality.
Depending on the criteria applied, Argentina could also be included in this group.
Cornia, Giovanni Andrea (2011), “Regímenes políticos, shocks externos y desigualdad de ingresos: América Latina durante los últimas tres décadas”, Distribución del ingreso.
Frankel, Jeffrey (2002), “Fourteen suggested questions to be investigated in the IMF’s handling of capital account crises, with specific examples in Korea, Indonesia, and Brazil.
Rapetti (2009), “A developing country view of the current global crises: What should not be forgotten and what should be done”, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 33 No. 4, July.
Gasparini, Leonardo and othres (2011), “Educational upgrading and returns to skills in Latin America.
Rosado, J. (2013), “Crecimiento e indicadores asociados a la cohesión social: un acercamiento a las brechas de desarrollo en el Caribe de habla inglesa”, Mexico City, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), unpublished.
Over the past decade, gross domestic income growth tripled and the operating surplus share increased B.
The terms of trade contribution to disposable income surged in most of the countries C.
Private consumption has become increasingly important as a determinant factor of growth D.
Greater trade openness coincided with a growing (net) export component of GDP E.
GDP growth tended to have a positive impact on investment (accelerator effect) Conclusions Introduction This chapter tracks economic growth in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past three decades from the perspective of aggregate demand.
It starts by describing the path that growth and functional income distribution have followed in the region and then explains the impact that changes in the terms of trade have had on the growth of gross national disposable income, stressing how they have shaped that economic growth in a number of countries over the past decade.
It goes on to discuss the growing contributions that consumption and net exports are making to GDP expansion in a context of trade openness.
The chapter concludes with an assessment of investment, highlighting its relationship with installed capacity utilization and, in particular, with income growth, noting its substantial accelerator effect in the region.
Over the past decade, gross domestic income growth tripled and the operating surplus share increased Between 1980 and 2012 gross national income in Latin America and the Caribbean, measured in current dollars, grew almost six-fold.
As a result, regional gross domestic income barely doubled over a 22-year span.
In contrast, in the past 10 years income growth has sped up substantially, as seen in the slightly more than three-fold increase of this aggregate between 2002 and 2012.
First, between 1980 and 2010 operating surplus as a percentage of GDP increased in the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
For the region as a whole, the operating surplus increased from an annual average of 43% during the 1980s to an annual average of 47% in For the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, the available information covers a limited number of years and countries and varies over time; accordingly, the statistics that are available are not homogeneous.
Statistics available for the countries of the region for 1980-2010 were compiled, seeking country comparability to the extent possible.
For each period, the average annual share of each of the components was calculated, as was the regional average, based on the simple average of figures for individual countries.
The period under review was divided into three subperiods as a means to identify the changes which occurred.
This subdivision took into account the available information in terms of number of countries and years, as well as the fact that 1990 and 2003 saw significant changes.
While 1990 marked the end of the lost decade and the launch, in many countries of the region, of sweeping economic reforms, 2003 brought the beginning of the rise in international prices of raw materials that fuelled the substantial increase in income in many countries of the region.
Second, the increase in operating surplus as a percentage of GDP is more widespread in the most recent period.
In some countries that are essentially specialized in the production of mining or agricultural commodities (Chile, Peru and Uruguay), the operating surplus as a percentage of GDP, in annual average terms, rose between 4 percentage points and 6 percentage points in 2002-2010 compared with 1990-2002.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, while the average annual operating surplus as a percentage of GDP remained at similar levels in both periods, it is high, at around 54% and 53%, respectively.
Third, the increase in operating surplus as a percentage of GDP in most of these countries was to the detriment of the compensation of employees share, which declined by a similar magnitude between the two periods.
One exception was Honduras, where the rise in the operating surplus share of GDP was at the expense of the net tax share.
Furthermore, burgeoning government resources fed by State-owned enterprise rents and income from soaring natural resource export prices and by higher tax receipts associated with faster growth and improvements in tax legislation and administration (ECLAC, 2013a) made it possible to implement redistributive fiscal policies aimed at offsetting the concentrator effect of the higher operating surplus share of GDP.
These fiscal policies (reflected above all in transfers and other redistributive costs), together with lower labour income concentration as a result of improved labour qualifications that narrowed the income gap attributable to differences in education, helped to reduce income concentration overall ((Lustig, López-Calva and Ortiz-Juárez, 2013).
This was reflected in the decline in income concentration ratios (Gini coefficient) in most of the countries during the past decade In some cases, the increase in government revenues made it possible to reduce the public debt and implement countercyclical policies during the economic crisis of 2008-2009.
Not only did total public debt decline in the span of a few years (between 2003 and 2008), but its composition changed significantly, shifting towards longer maturities, a higher percentage of fixed-rate debt and an increase in the portion held by residents and the percentage in local currency.
Accordingly, since 2010 domestic debt has accounted for a larger share of total public indebtedness than external debt.2 In Costa Rica and Nicaragua, the trend has been different.
In Nicaragua, it rose from 33% to 36% between the two periods.
The operating surplus share of GDP declined by the same magnitude in both countries.
Between that period and 1990-2002, the compensation of employees’ share of GDP expanded from an annual average of 37% to an annual average of 42%, while the operating surplus share shrank from an annual average of 54% to an annual average of 44% per cent.
The larger decline of the latter aggregate was reflected in a similar increase in the net tax share of total income.
The terms of trade contribution to disposable income surged in most of the countries Analyzing how improving terms of trade contribute to GDP growth poses two challenges.
Conceptually, faster growth associated with improving terms of trade in Latin America and the Caribbean since 2003 contrasts with the focus in the past on the negative impact of deteriorating terms of trade on long-term growth when the deterioration is prolonged, and, especially, when the terms of trade are volatile (Blattman, Hwang and Williamson, 2003).
A prolonged improvement in the terms of trade can, however, spur an increase in income and savings.
On the one hand, favourable export price trends entail the risk (owing to exchange-rate appreciation) that the additional savings generated by higher disposable income will continue to be invested in the sector that generated them, thus reinforcing the existing pattern of specialization instead of diversification and industrialization (Palma, 2013).
On the other hand, increasing export concentration in natural resources makes a country’s terms of trade more volatile and acts as a drag on long-term growth.
There is evidence that this has happened in Latin America and the Caribbean as a result of the surge in China’s demand for raw materials (Fung, Garcia-Herrero and Nigrinis, 2013).
Greater specialization in natural resources, then, produces contradictory effects.3 One reason why it is hard to reach clear conclusions about the probable impact of the so-called Dutch disease on growth could be that the benefits of commodity-based wealth more than offset the costs of greater export concentration (World Bank, 2012).
Despite the deteriorating primary balance from 2008 on, the debt ratio has been rather consistent.
This public debt trend has been more characteristic of the countries of South America, because most of the countries of Central America and the Caribbean still have high levels of public debt as a percentage of GDP.
Some studies suggest that lasting terms-of-trade improvements can have a positive impact on growth (Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 2004).
But there is also evidence that specialization in commodity production can be a factor in a slow-growth path (Sala-i-Martin, 1997).
Accordingly, changes in the terms of trade are not taken into account either.
The macroeconomic aggregates of the countries of the region, as measured by ECLAC in current and constant prices, include gross national disposable income in dollar terms.
While the academic discussion as to whether national income should be in gross or net terms continues, ECLAC calculates it in gross terms because most of the countries do not estimate consumption of fixed capital.
The findings for Latin America as a whole show the negative terms of trade contribution and the loss of labour productivity during the 1980s as a result of low commodity prices and the sharp contraction during the period (a scenario that reversed somewhat in the 1990s).
Nearly a third (29%) of this increase can be attributed to the terms of trade impact; the rest is due to increases in labour productivity and the labour participation rate (see figure II.2).
Unlike the previous period (1990-2002), nor was the contribution of net current transfers (most of which relate to remittances from emigrants) significant in these countries between 2003 and 2011, with the exception of Honduras and Nicaragua (see figure II.3).
A first approach to the topic suggests that there is a positive correlation between the growth of per capita gross national disposable income (arising from increasing terms of trade) and a higher national made it possible to fund the increase in investment and thus in the stock of capital, with the resulting increase in production capacity.
The relationship between consumption and gains in per capita gross disposable national income associated with changes in the terms of trade is positive only during 2003-2009, and it is influenced by the negative-to-positive shift in the public consumption ratio owing to the sharp increase in tax revenues as a result of improved terms of trade and expanding economic activity.
As tax revenues increased thanks to the jump in income associated with booming international prices for commodities exported by the countries of the region and burgeoning economic activity, public expenditure in a number of countries rose.
Accordingly, the contribution of public consumption to growth remained relatively constant, in annual average terms, between 2002 and 2012.
In the 1980s, the contribution of investment to growth was very negative.
It turned positive between 1990 and 2002, when it reached its highest level for the period.
Although investment surged between 2003 and 2008, its contribution to growth in annual average terms fell in comparison with the previous period because consumption was a significant driver of regional GDP growth during those years.
It continued to ebb in 2009-2012, albeit with significant differences between countries, largely as a result of plummeting investment in 2009.
Investment patterns between 1980 and 2012 show that volatility has tended to be higher during contractions because that is when financial constraints on investment have been tighter (Fanelli, 2008).
Third, since the 1990s the contribution of net exports to growth has been, with some exceptions, persistently negative.
This attribute of the impact of regional aggregate demand is one of the main differences between growth in Latin America and growth in Asia (De la Torre and others, 2013).
The negative contribution of net exports to GDP growth was more marked in the countries of South America, and, in average annual terms, it heightened between 2009 and 2012.
The trend in Mexico and the countries of Central America and the Caribbean differed somewhat in that the contribution of net exports to GDP growth (while negative in 2003-2008) was positive in 2009-2012 owing in part to the significant contraction of imports in 2009.
In short, economic growth in Latin America and the Caribbean has been associated primarily with the expansion of domestic demand and, to a greater extent, with the expansion of private consumption.
The contribution to growth made by the other components of aggregate demand (investment, public consumption and net exports) has been subject to slower growth and/or greater volatility and has therefore been limited and uneven; this has kept the region from pursuing a relatively high, stable and sustained growth path.
Greater trade openness coincided with a growing (net) export component of GDP On the macroeconomic front there is ample empirical literature showing mixed findings on the link between trade and growth.
These studies usually focus on the correlation between a measure of international integration or trade openness and GDP or per capita income growth.
In the 1990s, several empirical studies concluded that economies that were period following the Washington Consensus new studies criticized those earlier ones for using unsuitable indicators of openness (some highly correlated with other variables that affect growth), for underestimating geographical factors and for being inconclusive in determining causation (Rodríguez and Rodrik, 2000).
The degree of openness to international trade can be measured from different perspectives.
Expressed as the export and import share of GDP, the trade openness of Latin America and the Caribbean increased from 23% in 1980 and the other countries of South America have lower levels of openness according to this measure, although the indicator has increased significantly since 1980 (see figure II.6.A).
The data in figure II.6.B show that average tariffs in Latin America declined significantly over the past decade but remain significantly above the world average.
Tariffs came down in all of the subregions, especially so in Mexico.
However, this indicator does not take account of non-tariff barriers, which can also affect the external trade of an economy.
Lastly, the relative importance of foreign trade can also be measured in terms of the weight of the export sector in the economy, expressed as the export share of GDP.
This indicator does not take account of the fact that imported inputs make up part of export value, so a better way to gauge the contribution of the export sector is to subtract import content from net exports.7 Accordingly, net exports from Latin America (excluding import content) increased (see figure II.7).
During the period between 1990 and 2010, net exports from Latin America rose at an annual average pace of share of export GDP in total GDP, the export sector’s contribution to economic growth was on average one-fifth of the non-export GDP contribution.
However, because of its greater share of the total, non-export GDP contributed slightly more to growth during 2000-2010.
The pattern is the same in the subregions, with net exports rising faster in the first period and being more of a factor in GDP growth in the second.
Calculations for five countries of the region that have input-output matrices showed that the GDP share of gross and net exports, respectively, is 15% and 13% E.
There was a positive correlation between capacity use and investment The relationship between economic growth and investment has been extensively discussed in the literature.
From a long-term perspective, economic theory suggests that capital accumulation and technical progress, together with population growth, labour force qualifications and, according to certain approaches (such as the one taken by ECLAC), production structure characteristics play a fundamental role in achieving a certain level of activity.
On the other hand, the empirical literature confirms that investment is necessary for growth, although it is not the only relevant factor.
Sala-i-Martin (1997) used sound estimation methods to identify investment as positively correlated to growth.
Real exchange rate distortions and the spread between the official exchange rate and the informal market rate have also been identified as negatively correlated with growth.
Recent studies look at the impact of public investment and foreign direct investment on growth and assign a positive impact to both (Toulaboe, Terry and Johansen, 2009; Cullison, 1993; Bukhari, Ali and Saddaqat, 2007).
Over the long term, investment is essential for growth, mainly because it impacts supply and helps define the economic structure.
In addition to making it possible to expand production capacity, investment is a good way to incorporate technical progress that will subsequently boost capital productivity and, in turn, growth.
Investment is also a vehicle for structural change, since it reallocates resources towards more dynamic sectors of the economy and consolidates production linkages; both factors spark gains in efficiency, productivity and systemic competitiveness of the economic structure.
Public investment in infrastructure is special in that it complements private investment by generating the externalities needed to make private projects profitable.
The lack of adequate infrastructure limits the growth of private investment and biases it in favour of enclave sectors (that is, sectors that have limited linkages to the rest of the economy).
From a short- and medium-term perspective, the level of economic activity and the pace of growth are viewed as the outcome of levels of aggregate demand, key relative prices and supply constraints.
Investment spurs aggregate demand (multiplier effect) and has a lot to do with the level of investment —especially the kind that has a high impact on employment.
Owing to the nature of long-term investment decisions, profitability and growth expectations are very high-impact factors.
For this reason, good current performance in a framework of sustainable growth (in other words, economic performance that is not subject to marked and prolonged imbalances) helps generate positive expectations that favour present decisions on future investments and enhance the growth path.
In the case of Latin America, there is evidence of a direct correlation between the degree of installed capacity utilization and investment growth, taking the gap between actual GDP and estimated potential GDP as a proxy variable for idle installed capacity (ECLAC, 2010, p. 68; Ffrench Davis, 2010).
For just two countries (Ecuador and the (Plurinational State of Bolivia) no significant correlation was found between investment and the output gap (see table II.4).9 This suggests justification for aggregate demand management policies aimed at ensuring that it helps an economy operate close to the production frontier, thus promoting (private) investment.
The differences between correlation coefficients (which are higher in Argentina and Mexico and lower in Brazil and Peru) point to the existence of other determinants of investment and the need to tailor aggregate demand management to the specific circumstances of each country.
However, a number of empirical studies suggest that in the short to medium term the causalities between economic growth and investment can be mutual (Blomström, Lipsey and Zehjan, 1993; Peltonen, Sousa and Vansteenkiste, 2011; Cheung, Dooley and Sushko, 2012).
Increasing investment, then, helps boost economic activity by means of a positive impact on demand.
In turn, economic growth spurs investment by reducing idle capacity and improving expectations of future profitability.
There has been a positive correlation between growth and investment The causal relationship between growth and investment is a subject of discussion in the literature.
The findings are not conclusive and depend a good deal on the period under review, the subject economy and considerations such as the number of lags and the estimation method.
Beyond the theoretical relationship between the two variables, these exercises are hampered by the fact that, ex post, the relation between these variables falls within national accounting identity relationships, which poses problems of simultaneity between variables and makes it difficult to prove the existence of causalities in either direction.
The correlations between GDP growth rate and regional investment rates were also calculated, taking into account all available observations, that is, including all years and all countries.
The same exercise was conducted to calculate the correlations between GDP growth rates and public and private investment rates, as well as the correlations between GDP growth rate and construction and machinery and equipment investment rates.
The exercise was conducted for 18 countries, which were included depending on data availability.
Haiti and the English- and Dutchspeaking countries of the Caribbean were not included because the requisite information was not available.
For a number of countries the available data do not cover the entire period from 1980 to 2010, but they were included taking into account the information available.
In the analysis set out in table II.5 it can be seen that, in the great majority of the countries and the region as a whole, GDP growth rate was positively and significantly correlated with the investment rate in the subsequent period.
In the case of Brazil, the correlation between the two variables, although not statistically significant, was positive.
In this regard, the empirical evidence suggests that an increase in present economic activity has a positive impact on the investment rate in the subsequent period.
The findings are consistent with the hypothesis that investment in the subject period responded to expectations of future growth based on present performance and changes in installed capacity utilization and in aggregate demand, that is to say, an essentially short-term approach prevailed.
This finding is important because, with GDP growth positively and significantly correlated with the investment rate in the subsequent period, declining activity levels had a negative impact on the levels of investment and growth in subsequent periods.
First, the number of cases in which the correlations are statistically significant is far lower than for total investment.
The correlation between GDP growth rate in t and public investment rate in t-1 is significant only for some countries; the correlation coefficient has mixed signs.
This may be due to the fact that in countries where the sign is negative, the increase in public investment took place in a context of low sustainability of public finances, so higher spending would have led to fiscal imbalances whose subsequent correction negatively impacted the GDP growth rate.
In turn, in the few cases where the correlation between GDP growth rate and public investment rate in t and t+1 is significant, the sign is positive.
Second, the findings for private investment are quite similar to those for total investment.
GDP growth rate was positively and significantly correlated with the private investment rate for the subsequent period in a large number of countries and for the region as a whole.
This indicates that an increase in this type of investment would primarily be due to elements linked to aggregate demand, trends in expectations and the utilization of installed capacity).
However, for the region as a whole the correlations between GDP growth rate and construction investment rates in the same period and the subsequent period are positive and significant.
Accordingly, in a substantial number of countries and in the region as a whole GDP growth rate was positively and significantly correlated with the machinery and equipment investment rate for the same period and, more broadly, the subsequent period (see table II.7).
GDP growth tended to have a positive impact on investment (accelerator effect) In view of the findings and bearing in mind the constraints described, the next step was to look for causality relationships (in Granger’s sense) between GDP growth rate and investment rate.
For presentation purposes, the value in the vertical axis of the figures corresponds to 1-p value.
The higher this value, the higher the probability of rejecting the null hypothesis.
Two null hypotheses were tested: Null hypothesis 1: the investment rate (in Granger’s sense) does not cause the GDP growth rate.
Rejection of null hypothesis 1 can be interpreted to mean that changes in the investment rate precede changes in the GDP growth rate.
Null hypothesis 2: the GDP growth rate (in Granger’s sense) does not cause the investment rate.
Rejection of null hypothesis 2 can be interpreted to mean that changes in the GDP growth rate precede changes in the investment rate.
According to the findings, in general null hypothesis 1 cannot be rejected but null hypothesis 2 can, confirming the findings of the correlation tests.
This provides evidence that changes in GDP growth rate preceded and were positively correlated with changes in the investment rate during the period under review.
For Argentina, Costa Rica and Panama, both hypotheses can be rejected, so the causality between the two variables (in Granger’s sense) is two-way.
For Brazil, the findings make it possible to reject null hypothesis 1 but not null hypothesis 2, which would seem to indicate that, contrary to what occurs in most of the other countries, in Brazil changes in the investment rate precede changes in the GDP growth rate.
This would seem to mean that there is no causality between the two variables.
However, the value of 1-p value is greater in the case of null hypothesis 1, so for Mexico it is more likely that changes in the investment rate precede changes in the GDP growth rate rather than the other way round.
Nor was it possible to reject either of the hypotheses in the cases of Chile, Ecuador and Guatemala, although in these three countries the value of 1-p value is higher in null hypothesis 1 than in null hypothesis 2.
Accordingly, it is more likely that a change in the GDP growth rate precedes changes in investment rates.
In the first case (see figure II.9), in most of the countries neither of the null hypotheses could be rejected.
In contrast, in the second case (see figure II.10) null hypothesis 2 can be rejected in a significant number of countries.
The findings therefore lead to a conclusion similar to the one for the overall investment rate: that the GDP growth rate precedes the private investment rate.
Causality between GDP growth rate and the construction investment rate is two-way in a number of countries.
And while GDP growth rate precedes the construction investment rate in a larger number of countries, the causality is inverse in a substantial number of countries.
In countries where the findings are significant, null hypothesis 2 can be rejected.
This would seem to indicate that changes in the GDP growth rate precede changes in the machinery and equipment investment rate.
Exceptions to this are Argentina and Colombia, where the findings show that causality is two-way.
The findings suggest that in the period under review, rising investment rates have in most cases been linked to aggregate demand pressures (expectations of demand growth or an effective increase in demand).
At the regional level, aggregate demand trends and their drivers provide some insight into this outcome.
The increase in external demand has been mainly due to higher demand for commodities and energy products.12 And domestic demand has grown largely on the strength of steadily rising household consumption in response to improving labour market indicators (falling unemployment, higher employment rates and rising real wages) and stepped-up bank lending to families.
Another factor behind the surge in household consumption is the substantial expansion of the consumption base in most of the countries as poverty recedes.
This is not a minor factor, because consumption propensity in population segments that gain access to goods and services consumption is very high (generally, equal or close to 1), so rising family income translates almost entirely into higher consumption.13 Between 2002 and 2011 the poverty rate in Latin America and the Caribbean dropped from 43.9% to 29.4%.
While poverty in the region remains high and bringing it down is one of the region’s major challenges, this 14.4 percentage-point decrease in a 10-year span is substantial (ECLAC, 2013b).
The expansion of the consumption base owing to this set of factors has therefore been one of the key drivers of rising investment in the commerce sector in a number of the economies of Latin America.
Conclusions The rise in income in Latin America and the Caribbean gathered momentum over the past decade as the operating surplus share rose at the expense, in most countries, of the compensation of employees share.
However, in a number of countries of the region the rising operating surplus share pushed public savings up as government revenues climbed thanks to booming international raw materials prices.
This enabled these countries to implement redistributive public policies aimed at partially offsetting the concentrator effect of the higher operating surplus share.
The terms of trade contribution to income growth changed throughout the period reviewed.
This contribution was negative during the 1980s (as was labour productivity’s contribution), but it partially recovered during the 1990s and increased significantly from 2004, especially in economies that are more specialized in the production and export of raw materials.
Income growth fuelled a surge in regional domestic demand in the past decade, with consumption being the component of demand that contributed the most to growth.
The three main drivers here were a stronger contribution of public consumption, procyclical changes in investment and the persistent negative contribution of exports net of imports.
In fact, the contribution to non-export GDP growth was somewhat larger in the past decade than in the previous period.
Lastly, an examination of 16 countries of Latin America yields evidence of a negative correlation between the GDP gap and the growth of investment in the region.
And the analysis of the correlations between GDP growth rate and investment rate makes it possible to conclude that GDP growth rate is correlated positively and significantly with the investment rate in the subsequent period.
The findings of a causality analysis (in Granger’s sense) indicate that changes in the GDP growth rate precede changes in investment rates.
The findings suggest that throughout the period under review, increases in the investment rate have been linked to aggregate demand pressures and that the accelerator effect —i.e. where investment rises a result of accelerating GDP growth— has been crucial.
While for the vast majority of countries, there are no statistics on gross fixed capital formation by investment target sector, partial data from the countries themselves and information from other sources make it possible to estimate that in commodity producing and exporting countries the largest investment share has gone to projects related to mining and the energy sector.
In addition, a simple correlation exercise between the total investment ratio and the level of international raw materials prices shows that in several countries the investment ratio was positively and significantly correlated with the level of international prices for the major commodities in their export basket (Manuelito and Jiménez, 2013).
The connection between rising consumption and the increase in the investment ratio is reflected in the strong correlation between the two variables (Manuelito and Jiménez, 2013).
Dollar, David (1992), “Outward-oriented developing economies really do grow more rapidly: evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985”, Economic Development and Cultural Change, vol. 40, No. 3.
Panagariya, A. (2004), “Miracles and debacles: in defence of trade openness”, World Economy, No. 27.
Johansen (2009), “Foreign direct investment and economic growth in developing countries”, Southwestern Economic Review, Vol. 36, No. 1.
A skilled labour force and capital accumulation as drivers of productivity D.
The main trends have been tertiarization and investment in non-tradable sectors E.
The economic cycle and the negative impact of structural heterogeneity on productivity G.
The limited impact of international trade on productivity in Latin America and the Caribbean Conclusions Introduction This chapter looks at how labour productivity has evolved in the region and analyses how it ties into investment, population growth, workforce skills and structural change, in addition to its link with foreign trade.
The findings of the analysis are summarized at the end of the chapter.
A slow recovery for labour productivity During the 1980s, the combination of slow economic growth and higher employment, owing mainly to population growth and, therefore, driven by supply, triggered a fall in average labour productivity (ECLAC, 2007).
Weak job in Latin America and the Caribbean picked up speed somewhat to an annual rate of 1.1% in the 2000s.
This helped to reduce the gap with Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, although other regions, above all East Asia, posted much stronger growth (ECLAC/ILO, 2012).
By around 2002 few countries (notably Chile and Uruguay, and to a lesser extent Colombia, Costa Rica and Guatemala) recorded average productivity above the level registered in 1980 (Fuentes, Aravena and Iberti, 2013), but in subsequent years that upswing continued to gain momentum and extended to more countries.
The six South American countries with information available accumulated countries in the north of the region with data available, the improvement in labour productivity was less marked, with American countries included in the study had clearly surpassed the 1980 level.
Only in Nicaragua, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mexico, and Paraguay did average labour productivity fall short of the levels recorded in 1980.
Heterogeneous patterns in labour productivity Despite the modest increase in average productivity for the region as a whole, there are still major differences in productivity levels between the countries of the region (see figure III.1).
Kaldewei, “Empleo, crecimiento sostenible e igualdad” Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), 2013, unpublished. a Data from 2011. b Data from 2010. c Data from 2009. (Thousands of dollars at constant 2005 prices) The countries with the highest levels of labour productivity include some Caribbean countries with service-based economies, such as the Bahamas and Barbados.
At the other end of the spectrum are countries such as Nicaragua and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
Productivity trends have also differed between industries; two sectors in particular have shown opposite patterns (see figure III.2).
Agriculture saw the largest rise in output per worker as the absolute number of persons employed in the sector expanded by very little.
This is attributable to the relative contraction of the peasant economy caused by restricted access to production resources, which encourages the rural population, especially young people, to change to a different economic activity or to migrate abroad.
Furthermore, in several countries changes in the agri-business sector contributed to a substantial increase in production, often export-oriented, and led to significant increases in output per worker (Sotomayor, Rodríguez and Rodrigues, 2011).
Output per worker fell markedly in the mining sector, owing, principally, to the sharp rise in the number of people employed in the industry possibly on account of high mineral prices in recent years.
These prices have brought into production, sometimes informally, marginal deposits that would be unprofitable if prices were lower.
The lower productivity of these mines has brought down the sector’s average labour productivity.1 Output per worker in most other industries recorded moderate increases until 2009 and resumed this uptrend in 2010 or 2011.
For the period as a whole, noteworthy productivity increases were seen in basic services (public utilities and transport, storage and communications), commerce, restaurants and hotels, and manufacturing.
Labour productivity patterns in the construction sector were similar to those in the manufacturing industry until 2008, and only started to pick up once more in 2011.
Productivity in community, social and personal services did not change much, while the financial services, real estate and business services sector posted the weakest figures, after mining.2 C.
A skilled labour force and capital accumulation as drivers of productivity Improvements in labour productivity have depended primarily on the skills level of the labour force, and on investment and the technical progress it brings.
Formal education levels are key for explaining workforce contribution to productivity Since labour productivity is measured in constant terms, it does not take into account variations in output that may result from changes in prices, especially for export products.
This is the case for the mining sector, where, while investment might have increased, it has been in lower-grade mines, leading to lower productivity in constant terms but higher productivity in nominal terms owing to rising mineral prices.
The opposite is true for agriculture, where falling prices can result in larger productivity increases at constant prices than at current prices.
Measuring labour productivity in the service sector is limited by the methodological difficulties in determining sectoral output. and economic growth (Buonomo and Yanes, 2013).
While it has been difficult to quantify the contribution of education to economic growth at the global level,3 figure III.3 establishes a clear positive correlation between education level and per capita GDP for the countries of the region.
This obviously does not imply a simple causal relationship, but rather the existence of virtuous and vicious circles, since higher education levels help to boost economic growth and wealthier societies have more possibilities for investing in education, which in turn drives education levels up faster.
The opposite is also true: lower education levels are associated with lower levels of wealth.
In the 1980s, the proportion of the urban average of four countries) (ECLAC, 2000).
Between around 1990 and around 2010, the average number of years of Consequently, the changes in labour productivity in the region —especially the decline in the 1980s and virtual stagnation in the 1990s in many countries— cannot be attributed to changes (improvements) in labour force skill levels.
Rather, it can be assumed that for a large part of the past decades this growing potential was underutilized.
One explanation for the decline in labour productivity during the 1980s and its subsequent weak recovery is the pattern in gross capital formation per worker, combined with other causes relating to the characteristics of labour supply.
Galor (2011) discusses the historical impact of differences in human capital formation on the dynamics of development and economic growth.
Raising the average education level of the labour force in the region is not without its challenges, especially with regard to coverage, quality and segmentation.
See, in this connection, Buonomo and Yanes (2013). using growth models developed by N.
To test the hypothesis that there is a direct relationship between investment and the incorporation of technical progress, reflected in changes in labour productivity, an empirical analysis was conducted using vector autoregressive (VAR) models including investment in machinery and equipment, GDP and labour productivity, measured as GDP per hour worked.
Investment, through Keynesian multipliers, was expected to affect production, which, in turn, would have an impact on labour productivity.
VAR models were estimated for these three variables using annual data for 16 Latin American countries for the period 1980-2011.8 The variance decomposition shows what proportion of the change in a particular variable is attributable to or the result of a simultaneous change in all the variables in the model.
See Fuentes, Aravena and Iberti (2013) for the sources of the data and details of the methodology. errors in relation to labour productivity can be explained by investment (as high as around 80% for Argentina and Peru), while for six countries that percentage is only about 10%.
This suggests that investment may be one of the main sources of change in labour productivity, which, in turn, can be used as an indicator of technological progress due to investment.
However, it also suggests that total investment in machinery and equipment, on the whole, is not necessarily the main driver of productivity in all countries, and that other factors could have a fundamental role, such as investment composition and target sector, demographic trends, and the long-term uptrend in women’s labour-market participation and the resulting boost to labour supply.
It is noteworthy that several of the countries where investment is not one of the main factors determining labour productivity have high population growth, such as the Plurinational State of Bolivia and some Central American countries.
The main trends have been tertiarization and investment in non-tradable sectors Agriculture, manufacturing and the construction sector saw their share of GDP fall during the past three decades for the region as a whole.
In the case of manufacturing and construction, this pattern was in stark contrast to previous decades (see figure III.6).
First, the increase in investment in the industrial sector, especially in Argentina and Brazil, in the second period helped to boost overall productivity as a result of the comparatively higher productivity of the industrial sector.
Second, most of the increase in investment was in the non-tradable sectors, as well as in the sectors producing tradable commodities (mining and agriculture).
On the one hand, investment grew more in non-tradable sectors, particularly public administration (excluding construction) and transport, there being no evidence it particularly targeted areas, such as infrastructure (included in the construction sector in this case), that might have contributed to boosting productivity in the economy as a whole.
In Argentina agriculture ranked second among the tradable sectors as an investment destination.
This highlights the importance of commodity exports (copper in Chile, iron ore in Brazil, gold and silver in Mexico and soybeans in Argentina), driven by booming prices.
The tradable sectors were defined as mining, agriculture and industry; all others were considered non-tradable.
This breakdown between the two sectors does not reflect the fact that some services have become tradable, although non-tradable components still make up most of the tertiary sector.
Most investment is, therefore, biased towards sectors (non-tradable ones) that are more labour-intensive —albeit partly because of a pattern of employment that is governed more by labour supply than by demand— and have lower productivity levels, as well as tradable primary sectors (mining and agriculture) that have variable productivity levels.
The region’s countries would therefore seem to be experiencing, to varying degrees, symptoms of Dutch disease, with not enough investment aimed at diversifying tradable production.
Thus, although investment has increased, its contribution to structural change, defined as the reallocation of resources from low-productivity sectors (mostly non-tradable) to high-productivity sectors (tradable) has been positive but relatively limited in these countries.
This confirms that not only the amount, but also the mix and destination of investment, have influenced productivity in the region.
Structural change as a weak source of labour productivity10 Steadily rising labour productivity is key to economic and social development.
Achieving such an increase, which can also be measured in terms of growth in per capita GDP, requires constant transformation of the production structure by means of two simultaneous processes.
First, it calls for structural change, understood as the reallocation of resources from low-productivity sectors —which typically generate low-quality jobs— to intermediate- and high-productivity sectors.
Second, the productivity of individual branches of activity can receive a boost from increased physical or human capital, technological change, more efficient use of the resources allocated to the sector, the closure of unproductive businesses and the creation of new, more productive ones.
Investment plays a fundamental role in both processes, as do workforce skill levels.
Labour productivity levels and trends must be interpreted against the backdrop of the region’s structural heterogeneity, which is reflected in the differing productivity levels seen within each sector.
Changes in productivity associated with the reallocation of resources within each sector may be impeded by this structural heterogeneity.
They may be the result of a decrease in allocated resources or reflect improvements in a single group of companies in the sector.
The rise of the Asian economies in recent decades has been characterized by the simultaneous reallocation of resources between sectors (structural change) and within each sector (McMillan and Rodrik, 2011).
The first term on the right is the sum of changes in productivity in individual sectors, weighted for their employment share at the beginning of the subject period.
The second term represents the contribution of structural change to the overall variation in productivity, calculated as the sum of the changes in the different sectors’ shares in overall employment, weighted by the corresponding productivity.12 This section is based largely on Weller and Kaldewei (2013).
If a sector loses part of its share in the employment structure to a sector with higher average productivity, aggregate productivity increases, and vice versa. in the Andean countries and a positive one in Central America and the Caribbean.
In the semi-industrialized countries (particularly Latin American countries, but also Turkey and South Africa) the positive contribution exceeded that seen in China.
The aim was to differentiate between one subperiod with generally modest and highly volatile economic growth and another with stronger and —with the exception of 2009— relatively stable growth rates.13 Despite using the same methodology as McMillan and Rodrik (2011), the results differ somewhat owing to the differences in the periods covered and the larger number of countries included.
Dividing the study period into two subperiods makes it possible to weight each one more accurately, using the production structure See Weller and Kaldewei (2013) for detailed country-level results.
On average for these countries, the contribution to labour productivity during this period (as shown by the shaded rectangle) from both the reallocation of resources between sectors (structural change) and the reallocation of resources within each sector, was minimal (0.1 of a percentage point per year).
Furthermore, no directly or inversely proportional relationship was found between each contribution.
In the subsequent period (2002-2011), both contributions, while still highly dispersed, were larger than in the prior period.
However, the contribution of resource reallocation among sectors (structural change) continued to be significantly weaker, as shown by the red part of the bar for each country.
These bars, except for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mexico and Peru, are substantially smaller for all of the countries.
The slow growth in productivity during this period was attributable largely to agriculture and mining, which saw significant productivity gains but no job creation.
The median rate for the countries is also 0.2%; the weighted average shows no growth.
In this period more countries (Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, Argentina (urban areas), Ecuador, Barbados, Brazil, Colombia, Honduras and Chile) posted significant increases in the contributions of both processes, as shown by the overall annual growth rate of labour productivity.
At the other extreme, only in Nicaragua did both processes have a negative impact.
In contrast with the previous period, only four countries experienced negative structural change and in only six countries (three of which were Caribbean) did the changes resulting from the reallocation of resources within individual sectors have a negative impact.
In the second period (2003-2010), a number of branches of activity (including some in the tertiary sector) grew thanks to a combination of increased employment and labour productivity, and the productivity of each branch of activity rose across the board for the region as a whole, with the exception of mining.
In several mining or hydrocarbonproducing countries (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Mexico and Peru), this sector’s contribution to overall productivity was negative, possibly because less-productive fields were brought on line as international prices soared.
Most job creation continued to take place in the sectors producing mostly non-tradable goods and services, and there was a reversal of the commerce sector productivity downtrend seen in the previous period.
Commerce and basic services, by combining productivity gains with a significant increase in employment, were among the main sources of productivity growth resulting from structural change, which serves as further evidence that this process took place predominantly in non-tradable sectors.
In these economies, the medium- and high-productivity sectors tend to account for a larger share of employment, reflecting the greater dynamism and weight of labour demand in the labour market as a whole.
This reduces the pressure exerted on low-productivity sectors by excess labour supply and thus leads to narrower income gaps (see figure III.11).
For example, the electricity, gas and water sector is very homogeneous due to capital and technology requirements, while commerce is very heterogeneous. cycle (Ocampo, Rada and Taylor, 2009).
In marked contrast with developed economies and owing particularly to the labour supply situation, in periods of sluggish economic growth and low labour demand those markets have tended to adjust by reducing labour productivity rather than lowering employment (ECLAC/ILO, 2012).
This structural heterogeneity has had an adverse effect both on structural change, since the employment driven by supply-side pressures tends to be concentrated in low-productivity sectors, and on productivity gains within individual sectors, since the higher employment in each branch of activity reduces its marginal productivity, which in turn is detrimental to its average productivity.
Specifically, under conditions of sluggish economic growth and low labour demand, income gaps between these two segments tend to widen, while the opposite takes place during periods of increased demand for labour.
Thus, for the region as a whole, it is estimated that between 1980 and 1989 real average earnings fell by 7% in medium and large companies, by 30% in small companies and in the public sector, and by 42% in the informal sector (PREALC, 1990).
First, the emergence of new, more productive posts gives access to better jobs to workers who were previously employed in low-productivity sectors and, second, it reduces income gaps between the two segments.19 G.
The limited impact of international trade on productivity in Latin America and the Caribbean 1.
The positive distributive impact is more pronounced if, as occurred during much of the 2000s, demand covers all skill levels.
Intra-industry trade is measured using the Grubel-Lloyd index, which shows the extent to which trade between two countries takes place between similar sectors.
In contrast to inter-industry trade, growth in intra-industry trade is based on economies of scale and product differentiation.
Both of these elements help to explain trade patterns within the framework of the new theory of international trade that emerged in the 1980s, another factor of which is the recognition of the existence of markets characterized by imperfect competition (Durán Lima and Álvarez, 2011).
A weakness of the index is its sensitivity to the level of aggregation of trade flows: the likelihood of identifying intra-industry trade flows increases in line with the level of aggregation of the trade classification used and the number of countries.
The higher degree of intra-industry trade with the United States is mainly attributable to the extension of its value chains into Mexico and Central America.
However, the benefits of this trade are limited because they are based primarily on the maquila sector, where the vast majority of inputs are imported rather than produced domestically.
As to partners from outside the region, the highest proportion of intra-industry trade is with the United States, followed by the European Union (see table III.2).21 The region’s trade with developing Asia is essentially inter-industrial.
Given that this was precisely the area of trade that saw the most growth in the last decade, the level of intra-industry trade in the region declined overall, suggesting that the contribution of trade to productivity, from a business perspective, was not significant.
The incipient participation of Latin America and the Caribbean in international value chains Another determinant of the impact of trade on growth is the degree to which it is part of a regional or international value chain.
The involvement of a company, sector or country in a chain can benefit productivity, for example, by establishing more stable demand or access to new technologies, business practices or financing.
Latin America and the Caribbean has had little involvement in international production chains, as shown by an indicator used to measure the fragmentation of production processes.
This indicator measures the share of intermediate products (including accessories, components, parts and pieces) in trade, which account for more than half of world trade (excluding fuel) (WTO/IDE-JETRO, 2011).
In the region, intermediate goods accounted for only 10% of exports to destinations both within and outside the region in 2011.
This figure is surprising, given that the share of manufacturing is much higher for intraregional exports than for extraregional exports.
However, the large share of trade in manufactures within the region does not translate into a higher share of intermediate goods in intraregional trade.
This suggests that the manufactured goods traded between the countries of the region are made almost entirely in the exporting country.
In other regions, intermediate goods accounted for a substantially higher proportion of intraregional exports in 2011: 30% in the Association of Southeast Asian Nations, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea (ASEAN +3), 19% in the countries of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and 17% in the European Union (ECLAC, 2012).
Notwithstanding the above, there are marked differences between the countries in the region with respect to their production chains with other countries.
These differences can be shown using the vertical integration indicator, which measures the proportion of exports composed of imported intermediate inputs (see figure III.12).
In 2007 the most integrated countries were Costa Rica and Nicaragua, and the least integrated were the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Peru.
The vertical integration of Latin America as a region declined between 2004 and 2007.
The impact of participation in value chains on inclusive growth depends crucially on the value-added generated in the link in which the company, sector or country is operating and the potential for upgrading to links with higher productivity and skill levels.
There are significant differences between the sectors, for example, in the development of links, opportunities for acquiring technological knowledge (especially regarding cutting-edge technologies), options for upgrading from relatively low levels of technology, and leveraging opportunities based on training of the workforce.
Productivity as a driver, not a consequence, of exports On the basis of the finding that the productivity of exporting firms is higher than that of other companies, further research has been conducted to ascertain the direction of causality between productivity and exports (Melitz, 2003).
In general, most studies mention at least one of the following two hypotheses to explain this finding: (i) self-selection and (ii) “learning by doing”.
However, these general observations hide considerable heterogeneity since drawing comparisons between countries and even between studies on the same country is difficult, since the methodologies of the studies vary widely.
It was also found that, even when measuring using the same model, the productivity gains made by exporters vary considerably between countries.
In addition, more open countries with more effective governments report higher productivity levels.
Countries’ level of development does not appear to have an impact on the relationship between exports and firms’ productivity levels.
Another line of research has analysed the entry and exit of firms, which has shown systematic differences in the productivity, size and other economic characteristics of firms that are entering and those that are exiting the market (Dunne, Roberts and Samuelson, 1989).
Wagner (2011) reviewed the literature available between 2006 and 2011 and concluded that the probability of survival is higher for exporters, even controlling for the company’s size, age and productivity.
In the same connection, a variety of studies have shown that the size of firms is inherently linked to survival in foreign markets (Arauzo-Carod and Manjón-Antolín, 2008) and that smaller firms are more likely to exit the market (Grilli, Piva and Rossi Lamastra, 2010).
Conclusions The most important determinant of labour productivity in the region has been investment, which, along with the increasingly skilled labour force and the demographic dividend, has helped to boost productivity in most countries since 2003.
This contrasts with the fall in labour productivity during the 1980s, when investment slumped, and the lacklustre performance of the 1990s, when investment saw only limited growth.
Although the favourable external environment since 2003 has fostered savings and investment (see chapter II), thus contributing to increased productivity, exchange-rate appreciation, among other variables, has promoted higher growth of investment in non-tradable sectors (as well as in commodity-exporting sectors), which generally register lower levels of labour productivity than tradable sectors.
As a result, despite the contribution of investment to labour productivity, productivity increases were lower than they would have been if there had been greater diversification in tradable production.
In turn, the predominantly inter-industry nature of the specialization pattern between Latin America and China, which has been reinforced by the increased trade flows between them, has been less favourable towards the processes of intra-industry specialization that have characterized other trade flows, thus making less of a contribution to learning and technological development.
Furthermore, the participation of Latin American and Caribbean countries in international value chains, especially in the most intensive stages in terms of productivity and learning, has been limited and, in general, exports reflect the region’s performance in terms of productivity instead of contributing to it.
This highlights the central role of investment and skilled labour, as well as the need for explicit and ambitious policies in these areas as a means of boosting productivity and promoting the diversification of investment and production, especially in tradable sectors.
Ensuring the sectoral focus of investment is key, grounded in consultation processes that involve the public and private sectors in each country with a view to building a shared vision and making long-term institutional arrangements to reduce the degree of uncertainty facing decision-making in the field of investment.
Another essential factor is introducing macroeconomic policies that ensure appropriate relative prices, financing, complementary public investment and demand management, as well as social, microeconomic and sectoral policies to lend sustainability to the process.
Samuelson (1989), “Plant turnover and gross employment flows in the U.S. manufacturing sector”, Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 7, No. 1.
Rossi Lamastra (2010), “Firm dissolution in high-tech sectors: an analysis of closure and M&A”, Economics Letters, vol. 109.
Johansen, L. (1959), “Substitution versus fixed production coefficients in the theory of economic growth: a synthesis”, Econometrica, No. 27.
Melitz, Marc J. (2003), “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity“, Econometrica, vol. 71, No. 6.
Wagner, Joachim (2011), “Exports, imports and firm survival: first evidence for manufacturing enterprises in Germany“, IZA Discussion Papers, No. 5924, Institute for the Study of Labor (IZA). (2007), “Entry, exit and productivity.
The contribution of fiscal policy to growth and equality has gradually strengthened B.
Monetary and exchange-rate policy have gradually come to play a greater role in reducing nominal and real volatility C.
Strategic aspects of macroeconomic policy for boosting growth Introduction The main macroeconomic policies implemented over the past three decades are outlined below, highlighting how they have been enhanced over time.
In the case of fiscal policy, the discussion centres on how this enhancement contributed to growth in relation to public debt, countercyclical action, social spending and public investment.
For monetary and exchange-rate policy, the focus is on the policy contribution to nominal stability (inflation and interest rate reduction) and the enhancement that comes with institutional changes and flexible exchange-rate management; these changes helped to broaden the scope for monetary policy to play a countercyclical role during the global financial crisis of 2008-2009.
This chapter also looks at the build-up of international reserves as the monetary authorities responded to growing international financial volatility.
The contribution of fiscal policy to growth and equality has gradually strengthened One of the critical aspects of the relationship between fiscal policy and growth lies in how it impacts the level and composition of public expenditure and income in the macroeconomic cycle as well as the medium-term GDP trend.
This relationship is explored below, taking account of how debt, countercyclical fiscal policy, social spending and public investment affect growth. 1.
Debt reduction has helped stabilize economic agents’ expectations In past decades, the public-debt-to-GDP ratio has been a recurring financial constraint on economic growth in Latin America and the Caribbean as well as in other regions.
It was also a drag on growth expectations and added to the cost of financing public and private investment projects.
Favouring the tradable sectors would mean prioritizing exportable and importable sectors over non-tradable ones.
But the former include producers of natural resources that, because they have absolute advantages and generate rents, would not need policy instruments to encourage investment in them in comparison with investment in other sectors.
That is why this proposal is for fostering investment in the tradable sectors in a more limited sense that takes account of their forward and backward linkages and does not include natural resource-producing sectors.
External public debt as a percentage of GDP was already growing in the 1970s (see figure IV.1), but in the 1980s weak economic growth, capital flight and the resulting sharp depreciation of national currencies in a framework of dollarized liabilities swelled fiscal deficits and increased the public debt burden.
Between 1980 and 1989 external public debt rose from less than 35% of GDP to a high of 75% of GDP on average and surpassed 100% of GDP in Ecuador, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
In the 1990s, the external public debt burden eased substantially as economic growth returned, albeit unevenly, and debt was renegotiated or restructured.
In other cases, exchange rates that held steady or appreciated in real terms were also a factor, temporarily reducing external liabilities in national currency.
But these scenarios were unsustainable, and, as explained in chapter I, new crises were set off.
Not only did the level of public debt come down in the span of a few years (between 2003 and 2007).
Its make-up changed significantly, too, shifting to longer terms, a higher percentage of fixed-rate debt, a greater share held by residents and a larger portion denominated in local currency (since 2010, domestic debt has accounted for a larger share of total public debt than external debt has).
Several countries issued external debt denominated in local currency, thus overcoming the so-called “original sin” that worked against this option.
The external component shrank to values in the area of 16% of GDP.
As noted above, much of this decline took place in 20032007; despite the deteriorating primary balance after 2008, the debt ratio has held fairly steady since then (32% of GDP in 2012) because the difference between interest rates and the rate of economic growth (the snowball effect) has been insignificant, except in some countries of Central America and the Caribbean.
A breakdown of the factors behind public debt trends shows high exposure to the risk of rising exchange rates until 2002.
The drop in debt as a percentage of GDP starting in 2003 was due to the reversal of that trend, but also to positive primary balances, economic growth and lower external and domestic interest rates (see figure IV.2).
This can be seen in the widespread upgrade of sovereign risk ratings, showing that public debt reduction has been a factor in stabilizing economic actors’ expectations.
In such exercises, it is common to find a high residual (the so-called stock-flow adjustment) indicating discrepancies between fiscal balances and changes in public debt.
Among the potential reasons are coverage, accounting methods, the impact of asset and liability valuation and debt renegotiation or outright debt relief.
And some countries of South America need to further reduce debt levels in the medium term because public debt interest rates remain high.
Thanks to this set of factors, the region still has room (albeit constrained in a few cases) for facing adverse scenarios, mainly because public debt is below pre-crisis levels. 2.
Progress has been made in implementing countercyclical policies during contractions of the economic cycle Ideally, fiscal policies should promote the generation of surpluses during booms and allow deficits during recessions, with a fixed average balance throughout the economic cycle, so as to reduce the negative impact of public-spending procyclicality on economic growth.
Fiscal accounts in the region have tended to fluctuate widely due to their sensitivity to swings in GDP and commodity prices (Martner, González and Podestá, 2013).
The primary cyclical factors have been gaps between effective growth and the trend growth rate, as well as raw materials prices.
Wide (recessionary) gaps between effective growth and the growth trend rate like the ones that opened in the early 2000s in a number of countries (Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Dominican Republic, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Mexico, Panama and Uruguay) increased the cyclical component of the fiscal balance and added three or more percentage points to the cyclical deficit.
If the effective fiscal balance is corrected for these two factors, it will reflect decisions made by the authority more than cycle impacts.
It will therefore be possible to identify the fiscal policy stance in certain periods by comparing variations in the cyclically-adjusted fiscal balance with the GDP gap.
When the GDP gap is positive, a procyclical policy is characterized by a decrease in the cyclically-adjusted fiscal balance, which indicates an expansionary discretionary measure.
By the same token, if the gap is negative (that is, GDP is in a recessionary phase that is below trend), a procyclical policy is characterized by a rising cyclically-adjusted fiscal balance, indicating a contractionary discretionary policy.
In Martner (2007), an examination of 267 episodes in 18 countries in Latin America during prevalence of procyclical policies, it also shows that this is not always the case: a number of countries of the region implemented restrictive measures during booms, in the 1990s, and after 2003.
Furthermore, there has been some degree of asymmetry, since with positive GDP gaps there has been a trend towards procyclicality.
This would indicate that it would have been more difficult to apply countercyclical policies during upswings.
Another way of examining fiscal policy stance is to compare growth in public spending and in GDP.
In the 2000s, income in Latin America (including tax receipts, see ECLAC, 2013) grew faster than GDP and expenditure.
This improved the debt position and boosted expectations (see Martner, González and Podestá, 2013), thus mitigating the assessment.
The global financial crisis of 2008-2009 shrank the fiscal space in a number of countries, forcing them to slow the pace of expansion of public expenditure despite the recession.
Between 2010 and 2012 the average gap was much smaller because some of these countries withdrew some fiscal stimuli.
While there were wide swings in the rate of growth of public expenditure when compared with the GDP growth rate, the speed-up in 2012 is likely associated with a countercyclical response to the adverse impacts of the global economic crisis.
Spending fell off in Dominica, Grenada and Jamaica, where fiscal space was constrained by the substantial public debt burden on their economies.
The overall pattern between 2010 and 2012 seems to have little correlation with where any given economy is in the cycle; public expenditure growth rates are highly volatile, although, on average, they increased more in the 13 countries of the Caribbean than in the 20 countries of Latin America.
Public investment has partially recovered During the 1980s and 1990s, fiscal consolidation in the region translated into a sharp decline in public investment, with its negative impact on medium-term economic growth.
This has been the most procyclical component of spending, as has been documented in many studies (see, for example, Akitoby and others, 2006).
In terms of composition, capital expenditure has gained considerable space and risen at the same pace that public debt interest payments have fallen (see figure IV.3).
In Latin America, the simple average of public capital expenditure for 20 countries increased from 2% of GDP to 4.6% of GDP between 1990 and 2012.
In practice it has been easier to cut back on investment during downswings.
Public investment in infrastructure fell from 3.1% of GDP to close to 1.0% of GDP in the 1980s (see Perroti and Sánchez, 2011) and remained at those levels until 2008.
But capital expenditure has fallen —sharply in some cases— in a number of Caribbean countries that had a high public investment ratio in early 2000.
While these practices represent a real and potentially very attractive alternative for reducing the bias against public investment, they entail future fiscal obligations that must be part of a careful assessment of the costs, benefits and risks of each initiative in this area. 4.
Social spending and fiscal policy support for growth with equality has strengthened Fiscal policy has substantial potential for making a significant contribution to the growth and improved distribution of nearly 63% in 2010-2011 (see ECLAC, 2012a).
In recent years, fiscal policies have given sustainability to public social have made social spending a macroeconomic priority.
As a result, they were more agile in their countercyclical response to the 2009 crisis, showing that such spending is a cornerstone of policies aimed at macroeconomic stabilization and poverty reduction. including Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba and Uruguay.
There is striking heterogeneity in spending on education, which can be explained in part by the varying public/ private split in delivering education services at different levels.
In certain cases, however, it is also due to insufficient capacity on the part of the State to generate the necessary resources.
The impact of direct public sector spending on education, with changes in preschool and primary and secondary school coverage, has been substantial in the countries of the region (see OECD, 2012).
Empirical evidence (González and Martner, 2012) shows that, in addition to the direct impact of fiscal measures and the macroeconomic cycle, the quality of education and an array of institutional variables have played a significant role in the recent improvements in income distribution in Latin America.
Particular attention should be paid to human capital indicators: by any measure, they are key in determining the distribution of disposable income.
From the point of view of the tax system, the redistributive effect of fiscal action depends directly on the level, composition and degree of progressivity of each component of taxes and transfers.
These three dimensions shape the picture in each country (Joumard, Pisu and Bloch, 2012).
Thus, in Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, disposable-income inequality after taxes and transfers is 30% lower than marketon average.
OECD countries with more unequal primary distribution tend to redistribute more through fiscal action.
Direct transfers reduce income dispersion more than taxes do: three quarters of the decrease in inequality between market income and disposable income can be attributed to transfers, and the rest to taxes.
In the countries of Latin America, direct fiscal action only slightly improves the markedly unequal distribution of personal income.
Lustig, Pessino and Scott (2012) found that in six countries the decrease in inequality attributable to transfers is 2% on average, although the impact is significant in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay (on the order that income per adult appears to be the main driver of improving distribution between 2002 and 2011 in 10 countries of the region.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua, changes in labour income were behind 90% or more of the rise in total income per adult.
The limited impact of fiscal action on income distribution is related, on the one hand, to a lower comparative level of cash transfers, and, on the other hand, to limited direct tax receipts.
The latter represent approximately half of indirect taxes, which have a regressive impact on income distribution.
Accordingly, the still inadequate contribution of personal income tax despite recent progress, coupled with the small property and wealth tax take, leads to tax systems that do very little to help bring Gini coefficients down.
In short, the redistribution of disposable income via taxes has been practically non-existent in the region.
Most of the countries of the region saw a marked increase in the tax burden in relation to GDP (especially from 2002 on) together with major structural changes such as the consolidation of the value added tax, a significant improvement in the share of direct taxes and the roll-back of taxes on international trade.
Contributing to this increase in the tax burden, albeit with variations from country to country, were a favourable macroeconomic context, steadily rising commodity prices, new taxes such as financial transaction taxes and minimum taxes, cuts in exemptions and deductions, improved tax administration and rising consumption.
A recent change has been the increase in the portion of receipts coming from income taxes, consolidating towards greater tax system progressivity in the region over the past decade.
As a percentage of GDP, income tax the Caribbean it went from 6.3% of GDP to 7.7% of GDP.
Among the reasons were partial expansion of the base for some taxes on services, implementation of minimum taxes and contributions, improvements in tracking the universe of taxpayers, and, in some countries, the appropriation of additional resources from the production and export of commodities.
There were more personal income tax reform measures in Latin America and the Caribbean in recent years; the tax base was expanded, and taxation was extended to all labour income and capital yields as well as dividends.
Monetary and exchange-rate policy have gradually come to play a greater role in reducing nominal and real volatility The evolution of monetary policy during the past three decades is outlined below, highlighting how it has helped reduce nominal volatility (inflation).
The focus is on how monetary policy has been enhanced, both institutionally and, in many countries, by means of more flexible exchange rate regimes.
This enabled most of the countries of the region to address the impacts of the 2008-2009 global financial crisis using countercyclical monetary policies that complemented the fiscal policies put in place at that time, in order to dampen real economic volatility and thereby promote growth.
Finally, management of international reserves is examined as an increasingly important component of monetary and exchange-rate policy over the past decade and a half, spotlighting the build-up of international reserves in the region in response to international financial volatility. 1.
During the 1980s and part of the 1990s, the region tended to have fixed exchange-rate regimes that were often used as an exchange-rate anchor as part of a macroeconomic stabilization plan.
Accordingly, monetary policy during the 1980s acted countercyclically and did not help to reduce nominal inflation volatility, nominal exchange-rate volatility or real GDP volatility.
Inflation declined throughout the region during the second half of the 1990s, not only on average but also in recorded inflation rates in excess of 20% during the first half of the 1990s; during the second half of the decade just all of the countries.
The latter was reflected in the gradual adoption by most of the region’s central banks of low and stable inflation as a priority goal (or even, in some cases, the only goal), either implicitly or explicitly, to the point of setting official inflation rate targets in the 1990s and early 2000s.
Such a change of focus towards achieving low and stable inflation crystallized in central bank charter reforms in the region, independence from political pressure and, among other reforms, imposed restrictions on the central banks’ ability to fund public deficits.
In addition to this shift in monetary policy orientation, external factors such as the emergence of China and India in global markets helped bring down prices for manufactures and thus mitigated external inflationary pressures.
As inflation rates in the region fell, so did bank lending rates, as shown in figure IV.6.
Lending rates in the region in most of the countries of the region encouraged the growth of domestic consumption and investment demand, particularly from 2003 on (see chapter II).
The 1980s and part of the 1990s were also marked by high volatility of real exchange rates against the United States dollar, as shown in figure IV.7, in particular in South America and Mexico.
This volatility was largely a reflection of regular devaluations in countries with fixed exchange rates.
As inflation was gradually controlled and exchange-rate regimes became more flexible, average volatility declined over time.
Monetary policy helped to reduce real economic growth volatility in the face of the international financial crisis The global financial crisis of 2008-2009, which is regarded as the most severe since the Great Depression, sent economic activity, world trade and international financial flows into a tailspin.
The expected impact on Latin America and the Caribbean was a reversal of the growth trend that had begun in 2003.
Many countries of the region did indeed see a contraction of economic activity as a result of the crisis.
For that reason, the authorities of Latin America and the Caribbean started to aim their actions at keeping the decline in external aggregate demand and the drop in international financial flows from triggering a contraction of economic activity that would, as in the past, be prolonged and cause a sharp increase in marginalization and poverty.
Monetary authorities began by reversing the monetary policy rate increases made since mid-20087 and encouraging the expansion of credit so that shrinking financial flows and negative expectations would not collapse payment and credit systems and thus the aggregate domestic demand that would be crucial for a recovery.
During this period, policy rates were lowered quickly, especially in those economies that were more integrated into international financial markets.
Between July 2008 and December 2009, monetary policy rates were revised downwards in 16 of the region’s economies, were held unchanged in 11 economies and were increased in only 3.
The most significant contractions were in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile and Colombia where the changes were of more than 600 basis points.
The intention behind these changes in monetary-policy reference rates was not reflected, in the short run, in monetary aggregate growth because negative expectations as to aggregate demand translated into slower growth in monetary aggregates, such as credit..
However, in the course of 2010 efforts to advance expansionary monetary policy finally managed to reverse the trend; aggregates began to grow in some cases and to grow faster in others.8 Similarly, lending (especially by private institutions) slowed considerably and in some cases even contracted.
In response to the private credit crunch, channeling resources through the public banking system was often used by the governments of the region as a tool for mitigating the adverse effects of the crisis.
In Brazil, the cutback in private bank lending was offset by injecting funds into public banks (so that they could increase the supply of credit to the public) and, in some cases, into other financial institutions that might be facing temporary liquidity constraints.
Growing concerns about the international liquidity squeeze and its impact on the stability of the region’s financial systems gave rise to a number of measures to provide funds to national financial institutions in order to keep the lack of liquidity from creating solvency problems. 4.
Financial instability fed the build-up of international reserves After the sudden stops associated with the crisis of the late 1990s and early 2000s9 and as developing countries became more integrated into international capital markets, it became clear that the emerging economies were highly exposed to sudden reversals of capital flows.
The lack of liquidity during these episodes, and the lack of appropriate mechanisms for providing it, brought to light one of the major weaknesses of the international financial system (ECLAC, 2012b).
The response was a build-up of international reserves in Latin America and the Caribbean.
This self-insurance mechanism makes it less necessary for countries to turn to private financial markets in times of high costs10 that come with international financial market illiquidity or heightened perceived risk of certain categories of assets.
The conditionality imposed by the international financial institutions that provide assistance, along with delays in the disbursement of funds, also spurred the countries into pursuing a policy of build-up of reserves (ECLAC, 2012b).
However, the pattern in Central America differs from the one seen in South America because the terms of trade improved significantly in the latter.
Monetary policy rate increases were in response to heightening inflationary pressures that by the third quarter of 2008 had driven food and energy prices up.
The drop in external aggregate demand in the region and the decline in financial flows, including remittances from workers abroad, sparked greater currency volatility in the region, especially in those economies that were more integrated into international financial markets.
In some cases this led to central bank intervention in currency markets and therefore led to a temporary decrease in international reserves.
At the extreme, where access to borrowing is rationed or closed off outright, the cost increases to infinity.
While there are many empirical studies that have tested for a relationship between exchange-rate volatility and investment and growth, there are no conclusive findings (Eichengreen, 2007).
However, others such as Aghion and others (2009) have found that in countries with underdeveloped financial systems, excessive exchange-rate volatility may negatively impact growth, particularly if the shocks that hit the economy are financial.
The solid line tracks exchange-rate volatility measured by the exchange-rate coefficient of variation; the bars show the annual accumulation of reserves in response to central bank intervention.
As can be seen in the figure, exchange-rate volatility in economies with flexible exchange rates increased significantly following the financial crisis.
The coefficient of variation of the nominal exchange rate in these economies rose significantly between July 2008 and October 2009.
After that, this indicator declined but remained above the pre-crisis level, showing that exchange-rate volatility persisted.
The region had been building up reserves long before the crisis, but the pace accelerated markedly in its wake.
In most of the countries of the region, improving terms of trade, larger inflows of short-term capital and soaring remittances and foreign direct investment boosted international reserves (ECLAC, 2011).
However, after the crisis and in response to greater international financial market volatility, many central banks in the region opted for a more aggressive international reserve build-up policy in order to reduce the volatility of their currencies and prevent these fluctuations from having a long-term impact on the production capacity of the economy, especially in the tradable goods-producing sectors.
A third argument, which is currently the subject of considerable debate, refers to the build-up of reserves to influence the real exchange rate level.
Changes in the average real effective exchange rate in 21 countries of the region before and after the international financial crisis can be seen in figure IV.11 and show that exchange-rate appreciation has on average been more marked in the countries of South America than in Mexico and Central America.
Despite growing recognition that short-term capital can be managed and disincentivized by means of limits, taxes or macroprudential policies, the malleability of financial flows and their ability to escape regulations after the latter have been in effect for a certain period of time work against the effectiveness of these regulations in the long term.
So, the costs of building up reserves include the risk that the value of central-bank assets measured in domestic currency will change over time along with the exchange rate.
Another factor to take into account is the cost arising from the spread between low rates of return on external assets and the typically higher interest rates paid on debt issued by the central bank to sterilize the monetary effect of the purchase of foreign currency,13 as well as the additional cost of any remunerated reserve requirements.
For a review of how sterilization works and the channels through which it can impact exchange rates, see Taylor and Sarno (2001).
For central banks, monetary expansion owing to payouts on sterilization instruments is an additional monetary policy constraint when it is a major source of monetary base expansion.
Strategic aspects of macroeconomic policy for boosting growth The gradual strengthening of fiscal, monetary and exchange-rate policies in recent decades suggests that their contribution to greater growth with equality will be decisive in the future.
There are four reasons why macroeconomic policy should give priority attention to encouraging investment in Latin America and the Caribbean and thereby help to create the conditions for diversifying the production structure.
First is a likely future scenario in which high prices for the region’s export commodities contribute significantly less to disposable income.
In many countries, especially in South America, improving terms of trade accounted for one third or more of the rise in national disposable income during the past decade, as documented in chapter II.
However, this could be coming to an end as the commodity price super-cycle winds down.
It is therefore necessary to diversify the production structure with a focus on environmental sustainability and less dependence on the exploitation of natural resources and, especially, on identifying and promoting new axes of growth in an uncertain environment where coordinating public and private investment can lead to significant externalities.
Second, slowing GDP growth in the region in recent years, and the increasing dependence of growth on expanding consumption in the face of a weakening investment contribution and the negative contribution of net exports (exports minus imports) does not help reduce external vulnerability, and this casts doubts on the sustainability of GDP growth over the long term.
It is therefore necessary to give priority to increasing investment, especially in the tradable sectors that produce goods and services and in infrastructure sectors that contribute to systemic competitiveness.
Thirdly, investment is one of the key channels for the technological progress and increased productivity needed for growth and competitiveness in the long term.
Lastly, as noted in chapter III, over the past few years investment in non-tradable (lower-productivity) sectors has increased more than in tradable (higher-productivity) sectors in a number of countries.
This trend needs to be reversed in order to promote a more balanced and productive process in the future.
Set out below are macroeconomic strategy guidelines for promoting investment, especially in tradable sectors with greater linkages, as part of socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable economic growth. 1.
Boosting private investment generally requires a set of economic, institutional and social conditions that make for an attractive outlook for long-term returns; this could be provided by social compacts for investment.
In addition to complementary investments in infrastructure (energy, transport and telecommunications) and other public policies, inclusive growth makes socially sustainable investment possible.
On the labour front, this approach involves building labour relations at different levels (ranging from individual businesses to the national level) that recognize the legitimate divergence of opinions and interests and provide forums for dialogue and negotiation, respecting the rights of internationally recognized trade unions.
The institutional environment must also include rules and procedures to facilitate the management and resolution of social, environmental and other conflicts that, if not resolved, could delay or prevent the execution of private investment projects. 2.
Promoting investment in the short term calls for stabilizing, countercyclical macroeconomic policies The institutional setting for monetary and fiscal policies geared towards the steady growth of aggregate demand is crucial because it has been shown to be a determining factor in investment and growth in Latin America and the Caribbean.
From a macroeconomic viewpoint, the positive correlation between investment and installed capacity utilization and, in particular, evidence of an accelerator effect that makes investment depend on the past GDP growth path (see chapter II), justify the implementation of countercyclical fiscal and monetary policies, recognizing the greater impact potential of the former and the greater operational flexibility of the latter.
Such policies should help reduce idle capacity and economic growth volatility (booms and busts)15 that, by leading to sudden downturns in GDP growth, discourage investment.
These considerations give rise to three macroeconomic policy orientations in regard to the correlation between investment and growth.
While these are discussed here separately, in practice they are very much interlinked and are part of the main goal: higher rates of growth.
First, since idle capacity disincentivizes investment, it is necessary to achieve and maintain levels of activity that are consistent with high, sustainable use of production capacities.
In these conditions, aggregate demand can expand and remain high without compromising internal and external balances.
However, this involves so many targets that meeting them requires, more than a single type of instrument, adopting a set of fiscal, monetary, exchange-rate, financial (domestic and external) and labour-market policies aimed in that direction in a manner that is consistent and sustained over time.
Depending on the situation in each country, there is more than one way to shape a macroeconomic policy framework that is conducive to these results.
The economies of Latin America and the Caribbean have a long history of domestic and external turmoil set off by economic, social or political factors, extreme events or natural disasters, causing wide fluctuations and declines in activity that have negatively impacted investment and, therefore, growth.
Thus, not only is it important to achieve a high degree of use of production capacity —it needs to be maintained by implementing temporary countercyclical policies to smooth the fluctuations resulting from such shocks.
Doing so calls for creating space or scope for action on the fiscal, monetary, exchange-rate and financial (both internal and external) fronts that allows for countercyclical measures without disrupting the trends of the key variables that determine long-term growth or working against short- and medium-term policy consistency or credibility.
As in the previous case, this space can be created through a range of instruments, such as the build-up of savings, international reserves and mechanisms for accessing liquidity or emergency funding.
Thirdly, beyond the fluctuations caused by temporary shocks, macroeconomic policy should, by promoting internal and external balances that are sustainable over time, help to prevent crises that lead to recessions, slow growth and idle production capacity.
Over the past few decades, Latin America and the Caribbean has gone through crises sparked by the long-term unsustainability of finances (public and private, domestic and external) together with a serious loss of competitiveness by the export goods- and services-producing and import-substitution sectors (tradable goods and services).
This does not just mean ensuring nominal stability in order to control inflation, but ensuring real stability as well, so as to contribute to stable growth of demand and output.
Preventing crises and avoiding the accumulation of imbalances that increase vulnerabilities is, then, a third key aspect for sustaining growth over the long term.
In the current context of financial globalization, this goal is facing new challenges.
In addition to fiscal, monetary and exchange-rate policies seeking public finance solvency and price and external-balance stability, macroprudential policy and financial regulation have gained greater importance, especially in the wake of the 2008-2009 global financial crisis.
As that and other crises have shown, private actors (particularly the financial markets) are prone to herd behaviour, with episodes of euphoria followed by panics, perceived procyclicality of individual risks and underestimation, if not complete ignorance, of systemic risks.
Several policy issues run through the three aspects discussed above, but it is useful to highlight the role that avoiding excessive deviation of the real exchange rate from its long-term trend plays in all of them.
This is key for investment, not only in terms of avoiding imbalances that give rise to crises, but also because the scale of domestic markets (population size and per capita income) in certain cases is still too low to serve as an incentive for private investment.
This underlines the importance of export or tradable-sector development (which includes exportable and importable goods and services) as a source of growth —a factor in which the real exchange rate is a key variable, as highlighted in the next section.
As noted, the region has tapped domestic savings for financing investment to a lesser extent than other countries, and this was a source of vulnerability for quite some time.
Experience after 2003 shows that a higher domestic savings rate was among the sources of the region’s resilience in the face of the financial crisis.
For these savings to materialize there must be fiscal and financial development policies pointing in that direction.
Implementing countercyclical and crisis-prevention policies is not without its challenges and has substantial institutional requirements.
By the early 2000s legal initiatives aimed at strengthening accountability and transparency in public finances (generically labeled as fiscal rules) were already gaining momentum.
But these first-generation rules had a procyclical bias: targets that are based on a balanced budget (zero deficit) or on a reduction of public debt regardless of macroeconomic conditions exacerbate boom-and-bust cycles and thus hamper relatively stable and sustainable growth.
Just setting annual deficit or public-debt ceilings is not enough to achieve stabilization.
Second-generation macro-fiscal rules also require substantial institutional development, especially the ability to transform sensitivity analyses and prospective scenarios into budgeting procedures so as to ensure appropriate multi-year budget programming, clauses of exception and explicit treatment of transitory income.
Institutions and their capacities, reflected in monetary and fiscal authority credibility, should help ease the pressure for procyclical policies during cycle upswings and make it easier to withdraw stimulus policies when they are no longer justified.
Such weaknesses have surfaced in a number of countries in recent years.
In turn, the free operation of automatic stabilizers during downturns can lead to significant temporary deficits that will need to be addressed.
The corollary of the structural rules is, then, the need for a comprehensive funding strategy that will mitigate any spending restrictions stemming from cyclical deficits and avoid the unsustainable expansion of expenditure in the face of temporary surpluses.
The countries of the region have taken three approaches in this regard.
First, several countries have developed strategies for integration into international financial markets that go beyond temporary deficit funding to seek a stable presence in those markets so it will be easier to tap them.
Secondly, developing domestic financial markets as a source of funding for both the private and the public sector has become very important for the region.
While consolidating explicit savings mechanisms during booms has proven to be complex, some stabilization funds linked to fiscal responsibility legislation (as in Chile and Peru) have become the tools of choice for public-sector funding strategies.
While the greater prudence and response capacity seen in recent years have been based on a certain consensus, in most countries of the region there is still no robust institutional framework for fiscal and monetary policy coordination.
The challenge, then, is to design strategies to internalize cycle impacts on public finances and to ensure effective coordination of the set of countercyclical policies.
In order to be effective, countercyclical policies must encompass actions in multiple areas, such as monetary, macroprudential, labour (including wage policies) and production policies.
There are at least two perverse dynamics that can considerably amplify macroeconomic fluctuations and act as a drag on investment.
At the low point of the cycle, lack of coordination can lead to higher-than-necessary interest rates, which in turn amplifies fiscal imbalances both on the primary balance side and on the interest payment side and jeopardizes public-sector solvency by feeding expectations of higher interest rates and disincentivizing private investment.
Subsequent correction of the public accounts imbalance can turn a recession into a depression, with very negative consequences for unemployment.
The institutional framework has yet to be reformed in a way that encourages monetary and fiscal policy coordination.
This issue is under discussion in a number of countries and should not only be part of the investment promotion agenda but also be linked to the challenge of ensuring stable, sustained growth in general. 3.
Any relative price bias against investment in tradable sectors resulting from overvalued exchange rates that are difficult to adjust provides justification for correcting this problem with other policy instruments, without contractionary impacts.18 The contribution of exchange-rate policy to promoting investment in the tradable sectors has both potential and limits.
On the one hand, over the past few years exchange-rate volatility has increased in many countries and likely heightened uncertainty for investments that could have taken place in the tradable sectors.
Setting up financial mechanisms that allow exchange-rate hedges and intervening in the market to reduce exchange-rate volatility without necessarily changing its trend are practices that several countries have already implemented and could be strengthened.
In the eurozone, what is called “internal devaluation” has been used for this purpose, but by turning to contractionary fiscal policies that favour spending cuts.
Most countries have adopted flexible exchange-rate regimes that, while subject to a certain degree of managed flexibility or dirty floats, have made it possible to relatively successfully weather external shocks.
Facilitating the investment of pension fund or of sovereign wealth funds abroad can help ease appreciation pressure.
But the quasi-fiscal costs (especially, the opportunity cost of reserve build-up and sterilization costs) of warding off currency appreciation in high international financial liquidity scenarios can be high, and the malleability of financial flows makes it difficult to achieve full and lasting control over them in a globalized economy.
This context warrants other policy actions that, through a variety of incentives, can encourage investment in the tradable sectors in particular.
High international liquidity and liquidity constraints alike call for a new pro-investment fiscal policy agenda (Fanelli, 2013) geared above all towards promoting investment in the higher-productivity sectors (goods and services), especially the tradable sectors, and fostering diversification.
First, public or public-private investment should focus on infrastructure (complementary non-tradable sector) with the aim of reducing the logistical and transport costs associated with the delivery of tradable goods and services, thereby seeking to counteract what could be an unfavourable relative price ratio stemming from significant exchange-rate misalignments (especially, real appreciation).
This could be enhanced by a region-wide financial policy orientation, so that national, regional and international public banks focus their resources on addressing this need, based on the general recognition that there are marked gaps and lags in this area (Estevadeordal and others, 2010).
Having a more adequate infrastructure and, in general, sound institutional arrangements conducive to resolving conflicts and setting rules that reduce investment risk while ensuring stability and social inclusion would be part of a suitable business climate for sustained investing.
An unfavourable business climate drives up the cost of other investment attraction mechanisms (such as exemptions and subsidies) needed to offset it.
In a broader sense, moreover, the business climate hinges on perceptions of future demand and democratic and institutional stability, which can be achieved only by means of inclusive, socially sustainable growth providing quality public goods, an appropriate distribution of disposable income and environmental sustainability.
This means that a high rate of long-term economic growth in Latin America and the Caribbean requires a diversified, efficient and cost-competitive energy matrix in which renewable energy plays a relevant role (see box IV.1).
As noted in chapter II, improvements in education, government collection of rents generated by the exploitation of natural resources, as well as the reallocation of public expenditure, have helped decrease final income concentration despite a higher operating surplus and so are seen as public policy musts for growth to be inclusive and socially sustainable.
Energy consumption in Latin America and the Caribbean grew at a similar but slower respectively, in the 1980s, 1990s and 2000s (see figure 2).
The global weighted average of price elasticities of energy demand is negative and statistically significant but relatively low (-0.206).
This price elasticity is even lower in studies available for Latin America (even with a particularly small value for the entire region, at -0.014).d This low price elasticity of demand reflects low substitutibility and the lack of technology innovation and diffusion in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Accordingly, the ability to influence the consumption path with the price mechanism alone is still limited in the region and should therefore be complemented by regulations and other kinds of public policies.
So, in order to maintain a high pace of growth, Latin America and the Caribbean needs to build, soon, an adequate and flexible energy supply at reasonable prices that, however, reflects all of its negative externalities.
In this context, the major challenges lie in building an adequate energy supply in specific regions or sectors such as mining, air pollution in urban areas and CO2 emissions and their impacts on climate change.
These challenges are substantial and should be addressed very soon in view of the high correlation between per capita income, per capita energy consumption and per capita emissions and the fact that infrastructure built today will most likely be in use for the next 40 years (ECLAC, 2010; Hepburn and Stern, 2008).
Building this clean and efficient energy matrix therefore entails an international strategic competitive advantage and a need for economic growth, but it is also essential for sustainable development.
It includes the demand for energy by the industrial, transport, agriculture, housing, commerce and public services sectors as well as non-energy use.
The review of the international literature on long-term income elasticity yielded 414 estimations (ranging from -6.48 to 8.01; simple average = 0.81). d The meta-analysis for price elasticity includes a total of 417 long-term estimations (ranging from -4.2 to 4.16; simple average = -0.398).
A meta-analysis dividing OECD member countries (excluding Chile and Mexico) and non-OECD countries showed that income elasticity for OECD countries is 0.63 and for non-OECD countries it is 0.78.
Price elasticity is -0.15 for OECD countries and -0.11 for non-OECD countries.
Second, subsidies could be channelled to promote complementarities (externalities) between private investment projects as well as structural change associated with diversified investments in the tradable sectors with greater linkages, taking account of their environmental sustainability.
Given the risk of introducing incentives by means of tax exemptions —a scenario of extreme fiscal opacity with no clear outcomes that already exists in several countries of the region (Jiménez and Podestá, 2009)— a good alternative would be selective, fixed-term subsidies targeting investments with greater externalities and ensuring regular assessments of the impact of such measures.
This transition to a new generation of subsidy-dependent incentives and loans will ensure greater transparency because the expenditures involved will have to be included in each annual government budget and will be easier to evaluate, as is the case in most OECD countries.
Third, improving public capacities to implement these measures and coordinate public and private investment is as important as designing appropriate incentives.
In addition to the risk of not ensuring proper coordination among the public institutions charged with promoting structural change, there are other hazards: establishing incentives that can be diverted and manipulate eligibility rules; attracting overly risky projects; and using subsidies to encourage investments that would have been carried out without government support.
Addressing these risks and ensuring compliance with criteria (such as environmental standards) that are not always consistent with private returns in the short term require robust institutional coordination, monitoring and evaluation.
Fiscal transparency, which should be extended with particular attention to all subsidies, must play a key role as a deterrent to even the most extreme abuse.
In addition to budget and expenditure oversight by the legislative branch, courts of auditors and comptrollers, social oversight has to be extended as an instrument for citizen participation in the design, monitoring and follow-up of government action, including the use of subsidies and transfers.
Social oversight is a useful tool for preventing corruption and enhancing citizen participation in fiscal matters.
Initiatives in the area of transparency, especially social oversight, in Latin America and the Caribbean have differed in pace and scope and are still very incipient.
Long-term employment policies should include encouraging investment in higher value-added tradable sectors, that is, they should facilitate structural change.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the lack of skilled workers is often cited as a hindrance to better business performance (Weller, 2011).
Investment projects are profitable only to the extent that there is an appropriately qualified labour force.
This is especially crucial in the case of investments involving new technologies; fully leveraging them requires new skills and know-how that would be particularly important for structural change involving the reallocation of investment and labour to sectors with greater productivity requirements.
Training poses challenges that are often related to information and communication technologies (ICT), which make up a growing share of many investments.
National systems of vocational education and training must also take account of the needs of small and medium-sized enterprises, which often run into difficulties in finding skilled labour that can block their expansion through new investment.
Aghion, P. and others (2009), “Exchange rate volatility and productivity growth: the role of financial development”, Journal of Monetary Economics, No. 56.
Lee (2008), “Financial versus monetary mercantilism: long-run view of large international reserves hoarding”, World Economy, No. 31.
Estevadeordal, A. and others (2011), “Invertir en integración: Los retornos de la complementariedad entre software y hardware”, Notas Técnicas, No.
Jiménez (2013), “La inversión y el ahorro en América Latina: nuevos rasgos estilizados, requerimientos para el crecimiento y elementos de una estrategia para fortalecer su financiamiento”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
Presbitero (2012), “Public debt and economic growth: is there a causal effect?”, MoFiR Working Paper, No. 65.
Sarno (2001), “Official intervention in the foreign exchange market: is it effective, and, if so, how does it work?”, Social Science Research Network Scholarly Paper, No.
Total net capital income is the balance on the capital and financial accounts plus errors and omissions, plus loans and the use of IMF credit plus exceptional financing.
A currency depreciates in real effective terms when this index rises and appreciates when it falls. b Preliminary figures, weighted by trade in 2011. c Figures as of May. d Simple average of the extraregional real effective exchange rate for 20 countries.
Up to 2009, employed persons who work less than 35 hours per week and wish to work more hours.
In the first series a different sample was used and in the later series different measurements were used. e Employed persons who work less than 48 hours per week and wish to work more hours. f Employed persons wishing to work more than their current job permits.
The increasing concentration of vaccine procurement in higher-income countries is a case in point.
These countries account for a higher proportion of vaccine procurement commitments than of the world’s population.
In fact, the European Union, the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and Japan accounted for 39% of vaccine procurement commitments as of November 2021, despite having only 12.9% of the world’s population.
Moreover, their vaccination rates are above the average for developing and lower-income countries.
The ability to vaccinate the population not only has an immediate effect on pandemic control, but also reduces the likelihood of new strains emerging.
The lower a country’s vaccination rate is, the more it will struggle to control the pandemic and thus to initiate a sustainable and inclusive recovery.
There are also large differences in countries’ response capabilities in terms of fiscal efforts to mitigate the effects of the COVID-19 crisis and stimulate economic and social recovery: these have proved to be much more limited in emerging and developing economies, including those of Latin America and the Caribbean.
The efforts of advanced economies, which have been unprecedented in scale, began with measures to sustain economic activity and mitigate the adverse social effects of the crisis and have continued with new fiscal initiatives aimed at promoting strong and sustainable growth.
According to International Monetary Fund (IMF) figures, the fiscal measures announced by advanced economies totalled about US$ 14.9 trillion for the period between January 2020 and September 2021, while emerging economies had announced measures amounting to about US$ 2.7 trillion.
The response capacity of conventional and unconventional monetary policy has also differed significantly across countries.
While most countries implemented expansionary monetary policies during 2020 via interest rates and the expansion of central bank balance sheets, rising inflation created uncertainty about their ability to sustain these policies.
The balance sheets of the United States Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan and the European Central Bank currently represent about 60% of the GDP of the countries concerned, reflecting their efforts to provide liquidity.
Although the inflationary dynamic has created further pressure for monetary policy rate normalization, the response of developed countries has so far been gradual and cautious, and rates have generally been held at historic lows.
By contrast, emerging and developing countries, including those of Latin America, have begun a more rapid process of policy rate normalization.
Rates have risen in a great many countries, reflecting the asymmetries between the developed and developing world when it comes to dealing with the consequences and costs of inflationary pressures.
These disparities and asymmetries affect not only short-term growth dynamics, but also the ability to sustain growth in the medium term.
In 2022, according to IMF estimates,1 the group of advanced economies is the only one that is expected to return to, and perhaps even exceed, its pre-pandemic growth trajectory.
The other groups of countries will remain on a much lower growth trajectory in the medium term (until 2025) than was projected before the pandemic, highlighting the lasting damage to growth that the pandemic inflicted on these economies. 1 International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Economic Outlook.
Global financial markets performed well in 2021, despite some brief bouts of increased volatility linked not only to the evolution of the pandemic, but also to uncertainty about the inflation outlook and the possibility of monetary stimulus being withdrawn early.
This has increased the likelihood that central banks in developed economies will reduce their monetary stimulus, which may have adverse effects on emerging markets.
A rise in policy rates or a reduction in asset purchases by central banks could generate volatility in financial markets and create difficulties, especially in emerging and developing economies.
To mitigate these risks, monetary policy changes need to be made cautiously and signalled clearly and well in advance.
Emerging and developing countries should also prepare for interest rate increases in advanced economies by extending debt maturities where feasible, thereby reducing their refinancing needs.
Meanwhile, regulators should focus on limiting the build-up of currency mismatches on balance sheets and dealing with increased exchange-rate volatility.
Growth rates in the United States and China, the region’s two main trading partners, are projected to be substantially lower in 2022 than in 2021.
Moreover, intensifying supply shocks due to difficulties in value chains are expected to persist, as are logistical problems and high transport costs.
The monetary and fiscal stimulus programmes that propped up economies and served to reduce the negative impact of the pandemic during 2020 and 2021 are also expected to taper off in 2022.
New variants of COVID-19, such as omicron, are casting a pall over growth dynamics in 2022 and beyond.
The group of developed economies is estimated to have grown by 5.2% in 2021, with the United States expanding by 6%, the eurozone by 5.2%, Japan by 2.4% and the United Kingdom by around 6.8%.
Growth that year in the group of emerging and developing economies is put at 6.4%, led by China with 8.0% and India with 9.5%.
Some emerging subregions, such as the Middle East and North Africa (4.1% growth) and Sub-Saharan Africa (3.7%), were less buoyant.
In 2022, the world economy is expected to grow by an average of 4.9%.
Growth in developed economies is forecast at 4.2%, with the United States expanding by 3.9% and the eurozone by 4.6%.
From the perspective of the Latin American and Caribbean countries, the region’s exports are estimated to have grown by 25% in value in 2021, with export prices rising by 17% and volume by 8%.
Meanwhile, imports are estimated to have grown by 32% in value, the largest increase since 2010, when they rose by the same amount in the aftermath of the global financial crisis.
After collapsing in 2020, the volume of imports is estimated to have risen by 20%, in line with the expansion of both domestic consumption and domestic investment in the region, with import prices also rising, by 12%.
While the favourable evolution of commodity prices in 2021 caused the terms of trade to increase by an estimated average of about 5% in the region, there are differences at the subregional level.
The terms of trade fell by 5% in the Caribbean Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2018 Executive summary 13 (excluding Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago) and by 1% in Central America, partly as a result of the large share of energy in the import baskets of these countries.
Conversely, it was precisely in the group of hydrocarbon-exporting countries that the terms of trade rose the most (15%).
Remittances have remained on an upward trajectory: after increasing by 8% in 2020, they are estimated to have risen by almost 30% in 2021.
They continue to be a very important source of external resources for the countries of the region, particularly Central America, Mexico and some Caribbean countries.
The services deficit worsened in 2021, influenced mainly by a deterioration in the transport and other services account, whose imports increased in line with the rise in goods imports.
The income deficit widened in 2021, meanwhile, mainly owing to higher profit remittances by foreign-owned enterprises in a context of rising commodity prices.
Indeed, debt issuance by the region in international markets continued to rise, with an increase of 12.3% in the first 10 months of 2021 compared to the same period in 2020, although now with a greater role for private debt and slower growth in sovereign issuance.
Non-bank private sector issuance grew by 77%, while sovereign issuance increased by 14%, after being highly dynamic in 2020.
With regard to quarterly growth dynamics in the region, the gradual easing of pandemic containment measures and favourable external conditions translated into increasingly vigorous economic activity, with a slight contraction in the first quarter of 2021 followed by growth that peaked at an average of 16.1% in the second quarter of the year.
This dynamism, which was much stronger than anticipated, was not sustained in the second half of the year, when there was a slowdown.
Private consumption was a key driver, contributing around half of second-quarter growth.
There was also a strong pick-up in investment, in a context of recovering demand and a higher level of construction activity.
On the other hand, while exports grew significantly, the net external sector (exports minus imports) made a negative contribution to output growth, owing to a sharp increase in imports.
From a sectoral perspective, the expansion of economic activity was led by the recovery in the sectors worst affected by the pandemic (construction, retail, manufacturing, and transport and communications), all of which saw a broad-based rise.
All other sectors of economic activity also recovered during the second quarter.
With regard to the dynamics of labour markets during 2021, they slowly recovered from the strong impact of the COVID-19 pandemic.
As of the third quarter of 2021, the regional participation rate was 60.5% and the employment rate was 54.9%, so that both were higher than in the third quarter of 2020 but lower than in the same period of 2019.
The increase in employment exceeded the number of people returning to the 14 Executive summary Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) labour market, so that the open unemployment rate gradually declined.
This indicator trended downward throughout the year and averaged 9.1% for 14 countries in the third quarter of 2021.
However, employment has lagged significantly behind GDP, with new job creation trailing growth.
Moreover, the slow recovery in employment has accentuated inequality between men and women.
In general, women have been returning to the labour market more slowly and struggling more to find employment, which has widened the gender gaps in the regional labour market.
The female participation rate in the third quarter of 2021 was 49.7%, while the male participation rate was 71.5%, 2 percentage points lower than in the same period of 2019.
In 2020, this group of female workers was more affected by job losses than men with the same level of education and than more educated women.
This group also struggled the most to re-enter the labour market during the early months of 2021, and its employment level was 16% lower in the second quarter of 2021 than in the same quarter of 2019.
During 2020, contrary to what usually happens in crises of economic origin, informal employment could not behave countercyclically and thus did not help to mitigate household income losses, with many jobs in the informal segment of the labour market being destroyed.
This has resulted in significant increases in the informality rate, implying that the greater number of employed persons has been associated with lower job quality.
The recovery in employment has been uneven across the different production sectors.
By the second quarter of 2021, employment had almost fully recovered in construction, had partially recovered in retail and remained very depressed in hotel and restaurant-related sectors compared with the second quarter of 2019.
In other sectors, such as manufacturing and community, social and personal services, it partially recovered and remains lower than before the pandemic.
In contrast, employment in agriculture, financial and business services and basic services showed a positive change compared with the second quarter of 2019.
The dynamics of job creation suggest that labour markets will not recover their pre-pandemic performance.
The unemployment rate is expected to be around 9.7% in 2021, so lower than in 2020 (10.3%) but higher Against a backdrop of growing uncertainties about the dynamics of the pandemic, growth, inflation and prolonged negative supply shocks, the global macroeconomic situation is being affected by increasing uncertainties about developed countries’ monetary policy responses.
As a result, the region is expected to face a more challenging external scenario in 2022, with reduced economic dynamism and greater monetary and financial volatility and uncertainty.
In the context of the region’s countries, the macroeconomic environment will also become more uncertain and challenging in 2022, with slower than anticipated economic growth and jobs recovery, stronger inflationary pressures and elevated exchange-rate volatility, in addition to low levels of investment and productivity and high levels of informality, inequality and poverty.
To boost the economic recovery and manage real and nominal macrofinancial risks, it will be necessary to implement coordinated macroeconomic policies and use all the instruments at the authorities’ disposal to appropriately prioritize growth challenges while maintaining monetary and financial stability.
The urgent need to continue implementing Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2018 Executive summary 15 policies in support of economic expansion and decent job creation requires strong linkages between fiscal and monetary policies, as well as sectoral employment policies to boost new job growth.
In 2020, fiscal policy became one of the most important public policy tools for responding to the socioeconomic crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The countries of Latin America announced large fiscal packages of unprecedented scope, averaging 4.6% of GDP, to strengthen public health systems, support families and protect the production structure.
Among the fiscal instruments employed, public spending played a leading role, with a substantial increase in subsidies and current transfers to mitigate the impact of the pandemic on household and business incomes.
These fiscal efforts, however, had a variety of effects on the public accounts, with implications for fiscal policy in 2021 and beyond.
The increase in public spending, in a context of lower tax revenues, resulted in an expansion of fiscal deficits and a substantial increase in public debt.
Despite the key role of fiscal policy in tackling the crisis, the budgets approved for 2021 showed a trend of declining fiscal deficits and stabilization of the public debt trajectory.
This trend is reflected in the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus via a reduction in primary expenditure in a number of countries, partly due to the expiry of pandemic-related emergency programmes.
This dynamic has been most evident in Latin America, where the projected decrease in public spending (mainly due to a reduction in subsidies and current transfers) and the recovery of public revenues (especially tax revenues) will be reflected in lower fiscal deficits.
According to official projections, overall central government deficits will come in at about 5.0% of GDP in 2021, down from 6.9% of GDP in 2020.
However, the level of central government gross public debt is expected to remain high.
In the Caribbean, the recovery in total revenues during 2021 should lead to a reduction in fiscal deficits.
Fiscal deficits are expected to narrow by less in the Caribbean than in Latin America because of a projected increase in total central government outlays, particularly capital spending on projects associated with reconstruction following natural disasters and adverse weather events.
As in Latin America, central governments’ gross public debt is projected to remain high.
The prevailing fiscal situation in the region creates the dilemma of how to maintain a pro-growth fiscal policy that can support the expansion of investment and help narrow social divides, in a context characterized by greater macroeconomic headwinds, less fiscal space and unequal access to financing.
Historical experience shows that these factors should not be allowed to result in a contractionary fiscal policy that undermines the fragile process of economic recovery and neglects the need to increase the region’s low levels of investment and reduce growing social divides.
Fiscal policy must continue to play a central role in mitigating the effects of the pandemic, boosting economic recovery and laying the foundations for sustained and sustainable growth.
This process will require a fiscal sustainability framework focused on strengthening the generation of permanent revenues to finance permanent spending needs.
In a context where public expenditure levels are difficult to maintain, it is essential to adopt a strategic approach to spending focused on programmes with high economic, social and environmental returns that contribute to a shift towards sustainability in the region’s development model.
Public investment, which has been the main adjustment 16 Executive summary Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) variable over the last decade, must be protected so that quality employment-intensive, gender-equitable investments can be made in strategic sectors.
To complement this, the universalization and financial sustainability of social protection systems must be at the heart of fiscal policy going forward.
For a development-oriented expenditure policy to be sustainable, a new generation of tax policies will be needed to strengthen tax revenues and improve their composition.
Nevertheless, the processes involved in modifying tax systems require a medium-term outlook and a broad social and political consensus, especially in the current context.
Short-term measures are therefore important, such as actions to reduce tax evasion, which amounted to US$ 325 billion or 6.1% of regional GDP in 2018, and a review of tax expenditures, which average 3.7% of GDP.
In the medium term, new tax policies should be based on direct taxation with greater vertical equity, on the principle that those who have most should contribute most.
It is important to pursue reforms that consolidate personal and corporate income taxes and extend the scope of wealth and property taxes.
In addition, new green taxes, taxes on the digital economy and taxes on the consumption of unhealthy products could be considered.
Multilateralism, via financing for development, is also necessary to generate the fiscal space that the region’s countries require in the short term to pursue a pro-growth fiscal policy and avoid premature fiscal tightening.
To this end, it is important for developed countries and international financial institutions to support economies suffering from financial constraints, including middle-income economies, so that they can access financing on favourable terms.
One of the main measures taken in 2021 to improve emerging and developing countries’ access to liquidity was the general allocation by IMF in August that year of special drawing rights (SDRs) worth US$ 650 billion.
While the allocation strengthened the international reserve position in all developing regions, in the aggregate its distribution has disproportionately benefited developed countries.
Developing countries, which make greater use of SDRs, received only 35.6% of the total.
In the area of financial and monetary policy, the countries of the region are facing a testing situation in which they must try to reconcile more dynamic economic growth with objectives of domestic price stability and exchange-rate and financial stability.
To avoid costly trade-offs between these objectives, they need to maintain complementarity between monetary, exchange-rate and macroprudential instruments, avoiding disproportionate use of only one instrument.
Combining all the instruments available to the region’s monetary authorities will make it possible to preserve nominal stability and achieve sustainable, inclusive and equalizing growth.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2018 Executive summary 17 A central element that will affect monetary policy dynamics in the region is the evolution of inflation, which has been on an upward trend since the second half of 2020.
While inflation has been rising in all the countries, it is highest in those of South America, where it reached 7.0% in September 2021, up 3.9 percentage points from December 2020.
As in the rest of the world, particular supply and demand factors explain the pick-up in inflation in the region.
Foremost among the supply factors are global trade tensions, disruptions in logistics chains and increasing depreciation of the region’s currencies, which has strongly affected the dynamics of inflation in the region.
This has been compounded by rising energy and food prices in the first 10 months of the year.
Between December 2020 and September 2021, West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil prices increased by 54.6%, while in the case of foodstuffs, international market prices for meat and wheat rose by 3.5% and 13.3%, respectively.
The prices of other goods imported by the region have also risen substantially, as reflected in the rise in inflation for goods exported by the United States from 0.4% year on year in December 2020 to 16.3% in September 2021.
Demand factors include substantial consumption growth and a rapid recovery in demand for durable goods and services, supported by the transfer programmes and strong monetary boosts to lending that were put in place during the crisis and extended into 2021 in some countries.
During 2020, the region’s monetary authorities were able to significantly expand the range of instruments at their disposal to pursue expansionary policies.
Conventional instruments such as interest rate cuts, changes in reserve requirement rates and the strengthening of mechanisms to support financial intermediation were supplemented by less conventional instruments, such as central bank purchases of private and government securities held by financial institutions and the direct transfer of resources to the public sector when it acted as a coguarantor of State-backed loans.
In addition, macroprudential regulations were adjusted to maintain the stability of the financial system and the smooth functioning of the payments system and to reduce the impact of systemic risks on the performance of the region’s economies.
This involved increased interventions in exchange rate markets and changes in reserve requirements for deposits, alongside measures to regulate capital flows.
These actions were usually accompanied by the establishment of currency swap agreements with central banks outside the region and the expansion of credit facilities offered by international organizations.
The rise in regional inflation in 2021 created a monetary policy dilemma: on the one hand, there is still a need for policies to support economic growth and job creation, while on the other, policies to mitigate inflationary pressures and exchange-rate volatility are required.
In this context, some monetary authorities in the region tended to scale down policies to promote credit and aggregate demand growth during 2021, although the stance remains broadly expansionary.
Policy rates were raised in eight of the economies that use them as their main monetary policy instrument, with an average increase of 2 percentage points.
During 2021, however, benchmark policy rates remained broadly negative in real terms and monetary aggregates continued to grow more rapidly than in the pre-pandemic period.
Despite the policy rate increases, the downward trend in nominal lending rates observed in the region’s economies since 2019 continued in 2021, except in countries with chronic inflation problems.
Despite this, credit growth tended to slow, and overall lending to the private sector had contracted by the third quarter of 2021.
With regard to exchange-rate dynamics, the trend of depreciation against the dollar that had been observed since mid-2018 continued during 2021.
In total, the currencies of 16 economies in the region depreciated against the dollar.
To mitigate volatility, the authorities implemented a number of measures, including higher levels of market intervention through the purchase or sale of foreign currency, and changes in regulations governing financial flows.
Meanwhile, the region’s international reserves increased by an average of 5.2% in 2021, growing in 22 economies of the region.
This dynamic of rising international reserves in Latin America and the Caribbean reflects a variety of factors, including the establishment of swap and liquidity lines with the United States Federal Reserve and various international financial institutions, increased issuance of securities in voluntary markets, improving terms of trade, particularly in 2021, and the issuance of new SDRs.
One of the lessons of monetary policy management in 2020 and 2021 is that the combination of macroprudential, monetary and exchange-rate instruments is essential to promote macrofinancial stability in the region’s economies, mitigate the adverse effects of the crisis on the real sector and support expansionary policies to reactivate the economy.
Given the increasing macrofinancial risks, the future actions of central banks in the region will depend on the specific characteristics of each country, namely the degree of openness of the current and capital account, the exchange-rate regime, macroprudential regulation and the ability to access external financing.
Growth is expected to average 6.2% for the region in 2021, with South America growing at 6.4%, Central America and Mexico at 6.0%, and the Caribbean (excluding Guyana) at 1.2%.
In a context where the COVID-19 crisis exacerbated the region’s structural problems, adding further uncertainties and macroeconomic risks, the region’s economic growth is expected to slow from 2022, when it is projected to average 2.1%: 1.4% for South America, 3.3% for Central America and Mexico, and 6.1% for the Caribbean (excluding Guyana).
With the growth rates estimated for 2021 and 2022, less than half the countries in the region will have managed to recover the activity levels of 2019, before the crisis: 11 countries will achieve this in 2021 and a further 3 in 2022.
This shows that the crisis caused by the pandemic has had lasting effects on economic growth in much of Latin America and the Caribbean and has aggravated the structural problems that already characterized the region before the crisis.
The set of measures announced by the advanced economies amounted to an estimated US$ 14.9 trillion by the end of September 2021, while the emerging countries had mobilized some US$ 2.7 trillion (IMF, 2021b).
Moreover, the fiscal space available to the latter to continue to underpin the recovery through policy support has narrowed.
For example, in Latin America, in 2021 there is already a tendency to formulate budgets so as to reduce fiscal deficits and stabilize the level of public debt (see box VII.1 in the section on fiscal policy (chapter VII)).
There have also been significant asymmetries in monetary policy between the developed and the emerging and developing countries; and these will persist in the future.
In the developed economies, interest rates were kept at historically low levels to support aggregate demand during the pandemic.
This was accompanied by unconventional monetary easing policies on an unprecedented scale.
In the emerging and developing countries, while the monetary policy of lowering rates (and, in several cases, also quantitative easing) played a very important role in 2020, rising inflation is becoming a challenge that has already led several countries to start normalizing policy by raising rates this year.
In general, there is a perception that in the developed countries, where inflation expectations are more firmly anchored, rate hikes can be more gradual and start later than in the emerging and developing economies, where inflation expectations are rising faster.
Lastly, the access that countries have had, and still have, to vaccines to confront the pandemic has also differed widely.
Vaccine procurement has been heavily concentrated in the higher-income countries, which have made vaccine purchase commitments in excess of their share of world population.
For example, Canada, the European Union, Japan, the United Kingdom and the United States between them accounted for 39% of vaccine purchase commitments in November 2021, despite having just 12.9% of the world’s population.
Their vaccination rates are also above the average of emerging and lower-income countries (ECLAC, 2021b).
These disparities and asymmetries have jeopardized the capacity of several emerging and developing economies, including those of Latin America and the Caribbean, to sustain medium-term growth —notwithstanding the growth rebound recorded in 2021, which, in some cases, will continue in 2022.
In 2022, the developed economy group alone is expected to regain the pre-pandemic growth trajectory, and even surpass it.
In contrast, the other country groupings will maintain a much lower growth path in the medium term (up to 2025) than had been projected before the pandemic.
In contrast, the developed economies are expected to expand by 5.2%, two tenths of a point less than projected a few months ago (see figure I.1).
This downward revision is explained mainly by a reduction of almost one percentage point in the growth forecast for the United States, to 6% for this year.
In the emerging and developing countries, the upward revision mainly reflects the improved outlook in several commodity-exporting countries, offsetting lower growth in China (now projected at 8%, four tenths of a percentage point less than forecast a few months ago).
The downward revision of growth in the region’s two main trading partners (the United States and China) reflects the slowdown that has been taking place in these economies since the third quarter of the year.
In the first case, supply shortages and the spread of the delta variant of the virus affected domestic demand.
The latter contracted in September for the first time since February 2020.
In the case of the eurozone, the projection was revised slightly upwards, and the bloc is now expected to grow by 5.2%.
This is explained by a positive third quarter performance, which recorded a 2.2% expansion relative to the previous quarter, driven by stronger consumption of services as restrictions were eased and the vaccine rollout weakened the link between COVID-19 cases and hospitalizations.
However, the fourth wave of infections that the continent is now facing could undermine the projection once more.
Some countries are re-imposing restrictions on activity, although these are targeted measures as yet.
For 2022, global economic growth is expected to slow to 4.9% on average.
Specifically, the advanced economies are likely to expand by 4.2% and emerging and developing economies by 5.1%.
Lower growth rates are to be expected in 2022 because, unlike in 2021, there will not be a low base for comparison.
Moreover, the supply shocks that have now been visible for several months, and have been intensifying, can be expected to persist through the first half of 2022 or beyond.
Logistical problems, high transportation costs,1 rising input prices, and supply chain difficulties could last until mid-year.2 Lastly, the monetary and fiscal stimulus programmes that have been buttressing the economies and have helped mitigate the negative impacts of the pandemic are expected to taper off next year (Bloomberg, 2021).
The buoyancy of global goods trade in 2021 reflects not only the low comparison base of 2020, but also an increase in aggregate demand fuelled by expansionary monetary and fiscal policies across the board.
It has also been boosted by the resumption of economic activity in countries that have been able to roll out large-scale COVID-19 vaccination programmes.
This situation, coupled with a shift in consumption patterns, away from services that were affected by mobility restrictions (restaurants, cinemas, travel, among others) towards goods (clothing, electronics, furniture and others), generated a major revival of merchandise trade (BCRP, 2021).
For 2022, WTO expects slower growth in trade volumes (+4.7%), aligned with the moderation of global GDP growth.
This reflects not only the higher base of comparison, but also the fact that the supply shortages referred to above are projected to continue.
In addition, WTO warns that the pandemic itself represents potentially an even greater risk to global trade and production, particularly if more lethal variants emerge (WTO, 2021). 1 The global pandemic caused several difficulties in maritime transportation, which resulted in higher freight costs.
Commodity prices have continued the upward trend that began in May 2020; and, for the full year, they are projected to be 42% higher than their average level in 2020 In the case of industrial metals and minerals, average prices have weakened in the second half of the year.
In the case of copper, for example, since attaining historical highs on 10 May (US$ 4.86 per pound), the daily price has remained above US$ 4 permanently up to the time of writing this chapter (14 November 2021).
Agricultural prices have tended to stabilize in the second half of the year, also at well above pre-pandemic levels.
Energy prices have maintained the upward trend that began in May 2020, without interruption (see figure I.3).
For 2021 as a whole, the price of agricultural products is expected to be 22% higher than their average level in 2020; the prices of metals and minerals are expected to be up by 37%; and energy prices are forecast to rise by 74% (see figure I.3).
A slight reduction of around 3.2% in commodity prices is expected for 2022.
Metals and minerals are likely to fall the most (by 8.4% compared to the average level in 2021).
This would be explained by the economic slowdown, especially in China and its construction sector, which has been displaying problems.
In the case of energy and agricultural products, prices are projected to remain broadly stable, with little variation from the average level of 2021 (0.3% and -0.4%, respectively).
The supply of oil, natural gas and coal is expected increase to match higher demand resulting from the ongoing process of normalization of global transportation and production.
In the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter I 25 case of agricultural products, 2021 represents a high base for comparison, as there were several adverse weather events that pushed prices higher.
On the other hand, this effect is counterbalanced by the fact that energy prices will affect agricultural production costs and the demand for biofuels, thereby helping to support price levels (Capital Economics, 2021b).
Following the same logic, the CBOE also produces the VXEEM index, which measures volatility in emerging markets, while Deutsche Börse and Goldman Sachs produce the V2X index, which measures eurozone volatility.
In the latter group of countries, there has been an upward trend in monetary policy (benchmark) interest rates, some of which have risen sharply.
However, in the main developed economies, central banks are still keeping rates at historical minimum levels (see figure I.7); and, with the exception of the Bank of England, they have shown no signs of raising them soon.3 In the United States, consumer price inflation rose to an annual rate of 6.8% in November 2021, a peak not seen since 1990.
However, Federal Reserve Chairman Jerome Powell stressed that he expects inflation to start moderating in the second or third quarter of 2022 and gave no indication of an imminent interest rate hike.
The federal funds (policy rate) futures markets predict a path of three rate hikes through end-2022.
This would mean next year ending with a rate of just over 0.7% (today it is in a range of 0% to 0.25%, with a midpoint of 0.125%) (see figure I.8).
In the case of the eurozone, the European Central Bank (ECB) considers the uptick in inflation to be a transitory phenomenon and expects pressures to ease in 2022.
With regard to asset purchase programmes, at its early-November meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), of the United States Federal Reserve, announced that it would start tapering its asset purchase programme as from that month.
This does not mean a downsizing of the Federal Reserve balance sheet, but, instead, a slower pace of monthly growth.
Although the balance sheets of the main central banks are expanding each month by less than at the start of the pandemic, they remain at record levels (close to 60% of GDP), which implies high levels of liquidity in the world economy (see figure I.9).
Portfolio shifts towards “safe” securities with rates that have become more attractive, put pressure on emerging market exchange rates and also on emerging market bond prices.
Thus, with higher rates in the United States and wider sovereign spreads, the cost of financing for other countries increases; and with debt levels also higher because of the pandemic, these countries are rendered even more vulnerable.
Monetary normalization, in the sense of shrinking the Federal Reserve balance sheet also has an impact on emerging markets.
Suffice it to recall the announcement of the start of monetary normalization in May 2013 made by former Federal Reserve Chairman Ben Bernanke, in which he raised the prospect of tapering quantitative easing by reducing purchases of treasury bonds and other instruments.
The announcement took much of the market by surprise and there was a massive sell-off of these bonds in anticipation of a fall in prices, which indeed occurred almost immediately (an episode known as the “taper tantrum”).
Nonetheless, yields remain low in historical terms, at around 1.5% (see figure 1.10).
This time, moreover, the Federal Reserve has been discussing the gradual withdrawal of monetary stimulus for several months, and has even trailed the likely sequence of the process.
The 2013 precedent has been a learning experience for the Federal Reserve authorities.
With this greater degree of communication and predictability of its movements, the surprise factor is expected to be more muted (Lema, 2021).
Thus, the effects on emerging markets could also be less abrupt and more predictable than In this regard, the central banks of systemically important economies, particularly the United States, are expected to continue to issue clear guidance on their future monetary policy approach, and to manage the withdrawal of stimulus cautiously.
The monetary authorities are weighing inflation control against other no less important objectives.
For example, there is the need to avoid possible asset price deflation owing to a faster-than-expected rise in interest rates, to cope with the debt sustainability problems that could ensue, since debt ratios have risen across the board to finance pandemic-related spending.
In the first quarter of 2021, the rate of change in money supply was 25% for the United States, 10.8% for the eurozone, 18.4% for the United Kingdom and 14.5% for Japan.
In the second and third quarters, the rate of change in money supply for the same countries averaged 13.8%, 7.8%, 11.3% and 9.2%, respectively.
The money supply trend reflects the behaviour of the balance sheets of the above central banks.
As an example, between 4 March 2020 and 28 December 2020, the United States Federal Reserve’s balance sheet expanded by US$ 3 trillion (from US$ 4.1 trillion to US$ 7.4 trillion).
By the same date, the balance sheets of the ECB and the Bank of Japan stood at US$ 9.7 trillion and US$ 6.4 trillion, respectively.
In comparative terms, the assets of the United States Federal Reserve, the ECB, the Bank of England and the Bank of Japan amount to 33%, 60%, 43% and 129% of their respective GDPs (Atlantic Council, 2021).
Monetary policy based on balance-sheet expansion was also adopted by most central banks in developed countries (Australia, Canada, the Russian Federation, Sweden and Switzerland) and by some banks in developing countries (China, Indonesia, Malaysia and South Africa).
Among the latter is the case of the People’s Bank of China, whose assets rose from US$ 5.2 trillion to US$ 6.2 trillion between the beginning of 2020 and October 2021.
This monetary policy stance is unprecedented, even compared to the policy adopted to deal with the global financial crisis and its fallout.
In the case of the global financial crisis, by contrast, a similar expansion took 11 years (Marsh, 2021).
Monetary policies have supported countercyclical efforts The monetary policy of balance-sheet expansion is remarkable not only for its magnitude, but also for its objective.
Analysis of the balance sheets of the main central banks shows that, in the case of the United States, for example, the increase in the Federal Reserve’s assets in the 2020–2021 biennium roughly coincides with the increase in the public deficit (ECLAC, 2021) and in government debt.
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Federal Reserve combined the purchase of securities with the creation of nine financing instruments for businesses, municipalities, and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), among others.
Currently, securities purchases account for 98% of the Federal Reserve’s total operations, with the remaining 2% going to financing instruments.
As of November 2021, the breakdown of Federal Reserve assets shows that, out of a total of US$ 8.7 trillion, securities accounted US$ 8.2 trillion, while financing instruments amounted to just US$ 2 billion.
In the same way, ECB carried out security-purchase and long-term refinancing operations to encourage bank lending to companies and households.
Security-purchase operations account for 68% of ECB operations, 98% of which are for the purchase of government securities.
A similar pattern can be seen in the case of the Bank of England, which introduced three lending instruments to strengthen the private sector that account for 12% of its total operations, while the remaining 84% is for the purchase of securities, of which 95% are government securities and the rest are purchases of corporate securities.
Lastly, the Bank of Japan established financing lines to support lending to the corporate sector and to stabilize repurchase markets, which account for 18% of the monetary authority’s operations.
The remainder (82%) involve purchases of securities, 95% of which are government securities.
Liquidity-expansion policies have not had a homogeneous effect on long-term interest rates Balance-sheet expansion policies have not had a homogeneous effect on long-term interest rates in the economies of developing countries.
Available data show that the United States maintains a significant spread in bond yields relative to other economies in the world, including Germany, Japan and the United Kingdom (see figure II.2).
This implies that treasury bonds remain the most attractive sovereign asset in the developing world, facilitating the financing of the United States public deficit, despite its growing public debt (125% of GDP as of the second quarter of 2021).
Higher relative yields imply higher demand for treasuries relative to other sovereign investment alternatives.
In turn, due to the negative relationship between the price of an asset and its interest rate, a greater demand for treasury bonds with respect to other alternatives increases their present value, which results in a lower interest rate.
This is partly why Treasury bonds have been able to maintain low yields compared with their historical performance, despite the fact that yields have risen since the mid-2020s (see figure II.3).
Liquidity expansion has, at the same time, benefited equity markets in developed countries The balance sheet policy has continued to benefit equity markets, as reflected in figure II.4 which shows changes in Federal Reserve assets and the S&P 500 index.
According to empirical data provided by the Federal Reserve, household wealth has increased US$ 18 trillion since early 2020.
This 17% increase over the last quarter of 2019 was driven by the accumulation of assets and, in particular, by their appreciation due to price increases that explain 80% of the increase in assets.
Between the last quarter of 2019 and the first quarter of 2021, the wealth share of the top percentile increased by 2.2 percentage points, while that of the bottom 50% increased by only 0.2 percentage points (Batty, Deeken, and Henriques Volz, 2021).
Balance sheet expansion policies have not had the same effect on equity markets in emerging economies.
As a result, the ratio between the two indices is at its lowest level since December 2001.
In percentage terms, the change in estimated earnings for developed countries increased from 6% to 7% between August and November 2021, while for developing countries it stagnated between 1% and 2% for the same period (Srinivasan and Ismail, 2021).
One of the factors behind the underperformance of developing countries and emerging markets has to do with the problems in China’s real estate market.
The real estate sector in China is valued at US$ 55 trillion and is twice the size of its counterpart in the United States.
Therefore, difficulties in this sector may result not only in a decline in aggregate demand and growth in the Chinese economy, but also in financial insolvency, with significant repercussions for the rest of the world, including developing economies.
Expansionary monetary policies have significantly increased liquidity in the financial system The fact that the bulk of balance sheet expansion policies have focused on financing fiscal deficits has had important implications for the financial sector.
That is, they must buy government securities through the financial system.2 The government sells securities to the financial system, which in turn sells them to the Federal Reserve.
As a result of these operations, liquidity levels in the financial sector have increased.
As shown in figure II.5, balance sheet expansion policies have resulted in a significant increase in commercial bank deposits.
Between March 2020 and June 2021, the banking system in the euro area increased its deposit levels by US$ 3 trillion, while the banking systems in the United States and Japan increased their deposits by US$ 1.7 trillion and US$ 1 trillion, respectively.
Wu, “$9 trillion binge turns central banks into the market’s biggest whales”, Bloomberg, 7 July, 2021.
The Federal Reserve meets this statutory requirement by conducting its purchases and sales of securities primarily through transactions with a group of major financial firms, known as “primary dealers” that have an established business relationship with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2021).
For the European Central Bank, see Cour-Thimann and Winkler (2013). 40 Chapter II Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Some of the excess liquidity has been recycled into the purchase of government securities, allowing the continued financing of public deficits.
As figure II.6 shows, since the start of the pandemic, the upward trend in the accumulation of securities by commercial banks has intensified.
At the same time, lending to the real sector (commercial and industrial sector) declined from US$ 3.1 trillion to US$ 2.5 trillion over the same period.
Burgess, “The most important number of the week is $8 trillion”, Bloomberg, 19 June 2021.
Despite the caution shown by monetary authorities in developed countries, inflation may affect the current dynamics of global liquidity expansion The main obstacle to the continuation of global liquidity expansion policies through balance sheets is the rise in inflation since late 2020, not only in the world’s major economies but also in developing countries.
In the case of the United States, the inflation rate increased from 1.3% to 4.6% between the last quarter of 2020 and the third quarter of 2021.
Analysis of the determinants of inflation shows that the main component is energy prices, followed by food prices, implying that inflation is driven by costs rather than demand (see table II.1).
However, there is concern that, by continuing to increase their balance sheets, central banks will continue to inject liquidity into the financial system, as they have done so far, thereby contributing to accelerating inflation, at a time when inflation has passed the thresholds for annual inflation rates consistent with full employment, which are between 2% and 3% per annum.
Although, the responses of the central banks of developed countries to this inflationary context have been heterogeneous, they are aimed at avoiding monetary policy measures that endanger economic recovery, especially in view of the increase in cases of COVID-19 in some countries, despite the rise in inflation.
In December 2021, persistent higher-than-anticipated inflation led the Federal Reserve to announce that it would accelerate its asset purchase programme and raise short-term interest rates in 2022 at a faster-than-expected pace (Smith and Golle, 2021).
At the same time, the United States Government has announced that it will use part of its oil reserves, equivalent to 50 million barrels (2.5 days of oil consumption in the country), in order to increase supply and lower energy prices.
The ECB has also begun tapering its securities purchases, and its bond-buying program (1.9 trillion euros), which it adopted as an economic policy measure to deal with the pandemic, is expected to end in March 2022.
In addition, the ECB has announced that it will not raise interest rates in 2022, since inflationary expectations are below its monetary policy target.
However, it also announced that it would broaden the criteria for buying government bonds (Arnold, 2021).
As of December 2021, 24 central banks in the world had raised their interest rates (six countries in Africa, three in Asia, seven in Latin America and eight in Europe) (Smith and Golle, 2021).
The increase in commodity prices mentioned in chapter I resulted in higher export prices in countries whose baskets are concentrated in commodities.
For South American countries in particular, export prices are expected to increase by 28% this year (see figure III.1).
In terms of export volumes, all subgroups experienced increases, with the region’s main trading partners, including China, the United States and the European Union showing a rebound in growth this year.
Meanwhile, imports of goods are expected to grow by 32% in value in 2021, the largest increase since 2010, when they grew by almost the same extent after the global financial crisis.
By volume, imports look set to increase by 20% this year, in line with the expansion of domestic activity in the region (both consumption and investment) following the collapse in 2020.
Import prices also appear likely to grow this year, reaching 12% (see figure III.2).
In 2021, the terms of trade rose on average for the region, albeit with differences at the subregional level While the favourable evolution of commodity prices in 2021 is projected to cause the terms of trade in the region to improve by about 5% on average, there are differences at the subregional level.
The terms of trade are expected to decline by 5% in the Caribbean (excluding Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago) and by 1% in Central America, partly because of the sizeable energy component in their import baskets (see figure III.3).
The group recording the largest increase in the terms of trade this year is precisely that of hydrocarbon exporters (15%), followed by the group of exporters of metals and minerals (13%) and that of agro-industrial products (13%).
This is a generalized trend at the country level, as flows are increasing at double-digit rates in virtually all the region’s main recipients (see figure III.4).
The dynamism of remittances is linked to the economic recovery in the countries of origin.
It is also linked in part to the fact that migrants may have benefited from stimulus and employment support programmes in remittance-sending countries (primarily the United States and Spain) (World Bank, 2020).
In addition, some migrants are employed in jobs associated with essential services, which enabled them to remain in employment during the 2020 lockdowns.
For example, as of September 2021, unemployment among Mexican migrants in the United States was 4.1%, below average unemployment and below the pre-pandemic unemployment level (BBVA Research, 2021).
This is mainly the result of a deterioration in the transport and other services account where imports have increased in line with goods imports partly because of their association with the latter.
In the case of transport services, the deterioration is also due to high international freight payments linked to the recovery in global demand for goods and logistical bottlenecks.
The travel services account has shown some recovery so far this year, influenced by improvements in inbound tourism in some economies in the region as restrictions on international travel have eased.
The income balance deficit is expected to widen in 2021, primarily as a result of higher earnings by foreign investment firms amid rising commodity prices The deficit on the region’s income balance is projected to increase from 3.0% of GDP in 2020 to 3.3% of GDP in 2021.
The sharp rise in commodity prices has increased the profits of firms linked to foreign investment, which implies a rise in the share of profits that they remit to their parent companies abroad.
Outflows of the remaining financial flows —portfolio investment and other investment— have continued to recover so far in 2021 (up to the second quarter), following a similar pattern to other emerging markets.
However, the recovery in financial flows has been accompanied by a deterioration in credit ratings in several countries in the region and a slight increase in sovereign risk The credit quality of Latin American and Caribbean countries continued to deteriorate in recent months.
Downgrades have outnumbered upgrades for eight consecutive years, and the imbalance worsened significantly in 2020 (ECLAC, 2021b).
The pandemic led to large increases in the debt ratios of countries, which resorted to public debt issuance to cover the costs of mitigating its effects.
Colombia is rated investment-grade by Moody’s, but was downgraded in 2021 by Standard & Poor’s and Fitch, and Trinidad and Tobago has this rating with Standard & Poor’s only.
For a country to be included in this category, it must have a credit rating of BBB- or higher (according to Standard & Poor’s and Fitch) or Baa3 or higher (according to Moody’s).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter III 53 In parallel to this ratings trend, sovereign risk in the region, as measured by the Emerging Markets Bond Index Global (EMBIG), has been on a slight upward track in recent months.
Despite the rise seen in recent months, this indicator is at levels well below those recorded for much of 2018 and 2019.
Most significantly, it is below the 2020 average, which reached 507 points owing to the sharp rise registered in the early months of the pandemic (see figure III.7).
At the country level, it is striking that, with the exception of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, all countries increased their sovereign risk in the quarter from August to October 2021.
Debt issuance on international markets continues to grow, although private companies are now playing a greater role, while sovereign issuance has grown at a slower pace During the first 10 months of 2021, total debt issuance amounted to US$ 137.513 billion, up 12.3% on the same period the previous year (see figure III.8).
The main sectors are sovereign and non-bank corporate debt, with 42% and 40% of the total issued, respectively, followed by issues by quasi-sovereign, bank and supranational entities, but at much lower levels.
At the same time, there is a trend towards greater linkage of debt issuance to financing for sustainable projects.
Non-bank private sector issuance totalled US$ 57.474 billion between January and October 2021.
Issuance has risen 77% so far in 2021, due to the low base of comparison in 2020, when companies were cautious in their investment plans, given the uncertainty caused by the pandemic.
Brazilian and Mexican companies are the largest participants in international debt markets, accounting for 70% of the total issued by that sector during the period under review.
The quasi-sovereign issuance sector saw a fall of 44%, amounting to US$ 13.636 billion, or 10% of the total.
Bank issues fell by 47%, while supranational issues, which account for 4% of the total, grew by 3%.
Lastly, sovereign issues totalled US$ 54.968 billion between January and October 2021, in various operations carried out by just 10 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
That issuance represented a rise of 14%, following the high growth of the previous year, in a context where governments were seeking sources of financing for their pandemic mitigation plans (see figure III.8).
Of the total issued, 84% are bonds from countries with investment grade ratings from rating agencies.
The main issues come from Chile, Mexico and Peru, with 61% of total sovereign issues.
In addition to the major operations carried out during the first half of this year, which are analysed by ECLAC (2021a), debt issues aimed at financing projects linked to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals continue to stand out.
They include several made by Chile in July and September, for US$ 5.8 billion and US$ 2.1 billion, respectively; Mexico, also in July, for almost US$ 1.5 billion, and Peru, which issued for the first time in October (see table III.2).
Colombia and Guatemala also made debt issues in order to obtain resources to finance their respective budgets.
That resulted in year-on-year GDP growth of 16.1% for that quarter, after a decline of 0.12% in the first quarter.
This buoyancy in activity, which was notably stronger than expected for the regional average, did not, however, lead to a recovery of the pre-crisis level of activity because the slowdown in the second half of the year was greater than expected (see figure IV.1).
State of) From the third quarter onwards the activity indicators of the main sectors declined and stagnated The available information shows a marked slowdown in output in the main branches of activity in the third quarter compared with the second quarter.
In particular, most activity indicators for manufacturing, construction and commerce showed declines and stagnation in their indices (see figure IV.3).
Chile Manufacturing Commerce Construction Exports and gross fixed capital formation combine with consumption for the second-quarter recovery, and private consumption was the main driver of GDP growth By demand components, GDP growth in the second quarter was supported by domestic spending.
Private consumption was a key driver of growth, contributing around half of second-quarter growth.
Likewise, there was an upturn in investment, in a context of recovering demand and higher levels of activity in the construction sector.
The net external sector made a negative contribution to GDP growth, which appeared more associated with the quickening pace of recovery of imports than with the increase in external demand.
In the third quarter, the low increase in the level of activity will mainly be the result of domestic demand, although the external sector is also expected to make a positive contribution to GDP growth.
After the robust increases in the second quarter of 2021, all components of domestic demand are slowing (see figures IV.4 and IV.5).
This is compounded by the slow recovery of the labour market, where participation rates have not recovered.
In all of them —construction, commerce, manufacturing, and transport and communications— there was a generalized increase in activity.
The rest of the sectors of economic activity also saw recoveries in the second quarter (see figure IV.6).
The increase in economic activity was comparatively more marked in the services sector, where the level lags even further behind the pre-pandemic level.
Particularly noteworthy is the improvement observed in commerce and hotels and restaurants, driven mainly by the recovery in demand.
However, the recovery of other tourism-related activities continues to lag, as there are still some restrictions on the international movement of people, for one, and capacity controls also remain in place.
These constraints have not prevented the gradual recovery of tourism, although the sector is still well below pre-pandemic levels.
In addition, the sluggish distribution of production inputs at the global level has had a more pronounced impact on some sectors whose activity has been affected.
These supply difficulties pose a risk that could become an additional obstacle to output in certain sectors of activity.
The regional inflation rate in May that year (1.9%) was the lowest in a decade, and by the close of the year it was still at historically low levels (3.0%).
It began rising in the second half of 2020, however, putting the region in a very difficult predicament.
Structural problems connected with low growth, low job creation capacity and high levels of informality, poverty and inequality, which predated the pandemic but were exacerbated by it, have now been compounded by rising inflation and high exchange-rate volatility.
Rep. of), Haiti and Suriname While inflation has risen in all subregions, it is highest in the economies of South America, where it reached 7.0% in September 2021, up 3.9 percentage points from December 2020 and 4.6 percentage points from the same month a year earlier.
For the English-speaking Caribbean economies, inflation as of September is estimated at 4.2%, up 2.0 percentage points from December 2020.
Interestingly, notwithstanding the rise over the past year, only in the subregion comprising the South American economies is inflation higher than in October 2008, during the global financial crisis.
Only in three economies (Guatemala, Haiti and Uruguay) did the inflation rate decline between September 2020 and September 2021.
Of the countries which have chronic inflation and are therefore not included in the regional and subregional averages (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Haiti and Suriname), Argentina’s inflation rate increased strongly in the first nine months of 2021, from 35.2% in September 2020 to 51.7% in September 2021.
One thing that stands out in this chart is that since April 2018, inflation has been higher for tradable goods than for non-tradable goods and services.
This difference in inflation dynamics was accentuated during the COVID-19 crisis but has narrowed since November 2020.
A second point worth noting is that tradable goods inflation as of September 2021 was the highest since the global financial crisis in late 2008.
In the case of non-tradable goods and services, inflation was at its highest since January 2006.
Like the ratio of tradable goods inflation to non-tradable goods and services inflation, the difference between food and core inflation increased during the crisis and has tended to diminish more recently.
In November 2020, the ratio of food to core inflation was 4.4, whereas at the start of the crisis in March 2020 it was 1.5.
A third point worth noting is that core inflation has been rising faster than food inflation since March 2021.
While core inflation rose by 2.2 percentage points between March and September 2021, food inflation rose by 1.2 percentage points.
A combination of external and internal factors has driven up inflation in the region’s economies Rising energy and food prices on international markets, as well as rising global inflation, have contributed to higher inflation in the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean.
West Texas Intermediate (WTI) oil prices increased by 54.6% between December 2020 and September 2021, in contrast to the evolution of this indicator during 2020, when it fell by over 20%.
Meanwhile, inflation rates for foodstuffs such as meat and wheat increased by 3.5% and 13.3%, respectively, in the first nine months of 2021.
Inflation rates for goods other than energy and food also increased in the first nine months of 2021.
This is reflected in the rise in inflation for goods exported by the United States, from 0.4% year on year in December 2020 to 16.3% in September 2021.
Global trade tensions and disruptions to logistics chains have also contributed to a rise in regional inflation, as have the depreciation of some regional currencies and the large nominal imbalances that have been building up.
In some countries, moreover, wage increases have also fuelled the greater price dynamism in evidence since the second half of 2020.
They include higher prices for various production inputs, rising freight rates and wage increases.
Widespread difficulties with the supply of inputs are one problem that has disrupted production chains and raised production costs.
For example, several economies in the region have reported reduced availability of raw materials and inputs and lower input inventory levels over the past three months.
The greatest constraints are associated with shortages of construction materials, spare parts and machinery and equipment.
Similarly, there have been shortfalls in the supply of plastics, some foodstuffs, and oils for industrial sectors.
During 2020, the temporary or permanent closure of many economic activities led to a sharp drop in the level of employment in all countries in the region.
That impact was particularly noticeable in the second quarter of the year, when, on average for 14 countries, the employment rate fell by 10.1 percentage points compared to the same period in 2019.
That trend was accompanied by the withdrawal of a large number of people from the labour market, leading to a fall of 9.4 percentage points in the total participation rate.
While the decline in the labour force mitigated the impact of the widespread job losses on the open unemployment rate, that rate still deteriorated significantly relative to the second quarter of 2019, rising by 2.7 percentage points in the second quarter of 2020 (see figure VI.1).
After the second quarter of 2020, as economic activities gradually reopened, workers started returning to the labour market.
This was reflected in an increase in the participation and employment rates in the following quarters (see figures VI.1 and VI.2).
As of the third quarter, the regional participation rate stood at 61.9% and the employment rate at 56.3%, levels higher than in the third quarter of 2020, but still lower than for the same period in 2019.
The magnitude of the rise in employment exceeded that of the return to the labour market, with the result that the open unemployment rate gradually lowered.
Labour markets have yet to recover to conditions on the eve of the pandemic.
First, many activities, such as those related to leisure and events, tourism, restaurants and manufacturing, have not yet fully resumed.
Second, most countries have only seen a partial return to school and day-care services.
Third, there is also the perceived lack of job opportunities or fear of contagion among workers.
These factors could encourage some workers to remain inactive while waiting for conditions to return to employment in their sector to improve.
In addition to the sectoral considerations mentioned above, some companies have not yet fully reinstated all their staff or have not yet resumed production at full capacity, which is why they do not yet need new workers.
According to recent estimates, the region still lags well behind pre-pandemic levels and the recovery seen in developed countries in terms of hours worked, increasing the risk of wide productivity gaps, not only between small and large enterprises, but also between countries (ILO, 2021).
Widening gender gaps in the labour market The recovery of labour indicators by gender has been uneven during 2021.
The average for the 14 countries with available information shows that women are returning to the market more gradually and have greater difficulty finding employment, which has widened the gender gaps in the regional labour market.
The slower pace of women’s return to the labour force has come in a context where many school and care activities have not yet fully resumed.
Over the past 30 years, Latin America has seen a growing trend in the incorporation of women Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VI 75 into paid activities (ECLAC/ILO, 2019).
However, the labour participation rate is relatively low compared to that of women in developed countries, and the 2020 crisis abruptly interrupted this trend with the widespread exit of women from the labour market, mainly to take on care work.
This suggests that women face greater difficulty successfully rejoining the labour market, possibly due to their greater participation in sectors that have not yet fully recovered, such as paid domestic work and employment in the service and commerce sectors.
As a result of these trends, in the third quarter of 2021 the unemployment rate for women fell to 11.1%, while that of men declined to 7.6%.
This meant that the unemployment rate gap between men and women widened from 2.7 percentage points in the third quarter of 2019 to 3.5 percentage points by the third quarter of 2021 (see figure VI.3C).
The greatest difficulties were encountered by women with lower levels of educational attainment.
In 2020, this group of female workers was more affected by job losses than men with the same level of education and than more-educated women.
During the first months of 2021, this group was the one that had most difficulty re-entering the labour market and in the second quarter of 2021 had an employment level 16% lower than in the same quarter of 2019 (ECLAC/ILO, 2021).
Return of informal workers to the labour market During the pandemic that broke out in 2020, in contrast to what usually happens in economic crises, informality was not able to behave in a countercyclical way, so it did not help to mitigate household income losses.
As a result of mobility restrictions and the inherent characteristics of many informal jobs, which prevented the adoption of alternative measures such as teleworking, many informal workers had to withdraw from the labour market.
In addition, many activities considered essential, such as those in public administration, education and health services, accounted for the largest proportion of formal wage earners.
Sectors with a higher proportion of informal employment, such as commerce, construction, and restaurants and hotels, contracted more.
This meant that in 2020 most countries in the region recorded declines in the labour informality rate compared with 2019 (see figure VI.4).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VI 77 Given the need to generate income, in 2021 many informal workers had to return to the labour market, possibly under the same informal conditions as before the pandemic.
An analysis of employment growth for six countries in the region shows that it has been driven almost entirely by the growth of informal employment, which has accounted for about 70% or more of net job creation in Argentina, Costa Rica, Mexico, Paraguay and Peru (Maurizio, 2021).1 In this context, informality rates can be expected to grow again in 2021.
The trends in employment by occupational category during 2021 show a recovery in lower quality categories.
Own-account workers, most of whom are informal, had a faster rate of employment recovery than wage earners.
In the third quarter of 2021, self-employment was at higher levels than its pre-pandemic levels (see figure VI.5).
Other sectors with a high incidence of informality, but with a lower relative share, are paid domestic service and unpaid family work.
Employment levels in these groups were still much lower than in 2019.
These categories, which include a very high percentage of women, have suffered because of both the characteristics of the work itself and the loss of income in many employer households.
Disparate recovery in employment by sector In 2020, there was generalized reduction in employment across all sectors.
In the first months of 2021, however, the recovery in employment was uneven across different sectors, even among those hardest hit.
By the third quarter of the year, employment in construction had almost fully rebounded and that in trade had partially recovered, whereas employment in tourism-related sectors such as hotels and restaurants was still very depressed compared with the third quarter of 2019 (see figure VI.7).
Other sectors, such as manufacturing and community, social and personal Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VI 79 services, made partial recoveries but remain at lower levels than before the pandemic.
By contrast, employment in agriculture, financial and business services and basic services showed a positive change from the second quarter of 2019.
Differential evolution of real wages in the formal sector Since the beginning of the pandemic, analysing the evolution of average wages has been complicated by the significant employment restructuring that has taken place.
Although it is to be expected that in periods of crisis average wages tend to fall, the fact that most job losses have been among workers with lower levels of education and, in general, lower incomes, raises the average income in an economy.
Over the past year, the evolution of average wages in formal employment varied from country to country.
Real wages fell mainly in Argentina and Brazil, in contexts of high inflation, and to a lesser extent in Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay (see figure VI.8).
In September 2021, average inflation in the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean was at one of its highest levels for several years.
In this context, a downward trend in real wages is to be expected owing to lags before nominal wages adjust.
Ecuador was one of the countries where inflation was lower in 2020, and in the year to June 2021 it was actually negative.2 2 Ecuador was one of the countries where inflation was lowest in 2020, and in the year to June 2021 it was actually negative.
State of) 80 Chapter VI Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Outlook In the early months of the pandemic, and particularly during the second quarter of 2020, the fall in employment was greater than that in output, reflecting the uneven impact of the crisis, with greater job losses in low-productivity sectors (see figure VI.9).
Starting in the second half of 2020 and during 2021, output began to rebound, but the recovery in employment has been less buoyant.
This was helped by the fact that many workers who were employed but absent returned to the workplace and those who had reduced hours worked returned to their usual schedule, which increased output but not employment.
As noted in previous chapters, 2021 is expected to end with output growth of 6.2% for the region overall.
Labour supply will continue to lag, as will employment, and the unemployment rate is expected to be around 9.7%, lower than in 2020 (10.3%) but higher than in 2019 (8.1%).
Maurizio, R. (2021) “Empleo e informalidad en América Latina y el Caribe: una recuperación insuficiente y desigual.
Fiscal policy The prevailing macroeconomic environment is complicating fiscal policy management Fiscal stimulus through government spending is being eased, although expenditure remains above pre-pandemic levels Buoyant tax receipts have boosted the recovery of public revenue Fiscal outturns should improve in a scenario of lower expenditures and higher public-sector revenue Public debt remains at elevated levels B.
Fiscal policy The prevailing macroeconomic environment is complicating fiscal policy management Fiscal policy fulfilled a key role in the COVID-19 pandemic response in 2020.
Countries in Latin America announced unprecedentedly large fiscal stimulus packages, equivalent to an average of 4.6% of GDP, to strengthen public health systems, support families, and protect the production structure.
This involved the use of the full range of fiscal instruments, including tax policy and public spending, together with liquidity support and government-backed lending programmes.
Nonetheless, the role of public expenditure was predominant, with considerable increases in subsidies and transfers to mitigate the effects of the pandemic on household and business incomes.
Thus, fiscal policy played an important countercyclical role in cushioning the historic slump in economic activity in 2020.
However, the fiscal measures adopted in that year also had repercussions on the public accounts, with implications for fiscal policy in 2021 and beyond.
The growth of spending and the contraction of public-sector revenue in 2020 engendered fiscal deficits and a substantial increase in the public debt.
In 2021, the countries of the region are tending to design budgets that reduce fiscal deficits and stabilize the growth of public debt.
Accordingly, fiscal stimulus in the region is being dialled down, and primary expenditure is retreating in several countries —partly due to the ending of pandemic-related emergency programmes.
This situation creates the dilemma of how to maintain a pro-growth fiscal policy that supports the expansion of investment and contributes to closing social gaps, in a context of greater macroeconomic complexities, less fiscal space and unequal access to financing.
Historical experience teaches that these factors must not be allowed to trigger a contractionary fiscal policy that derails the fragile economic recovery process or ignores the challenges posed by the low levels of investment in the region and the growing social disparities, which the pandemic has aggravated further.
As analysed in this report, the region’s macroeconomic context has become more complex, and this has made fiscal policy management more difficult.
Although economic activity is expected to recover in 2021, this reflects a sharp statistical bounce.
Economic growth is likely to be weak going forward, in line with the trend in the years leading up to the crisis.
In addition, the risk of higher interest rates, as monetary stimulus in the developed economies is tapered and monetary policies are tightened in the region to curb inflationary pressures, could raise financing costs and interest payments.
This is compounded by the risk of depreciations among national currencies, which would make servicing external debt more expensive and aggravate external debt balances in local currency terms.
At the same time, countries are susceptible to credit rating downgrades owing to the deterioration of their fiscal indicators, which would affect financing conditions.
The fiscal space needed to implement a pro-development fiscal policy is limited.
Although public debt levels remain lower than in developed countries, gross public debt in the region has reached levels not seen in recent decades.
At the same time, the conditions that drive the debt dynamic—such as higher interest rates, national currency depreciations, projected low growth rates for the next few years, and persistent fiscal deficits— point to debt levels remaining high, which would continue to constrict the available fiscal space.
In addition, government revenues remain insufficient to fully cover public spending needs. 84 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Another consideration is that access to financing under favourable conditions has become an increasingly binding constraint on fiscal policy management in the region.
The current situation is characterized by highly heterogeneous access to financing across the different countries.
Some have been able to maintain access to the international financial market, issuing debt at favourable interest rates and maturities.
For countries that do not have access to these markets, international financial institutions continue to be the main sources of financing, with the conditionalities that this can entail.
Despite the current complex situation, the central role of fiscal policy in mitigating the effects of the pandemic, boosting the recovery of economic activity and laying the foundations for growth that is both sustained and sustainable in the medium term, needs to be maintained.
This will require a fiscal sustainability framework focused on strengthening the generation of permanent revenues to finance permanent expenditure demands.
In a context of pressures to maintain public expenditure levels, it is essential to adopt a strategic approach to spending, by targeting programmes with high economic, social and environmental returns that would contribute to a change in the development framework in the region.
Public investment, which was the main adjustment variable used in the last decade, must be ring-fenced in order to undertake investments intensive in decent jobs in strategic sectors with gender equality.
At the same time, the universalization of social protection systems and their financial sustainability must be key elements of fiscal policy going forward.
In this situation, new tax policies will be needed to underpin the sustainability of the public expenditure path that the region needs to follow.
These should be based on direct taxes with greater vertical equity, founded on the principle that those who have more should contribute more.
However, the processes involved in modifying tax systems require a medium-term vision and the forging of social and political consensus, especially in the current context.
Accordingly, it is important to adopt short-term measures (such as actions to reduce tax evasion, which amounted to US$ 325 billion in 2018, equivalent to 6.1% of regional GDP) and review tax expenditures that represent an average of 3.7% of GDP (ECLAC, 2019 and 2020c) (see box VII.1).
In addition, new green taxes, taxes on the digital economy, and other taxes on the consumption of unhealthy products could also be considered.
The expansion of fiscal space to avert the need for adjustments should also be a key multilateral priority.
In this regard, it is important that the multilateral lending institutions support financially constrained economies, including middle-income ones, to obtain international liquidity on favourable terms.
Moreover, public debt relief and debt standstills could perform an important role in opening up additional fiscal space.
However, these actions should be developed in multilateral frameworks that encourage private sector participation.
These incentives or benefits are granted through various types of tax treatment, such as exemptions, deductions, credits and reduced rates, and also include tax deferrals and accelerated depreciation systems.
Tax expenditures are not usually subject to the same control and evaluation mechanisms as direct expenditures, since they are not included in budgets and do not have a pre-established expiry date.
This renders them less transparent and makes it difficult to identify their beneficiaries.
Countries of the region have made progress in periodically measuring the fiscal cost of these tax reductions and in improving the quantity and quality of the information published.
In general, however, there are opportunities to improve the governance of tax expenditures; for example, in the design, definition, implementation, management, monitoring and evaluation processes.
Mexico’s experience in estimating tax expenditure An example of progress in the estimation of tax expenditure in the region is the document Renuncias recaudatorias,a which is published annually by the Mexican Ministry of Finance and Public Credit.
This presents an estimate of the revenue loss generated by the differential tax treatments provided for in the laws and decrees that currently govern the tax structure.
The document defines tax expenditure as tax treatments that deviate from the “normal” tax structure, giving rise to an exceptional regime that implies a lower or even a zero tax assessment.
Tax expenditure is quantified using the revenue loss method, which consists of estimating the amount of resources forgone by the treasury through the application of a differential tax treatment.
The revenue forgone estimated in the aforementioned report covers income tax (both corporate and personal), value added tax, excise duties and fiscal stimulus measures, under both federal tax laws and presidential decrees.
For these taxes, the incentives and benefits are identified by type of tax expenditure, which makes it possible to group those that operate in a similar way.
A major innovation in the estimation of revenue loss is the fact that, since 2019, the information used for this purpose has been obtained directly from tax returns, along with tax rulings submitted by taxpayers, and internet digital tax invoices (CFDI) for payroll and other sources provided by the Tax Administration Service (SAT).
This provides accurate and detailed information on tax expenditures to improve decision making in this area.
As a result, primary expenditure, which does not include interest payments, increased substantially in that year, growing by over 10% in several countries and by more than 20% in others (see figure VII.1).
At the same time, this fiscal stimulus served to attenuate the slump in economic activity.
Public expenditure thus played a countercyclical role, based mainly on discretionary spending, reflecting the limited impact of existing automatic stabilizers.
This dynamic is expected to reverse in 2021, given the planned withdrawal of the emergency programmes deployed in 2020, with implications for economic growth and social welfare in the medium-term.
In this context, the slowdown, or even contraction, of primary expenditure in some Latin American countries is expected to result in a reduction in total expenditure as a percentage of GDP (see figure VII.2).
In particular, primary current expenditure is projected to be lower, having been the fastest growing component in the previous year.
Nonetheless, these general trends will not necessarily be replicated among the different subregions of Latin America.
Total expenditure is projected to fall more steeply in the group of countries comprising Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico (-1.3 percentage points of GDP) than in those of South America (-0.9 percentage points).
At the same time, current projections point to a degree of rebalancing in the composition of public expenditure, with an increase in capital expenditure and a reduction in interest payments in South America, while capital expenditures could contract by 0.1 percentage points of GDP in Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico.
Considering the components of expenditure, primary current expenditure is expected to contract most sharply, both in Latin America as a whole and in its subregions.
This dynamic responds mainly to the scheduled winding-down of certain measures adopted in 2020 to mitigate the impact of the crisis caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
These include cash transfer programmes for families and businesses, the implementation of which greatly increased spending on current subsidies and transfers.
In some countries, there are also significant transfers from the central government to other public sector entities to strengthen health services and subsidize the consumption of public utilities, such as electricity and water.
However, as shown in figure VII.3, in 2021 most countries report contractions, with reductions of more than 20% in some cases.
In addition to the observed dynamic, the results for the first nine months of 2021 reveal significant differences between countries in the composition of current subsidies and transfers, in terms of both year-on-year variation and levels.
Although the reduction in these expenditures corresponds mainly to the scheduled withdrawal of programmes deployed to mitigate the impact of the pandemic in 2020, some countries have adopted new measures or expanded the coverage of existing programmes.
In Chile, the implementation of the Universal Family Emergency Income (IFE) 2.0 included the payment of economic assistance between June and November 2021 to the households most affected by the crisis (DIPRES, 2021).
Along the same lines, despite a reduction in overall current subsidies and transfers, Peru approved a voucher for families living in regions with a high risk of contagion from COVID-19 and the Yanapay Perú voucher, targeted at persons living in poverty.
Peru also expanded the coverage of existing programmes such as Juntos, Contigo and Cuna Más (MEF, 2021a).
In the Dominican Republic, while several programmes associated with the pandemic expired, a new programme, Supérate, was introduced to consolidate a number of existing ones.
Capital expenditures in Latin America are set to increase, for several reasons.
These include the implementation of employment-intensive economic reactivation programmes and the lifting of the mobility restrictions that had caused public works to be suspended in 2020.
Data on expenditure execution for the first nine months of the year show strong year-on-year growth in several countries (see figure VII.4).
As a result, capital outlays are approaching the levels recorded in 2019 and, in some cases, surpassing them in absolute terms.
In contrast, there have been contractions in some countries which, in general, reflect a high base of comparison relative to 2020.
An example is the Dominican Republic, where significant investments were made in the previous year.
These included outlays for the purchase and delivery of computers to students (in the framework of the Digital Education programme), as well as capital transfers to the National Housing Institute to finance the Dominicana Se Reconstruye plan (DIGEPRES, 2020).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VII 89 in Latin America during the first nine months of the year are not necessarily indicative of the final year-end outturn.
According to estimations made by the International Monetary Fund (IMF), the set of measures announced by this group of countries amounted to nearly US$ 14.9 trillion by the end of September 2021 (IMF, 2021a).
This includes about US$ 9.5 trillion in additional spending and tax relief, while the remaining US$ 5.4 trillion represents below-the-line liquidity instruments (including government guarantees for credit and quasi-fiscal operations).
Emerging economies, meanwhile, mobilized about US$ 2 trillion in above-the-line discretionary measures and close to US$ 750 billion through below-the-line liquidity instruments.
These measures were largely implemented in 2020 through emergency plans aimed at strengthening health sector systems, protecting jobs and preventing mass bankruptcies, while also providing economic relief through current transfers to those hardest hit by the economic crisis caused by the pandemic.
The scale of the funds involved had a major impact on fiscal balances and forced up the public debt.
However, and in conjunction with the vaccination roll-out, the fiscal responses facilitated a significant economic recovery from the second half of 2020 in most of the advanced economies, which should enable them to regain pre-pandemic levels of economic activity by the end of 2021, according to recent estimations (IMF, 2021b).
In 2021, fiscal policy in advanced economies was geared toward a dual objective: first, to maintain support for the most vulnerable firms and individuals in the continuing pandemic; and second, to lay the groundwork for strengthening economies through green transition, digital transformation and other longer-term investments.
As of end-September 2021, the new fiscal measures announced by the advanced economies totalled about US$ 2.5 trillion, mainly consisting of additional spending and tax relief measures.
In the emerging economies, such measures amounted to US$ 330 billion between January and September 2021.
As shown in the figure below, the United States announced recovery plans equivalent to about 9% of GDP in 2021; the Netherlands announced a package worth 6% of GDP; and Germany, Spain, Italy and the Czechia all had measures totalling approximately 4% of GDP.
This commitment is materialized through medium- and long-term plans that include a large component of investment in fixed and intangible assets.
These include ambitious projects to modernize transportation, housing and energy infrastructures; advance the digital transformation in production processes; and improve energy efficiency to reduce the impact on climate change.
These projects are expected to have a positive impact on economic activity and create new jobs.
There are also numerous initiatives to mitigate the social impacts of the crisis resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic by strengthening social protection systems.
In 2020, the European Union approved an unprecedented budget of € 2 trillion for 2021–2027, targeted to post-pandemic reconstruction.
This budget promotes modernization of the production and energy matrices to make them greener, more digital and more resilient.
The funds in question will be channelled through the multi-year budget 2021–2027 (€ 1.2 trillion) and a new instrument called “NextGenerationEU” (€ 806.9 billion), which is conceived as a temporary mechanism for channelling resources to member countries through grants and loans.
It is worth noting the firm commitment to target these resources to sectors with the greatest potential for achieving a sustainable, digital and resilient transformation.
Thus, more than 50% of the approved resources must be used to finance research and development activities under the Horizon Europe programme, and to achieve a just climate and digital transition for all, through the Just Transition Fund and the Digital Europe Programme.
This item also includes funding for the Recovery and Resilience Mechanism (rescUE) and the new health programme, EUproHealth.
In addition, 30% of the budget was committed to financing climate transition; and, in 2026 and 2027, at least 10% of the budget will be allocated to reversing biodiversity loss.a Other important initiatives have been announced by the United States government, which could inject close to US$ 2.3 trillion over the next 10 years through additional spending.
The first package of the agreement to fund infrastructure works (under the bipartisan Infrastructure Investment and Jobs Act) gives a major boost to infrastructure investments by adding US$ 572 billion (about 2.6% of 2021 GDP) to the regular budget.
This package, which was approved by Congress in early November 2021, aims to modernize more than 280,000 kilometres of highways and thousands of bridges across the United States, with the goal of closing gaps between communities and reshaping the country’s rail network.
It also seeks to expand access to drinking water, ensure that all Americans have access to high-speed Internet, and facilitate electromobility through new infrastructures and public transportation modalities, among other initiatives.
In addition, the Biden Administration submitted a bill to Congress that forms the basis for the Build Back Better Framework, the main objectives of which are to strengthen the country’s social protection system in health and education, and to address the climate crisis through changes in the energy matrix.
Among individual countries the patterns are heterogeneous, reflecting differences in the relative importance of direct fixed capital investment, capital transfers and financial investment.
For example, in Nicaragua, public investment in transportation projects has been particularly vigorous (Nicaraguan Ministry of Finance and Public Credit, 2021).
A similar pattern is seen in Peru, reflecting the roll-out of a variety of infrastructure projects, with transportation, education, sanitation, housing and agriculture and livestock the most prominent (MEF, 2021b).
In Argentina, there have been higher expenditures in physical investment (especially in transportation works), but also a significant increase in capital transfers to housing funds and to provinces and municipalities for public works (Ministry of Economy of Argentina, 2021).
The situation is similar in Ecuador, where significant capital transfers have been made to bolster financial funds associated with investment projects and social programmes (Ministry of Economy and Finance of Ecuador, 2021).
In Mexico, the upturn in capital expenditure corresponds mainly to financial investment, reflecting capital injections to strengthen the financial position of PEMEX, as physical investment was almost unchanged from one year to the next (SHCP, 2021).
Nicaragua Nicaragua 92 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Interest payments in Latin America are rising in line with public debt levels, a trend that preceded the crisis but was accelerated by the measures deployed in 2020.
As can be seen in figure VII.5, these outlays over the year to September reached levels well above those of 2019 in several countries.
For example, in Costa Rica cumulative interest payments in the year to September reached their highest level in the last 15 years (Ministry of Finance of Costa Rica, 2021).
In Brazil, interest payments have begun to increase, in line with the rise in the monetary policy rate, reflecting the heavy weight of short-term borrowing in the total debt stock.
In Argentina and Ecuador, in contrast, interest payments were lower than in 2019.
The agreements reached in 2020 in the framework of external debt restructuring processes have played a key role in both cases (Ministry of Economy of Argentina, 2021; Ministry of Economy and Finance of Ecuador, 2021).
In the Caribbean, total central government expenditure is projected to rise slightly in 2021, although remaining well above its 2020 level (see figure VII.6).
The countries of the subregion continue to battle with the effects of the pandemic, hampered by significant additional costs arising from natural disasters in 2021.
It should be noted that the demands on public accounts related to natural disasters are reflected in the dynamic of capital expenditures, which are set to remain high in 2021.
This is exemplified in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines with expenditures associated with reconstruction programmes following the eruption of the La Soufrière volcano, which started in December 2020 and was followed by an explosive eruption in the following April (Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Information Technology of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, 2021).
At the same time, the increase in gross public debt in 2020 has pushed up interest payments in several countries.
Composition of total central government expenditureab (percentages of GDP) 5 Interest Capital expenditure 0 Primary current expenditure B.
Buoyant tax receipts have boosted the recovery of public revenue The revival of economic activity and favourable commodities prices are expected to trigger a strong rebound in total central government revenue in Latin America —in particular, buoyant tax receipts, which could attain or exceed their 2019 levels.
Other revenues (composed of non-tax income, income from capital and grants) are expected to trend unevenly between the different subregions, with an increase in South America, reflecting higher royalties and dividends, offsetting a slight reduction in Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico.
Tax collection gathered pace in the first nine months of the year, supported by the recovery of economic activity, higher commodity prices and the positive statistical effect caused by the low 2020 comparison base.
The recovery of private consumption and imports boosted indirect tax revenue, with value added tax (VAT) receipts expanding rapidly (see figure VII.8).
In some cases, this dynamic was reinforced by the public policy measures adopted in 2021 to underpin household liquidity.
In Chile, for example, household liquidity was bolstered by the application of subsidies such as the Universal Emergency Family Income (IFE), and withdrawals from pension funds (DIPRES, 2021).
The uptick in the international price of crude oil and increased fuel consumption also boosted VAT receipts (through both price and quantity effects) and revenues from specific fuel duties (quantity effect).
Income tax revenue also grew strongly in most countries, partly as a result of higher advance payments for fiscal year 2021.
In addition, in the case of the Dominican Republic, the reintroduction of the tax regularization programme had an impact on income tax receipts, generating the equivalent of 0.1% of GDP between July and September (DIGEPRES, 2021).
In turn, the contraction in income tax collection in Ecuador is due to the high base of comparison with the previous year, resulting from the advance collection of income tax for fiscal year 2020, pursuant to Executive Decree No. 1109 (SRI, 2021).
Simple average real variation: 12 month rolling average (percentages) Income tax (ISR) Tax revenue B.
The figures shown for Argentina, Mexico and Peru correspond to national public administration, the federal public sector and central government, respectively.
Another key factor driving the growth of tax revenue in the first nine months of the year is the expiry of the relief extended to taxpayers during 2020 as part of the fiscal packages deployed to respond to the pandemic.
In Brazil, for example, it is estimated that the revenue intake of the Federal Internal Revenue Secretariat would have increased by 20.5% in real terms in the first three quarters of 2021, relative to the year-earlier period, instead of the 28.6% actually recorded (National Treasury of Brazil, 2021).
In this regard, revenue obtained from the financial transactions tax (IOF), which was zero-rated between April and September 2021 to alleviate the costs associated with emergency credit lines, rebounded strongly.
This reflects the extension of the deadline to pay the tax from May–June 2020 to October–November 2020.
A similar situation is seen in Chile, where non-mining tax revenues are estimated to have grown by 11.8% in real terms, compared to the year-earlier period, instead of the 30.7% observed, owing to the deployment of exceptional tax measures in 2020 (DIPRES, 2021).
Mining revenues grew strongly in the first nine months of 2021, relative to the same period of the previous year, and are now well above their 2019 levels (see table VII.1).
In Chile, the historically high price of copper boosted revenues from the corporate income tax and the specific mining duty paid by large private mining companies, reflecting the increased operating profits obtained by the sector.
In this context, the State-owned copper producer, Codelco, paid dividends to the Treasury equivalent to 0.4% of GDP in the first nine months of the year (DIPRES, 2021).
A similar dynamic can be discerned in Peru, where higher operating profits and exports from the mining sector led to a substantial increase in corporate income tax and special mining duty revenues, and also in royalty payments (MEF, 2021b).
In Ecuador, the growth in oil revenues is due to higher oil prices and an increase in production and exports (Ministry of Economy and Finance of Ecuador, 2021).
In Mexico, federal government oil revenues were less buoyant, owing partly to the deferrals granted to Pemex for the payment of the shared profit duty and payment of the monthly hydrocarbon extraction fee for In the Caribbean, government revenues are also projected to increase, driven by higher tax revenues (see figure VII.9).
In line with this projection, tax receipts surged in the second quarter of the year, posting growth rates above 10% in most countries, and above 20% in some cases.
However, the factors responsible for this dynamic were not necessarily the same from one country to another.
One example is the recovery in indirect tax revenue (especially VAT) in several countries, particularly in the Bahamas, Barbados, and Trinidad and Tobago.
In contrast, in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, revenue from property tax is the main driver, thanks to higher land sales (Ministry of Finance, Economic Planning and Information Technology of Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, 2021).
Meanwhile, in Suriname, dividend and royalty receipts, mainly denominated in dollars but expressed in national currency, were sharply higher in the first half of the year (Ministry of Finance and Planning of Suriname, 2021).
Composition of total central government incomea (percentages of GDP) Tax revenue 0 Other income (projection) B.
Fiscal outturns should improve in a scenario of lower expenditures and higher public-sector revenue The expected reduction in public expenditure levels and the recovery of public-sector revenue will be reflected in fiscal balances in Latin America.
The overall central government balance is projected to post a deficit of 5.0% of GDP in 2021, following a 6.9% shortfall in 2020 (see figure VII.10).
Despite this improvement, the deficit remains large and is likely to exert significant pressure on gross financing needs.
The primary balance is 98 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) forecast to come in at 2.4% of GDP in 2021, compared to the previous year’s deficit of 4.2%.
Despite this change, the size of the primary deficit is still likely to put greater pressure on public debt dynamics.
At the subregional level, similar reductions in fiscal deficits are expected in Latin America (see figure VII.11).
The reduction in the overall deficit in the group of countries comprising Central America, Mexico and the Dominican Republic is explained largely by the reduction in total expenditure (-1.3 percentage points of GDP) than by the increase in total income (+0.5 percentage points).
In contrast, in South America, the effect of the stronger growth of total income (+1.1 percentage points of GDP) was offset by a smaller reduction in total expenditure (-0.9 points).
In the Caribbean, the recovery of total revenue should reduce the fiscal deficits in 2021 (see figure VII.12), albeit by less than the deficit reduction expected in Latin America, given the dynamic of total spending.
Total expenditures have risen in several Caribbean countries so far this year, owing to the costs generated by adverse weather and geological events.
However, this context poses other challenges for the countries of the subregion, since the primary deficit will likely drive the already elevated public debt even higher.
The exceptionally favourable conditions prevailing in international markets during the first few months of the year, with low interest rates and extended maturities, led investment-grade countries to increase their sovereign debt issuance in response to the rapid search for financing, and, in other cases, to refinance maturing debt.
At year-end, this scenario has become more complex with a generalized increase in interest rates and weaker exchange rates, with potential effects on debt management in the medium term.
On the basis of preliminary official data, central government gross public debt in Latin America averaged 54.7% of GDP in September 2021, 1.7 percentage points lower than at the end of 2020 (see figure VII.13).
The fall in the ratio of gross public debt to GDP is mainly explained by the effect of a higher denominator.
At the subregional level, the public debt represented 56.1% and 53.3% of GDP in South America and Central America, respectively, in the third quarter of 2021.
In individual countries, public debt rose to 91.1% of GDP in Argentina, 83% in Brazil, 74.5% in Costa Rica and 66.5% in Panama.
Countries at the other extreme, with lower levels of public debt relative to GDP include Guatemala (26.5%), Paraguay (29.4%) and Peru with (31.5%).
In the case of the Caribbean, data on central government gross public debt are available up to September 2021 (see figure VII.14).
Debt levels averaged 90.3% of GDP in the third quarter of the year, up slightly since the end of 2020.
At the other extreme, Guyana’s gross public sector debt represents 36.6% of GDP, which is 11 percentage points lower than at the end of 2020.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VII 101 the COVID-19 crisis mainly by borrowing from multilateral organizations and through relief provided by the Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI)2 in the case of countries eligible for International Development Association (IDA) support.
In the case of Guyana, the figures correspond to the public sector.
The accumulation of public debt reflects both domestic and external factors, such as the primary fiscal deficit, the GDP growth rate, the implicit interest rate and the exchange rate.
In an uncertain scenario, the interactions between these factors afford a more detailed view of the risks associated with the amount of financing required in 2021.
In Latin American countries, the composition of public debt by type of currency and creditor residence plays an important role in the respective dynamics.
As shown in figure VII.15, a large proportion of the stock of foreign currency public debt in the region’s countries is still denominated in dollars.
In Argentina, Ecuador, Panama and Paraguay, almost 80% of the total debt is denominated in foreign currency (mostly dollars).
These have low levels of external debt, and a dollar-denominated share of less than 40%.
In the case of dollarized countries, such as Ecuador, El Salvador and Panama, their financing depends entirely on other economies.
Exchange rate depreciations have affected most of the countries of the region, with a consequent generalized increase in the cost of foreign currency debt. 2 The Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) is sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and the G20 member countries.
CG = central government, NCG = national central government, PS = public sector, NFPS = non-financial public sector.
Another relevant indicator is central government public debt classified by creditor residence.
Although the region on average maintains a balance between the domestic and external markets, the situation in individual countries varies considerably.
As figure VII.16 shows, among the 16 countries with information as of the third quarter of 2021, nearly 90% of the total debt in Nicaragua and Paraguay is held by external creditors.
This level of obligation to external creditors exerts additional pressure on the fiscal accounts.
Conversely, the countries with the highest levels of domestic financing, namely Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Mexico, in which more than 70% of total debt is domestic, are less exposed to external vulnerabilities; but they depend on other, no-less-important factors, such as interest rates and the economy’s growth rate.
In the case of Brazil, for example, the rise in the Special System for Settlement and Custody (SELIC) interest rate has added a cumulative 4 percentage points of GDP to the debt burden as of September 2021 (Central Bank of Brazil, 2021).
At the same time, however, a substantial increase in the growth rate has mitigated this effect by contributing to a 9.7 percentage point reduction in the cumulative debt/GDP ratio.
Conventional instruments, such as interest rate cuts, changes in reserve requirements and the strengthening of mechanisms to promote financial intermediation, were supplemented by less conventional instruments.
Thus, the treatment of debt rescheduling and provisions, regulatory requirements governing liquidity, capital and conservation and countercyclical buffers, and liquidity credit lines conditional on lending were all made more flexible.
Similarly, interventions in the foreign exchange markets, changes in required reserve ratios on deposits and the adoption of measures to regulate capital flows were all increased.
However, as noted in chapter V, since the middle of the second half of 2020 inflation has been gathering pace across the region; and the process has intensified in the first nine months of 2021.
This has reduced the space available to the region’s authorities, thereby creating a dilemma in monetary policy objectives: while there is still a need for policies that boost economic growth and job creation, inflationary pressures and exchange-rate volatility also need to be mitigated.
The challenge facing the region’s monetary authorities at the current juncture is thus to contain the rise in inflation and exchange rate volatility without jeopardizing the economic growth prospects of the region’s economies, beyond the outcome recorded in 2021.
In this context, some of the region’s monetary authorities have tended to reduce the intensity of policies that promote the growth of credit and aggregate demand, while keeping them broadly expansionary.
In some cases this has entailed hikes in monetary policy interest rates, together with slower growth of the monetary aggregates.
During the course of the year, 9 of the 12 central banks that use monetary policy rates as their main policy instrument decided to lower them.3 The result was an average drop of 2.15 percentage points, with Jamaica being the only country in which the policy rate remained unchanged in 2020.
As of December 2020, policy rates in all of these countries were at their lowest levels of the last decade; and they were below 1.0% in Chile, Costa Rica, Jamaica, Paraguay and Peru (see figure VII.17).
In 2021, as a result of the uptick in inflation and the depreciations experienced by most of the region’s currencies, monetary policy rates have risen by an average of 2.0 percentage points in eight of the economies in which this is the main instrument, with Brazil, Chile and Paraguay all raising their rates by larger amounts.
In terms of the frequency of adjustments, policy rates were adjusted six times in Brazil, five times in Mexico and four times in Peru.
The four economies in which policy rates have not been adjusted thus far (Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala and Honduras) are those in which inflation has varied the least and where domestic currencies have stayed relatively stable.
Despite the rate hikes observed, however, policy rates are currently negative in real terms in all of the economies that use this instrument as their key monetary policy lever.
This means the expansionary stance of monetary policy has been maintained thus far, although in some cases it has been eased somewhat.
Bank reserve requirements (required reserve ratio) were altered, and interventions in the interbank markets were increased, mainly to provide facilities to institutions that might otherwise face short-term liquidity problems.
These conventional measures were complemented by other less conventional ones, to provide additional funding for financial intermediation and also to finance expansionary public finance actions throughout the region.
Some central banks, especially those that use the interest rate as their main policy tool, made outright purchases of private and government securities held by financial institutions.
Others provided financing directly to the public sector to support measures to combat the pandemic.
Steps were also taken to mitigate the major impact that falling revenues could have on the public sector’s spending capacity.
The figure shows how the measures adopted by central banks fuelled a substantial expansion in this variable in 2020, and then how the pace has slackened since March 2021.
The figure also shows that this pattern prevailed in all monetary and exchange-rate policy frameworks.
Nonetheless, in economies with chronic inflation problems, the expansion of the monetary base began to slow sooner than in the other groupings as of August 2020.
Another point to note in figure VII.18 is that, despite the slower growth recorded during 2021, between April and September of that year the monetary base grew by more than in 2019.
In fact, this is the case in 20 of the 25 economies in the region for which up-to-date statistical data are available; and, in 17 of them, the most recent figure is higher than the average for 2019.
In the group of countries that use the monetary policy rate as their main instrument and have a flexible exchange rate, average lending rates declined by 2.56 percentage points in the 12 months to December 2020.
In economies that use the policy rate as the main instrument and maintain an intermediate exchange rate system, the reduction was 1.62 percentage points in the 12 months to December 2020, and 1.24 percentage points between December 2020 and September 2021.
For economies that target monetary aggregates and have an intermediate exchange rate 108 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) system, lending rates fell by 0.90 percentage points in the 12 months to December 2020, and by 0.45 percentage points between December 2020 and September 2021.
The economies with fixed exchange rates have seen the most moderate reduction, with rates falling by 0.01 percentage points in the 12 months to December 2020, and by 0.30 percentage points between December 2020 and July 2021.
This was the case in economies that use the policy rate as their main instrument (both those with flexible and those with intermediate exchange rates) and in economies that mainly target the monetary aggregates and have fixed exchange rates.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VII 109 In economies that use the policy rate and maintain flexible exchange rates, the real growth of credit to the private sector increased from 6.7%, in the fourth quarter of 2019 to 8.2% in the second quarter of 2020.
In this group of countries, credit expanded by 2.0% in the fourth quarter of 2020.
In 2021, the trend has been accentuated, with lending to the private sector growing by 1.1%, in the first quarter of the year before turning negative in the second and third quarters (-0.2% and -0.1%, respectively).
For economies that use the monetary policy rate and have intermediate exchange rates, private sector credit growth eased from 6.2% in the fourth quarter of 2019 to 5.5% in the second quarter of 2020, before dropping to 1.8% in the fourth quarter of that year.
In the economies with fixed exchange rates, the growth of domestic credit to the private sector increased from 1.8% in the fourth quarter of 2019 to 5.5% in the second quarter of 2020; and it ended with a year-on-year expansion of 2.2%.
In 2021, however, growth rates have been negative, at -0.3% in the first quarter and -1.2% in the second.
In the economies that use monetary aggregate targets as the main policy instrument and maintain an intermediate exchange rate system, policymakers’ efforts failed to boost credit growth, which has been in decline since the third quarter of 2019.
The downward trend in the growth of credit to the private sector in these economies became more pronounced in the fourth quarter of 2020.
Lastly, for economies with chronic inflation problems, credit to the private sector has been declining since 2015.
In this group of countries, falling inflation and rising nominal credit growth have led to smaller real contractions in 2021 than those experienced between the first quarter of 2019 and the second quarter of 2020 (see figure VII.20).
Dollarized economies: Ecuador, El Salvador and Panama. e Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Haiti and Suriname. 110 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) In terms of the composition of lending to the private sector, the share of consumer credit has shrunk across the region since the onset of the crisis.
Only the economies with fixed exchange rates saw an expansion in consumer credit between the fourth quarter of 2019 and the second quarter of 2021.
Mortgage lending has also seen its share of total credit decline regionwide, with the fixed exchange rate economies experiencing the steepest decline in the mortgage share of total credit.
This category experienced a slight upturn in the economies that use the policy rate as their main instrument.
Between the fourth quarter of 2019 and the second quarter of 2021, credit to the industrial and the commercial sectors have both increased their shares of total credit.
These variables have grown in economies that use the policy rate and have flexible exchange rates, and also in those with chronic inflation in the case of commercial credit, and in economies with fixed exchange rates in the case of industrial credit (see figure VII.21).
Factors such as the increased cost of long-term financing have contributed to the smaller share of mortgages in the total loan portfolio.
There are several reasons for this: a first reason is that the transfers received by households and businesses could be used partly for debt repayment.
A second reason is the use of credit facilities granted by central banks through the banking system, and those guaranteed by the government, which may also have made it possible to prepay loans with a view to avoiding future complications, given the financial uncertainty caused by the COVID-19 crisis.
A third reason relates to the different macroprudential measures implemented to reschedule, renegotiate, defer and reclassify loans, together with the implementation of technical standards to deal with defaults and credit risks.
These measures have tended to dissipate over time, such that 2021 is likely to see an increase in arrears —which could intensify once these temporary changes to the regulations expire and the risks of the most vulnerable segments with lower recovery rates come into play.
Nonetheless, in general the nonperforming loans rate remains lower than before the pandemic.
The average depreciation of the region’s currencies during that period, excluding the economies with chronic inflation, was smaller than in 2020: 5.9% compared to 8.7%.
In the chronically inflationary economies, the pace of depreciation slowed in 2021, although the rates in these countries exceeded 18% in the case of Argentina, 52% in the case of Suriname and 295% in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Haitian gourde was the only currency in this group of inflation-prone countries to appreciate in nominal terms in 2021, following its 9.8% depreciation in 2020.
The aforementioned exchange rate corrections (both the appreciations and the depreciations), and the resulting greater volatility, reflected the uncertainty created by the spread of COVID-19 and its far-reaching effects on the region’s economies.
This was compounded by the large-scale capital movements that have taken place during the crisis, the uncertainty surrounding the actions planned by the main central banks of the developing world, and fluctuations in commodity prices.
Increased liquidity in the region’s economies also stimulates demand for foreign exchange, especially in situations where economic activity is expected to grow more slowly after 2021.
Exchange rate volatility could aggravate vulnerability among economic agents where there are currency mismatches, since revenues are generated in local currency while expenditures are made in foreign currency or indexed units of account.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VII 113 Even in the context of the COVID-19 crisis, most central banks in the region have increased their international reserves Since the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, central banks have had to absorb large and sudden capital outflows, significant currency depreciations and rising risk premia.
At the same time, they had to avert a collapse in economic activity and a sharp deterioration in labour markets.
In these adverse circumstances, the monetary authorities have deployed a wide range of policy tools, including changes in monetary policy rates, international reserves management, adjustment of macroprudential rules and regulation of capital flows.
These aimed to preserve macroeconomic and financial stability in the face of an accumulation of high risks linked to the real sector, the financial sector and external conditions.
As documented in Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2020 and in Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2021 (ECLAC, 2020b and 2021b, respectively), the region’s central banks have adopted a variety of measures to mitigate exchange-rate volatility since the onset of the COVID-19 crisis.
These include increased levels of market intervention, through the purchase or sale of foreign exchange, and changes in the regulations governing financial flows.
As shown in figure VII.23, international reserves generally increased in 2020; and this trend has persisted in 2021.
At the regional level, total international reserves increased by 5.2% in 2021, and as in 2020, reserve levels rose in 22 countries.
Although the average increase in 2021 was 15.7%, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile and Suriname all posted expansions of over 30%.
International reserves fell in nine countries, with an average drop of 7.9%, and reductions of more than 10% in Ecuador, Panama and Saint Lucia.
December 2020–October 2021 The establishment of swap lines and liquidity facilities with the United States Federal Reserve and international financial institutions, together with increased bond issuance on the voluntary markets and the improvement in the terms of trade since mid-2020, which became more pronounced in 2021, were among the factors that enabled the countries to strengthen their foreign asset position.
The uptrend in reserves has also benefited from a stronger recovery in exports than in imports, as well as an increase in remittances and the rise in value of central bank gold reserves.
On the other hand, reduced revenues from tourism activities, increased imports and growing efforts to stabilize the exchange-rate market have dissipated reserves in some of the region’s economies.
This is a significant development in the region’s economic history, since international reserves have traditionally behaved procyclically in times of crisis.
For examples of macroprudential reserve management by different central banks in the region, see BIS (2021). 5 This is in line with Bianchi and Lorenzini (2021) and Bussière and others (2013).
Rep. of) Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2021 Chapter VII 115 these measures also made it possible to sustain expansionary economic policies and social protection programmes aimed at reviving economic activity.
Given the intensification of macrofinancial risks, the future actions of central banks in the region will depend on the characteristics of each country, such as the degree of openness of the current and capital account, its exchange-rate regime, its macroprudential regulation, and its capacity to access external financing, among others.
Accordingly, given the limited role of the international financial safety net, the proactive management of international reserves represents a coherent policy option for responding rapidly to possible financial shocks.
In the meantime, complementarity with other macroprudential instruments should be duly maintained to strengthen the resilience of the international liquidity position of the region’s countries.
As shown in figure VII.18, the monetary base expanded in 2020 and has held sustained levels in 2021, which may be a source of heightened risks associated with volatile capital flows.
To illustrate this, figure VII.24 shows an association between the balance of international reserves and money in circulation both relative to GDP, with heterogeneous situations pertaining among the different countries of the region, as reflected in the quadrants of the figure.
In particular, these instruments can be converted in the short term without incurring a significant loss on the amount initially invested.
In particular, since the global financial crisis, this relation has been positive for a large group of countries, which lie above the horizontal line.
The upper right quadrant indicates that the positive correlation can be high in certain countries, such as Brazil and Mexico, which are deeply integrated into financial markets and have a developed banking system.
However, the quadrant also includes countries that are less integrated but, owing to their exchange rate system, the level of reserves has tended to become more closely correlated with the degree of liquidity.
In other words, the overuse of policy instruments that could inhibit the still-fragile recovery of economic activity should be avoided.
Hiro (2015), “International reserves before and after the global crisis: Is there no end to hoarding?”, Journal of International Money and Finance, vol. 52(C).
SRI (Internal Revenue Service of Ecuador) (2021), “De enero a septiembre de 2021 la recaudación tributaria creció un 11%”, Boletín de Prensa, Quito, 11 October.
These structural problems made even worse by the crisis were compounded in the second half of 2021 by growing macroeconomic uncertainties owing to inflation trends, both in the countries of the region and in developed economies.
Latin American and Caribbean countries are also facing shrinking fiscal space and rising sovereign debt.
Inflation and public debt dynamics are expected to condition the countries’ macroeconomic policies in the coming years.
Therefore, amid projections for weak growth, these policies will have to reconcile greater momentum in economic growth with the objectives of domestic price stability and exchange-rate and financial stability.
This would require maintaining pro-growth fiscal and monetary policies and using monetary, exchange-rate and macroprudential instruments to advance in the nominal stabilization of economies.
Latin America and the Caribbean is expected to grow by 6.2% in 2021 and to decelerate in 2022 The region’s growth in 2021 was stronger than expected at the beginning of the year.
Favourable international trends —in terms of financial conditions, commodity prices and global trade flows— combined with increased mobility within countries and progress in immunization processes resulted in an improved growth outlook for 2021.
ECLAC projects 6.2% growth for the region, 6.4% in South America, 6.0% in Central America and Mexico, and 1.2% in the Caribbean (excluding Guyana) (see figure VIII.1).
However, in contrast to the general trend in the region, this year supply chain bottlenecks have affected manufacturing output in countries with major manufacturing hubs, such as Brazil and Mexico, to a greater extent than expected.
This largely explains the downward revisions in growth in these two countries.
Following the sharp declines in 2020, all components of domestic demand are expected to rebound considerably this year.
Private consumption is projected to have slowed from the third quarter of 2021 onward, following the strong increase in the first half of the year.
The rate of growth in private consumption is expected to continue to ease at the end of the year as a result of the pressure on household incomes caused by the current upturn in inflation.
The slowdown in consumption growth rates is expected to intensify from the beginning of next year, amid a sluggish labour market recovery and an increase in inflation which is expected to weigh on households’ disposable income and spending.
Added to this is the uncertainty about the health situation, which is expected to persist in 2022.
However, consumption is expected to continue to be the main contributor to spending.
Investment trends by sector of activity are expected to be mixed depending on the differentiated impact of the crisis on each and the possible permanent changes in the demand for different goods and services.
In terms of trade, the disruption in the trade in goods after the emergence of the pandemic was temporary, as seen particularly in the second quarter of 2020.
Limitations on the movement of people, however, have been more permanent and have had a lasting impact on tourist flows.
Goods exports are projected to rebound more sharply in 2021, given the low base of comparison, and less sharply in 2022.
Meanwhile, imports are expected to recover on the back of increased consumption and investment.
In addition to the structural problems exacerbated by the crisis, in the second half of 2021, growing macroeconomic challenges and other risks are expected to condition the performance of countries in the coming year and beyond The lower projected growth rate for 2022 is explained by a number of factors that are expected to weigh on countries’ performance next year.
In terms of the international context affecting the region, weaker global growth is expected in 2022, along with less dynamic external demand and slower growth in global trade.
In addition, commodity prices are expected to remain stable or even be somewhat lower than in 2021.
Although international financial conditions remain favourable so far, the eventual withdrawal of monetary stimulus by the major central banks are expected to affect emerging markets, including Latin America and the Caribbean.
The magnitude of these effects, 124 Chapter VIII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) however, will depend on how gradually the United States transitions to a tighter monetary policy and how this affects global financial markets and the cost of financing for the region.
With regard to macroeconomic policies in the countries of the region, 2022 also presents growing challenges, as the countries have less monetary and fiscal space available to support the reactivation of economic activity.
Inflation has been higher and lasted longer than expected a few months ago and this has led central banks in several countries in the region to start raising interest rates in order to keep inflation expectations close to their targets.
On the fiscal front, several countries have already adopted more restrictive budgets that seek to reduce fiscal deficits and stabilize debt ratios which rose significantly in 2020.
Finally, there is uncertainty associated with the evolution of the pandemic and the possibility that the appearance of new variants —like Omicron— could lead to new more or less widespread restrictions on mobility.
This would have damaging impacts on economic activity that cannot be ruled out.
On the basis of the projected growth rates for 2021 and 2022, less than half of the countries in the region will manage to recover their pre-crisis activity levels of 2019.
In 2021, 11 countries are expected to return to those levels, while in 2022, three more countries are expected to do so, bringing the total to 14 of the 33 countries in the region (see figure VIII.4).
This implies that by the end of 2022, almost three years after the start of the pandemic, more than half of the countries in the region will have failed to recover their 2019 GDP levels.
In this regard, the pandemic has inflicted lasting damage on the growth of the economies of much of Latin America and the Caribbean, exacerbating the structural problems that already characterized the region before the crisis.
Does not include Cuba and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. f Estimates based on figures denominated in dollars at current prices.
Does not include Cuba and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela. g Estimates based on figures denominated in dollars at current prices. h Includes errors and omissions. i A minus sign (-) indicates an increase in reserve assets. j Coverage corresponds to the central government.
Figures for Mexico and Peru correspond to the federal public sector and the general government, respectively. k Simple averages.
The extraregional real effective exchange rate index excludes trade with other Latin American and Caribbean countries. b A currency depreciates in real effective terms when this index rises and appreciates when it falls. c Preliminary figures. d Figures as of September.
Does not include hidden unemployment in Colombia, Ecuador, Jamaica and Panama. d As a result of the statistical emergency declared in 2016, the National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INDEC) of Argentina does not recognize the data for the period 2007–2015 for comparison and analysis of the labour market.
The annual average for 2020 corresponds to figures for the first, third and fourth quarters. n The average figures for the second and third quarters of 2019 come from the National Occupation and Employment Survey (ENOE).
The figures for the second quarter of 2020 come from the Occupation and Employment Telephone Survey (ETOE).
The figures for the third and fourth quarters of 2020 come from the new ENOE. o The figure for 2020 corresponds to a telephone survey conducted between September and October. p New measurements have been used since 2017.
The data are not comparable with the previous series. q New measurments have been used since 2015.
The average figures for the second quarter of 2020 correspond to April, May and June (telephone ECH).
The figures for 2020 and 2021 may present comparability problems with the 2019 data owing to adjustments in the statistical processes implemented by statistical and census institutions because of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. c Weighted average.
Does not include hidden unemployment in Colombia, Ecuador, Jamaica and Panama. d Data correspond to 31 urban agglomerations.
As a result of the statistical emergency declared in 2016, the National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INDEC) of Argentina does not recognize the data for the period 2007–2015 for comparison and analysis of the labour market.
The annual figure for 2016 corresponds to the average of the second, third and fourth quarters. e New measurement from 2016 based on the Continuous Employment Survey (ECE).
The figures for the third and fourth quarters of 2020 come from the new ENOE. k The figure for 2020 corresponds to a telephone survey conducted between September and October. l New measurements have been used since 2017.
The data are not comparable with the previous series. m New measurments have been used since 2015.
The data are not comparable with the previous series. n The average figures for the first quarter of 2020 come from the Continuous Household Survey (ECH) of January and February and the figures from March come from the telephone ECH.
The figures for the fourth quarter correspond to October, November and December (telephone ECH). o The 2019 figures are preliminary and correspond to May. p The 2020 figures correspond to the average of the third and fourth quarters. q The 2018 figure corresponds to April.
The 2020 figure corresponds to September. r The survey was not carried out in the second quarter (April) of 2020.
The annual average for 2020 corresponds to figures for the first, third and fourth quarters. s The 2019 figure corresponds to the average for March, June and December.
The figures for 2020 and 2021 may present comparability problems with the 2019 data owing to adjustments in the statistical processesimplemented by statistical and census institutions because of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic. c Weighted average. d Data correspond to 31 urban agglomerations.
The annual figure for 2016 corresponds to the average of the second, third and fourth quarters.
These data are therefore preliminary and will be replaced when new official data are published.
The 2016 annual data is the average of the second, third and fourth quarters. e New measurement from 2016 based on the Continuous Employment Survey (ECE).
The figures for the third and fourth quarters of 2020 come from the new ENOE. j The figure for 2020 corresponds to a telephone survey conducted between September and October. k New measurements have been used since 2017.
The data are not comparable with the previous series. l New measurements have been used since 2015.
The data are not comparable with the previous series. m The average figures for the first quarter of 2020 come from the Continuous Household Survey (ECH) of January and February and the figures from March come from the telephone ECH.
The figures for the fourth quarter correspond to October, November and December (telephone ECH). n The 2020 figures correspond to the average of the third and fourth quarters. o The 2018 figure corresponds to April.
The 2020 figure corresponds to September. p The survey was not carried out in the second quarter (April) of 2020.
The annual average for 2020 corresponds to figures for the first, third and fourth quarters. q The figures for 2019 and 2020 correspond to the first quarter of each year. r The annual average for 2020 corresponds to the first half of the year.
New series from 2013. f General index of hourly remuneration. g Manufacturing.
New series from 2015. h Average wage declared by workers registered with and paying into social security. i Average wage declared by private workers covered by social security. j Average wage declared by workers covered by social security.
As from 2013, corresponds to workers in small, medium and large businesses, in manufacturing, commerce and services. k Wage and salary index. l Average income in the formal sector.
This is a plausible description of what occurred in 2002 and part of 2003, which was a period marked by very slow GDP growth and a hefty trade surplus which enabled the region to post a positive balance on its current account in 2003.
Owing to the effects of the stabilization programmes implemented in previous years and of the recession and unemployment triggered by the adjustment, the recovery of relative prices did not generate any major inflationary pressures.
Of course, this general description is simply an attempt to trace the chain of events occurring in the region as a whole, since there are important differences to be observed across countries.
Starting in 2003 but especially in 2004, favourable external conditions began to have a positive effect on the terms of trade.
This, in turn, increased the purchasing power of export earnings and, since export activity was becoming more profitable, stimulated the growth of exportable supply.
Since the context for these events included high unemployment, low real wages, an underutilization of installed capacity and, in many cases, a recent history of great instability, it comes as no surprise that domestic demand was slow to react.
First, the countries’ central banks lowered interest rates as the level of activity began to recover based on a flexible monetary policy that also helped to sustain the nominal exchange rate.
Secondly, the public sector maintained a high savings rate, and although this did nothing to facilitate the expansion of the economy (in the best of cases, it was a neutral factor), it did help to sustain the relative prices of tradables while at the same time giving monetary policy makers a certain degree of flexibility.
This elicited an elastic response from imports, which began to rise accordingly.
Exports have expanded further; the upward trend in investment has grown more solid, especially in tradables-producing sectors; and the region has begun to see a substantial increase in employment and a slight rise in real wages.
This has spurred overall consumption, although the consumption of durable goods had already begun to pick up in response to the decline in interest rates.
As a result, GDP growth has accelerated, thereby spurring an expansion of imports and giving rise to a situation not seen in the region in at least the past 50 years: the region has posted a positive economic growth rate, for the second year running, in combination with a current account surplus.
Unlike past episodes, the trade surplus that is underpinning the positive balance on the current account is not based on a drop in imports.
In fact, imports have exhibited a GDP elasticity of 2.6 and, in real terms, have begun to rise faster than exports.
Thus, the “terms of trade effect” is gradually emerging as a decisive element in accounting for the trade surplus and, in conjunction with remittances, the surplus on the current account as well.
It is noteworthy that, with the sole exception of Haiti, all the countries of the region have grown in 2004.
What is more, for only the second time in the last 20 years, the GDP Imports Exports Consumption Investment region’s six largest economies have all grown by more than 3%.
Private consumption, meanwhile, has continued to grow more slowly than GDP, thereby helping to raise the savings rate.
This is only the second time that per capita income has risen when capital flows are shrinking.
GDP growth Net capital inflows as a percentage of current GDP The international backdrop As noted earlier, the region’s strong economic performance was closely tied to developments in the international economy.
World economic activity picked up speed in 2004, resulting in estimated global GDP growth of just under 4% (versus 2.6% in 2003), while the expansion of world trade could top 9% (versus 5.5% in 2003).
The United States and China have propelled the expansion in global economic activity, which has contributed to the commodity price hikes that have benefited many countries of the region, especially those in South America.
For 2004 as a whole the United States’ GDP is likely to expand by just over 4% (as against the 3% recorded in 2003), although growth slowed down somewhat in the course of the year and will probably continue to trend downward in 2005.
Durable goods consumption and housing investment, which had been sustaining the recovery, have begun to falter in the context of a large fiscal deficit that could exceed 4% of GDP and a worsening external imbalance that could raise the balance-of-payments current account deficit to 5.7% of GDP.
The shortfall has been financed largely with inflows from Asian governments seeking to prevent their currencies from appreciating.
The monetary policy stance changed in June, when the authorities began to raise the federal funds rate, and by mid-December, this rate stood at 2.25%.
However, this did not curb the depreciation of the dollar, whose value had fallen by 9.5% against the euro and by 5.9% against the yen by the end of November.
China posted GDP growth of 9.5% in the first three quarters of 2004, which witnessed a continuation of the large-scale investment seen since 2003.
Despite the various measures taken by the Chinese authorities to gradually cool down the economy so as to avert the danger of a sharp adjustment, as of the third quarter (in which GDP grew by 9.1%) the economy had yet to show any clear signs of slowing down, apart from a considerable slide in import growth.
Japan’s growth could reach some 4% in 2004 (compared to the 2.5% posted in 2003) on the strength of exports, which were given a decisive lift by the expansion of Chinese and United States demand.
Growth tended to slacken in the course of the year, however, probably in response to the slower increase in China’s imports and the appreciation of the yen.
The growth of the European Union’s GDP is estimated at 2% for the year as a whole.
Here again, the economy slowed down in the course of 2004, undoubtedly because of the sharp appreciation of the euro.
In keeping with its usual procyclical pattern, intraregional trade has risen steeply as the regional economy expands.
The biggest increases in intraregional trade have been seen in the Andean Community and in MERCOSUR, but Mexico’s and Chile’s exports to other countries in the region are also up sharply.
Trends in commodity prices (especially in the cases of petroleum and metals) have been a decisive factor in this regard.
Among the countries that are net oil importers, which are thus at a relative disadvantage, this negative effect has been more than offset in the cases of Chile and Peru (which are metal exporters) by higher export prices.
The combination of higher prices and larger volumes has given rise to an almost unprecedented upswing in the region’s merchandise trade.
The sum of total exports and imports amounts to US$ 860 billion (44% of GDP) and represents a 21.2% growth rate.
Exports have expanded by 22.4% (10.8% of the increase corresponds to the rise in volume and 10.5% to higher prices), while imports have climbed by 19.8% (with 14.4% corresponding to volume and 4.7% to prices).
For the third consecutive year, the region has posted a surplus on the merchandise trade account, with the positive balance rising at a rate of some US$ 20 billion per year, thus reaching the 2004 figure of US$ 61.875 billion (3.2% of GDP).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 17 As mentioned earlier, the improvement in the terms of trade in 2004 has brought an additional US$ 24 billion in foreign exchange into the region, which is more than the increase in the trade surplus and more than the upswing in the current account balance.
In other words, if it had not been for that improvement, both of these aggregates would have deteriorated slightly relative to their 2003 levels.
For the second year in a row, the region is posting a surplus (US$ 21.8 billion, or 1.1% of GDP) on the balance-of-payments current account.
The factors that account for the region’s surplus are qualitatively identical to those that were at work in 2003, but this time their impact has been stronger.
The positive components of the regional current account are the merchandise trade balance (US$ 61.875 billion) and current transfers (US$ 40.275 billion), for a combined balance of US$ 102.15 billion.
The services balance and the income balance both show deficits (US$ 15 billion and US$ 65.3 billion, respectively).
The region has been drawing on its largest current account surplus in at least the last 50 years to build up its reserves by US$ 9.3 billion (0.5% of GDP) and to pay off external liabilities equivalent to 0.6% of GDP.
This will show up in the region’s accounts as a capital outflow of US$ 12.5 billion, which can be broken down into net autonomous outflows (registered on the capital and financial accounts, plus errors and omissions) of US$ 19.4 billion and net compensatory inflows (use of IMF credit and exceptional financing) totalling US$ 6.8 billion.
The variation in the region’s autonomous flows can, in turn, be disaggregated into net inflows of US$ 37.9 billion in FDI (1.9% of GDP) and US$ 57.2 billion (2.9% of GDP) in outflows of portfolio investment and other capital.
With a net capital outflow equivalent to 0.6% of GDP (not counting workers’ remittances) and a US$ 65.3 deficit on the income account, the region will have made outward transfers totalling US$ 77.8 (4.0% of GDP) in 2003.
The region’s macroeconomic performance in 2004 resulted in a significant improvement in the countries’ fiscal accounts that will enable them to accumulate a weighted average central-government primary surplus equivalent to 2% of GDP, as against the 1.8% surplus posted in 2003.
The overall deficit (including interest on the debt) shrank from 1.2% of GDP to 1%.
Revenues, buoyed by the generally favourable context, behaved in a manner consistent with the level of activity in 2004, rising slightly as a percentage of GDP in comparison to their 2003 level, but expenditure remained constant in real terms.
The financial surplus made it possible to reduce debt-to-GDP ratios, but these ratios nonetheless remain very high, averaging 50% but exceeding 60% in seven countries of the region.
An analysis of movements in the benchmark interest rates set by the region’s central banks in the course of 2004 reveals that, in general, monetary policy supported the recovery of domestic demand by bringing down the cost of financing.
Although there were some months in which inflation indices went up, prompting the countries’ monetary authorities to raise interest rates, real interest rates generally followed a downward trend, with few exceptions, and even reached negative values in some cases.
This strategy was facilitated by the fact that public accounts were balanced and by the downturn in international interest rates in the first half of 2004.
In this regard, the United States Federal Reserve Board’s decision to raise interest rates and the expectation of further increases in the near future portend changes in the region’s interestrate trends, whose magnitude and sequencing will reflect developments in international financial markets, although these changes are likely to be relatively small.
The Latin American and Caribbean countries’ exchange-rate policies, almost all of which were implemented in an environment free of constraints, succeeded in keeping real exchange rates relatively stable.
This was no simple task, considering the prevalence of high commodity prices and the increase in export volume, especially in the case of South America.
This subregion’s effective exchange rates displayed a slight real appreciation, especially in the latter part of the year, that was particularly sharp in relation to the dollar.
In Mexico and Central America, on the other hand, real exchange rates have been more stable; in fact, they showed a tendency to rise somewhat in 2004, especially in Mexico, although this trend subsided in the second half of the year.
The supply pressure that these developments exerted on the relevant countries’ exchange markets coincided with the emergence of growing competition from Chinese products in the United States market, especially in view of the forthcoming expiration, in early 2005, of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing.
This situation has posed an economic policy dilemma for the subregion’s central banks.
The most striking feature of the region’s labour market was the faster pace of job creation as a result of higher labour demand.
After the sharp upturn in labourmarket participation in 2003, the labour supply expanded more moderately in 2004.5 This, together with the region-wide increase in the rate of job creation, reduced the unemployment rate from 10.7% in 2003 to 10.0% in 2004.
This positive outcome, however, is due not to a widespread improvement in the region’s labour-market indicators, but mainly to the trends observed in countries that are recovering from severe crises.
It may be presumed that this slight decline in unemployment, along with the incipient recovery of wage levels, contributed to the small downturn seen in the region-wide poverty rate, from an estimated 44.3% in 2003 to an estimated The rate of inflation continued to descend, reaching a region-wide average of 7.6%, as against 8.5% in 2003 and 12.1% in 2002.
Although trends in international commodity prices, particularly for food and oil, exerted upward pressure on price indices in the first half of the year, in the second half these pressures abated and inflation showed a fairly widespread tendency to decline.
The outlook for 2005 5 The labour supply is represented by the economically active population, which increases or decreases according to rates of population growth and labour-market participation.
In 2005 the international environment is expected to be positive for the region, albeit less so than in 2004, as world economic growth is projected to reach some 3%.
The probable slowdown in the United States economy and the recessionary and inflationary effects of high oil prices are the main factors underlying this forecast.
Moreover, while the dynamics of the cooling-down process in the Chinese economy are as yet uncertain, that economy’s growth is likely to be slower in 2005 than it was in 2004.
Growth is also expected to slacken in Japan and the euro area.
The risks currently facing the world economy are related to the imbalances in the United States economy and their potential impact on interest rates and the value of the dollar, the possibility of a sudden stop in China’s growth, the uncertainty surrounding the oil market and the possible adoption of protectionist measures, especially in the United States.
On the basis of this external environment and trends in the region’s economies, it is expected that the expansion begun two years ago will continue in 2005, although at a somewhat slower rate than in 2004.
Economic activity is likely to pick up, resulting in a region-wide average growth rate of 4%, which would raise per capita GDP by about 2.5% (see table 1.1).
The question arises as to the extent to which the growth observed in the region is based on a solid foundation that can sustain this growth in the medium term, or whether, on the contrary, this performance is merely the outcome of conditions that have been extraordinarily favourable but may deteriorate in the near future, as noted above.
Furthermore, the region has a considerable current account surplus that should be able to sustain relatively high growth rates, while no significant tension is foreseen in the external sector.
Nevertheless, it must be borne in mind that not long ago (from 1996 to 1998), the region experienced a comparable episode of high international commodity prices that enabled it to build up a current account surplus, but that these circumstances were short-lived.
Accordingly, in the short term the greatest risks seem to lie in the possibility of a traumatic adjustment of some of the imbalances currently in evidence in the international economy, since this would result in a drastic downturn in world GDP (and, therefore, in demand for the region’s exports) and would heighten global uncertainty.
In any event, the region should seize this opportunity to alter the basis on which it participates in the world economy.
In the medium term, this will require it to reduce its dependence on low-value-added natural resources, especially in the case of South America, and to correct its export profile’s excessive reliance on low wages, particularly in the case of Central America and the Caribbean and, to a lesser extent, Mexico.
The external sector In 2004 the Latin American and Caribbean region’s external sector turned in an excellent performance, buoyed by the region’s supply capacity with respect to both goods and services and by an international environment that strongly stimulated demand and prices.
For the third year in a row the merchandise trade balance ran a surplus (3.2% of GDP), and for the second year in a row the balance-of-payments current account posted a positive out-turn (1.1% of GDP).
The sharp upturns observed in the prices of a number of commodities were particularly beneficial for the South American countries that specialize in these products.
These increases were largely due to the stimulus generated by the rapid growth of China’s imports, in addition to the expansion of the United States economy.
High commodity prices helped to boost the region’s terms of trade, which improved much more than they had in 2003.
As a result, the region’s import capacity expanded, with external purchases rising sharply (by 19.8% and 14.4% in nominal and real terms, respectively), while its exports racked up one of the biggest increases on record (22.4% in nominal terms and 10.8% in real terms).
On the other hand, these external conditions were not helpful to the resource-poor economies of Central America and the Caribbean, which saw their external accounts deteriorate in the course of 2004.
The stimulus provided by the growth of United States demand has been insufficient to offset the higher prices of these countries’ imports, while their exports have come up against fierce competition from Chinese products.
The international environment should continue to be favourable in 2005, albeit to a somewhat lesser degree owing to the probable slackening of growth in the countries that account for the largest share of the world economy.
Profile of the world economic recovery World economic activity picked up speed in 2004, resulting in GDP growth of about 3.9% (versus 2.6% in 2003), while the expansion of world trade could top 9% (versus 5.5% in 2003).1 The vitality of trade reflects the external sector’s key role in propelling growth in many countries.
This expansion has been observed in both developed and developing economies and has been relatively faster in the latter group.
The improvement seen in 2004 does not, however, mean that the lowgrowth phase that began in 2001 is unequivocally over.
On the contrary, economic recovery has been elusive, as shown in figure 2.1.
The expansion seemed to gain a firmer foothold starting in the third quarter of 2003, but growth in the leading economies slackened again from the second quarter of 2004 onward.
The United States and China have been the main engines of global economic activity.2 Since 2003 the Chinese economy has enjoyed an investment boom that has had positive effects on activity in the other Asian countries, including Japan, and also in commodity suppliers such as some of the Latin American economies.
In the United States, on the other hand, growth has reflected the effects of the one-off fiscal and monetary stimulus measures taken to forestall a deepening of the 2001 recession.
The more moderate growth rates observed since mid-2004 have resulted mainly from changes in the factors underlying these two countries’ economic expansion.
This share amounts to 4% when estimated at market exchange rates, but reaches 13% when purchasing power parities are used.
Beyond these measurements, China’s impact should be gauged by the extent to which its imports have indirectly generated growth in other economies.
Durable goods consumption and housing investment, which had been sustaining the recovery, have begun to falter, and the negative growth of net exports has worsened despite the depreciation of the dollar.
This loss of momentum can be traced to the gradual waning or reversal of policy stimuli, in a context of ballooning fiscal and external deficits.
In the first half of the year these flows were sufficient to cover 58% of the current account deficit.
The monetary policy stance changed in June, when the authorities began to raise the federal funds rate, which had thus risen to 2.25% by mid-December.
However, as the authorities have opted to raise rates gradually, they have not managed to curb the depreciation of the dollar.
Accordingly, the exchange rate became the adjustment variable used to cope with the external imbalance, particularly towards the end of the year.
The dollar depreciated by 9.5% against the euro and by 5.9% against the yen (year-on-year rates as of late November), creating tensions in the world foreign-exchange market.
In addition to gradually tightening its monetary policy, the United States may take steps to strengthen its fiscal position, dampening economic growth in the process.
The current situation of other variables raises doubts as to whether the country has entered a period of sustained growth.
The investment boom –comparable to the one observed in the early 1990s– was generated by the revitalization of world trade and of capital inflows thanks to high real and financial profitability and to expectations of a revaluation of the yuan.
The liquidity created by these inflows triggered a huge jump in investment.
The authorities have taken action to address problems of overinvestment in certain sectors, bottlenecks, the scarcity of inputs, a rise in inflation and increased risk in the country’s fragile banking system.
Banks’ reserve requirements were raised and temporary investment controls were imposed, with the result that growth in GDP and other indicators declined in the course of the year.
Nonetheless, given the country’s negative real interest rates –which further boosted spending– and the continued vigour of growth in the third quarter (9.1%), short-term rates were raised slightly in late October.
This increase, being the first in nine years, is a sign that stronger measures may be needed to cool down the economy’s growth to the 8%-to-9% range in 2005.
Japan’s growth could reach some 4% in 2004 (compared to the 2.5% posted in 2003) on the strength of exports, which were given a decisive lift by Chinese and United States demand.
Growth tended to slacken in the course of the year, as the annualized rate of GDP growth went from 6.3% in the first quarter to 0.3% in the third, in response to the relative cooling-down of the Chinese economy and upward pressure on the yen.
The European Union’s GDP has followed a similar pattern, with annualized growth rates of 2.8% and 1.2% in the abovementioned quarters.
Here again, export growth was held back by the pronounced appreciation of the currency (euro); growth for the year will border on 2%.
While the outcome of China’s economic boom is as yet uncertain, its 2005 growth rate is likely to fall short of the 2004 figure and is expected to be in the 7.5%-to-8.8% range.
When aggregate growth is calculated using purchasing power parities, these two institutions estimate growth rates of 3.8% and 4.2%, respectively, in 2005. 6 These projections were taken from United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs, op. cit.; OECD, op. cit.; World Bank, op. cit.; and International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Economic Outlook, September 2004.
Towards the end of 2004 a number of institutions lowered their projections for 2005 in view of the publication of discouraging indicators in some leading economies.
The risks currently facing the world economy are related to the imbalances in the United States economy and their potential impact on interest rates and the value of the dollar, the possibility of a sudden stop in China’s growth, the uncertainty surrounding the oil market and the possible emergence of protectionist measures.
The effects of world economic activity on Latin American and Caribbean exports World economic activity has had an impact on the region, essentially by way of increased import demand in the United States and China.
The recovery of the United States economy stimulated its non-oil imports (see figure 2.3), whose year-on-year growth between January and September 2004 reached a solid 13.7%, with a notable expansion in purchases from China (28.8%).
The different countries of the region have taken advantage of this momentum to different degrees.
Mexico’s exports to the United States revived, after having languished for some time, and posted a rate not far below the growth of the worldwide total (11.3%).
Exports from Central America and the Caribbean exhibited a much more modest increase (5.5%) because of the poor performance of those from Costa Rica, El Salvador and the Dominican Republic, although exports from Honduras, Nicaragua and Trinidad and Tobago rose considerably, owing in this last case to sales of petrochemicals.
Nevertheless, given the slower growth of exports from Mexico and from Central America and the Caribbean, these suppliers have continued to lose market share in the United States.
The expansion of exports from MERCOSUR (15.4%) was driven mainly by those from Brazil, which accounted for 85% of the aggregate increase, with significant sales of manufactured goods (aircraft and inputs).
Exports from the Andean countries (24.8%) were heavily reliant on commodity sales (gold and copper), although they also included sales of manufactures (clothing, jewellery and furniture), which were boosted by the Andean Trade Promotion and Drug Eradication Act (ATPDEA).
United States imports from all countries levelled off around the middle of the year; this trend was closely mirrored by exports from Mexico but not by those from other parts of the region.
The flourishing Chinese economy has been crucial to the external sector in a number of Latin American countries owing to the increase in its imports, particularly in the first five months of the year, when its purchases from the region swelled by 68.8% (while its imports from all countries rose by 41.0%).
In fact, the trends observed in some commodity prices have been closely linked to China’s import patterns (see figure 2.4), with the result that the slowdown in such imports from April onward has curtailed the upward trend in these prices.
Commodity prices In the first 10 months of 2004 the price index for the commodities exported by Latin America and the Caribbean rose by 25.9%; excluding oil, the increase amounted to 27.1% (see figure 2.5).
This outcome was strongly influenced by minerals and metals, whose prices surged by 41.9%, thus outstripping the rise in oil prices.
In part, these year-on-year rates reflect the fact that the levels of these prices in the early months of 2003 provide a low basis for comparison.
The index began to rise in the second half of 2003 and peaked in April 2004, at which point it changed direction, falling by 5.4% between April and October (excluding oil).
As a result of the price increases observed in 2003-2004, for three months the index exceeded the peak level it had reached in 1997, just before it had entered a five-year decline.
Measured against a still less demanding basis for comparison, such as its average for the period 1990-1999, the index showed a 14.8% improvement in the first 10 months of 2004.
Indices weighted by the share of each product out of the region’s total exports in 1995.
Total excluding oil Average 1990-1999 Copper Gold Coffee (right-hand axis) Soybeans Maize Cellulose Meat Oil (right-hand axis) Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 27 In relation to the peak level reached by the aggregate index in April 2004, three significant patterns of price behaviour can be discerned.
First, the prices of some products have continued to rise since then owing to specific market situations.
In the case of oil, the upsurge in world demand since 2003 has led to the intensive use of installed capacity in some links of the production chain, where investment levels are low.
Although the supply of oil increased in 2004, the industry’s scant excess production capacity has magnified the impact of geopolitical tensions and short-term supply problems on oil prices.
The increase in meat prices was triggered by the closing of Pacific markets to United States meat exports because of health and sanitation concerns.
Other prices followed a second pattern consisting of sharp rises up until April 2004 and the maintenance of high levels since then, sometimes with considerable fluctuations.
Copper, gold and coffee are some of the commodities that followed this pattern.
These markets operate in conditions of scarcity brought about by rising demand (in the case of metals) or falling supply (in the case of coffee).
The third pattern, in contrast, is one of dramatic price decreases since April 2004.
A notable case is that of soybeans, a very important crop whose prices fell as a result of protectionist measures taken by China and, in particular, burgeoning world production, which contrasts with the 4% downturn posted in 2003.
Projections for the 2004/ 2005 harvest point to a 20% increase in output, despite the outbreak of soybean rust discovered in the southern United States in November.7 The balance-of-payments current account For the second year in a row, the region posted a surplus on the current account of the balance of payments.
In 2004, this surplus amounted to US$ 21.85 billion (1.1% of GDP), which was nearly a threefold increase over the balance recorded in 2003 (see figure 2.6).8 Brazil accounted for 51% of this amount, with the rest coming from Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Bolivia, Chile, the Dominican Republic and Ecuador.
Haiti, Panama, Peru and Uruguay all had nearly balanced current accounts, which in most cases represented an improvement over the preceding year’s result.
On the other hand, the current account deficits of the Central American countries (with the exception of Panama) were 9% larger in 2004 than in 2003.
This figure was corrected after the publication of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003-2004 (where the surplus was estimated at US$ 5.9 billion), mainly because a new estimate was issued by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela which put the level of exports much higher than before.
The factors that account for the region’s surplus are qualitatively identical to those that were at work in 2003, but this time their impact was stronger.
The positive components of the regional current account are the merchandise trade balance (US$ 61.875 billion) and current transfers (primarily workers’ remittances, which jumped by 16.8%), which totalled US$ 40.275 billion, for a combined balance of US$ 102.15 billion.
The deficit on the services account deepened, but investment income expanded considerably (17.0%) thanks to the upswing in activity and the region’s exchange stability.
Trade in goods and services In 2004, the region’s merchandise exporters turned in an outstanding performance.
Total exports and imports amounted to US$ 860 billion (44% of GDP), which was a 21.2% increase.
This was the third year in a row that a surplus has been posted on the merchandise trade balance, and since 2002 it has expanded at a rate of nearly US$ 20 billion per year, thus reaching the 2004 figure of US$ 61.875 billion (3.2% of GDP) (see figure 2.7).
First of all, in 2004 MERCOSUR and the Andean countries (including Chile but excluding the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) have further improved upon the remarkable export performance they achieved in 2003.
These countries account for 55% of the expansion of the region’s external sales this year.
For the most part, their exports are associated with the supply capacity of a fairly limited number of agricultural and mining products for which current market conditions are quite favourable.
These countries (particularly Argentina and Brazil) have also contributed to the growth of exports of manufactures, which are more sensitive to the advantageous level of the real exchange rate in a number of them.
Secondly, there are the Bolivarian Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 29 Republic of Venezuela and Mexico, which have only now, in 2004, turned in a good export performance.
Their important contribution to the growth of the region’s exports (43%) to some extent thus represents a recovery from the low levels of earlier years.
Thirdly, the Central American and Caribbean countries’ export performance has been mixed and is much less striking than the rest of the region’s.
The markets for their agricultural exports have strengthened somewhat, but not as much as the markets for the South American countries’ products have and, as for their exports of manufactures, only countries with low labour costs have been able to take advantage of the reactivation of demand in the United States.
Estimates indicate that higher export prices and increased export volumes were each responsible for about half of the region’s 22.4% export growth rate (see figure 2.8).
Higher prices have been a more important factor in countries whose export mix includes a larger proportion of strongly performing commodities.
After four years of lacklustre results, the region’s imports surpassed the peak level recorded in 2000.
This indicates that, in a number of countries, economic activity has recovered the strength it had lost in recent years.
All the countries posted positive growth rates for their imports, and in some cases –such as Argentina (60%) and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (55%)– the increases were remarkable.
Here, too, a recovery from abnormally low levels in earlier years has been one of the contributing factors.
Cases in point include Mexico (whose exports are closely linked to imports because of the size of its maquila sector), the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the member countries of MERCOSUR.
In these countries, the quantum of imports has been the primary cause for the increase.
Exchange stability, or a slight appreciation of their currencies, has also been a stimulus for imports.
Colombia’s and Chile’s imports rose above the levels Bolivia Panama Haiti Nicaragua Quantity Price Figures refer to annual rates of variation in the value of exports registered in 2000, after having regained those levels in 2003.
In the case of the Central American and Caribbean countries, higher prices are a more important part of the explanation for the expansion of imports, a large portion of which are made up of raw materials whose prices have risen.
For the region as a whole, 14 percentage points of the 19.8% expansion of imports of goods correspond to an increase in volume, with the remainder being accounted for by the upturn in prices.
Trade in services grew by around 9.1% in 2004 thanks to an upswing in tourism in the region and an increase in freight and insurance, which reflects stronger demand for transport services and higher rates.
The fact that intraregional trade grew more (28%) than total exports did attests to its procyclical character.
Previously, the variation in the terms of trade was calculated after excluding the total trade figures for net oil exporters. 10 Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador and Mexico.
The upward trend in the terms of trade that had begun in 2003 (1.3%) strengthened in 2004, as a 10.5% rise in export prices and a 4.7% increase in import prices translated into a positive variation of 5.6% (see figure 2.10).
The trend in commodity prices played a crucial role in this improvement.
Among the net importers, this negative effect was more than offset by increase in export prices only in the cases of Chile and Peru.
The region will witness an outflow of capital equivalent to 0.6% of its GDP for 2004 The region has drawn on its hefty current account surplus (nearly US$ 22 billion, or 1.1% of GDP) in 2004 to build up its reserves by US$ 9.304 billion (0.5% of GDP) and to pay off external liabilities equivalent to 0.6% of GDP.
This will show up in the region’s accounts as a capital outflow of US$ 12.5 billion.
The region’s autonomous flows have included a net inflow of US$ 37.85 billion in FDI (1.95% of GDP) and US$ 57 billion (2.9% of GDP) in outflows of portfolio investment and other capital.
These kinds of results had not been seen since 1980 (see figure 2.13).
Argentina will post an outflow of portfolio investment and other capital (including errors and omissions) of nearly US$ 12.6 billion, while the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil and Mexico will register outflows of almost US$ 16 billion, US$ 10.5 billion and US$ 3.3 billion, respectively.
The difference is smaller, however, if the US$ 4.6 billion purchase of equity in BBVA-Bancomer in Mexico by BBVA is factored out of the calculations.
Meanwhile, Chile is the country that receives the largest volume of FDI, measured as a percentage of GDP (8.2% in 2004).
These variations across trading blocs notwithstanding, FDI continues to be the main source of external financing and has been the second-most stable flow (after workers’ remittances).
Includes loans from commercial banks, multilateral banks and IMF. b Includes errors and omissions.
Under the heading of compensatory flows, the use of IMF credit will be negative this year (almost –US$ 5.6 billion), as compared to US$ 5.467 billion in 2003.
Argentina has paid out over US$ 1.3 billion to the Fund, while Brazil’s payments to IMF total somewhat over US$ 4 billion.
Exceptional financing (which includes Argentina’s interest arrears) is estimated at US$ 12.5 billion (versus US$ 13.24 billion in 2003).
As of December 2004, Latin America’s gross external debt stands at US$ 720 billion, or 38% of the region’s GDP, which is an improvement over the level of this indicator in 2003 (43%).
Net capital inflows correspond to the capital and financial balances, plus errors and omissions, IMF loans and credit, and exceptional financing.
Total NTR a NTR plus remittances Debt instruments and equities As of July 2004, the region’s bond issues amounted to US$ 17.509 billion, which was 15% lower than the total for the corresponding period in 2003 and equivalent to 31% of total emerging-market bond placements.
Brazil and Mexico each issued nearly 33% of the regional total, while the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela issued US$ 2 billion in bonds (11% of the total).
The 12-month moving average does not yet reflect the 15% drop because of the high bondissue figures posted during the second half of 2003 (see figure 2.15).
The region has been losing ground to other emerging markets (Central Europe and Eastern Europe) in this area (see figure 2.16).
For the region as a whole, 58% of the total for January-July was accounted for by sovereign bond issues, 32.6% by corporate bonds and the remainder by bank bonds.
The breakdown by issuer varies a great deal across regions, however; for example, in the Middle East and Asia, 81% of the total corresponds to sovereign issues, while no corporate bonds were issued at all.
The cumulative average weighted rate on Latin American sovereign bonds up to July was 6.2%, which was just slightly lower than the rates at which other emerging-market sovereign bonds were placed.
The increase in bond issues by emerging-market regions signals a decline in investor risk aversion.
In the case of corporate bonds, the weighted rate for Latin American offerings is 5.9% and the average maturity is nine years, which compare favourably with the terms and conditions obtained in other emerging-market regions.
As of November 2004, the Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBI) for Latin America was in the vicinity of 460 basis points, which was similar to where it had been in February 1998, before the Asian crisis.
Risk premiums were lower for all the countries and continued to decline despite the rise in international interest rates observed during the year (see figure 2.17).
The dollar-denominated stock index for the region had risen by 17.3% as of October, thus surpassing the previous record level, set in September 1997.
For the year to date, the average rate of return (in dollars) for investors on Argentina’s stock exchange comes to 15.5%, Brazil’s to 10.6%, Chile’s to 8.5% and Colombia’s to 72.3%, while the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mexico and Peru posted returns of 70%, 26.6% and 12.5%, respectively.
Macroeconomic policy Fiscal policy The region’s macroeconomic performance in 2004 brought about a significant improvement in the countries’ fiscal accounts, thanks to a considerable upswing in the level of activity.
This level of coverage (central government) is not, however, fully adequate for assessing the situation of some countries of the region that have a more decentralized public sector.
Indeed, the weighted average primary surplus this year is the best of the series beginning in 1990.
Moreover, although only preliminary data are available as yet, a review of budgeted revenues and expenditure for 2005 suggests that the coming year will witness a continuation of this trend.
Thanks to this out-turn, the Latin American and Caribbean countries’ average public debt-to-GDP ratio went down.
As pointed out in the Economic Survey, however, in most countries of the region the debt represents a very high proportion of GDP.
Thus, given that the international climate is likely to remain favourable, but with lower growth rates and higher interest rates, the region’s governments should continue to implement fiscal prudence measures aimed at further reducing the debt-to-GDP ratio.
While revenues have followed trends in the level of activity (increasing slightly as a proportion of GDP since 2003), expenditure has risen by less than the regional growth rate, remaining constant in real terms and falling as a percentage of GDP, thus giving rise to a healthier aggregate fiscal position.
On the revenue side, this outcome resulted from a combination of several factors.
On the one hand, the significant rise in the level of activity had a strong impact on tax receipts, since it not only expanded the tax base, but also led to an improvement in tax compliance.
On the other, the rise in the prices of certain commodities helped to strengthen the fiscal accounts of the countries that produce them.
The public debt figures for Paraguay and the Dominican Republic include external debt only. c Preliminary estimate. d Projections as of the end of the fiscal year. e National administration. f General government. g Federal government. h National central government.
The balances do not include adjustments for accruals, floating debt or the cost of financial restructuring. i Public sector. j Non-financial public sector. k Central administration. l Global public sector.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 41 This behaviour is part of a pattern of rising tax revenues observed in recent years.
In this connection, governments have devised different ways of appropriating some of these resources by way of taxation.
In the case of agricultural products, Argentina finances a sizeable share of its government expenditure with revenues generated by export duties.
Various revenue mechanisms have been designed by the governments of countries that engage in the large-scale exploitation of non-renewable resources, especially when these resources are Stateowned.
The most common of these instruments are royalties, generally based on output, that guarantee the State at least a minimum amount of income from mineral resources, and ordinary income taxes (often with differential rates) on companies in the business of exploiting such resources.
In addition, some governments opt to participate more directly in these activities, either through a State-owned enterprise or by purchasing a stake in related projects.
On the expenditure side, the countries have, on average, shown prudence in managing government outlays, thus building up the above-mentioned fiscal savings.
This has created a divergence between spending patterns and economic growth trends, which is quite unusual in the region.
Their purpose is to isolate, to some extent, the higher fiscal revenues derived from commodity price increases so that the authorities can keep fiscal policy smoother over time.5 The funds are meant to soften the impact that revenue changes caused by commodity price fluctuations can have on public accounts.
The principal feature of these funds is their status as government institutions that are normally separate from the budget and receive inflows from the exploitation of nonrenewable resources.
While these funds are a longstanding tradition in the region, they have been given new impetus in recent years.
As they are often of an extrabudgetary nature, special care must be taken in designing their operating rules to ensure that they function with the greatest possible transparency and the least possible discretionality.
A basic recommendation in this regard is that governments should avoid making successive changes to the funds’ operating rules with the intention of making their resources easier to withdraw, as authorities in some countries of the region have done in recent years.
This combination of rules and policy decisions made it possible to curb spending increases, thereby increasing government saving in the region.
For the medium and long terms, however, this improvement has not necessarily made the region’s public sectors less vulnerable.
Looking beyond 2004-2005, many countries have substantial financing needs and are still exposed to external shocks and adverse domestic factors.
It should be recalled, as well, that the possible increase in international interest rates could raise total financing needs, especially among heavily indebted countries.
Against this general backdrop, specific nuances can be discerned in each subregion.
The MERCOSUR countries have maintained the upward trend noted in the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003.
The overall improvement (despite differences between the countries) in this subregion’s primary fiscal balance (which rose, on average, from 2.1% in 2003 to 2.7% in 2004) was produced by a sharp upturn in revenues; in fact, in the biennium 2003-2004 Argentina and Brazil posted the highest tax revenue-to-GDP ratio for the period beginning in 1990.
This, in turn, resulted from the higher level of activity (growth in the subregion averaged 7.1%, exceeding the region-wide average) and prudent management of expenditure.
Nevertheless, these countries (primarily Argentina and Uruguay) have high debt-to-GDP ratios that will require them to ensure that their policies in this area are sustainable in the medium term.
The Andean subregion can be divided into two groups: oil-producing and other countries.
Among the oil-producing countries (Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela), in 2004 there was a very sharp rise in the level of activity (which was much more pronounced in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela).
However, this improvement was not reflected in these countries’ fiscal accounts, owing to their expansionary spending policies (and tax cuts, in the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela).
The other countries of the subregion continue to face complications on the fiscal front, to varying degrees.
Although their economies grew in 2004 (by a simple average of 3.9%), this growth fell short of the regionwide average.
They have succeeded, to some extent, in taking advantage of the better macroeconomic situation to whittle down their deficits.
However, given their fragile fiscal position (which is especially precarious in Bolivia), they need to apply prudent measures to guarantee the sustainability of their account balances in the medium term.
The Central American countries posted average growth of 3.8%, which was below the region-wide average.
The expansion was not enough to significantly reduce the subregion’s average overall deficit, which went from 3.2% of GDP in 2003 to 3.0% in 2004.
This overall outcome masks a variety of situations, however.6 Nicaragua is a special case, as it formalized its eligibility for debt relief under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative in 2004 and had much of its debt written off.
On average, the Caribbean countries’ fiscal accounts showed an improvement in 2004 despite the extremely complicated fiscal situation, which was aggravated by the natural disasters that struck the subregion.
For more details on the functioning of these funds and on their advantages and disadvantages, see ILPES, op. cit., and J.M.
Fedelino, Fiscal Policy Formulation and Implementation in Oil-Producing Countries, Washington, D.C., International Monetary Fund (IMF), 2003. 6 In Panama the new administration changed the fiscal methodology and, in 2004, posted a fiscal deficit of 5.3% of GDP, which is comparable to a deficit of 2% under the former methodology.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 43 be borne in mind, however, that these countries’ public borrowing has sped up in recent years, raising the debtto-GDP ratio from 62% in 1997 to 85% in 2003.
In sum, and again with respect to region-wide trends, fiscal policy in 2004 has met its objective of reducing the deficit and the debt-to-GDP ratio.
The first is that this is the outcome of factors that are not normally observed in the region: an unprecedented level of tax receipts (attributable to a very revenue-friendly external and macroeconomic framework) and a spending pattern that has not been aligned with this economic growth (owing to various initiatives and instruments).
The second caveat is that the region continues to display a number of structural problems that vary in terms of urgency, but are equally in need of attention.
Despite its recent revenue performance, the region still has a weak tax structure and shows a significant dispersion of tax burdens across the different countries.
On the expenditure side, the problems yet to be addressed include the very low level of public investment, the need to improve the provision of social services and the need to remedy the serious coverage and solvency problems observed in social security systems.
Lastly, the large debts carried by many countries of the region render them particularly vulnerable.
The region’s current level of economic growth and the stillfavourable external environment provide a unique opportunity to progress towards a countercyclical approach to fiscal policy, along with the design of mechanisms for reducing the vulnerability of the region’s economies and enhancing their capacity to achieve sustained growth.
Capitalizing on these positive conditions by introducing fiscal institutions aimed at better ensuring the medium- and long-term solvency and equity of fiscal policy, in a framework of high social demand, is an outstanding challenge for the region.
Exchange-rate policy7 7 The nominal exchange rate for a foreign currency is defined as the number of units of a given country’s currency that must be surrendered in exchange for one unit of the foreign currency at any given point in time.
A country’s currency depreciates (appreciates) in nominal terms when, at that point in time, more (fewer) units of that currency must be surrendered in exchange for one unit of the foreign currency than during the reference period.
The real bilateral exchange rate index for a foreign currency (for example, the dollar) is calculated by deflated the nominal exchange rate by the ratio between the inflation rate in one country and another (in the case of the dollar, the United States).
The average is weighted by each country’s real GDP. 9 Comments on exchange-rate movements are based on a comparison of the average levels for the first 10 months of 2004 with the corresponding period of 2003, unless otherwise indicated.
The analysis covers only those countries whose real effective exchange rates changed by over 4% and that serve to illustrate region-wide trends.
The real depreciation of the Mexican peso, which will be discussed below, accounts for the depreciation recorded for the other group of countries as a whole.
Whereas 2003 was a transitional year in exchange-rate trends, after a number of South American countries (including Argentina and Brazil) had experienced sharp real depreciations in 2002, 2004 ushered in a more stable macroeconomic environment and expectations.
In some countries, positive external factors were reinforced by better fiscal results.
What is more, unlike what occurred at some points in the 1990s, monetary policy was not exposed to severe current-account constraints, which helped to slow the appreciation of the countries’ currencies.
Colombia has registered a real effective appreciation of 8.3% and a 10.9% appreciation against the dollar.
The Colombian peso has risen against the dollar in nominal terms throughout almost all of 2004, with the only exception being a short-lived depreciation in April after interest rates had begun to climb in the United States.
This nominal appreciation, which has averaged 7.9%, reflects the region’s higher level of earnings from both industrial and commodity exports (such as oil, ferronickel and coal), as well as copious capital inflows and a steady influx of remittances.
The real effective exchange rate for the Chilean peso has appreciated by 7.6% in 2004, while the currency’s real appreciation against the dollar amounts to 11.6%.
A sizeable average nominal appreciation (13.1%) relative to 2003 has also occurred, although the nominal exchange rate has fluctuated considerably in the course of the year.
Chile has posted a high level of export earnings against the backdrop of very favourable terms of trade and sizeable FDI inflows, which have been partly offset by large-scale acquisitions of foreign assets and the settlement of liabilities.
Brazil’s real effective exchange rate has appreciated by 4.1%, on average, and the real has risen by 8.4% against the dollar.
Thanks to the country’s outstanding export performance, it has a robust current account surplus that has more than offset the voluminous outflows of foreign exchange registered on the financial v v v Chile Brazil Colombia account.
A monetary policy designed to keep a tight rein on inflation and improved expectations concerning the government’s economic policy has helped to spur demand for real-denominated financial assets.
All of these factors had something to do with the Brazilian currency’s 4.9% nominal appreciation against the dollar.
The currencies of the Central American and Caribbean countries and of Mexico, taken as a group, depreciated by an average of 4.1% in real effective terms and by 2.7% in real terms against the dollar.
The Mexican peso exhibited an average real effective depreciation of 4.6% and a real depreciation of 3.3% relative to the dollar.
The figure given above for the real depreciation of the peso reflects the result of comparing the average real exchange rates for the dollar in 2003 and 2004; a comparison of the real rates in December 2003 and October 2004, on the other hand, yields a very small variation (0.8%) (see figure 3.4).
The slight nominal appreciation (1%) of the quetzal is attributable to the inflow of foreign exchange, (especially in the form of remittances, which were up by 17% over the preceding year’s level), although Guatemala also continues to receive hefty financial inflows.
Then, between May and October 2004, the nominal exchange rate for the Dominican peso appreciated sharply, thus pushing down the real dollar exchange rate for the peso to historical lows.
Central bank issues of high-interest debt instruments and the upturn in economic agents’ expectations following the presidential elections were significant contributing factors to the peso’s appreciation in the third quarter of 2004.
Long-term trends in effective exchange rates With the exceptions of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador,13 the South American countries continued to exhibit high (i.e., depreciating in relation to historical averages) real effective exchange rates (see figure 3.5).
In October 2004, the real effective exchange rates of the full and associate member countries of MERCOSUR were over 10% higher than their average levels for the period from January 1992 to December 1998, i.e., the period preceding the devaluation in Brazil and the crises that broke out in Argentina and Ecuador.
Such estimates are difficult to arrive at because of the current situation with respect to the former country’s external debt and the tight exchange controls instituted by the latter nation.
The comparisons of historical averages are therefore of no more than indicative value.
The currencies of three Central American countries (Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador) have been more than 10% below the figures recorded for the above period.
As of October 2004, the real exchange rate against the dollar for the Dominican Republic, whose main trading partner is the United States, was 12% below the average for January 1992-December 1998, thus registering a notable appreciation.
The large volume of remittances sent by emigrants may be one of the principal causes why the currencies of the countries in this group have appreciated in real terms.
At the same time, these countries’ exports face strong competition from the products that China manufactures for sale on the United States market.
Exchange-rate regimes remain unchanged The relative exchange-rate stability observed throughout 2004 in Latin America and the Caribbean (with the notable exceptions of the Dominican Republic and Haiti) has also been fostered by the stability of the region’s exchange-rate regimes (see table 3.3).
The only noteworthy change that was observed in the countries listed in table 3.3 is the modification of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela’s official parity in February from 1,596 to 1,920 bolívares to the dollar, but even this change was made in accordance with the strict exchange controls then in place.
The theoretical arguments advanced on this subject range from the idea that exchange-rate volatility has the effect of diminishing trade flows between countries to the postulate that it can discourage foreign investment.
The effect of exchange volatility on a region’s economic policy has also been a recurrent subject of analysis and of interest for policy makers.
The following two figures illustrate how the real bilateral exchange rates of some of the members of MERCOSUR and the Andean community that are important trading partners have trended over the past 12 years.
In addition to the high degree of volatility exhibited by the three bilateral exchange rates shown in this figure, it may be seen that Argentina’s and Brazil’s bilateral exchange rate underwent a radical change starting in December 2001.
In contrast, Paraguay’s and Uruguay’s real bilateral exchange rates with Brazil were below that average.
In October 2004, at 18.1% and 14.1%, respectively, the real bilateral exchange rates between Colombia and Ecuador and between Peru and Ecuador remained above their January 1992-December 1998 averages despite the recent real appreciation of these currencies.
This has been made possible by the greater degrees of freedom associated with a favourable external environment.
Within this context, the region’s expanding current account surplus has made it unnecessary to provide incentives in the form of higher interest rates.
At the same time, there have been no major sources of pressure on exchange rates, and inflation has remained low in a majority of the countries.
Thanks to all of these factors, the economic situation in the last few years has given rise to a different type of cycle than has traditionally been seen in Latin America, which has typically been burdened by exchange-rate and inflationary constraints.
Against this backdrop, the countries’ central banks lowered interest rates in 2003 and the first half of 2004 in order to bolster the recovery.
In some cases, these reductions resulted in negative interest rates in real terms.
In order to remedy this situation and, in a few countries, to maintain existing spreads between local rates and the higher rates set by the United States Federal Reserve, the central banks moved cautiously to raise their interest rates in the second half of the year.
As a result, real interest rates picked up somewhat in the final months of the year.
In countries that witnessed an inflationary upsurge, as occurred in Mexico, rates rose more sharply.
As the year comes to a close, monetary policy (which, as noted, paved the way for the recovery during the first half of the year) continues to be assisted by the above factors and has sufficient degrees of freedom so that it can focus more directly on forestalling future inflationary episodes.
The challenge now facing the monetary authorities is to design a policy that will address the problem of negative real interest rates without dampening economic growth or spurring inflation.
Policies to support the reactivation A number of countries in the region (including Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica and Peru) seized the opportunity offered by favourable external conditions and low inflation to bolster their economies’ recoveries by reducing interest rates in 2003 and part of 2004 (see figure 3.8).
Mexico’s decision to take action early on, before any of the other countries, to reverse the decline in interest rates reflects its government’s determination to quell any further inflationary spikes.
Inflation Nominal deposit rate Interbank rate As a result of the various steps taken in this respect, real interest rates have fallen in 2004 –in some instances, as noted earlier, to negative levels In various cases, negative rates have been associated with an upturn in inflation.
The increase seen in real interest rates in the past few months should thus be analysed in the light of this phenomenon (see figure 3.9).
Real rates were calculated as r=i-p, where i is the nominal rate and p is the annualized inflation rate.
In view of the fact that the upswing in inflation registered in the second half of 2003 was followed by a further increase in the second half of 2004, Mexico’s monetary authorities have taken drastic steps to curb inflationary outbreaks.
They raised the rate offered on treasury certificates from 6.6% in June to 8.5% in November 2004, which is the largest rate hike to be made by any of the countries that are using inflation targets.
In recent months, the rise in inflation has driven down real interest rates sharply.
Brazil cut the SELIC rate by 10 percentage points to 16% in May 2004, but then raised it in September and October to 16.75%, thereby underscoring the authorities’ determination to meet their inflation targets.
The situation in Peru is quite similar: the central bank raised the target interbank rate from 2.5% in July to 3% in November and increased the open market operations rate by 50 basis points; meanwhile, inflation has broken through the ceiling (3.5%) of the target band.
This tight monetary policy, which entails keeping real interest rates high, has succeeded in dampening inflation in recent months.
Chile is at the other end of the spectrum, with an inflation rate that remained below the floor (2%) of the band until October.
Even so, the central bank joined in the process initiated by the United States Federal Reserve and raised the monetary policy rate from 1.75% in August to 2% in September and 2.25% in November.
The 12month inflation rate climbed to 2.5% in November, however, so it appears likely that the annual (DecemberDecember) inflation rate will approach the mid-point of the band (3%) established by the central bank.
Another country that has used inflation and interestrate targets as policy tools is Colombia, which has continued to apply the 6.75% rate set in April 2004.
In real terms, this rate –which was negative in the early part of the year (annualized inflation in the first semester amounted to 9.4%)– has since turned positive (annualized inflation for August-October was just 2.5%).
The Argentine authorities have not been neglecting inflation control (inflation has held to moderate levels), but their chief concern has been to block any further appreciation of the currency and, to this end, they have been intervening in the foreign-exchange market.
In the next few months both Argentina and Uruguay are expected to switch from the use of monetary aggregates to interest rates as their main policy tool.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the degrees of freedom of monetary policy have been restricted because of the need to finance the fiscal deficit.
In most of the countries, real interest rates have still not surpassed the levels seen in the second half of 2003.
The exceptions to this rule are the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Dominican Republic, where rates were deeply negative owing to high inflation, and, to a lesser extent, Colombia and Peru (see figure 3.9).
Commercial and industrial credit rallies Banking activity plays a larger role in the countries of the region than it does in more developed countries, and the credit channel is thus more important.
Thus, the fact that the volume of business and industrial loans remained very depressed up to the end of 2003 in most of the countries, even though their economies had already made a partial recovery, was seen as a warning sign.
The only categories in which some growth was seen were mortgages and consumer loans (see table 3.4).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 55 In the early months of 2004, however, commercial and industrial credit began to rally in many countries.
This has been a reflection of more optimistic expectations in the countries’ production sectors and banking systems, which have thus validated their forecasts that the outlook for growth would improve.
As indicated in table 3.4, in 2004 commercial and industrial credit has expanded considerably in Brazil, Mexico, Chile, Costa Rica and has risen, although less sharply, in Colombia (in comparison, in all cases, to the corresponding period of 2003).
The outlook Throughout 2003 and the first half of 2004, the countries’ policy makers placed priority on bolstering the reactivation of their economies while also keeping inflation under control.
During the second half of 2004, although the external situation remains favourable and no exchange-rate or inflationary pressures are in evidence in most of the countries, their central banks’ prime objectives have been to forestall inflationary surges and to eliminate negative real interest rates without endangering the economic upswing.
This is precisely the challenge they are facing in the months ahead: to keep inflation low and avoid negative real rates without undermining the recovery of economic activity.
All of the above is taking place within the context of higher international interest rates.
In fact, rates began to rise on international markets even before the United States Federal Reserve decided to hike its rates in June 2004.
These movements are being observed with concern by countries in the region that have hefty debt loads made up, at least in part, of short-term borrowings.
Against a backdrop of relatively normality in United States financial markets, it is very probable that monetary policy rates will continue to climb gradually, whether as part of an effort to curb inflation, as in Mexico, to hold the spread with rates in the United States constant, as in Chile, or to complete the transition to positive real interest rates.
It is also quite likely that the application of tighter monetary policies will continue to bring down the rate of price increases in high-inflation economies in the fairly near future.
In that event, sooner or later real interest rates can be expected to rise again.
Domestic performance Economic activity The momentum that the Latin American and Caribbean economies had acquired in the second half of 2003 continued throughout 2004.
Regional GDP expanded by 5.5% in what was the largest jump since 1980, contrasting with the low rates recorded since the late 1990s.
Meanwhile, the region’s per capita GDP climbed by 4.0%, which was the sharpest increase since 1979.
This performance represented a shift away from the trends that prevailed in the period 1998-2003, when per capita income tended to stagnate or even decrease slightly.
The regional gross national disposable income, per capita, was up by 5.2%, measured at The outlook is bright for 2005, since the region’s economies should continue to grow briskly, albeit at slightly lower rates of about 4%.
This outlook is consistent with the international conditions described in the chapter on the external sector.
These impressive aggregate results reflect the performance of most of the region’s economies.
With the exception of Haiti, all the Latin American and Caribbean countries turned in positive growth rates.
In Brazil, a significant upturn in domestic demand, combined with the vigour exhibited by the export sector since 2003, pushed the economy’s rate of growth above 5%.
Argentina’s economy continued to forge ahead in 2004, with a rate of 8.2% driven by an upswing in domestic demand and the return of investment to pre-crisis levels.
The Mexican economy benefited from continued expansion in United States demand, growing by 4.1%.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay recorded the region’s highest rates of growth in 2004 (18% and 12%, respectively), reflecting a comeback from very low rates and an upturn in domestic demand, driven by both investment and consumption.
Haiti, mired in a complex political and economic situation, was the only country to turn in a negative growth rate (3%).
The economic performance of the other Caribbean countries was undermined by the natural disasters that hit the subregion during the year.
A real increase in domestic demand was further strengthened by an improvement in the terms of trade.
The increase in both export volumes and the purchasing power of export earnings helped to build up demand for imports while maintaining a substantial trade surplus.
In a number of countries, trends in real exchange rates in 2002 had generated a correction of the relative prices of tradable as opposed to non-tradable goods and services and had helped to boost the external competitiveness of those countries’ export sectors.
This, in combination with the existence of idle capacity and a policy of lowering interest rates, enabled these economies to take advantage of the additional demand generated by more auspicious external conditions in 2003 and 2004.
On the external front, the global economic expansion driven by growth in the United States and the Asian economies fuelled increased demand for commodities and for some of the manufactures exported by the region.
High international oil prices benefited net exporters of this product, helping to boost the fiscal revenues of countries whose oil income represents a significant proportion of the total.
The prices of commodities that are important to the region remained high throughout 2004.
This heightened the terms-of-trade effect and the resulting positive impact on domestic economic activity by stimulating first an upturn in investment and later an increase in consumption.
Regional investment is estimated to have risen by about 11% in 2004, meaning that it returned almost to its level of 1998.1 This is largely attributable to the low rates seen previously, in combination with the revival of economic activity, the use of idle capacity (especially in the industrial sector) and low rates of interest.
Exchange-rate trends and higher demand spurred a significant rise in investment in machinery and equipment, most of which was imported.
As a percentage of GDP, however, the investment ratio2 was slightly below 19%.
Total consumption Gross capital formation Exports of goods and services Imports of goods and services In historical terms, the estimated 4.8% increase in total consumption was substantial.
In the 1990s, comparable rates of growth in consumption were recorded only in 1994 and 1997, when regional GDP expanded by over 5%.
Private consumption benefited from a significant increase in employment at the regional level and a slight upturn in wages and salaries, in addition to some of the factors already discussed.
As explained in the chapter on fiscal policy, however, this did not endanger the achievement of government finance targets, since the tax intake expanded significantly.
One of the most noteworthy features of the region’s economic performance in 2004 was a significant increase in gross national disposable income; measured at 2003 prices, this indicator rose by 6.8%.
This demonstrates the significant impact of the improvement in Latin America’s terms of trade, which is estimated at 1.3% of regional GDP, in addition to the fact that higher net factor payments abroad were offset by an equivalent increase in current transfers to the region, mainly in the form of remittances from non-residents.
As well as higher income, the region recorded a significant increase in total saving.
As shown in figure 4.5, the positive terms-of-trade effect was felt most strongly in the South American countries.
In the Andean countries, including Chile, the expansion of economic activity was driven mainly by vigorous growth in sectors linked to the production of hydrocarbons (Ecuador and Bolivia) and metals and minerals (Chile and Peru), as well as by a rise in domestic demand based on faster investment growth (Colombia) or a return to previous levels (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela).
Several Andean countries also saw an increase in exports of manufactures to the United States in the framework of trade agreements.
Although these exports do not account for a large share of total manufacturing output, they grew quickly enough during the year to contribute to the performance of that sector.
The income of the Andean countries climbed considerably, at rates well above the growth of GDP, with the result that domestic demand rose faster than had initially been expected and economic activity outstripped the authorities’ initial projections.
National income rose faster than GDP, but not to the same extent as in Chile and the Andean countries.
This, together with a partial upturn in real wages, contributed to a considerable rise in consumption.
The manufacturing sector kept up the momentum it had gained in 2003, thanks to stable external demand and rising domestic demand, in a context of moderate real exchange-rate appreciation throughout the year.
At the same time, the more favourable terms of trade had a positive impact on fiscal revenues.
Brazil experienced an upswing in domestic demand in 2004, based on investment both in machinery and equipment and in construction.
Continued high external demand bolstered the production of manufactures for export, particularly capital goods (iron and steel and aeronautical equipment) and consumer durables (motor vehicles); these two sectors expanded by about 25%.
The production of non-durable consumer goods, however, which is more dependent on domestic household consumption, grew at a considerably more modest rate.
In Mexico, high oil prices helped to swell fiscal revenues, while increased external demand from the United States spurred a revival in the maquila industry in the course of the year.
In the first nine months the maquila production index rose by 7.7% with respect to the same period of 2003.
In addition, investment in machinery and equipment rallied and growth sped up in the construction sector.
Up to the third quarter of 2004 gross fixed capital formation rose by 6.3%, with a 7.4% increase in investment in machinery and equipment, especially imports (9.7%), compared to the first nine months of 2003.
Private consumption also expanded throughout the year, thanks mainly to increased remittances from non-residents and an upturn in consumer credit.
As in Mexico, in a number of Central American countries (Honduras and Nicaragua) the maquila industry benefited from growth in the United States economy, while domestic demand trended upward, except in El Salvador.
In contrast to what happened in the South American countries, however, higher growth in the Central American subregion was not a result of income gains from better terms of trade.
For these countries, high international oil prices offset the rise in the prices of coffee and bananas, which are two of the subregion’s major exports, so that the overall effect was negative or only slightly positive (Guatemala).
Accordingly, higher domestic demand was financed mainly by increased remittances from non-residents.
Remittances continued to grow at rates that generally fell short of the 2003 figures (except in the case of El Salvador, whose positive current transfer balance rose by some 20%), but were still above 10%.
The upturn in investment may be attributed in some cases to increased activity in the construction sector (Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama), while Guatemala recorded higher investment in machinery and equipment.
Economic growth in the Caribbean countries was undermined by the natural disasters that hit the subregion in the second half of the year.
These phenomena not only affected the tourist industry, but also destroyed some of the agricultural sector’s export crops, including bananas.
Although some countries were harder hit by the storms than others, practically the whole subregion was affected to some degree.
Nevertheless, Belize, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago again recorded high rates of growth (7.0%, 4.0% and 6.2%, respectively) in 2004, thanks to increases in mining (Suriname), hydrocarbons and petrochemicals (Trinidad and Tobago) and tourism (Belize).
Like those of the Latin American economies, the external accounts and the income of the Caribbean economies benefited from the upturn in international commodity prices.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 63 ECLAC estimates indicate that in the last three decades more than 150 million people have been affected by natural disasters in Latin America and the Caribbean.
These disasters have taken their toll on more than 12 million direct victims and have caused 108,000 deaths.
Moreover, the total damage –and this is not an exhaustive estimate for the entire region– amounts to more than US$ 50 billion (calculated at constant 1998 prices) and has been concentrated in the smallest and relatively less developed countries.
The extraordinarily severe 2004 hurricane season in the Caribbean basin caused substantial damage in many islands as well as bordering continental countries.
The damage had varying economic and social impacts depending on the nations’ and territories’ resilience and response capability and on the size, diversification and strength of their economies, societies and infrastructure.
At the request of the affected areas, ECLAC has undertaken assessments in the Bahamas, Cayman Islands, Dominican Republic, Grenada and Jamaica and will have completed an impact study on the Gonaïves tragedy in Haiti before the end of the year.
Partial estimates put the damage and losses (in terms both of assets lost, destroyed or damaged and of economic flows that have been interrupted or altered) at over US$ 5.593 billion.
The five case studies conducted by ECLAC so far this year indicate that 79% of the total impact corresponds to actual physical damage to assets (houses, businesses, roads and bridges, utilities, schools, health care facilities, etc.).
This damage has, in turn, resulted in losses in terms of economic flows of more that US$ 1.195 billion.
The sectoral breakdown shows that most of the damage was done in social sectors (48%) and production –both goods and services, especially tourism– activities (33%).
Damage to infrastructure and electricity, water and sanitation utilities, and transport represents 16% of the total, and the direct environmental impact, 1.4%.
This last figure is smaller than it would be otherwise because most of the affected natural resources are expected to recover, but this does not mean that environmental action in terms of clean-up, habitat restoration and better environmental management is of lesser importance.
In point of fact, the amount of assessable damage clearly demonstrates that the valuation of environmental assets and services is inadequate.
The impact, measured in terms of GDP, is quite severe in most cases, with the only major exception being the Dominican Republic, where damage and losses represent less than 2% of that country’s current GDP.
In Grenada it amounts to 212% of GDP, and in the Cayman Islands it totals 138%.
Although the figures for Jamaica (8%) and the Bahamas (7%) are lower, they nonetheless represent a significant burden for the economy.
ECLAC has not appraised the impact on a number of other territories and countries (such as the Netherlands Antilles, parts of Mexico or the State of Florida), but once the impact on the overall economic performance of these areas is taken into account, the figure may end up being as much as 10 times higher.
From a social point of view, however, the most severe socioeconomic and human impacts have been concentrated in the smaller and least developed nations, whose capability to rebuild and return to a path of growth and development is limited owing to the lack of appropriate insurance coverage, institutional response capacity and preventive policies.
This is particularly the case in Haiti and Grenada, but other economies with fragile environments and indebted or poorly performing economies have been hard hit by these events.
Although the impact is somewhat less in the Bahamas (US$ 381 million), Jamaica (US$ 575 million) and the Dominican Republic (US$ 270 million), it nevertheless reinforces one of the key lessons learned from this year’s experience: namely, that the sustainability of economic and social development is closely intertwined with the environment.
The cumulative impact of natural disasters compounds the many development constraints faced by some of the smallest and poorest countries and territories, thereby making the quest for development an even more difficult task.
Strengthening the capacity to prevent and respond to the emergencies caused by natural disasters is thus one of the main ingredients in development and poverty eradication in many poor countries.
Another conclusion is that, even though most of the damage generally occurs in the private sector, it is the job of the governments concerned to assist low-income groups and segments of the population that are highly dependent on basic agricultural or fishing activities.
Production activities sustain a large proportion of the damage and the ensuing economic losses, which in some cases may persist for years.
The vulnerability of infrastructure is exacerbated by poor environmental management and environmental degradation, which thus generate high production risks and enormous human suffering.
Inflation For 2004 as a whole, inflation in Latin America and the Caribbean will barely exceed 7.5% (compared to 8.5% in 2003), thus maintaining its downward trend at the regional level, even though several countries have overshot the targets announced by the authorities at the start of the year.
Several countries recorded slightly higher inflation rates than in 2003, and in some cases there were minor inflationary surges (mostly in the first half of the year) driven by higher prices for transport, housing services and food (see figure 4.6).
These increases largely reflected upturns in the international prices of commodities –particularly food, oil and fuels– and of a number of industrial manufactures, in addition to the higher cost of transport and insurance services.
The pattern was most pronounced in the Central American countries, given their reliance on imports of oil and other raw materials.
Meanwhile, in several countries the recovery of domestic demand and stronger economic growth enabled wholesale suppliers to restore their profit margins.
The subregional aggregates were calculated as simple averages of the inflation rates in the corresponding countries.
In the second half of the year the pace of inflation slackened generally (except in Mexico, mainly because of sharper increases in food prices and regulated prices).
This slowdown reflected the behaviour of exchange rates in the course of the year, the application of a monetary policy of raising interest rates in several of the region’s countries and slower increases in commodity (particularly food) prices.
At the same time, as hikes in the international prices of industrial manufactures and of transport and insurance services tended to be concentrated in the first half of 2004, the prices of most countries’ manufactures imports were lower in the second half of the year than in the first.
Latin America (simple average for 19 countries) Higher-inflation countries Lower-inflation countries Central America a Andean Community b Dominican Republic and Haiti Jamaica In many countries, exchange-rate patterns somewhat mitigated the extent to which higher international prices for commodities and manufactured goods were passed through to domestic consumer prices.
In contrast to their behaviour in 2003, the countries’ exchange rates did not depreciate significantly; in fact, several local currencies appreciated, including some that had followed a similar trend in 2003 (those of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Paraguay and Peru).
Moreover, the fact that wages and salaries failed to rise in most of the countries in 2004 had a positive effect on producers’ costs.
The behaviour of oil prices continues to run counter to the trend described above, however, and presumably will continue to exert upward pressure on prices.
An analysis of wholesale or producer prices in countries that regularly publish such information shows that these prices generally outpaced consumer prices.
A rise in the wholesale price index is primarily indicative of increases in the international prices of raw materials and manufactures, since the basket used to calculate the index consists mainly of goods, many of which are tradable.
Employment and wages The upswing in regional economic activity fuelled dynamic job creation, but real wages hardly varied.
In contrast to the pattern in 2003, urban employment showed a significant increase of about 3.8% in 2004.
This had a clear impact on the regional unemployment rate, which eased from 10.7% to 10.0%.6 The improvement is explained by the fact that, following a sharp increase in 2003, labour-market participation rose only slightly, from 58.8% to 58.9% of the working-age population (14 countries).
The outstanding feature of the occupational structure in 2004 is the substantial growth of formal employment in several countries.
Specifically, under the new methodology Argentina counts more people as being employed because it includes activities that traditionally have not been regarded as employment.
The number of people recorded as unemployed also increased because the period within which a person must have sought work in order to be counted as unemployed was lengthened and because more informal job-search methods were included.
In the preceding edition of the Preliminary Overview, figures for Argentina and the regional calculation were based on data generated under the old methodology, in order to maintain comparability with previous rates.
As from this edition, however, the data generated under the new methodology will be used.
Consequently, at the regional level, the three rates mentioned for 2003 are higher than the ones published in the preceding edition of this report.
Employment Ec on ic gr w th (pe rc nt ge Change in em nt rate s GDP Employment In fact, with the pace of economic growth increasing almost everywhere, most of the countries (9 out of the 13 for which information is available) also reported increases in the employment rate.
Nonetheless, only four of these nine countries (Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil and Uruguay) can claim a clear improvement in the labour-market situation, since in these cases strong economic growth produced a substantial rise in the employment rate, which in turn alleviated the rate of unemployment.
In the other five (Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico and Peru), whose economies generally grew more slowly, the improvement in the level of employment was more than matched by an expansion in the labour supply, with the result that unemployment increased (see figures 4.8 and 4.9).
A similar pattern prevailed in Chile, where the employment rate remained broadly unchanged while labour-market participation increased, generating higher unemployment.
In these cases, it is unlikely that the expansion of the labour supply will revert to trend, making it possible for job creation to be reflected in unemployment rates, until economic growth becomes more stable.
Lastly, in the other three low- to moderate-growth countries (Colombia, Costa Rica and El Salvador), the employment rate dropped, but did not result in higher unemployment because labour-market participation also declined.
As the above description shows, the behaviour of the labour supply varied across countries.
Although small increases in the participation rate prevailed overall, some countries (such as Ecuador and Mexico) recorded sharp rises, while others (such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia) saw substantial falls.
At the regional level, this pattern generated the aforementioned increase of one tenth of a percentage point in the regional participation rate, which is below the long-term trend as determined by the growing number of women entering labour markets (see box 4.2).
The fact that the participation rate has departed from its clearly procyclical trend of previous years needs to be analysed in the light of events in 2003.
That year the region-wide labour supply increased sharply in response to the economic recovery, even though the upturn was still incipient.
This rise made up for earlier falls, illustrating the procyclical labour-market behaviour of many households.
The labour supply’s strong growth in 2003 can be interpreted as an ex ante adjustment to the approaching recovery, which did not go into full swing until 2004, and this is probably why the rate increased only slightly this year.
Despite the meagre increase in the participation rate, the economically active population in urban areas expanded by nearly 5 million people (3%) as a result of population growth, which is still relatively high in the region, and migration.
The sharp increase in employment was sufficient to absorb this expansion of the labour force and to reduce the unemployed population by over half a million.
One of the most striking trends in Latin American and Caribbean labour markets in recent years has been the rise in women’s labour-market participation.
This increase reflects the new opportunities that have arisen for women in the areas of both labour supply and labour demand, although inequalities and discrimination are still in evidence.
With respect to the labour supply, the upturn in women’s participation is a long-term trend that fluctuates in line with the economy’s performance.
Women’s participation has clearly been trending upward for the past several decades.
This pattern has been influenced by demographic changes, such as the decline in the average number of children per family, and cultural changes, such as the transformation of women’s economic and social roles.
In all but a few cases, this has given rise to the expansion of women’s access to the educational system and more widespread recognition of their right to engage in paid work.
This is not a uniform process, however, as shown by the considerable differences in participation rates between women with different levels of education.
While men have high participation rates that are more or less the same across all levels of education, reflecting the fact that men are more likely to be primary breadwinners, in the case of women there is a clear and positive correlation between participation and education.
At the same time, in the short term labour-market participation reflects changes in living conditions in the households to which workers belong.
In the case of poor households, the crises of the 1980s and 1990s triggered an increase in women’s participation, and many of these women subsequently stayed in the labour market.
This helped to fuel the long-term increase in women’s participation and to narrow the gap in economic activity rates between women from poor and non-poor households.
In addition, there is a “secondary labour force” (consisting mainly of young women and men) that enters and leaves the labour market –or delays or speeds up entry into it– in line with changes in the economy’s performance and in households’ perception of economic conditions.
In recent years the behaviour of this secondary labour force has been primarily procyclical in many countries.
Consequently, during the low-growth phase that the region’s economy entered in 1998, women’s participation increased more slowly.
However, given that men’s participation rate dipped slightly at the beginning of the current decade, the proportion of women in the region’s labour force has continued to rise.
Since 2003 the earlier trends have re-emerged and women’s participation rate has climbed significantly.
The increase in women’s labourmarket participation has been brought about not only by factors affecting the labour supply, but also by changes in labour demand.
Substantial growth has been observed in some branches of activity in which women’s participation has traditionally been high: commerce, restaurants and hotels; financial services, insurance, real estate and business services; and community, social and personal services, among others.
This has led to a sharp rise in women’s employment rates (see table).
For women, however, labour demand mostly targets workers with intermediate or high levels of education.
Women with low levels of education have few options in the formal labour market, and a high proportion of the workers in this category engage in informal commerce, domestic service and –especially in the case of young women– unpaid family work.
Women’s occupational structure therefore shows a higher proportion of informal employment than men’s (see table).
Recently, the expansion of demand for women workers in formal-sector activities, especially in the tertiary sector, has narrowed this “informality gap”, but in the context of an increase in the proportion of informal employment in the labour market as a whole.
The fact that women have higher unemployment rates and take longer to find employment is another sign of persistent labour-market inequality (see table).
While women’s employment rates have increased substantially, so has the unemployment gap between women and men in recent years.
The imbalance between the expanding supply of women workers and the scarcity of employment opportunities is also reflected by the increase in women’s labour emigration, often in conditions of discrimination and exploitation.
In aggregate terms, the labour income gap between men and women is slowly shrinking.
Recently this trend has been fairly widespread among workers in all categories of educational attainment (see figure below).
For the first time since 1998, wage employment expanded faster than selfemployment (at estimated rates of 3.8% and 3.7%, respectively), reflecting higher labour demand among firms.
This growth in wage employment was the fastest in the last 10 years.
Although these two categories of employment cannot be identified with “high-quality” and “low-quality” jobs, respectively, since both categories are very heterogeneous, the greater buoyancy of wage employment is good news because these jobs generally provide better standards of social protection and income stability, among other considerations.
Formal job creation gained momentum in a number of countries during the year.
Between December 2003 and September 2004 the year-on-year growth of formalsector wage employment, measured in most cases by participation in social security systems, rose from 7.8% to 9.0% in Argentina, from 2.9% to 6.3% in Brazil, from Nicaragua and from 1.9% to 2.7% in Peru.
In Chile formal-sector wage employment continued to grow at a fairly steady rate, with figures of 4.3% in December and 4.1% in September.
It should be borne in mind, however, that these measurements may lead to the overestimation of net job creation, as they may include cases in which existing jobs have been “formalized”.
Even so, the growth of this type of employment is a positive trend.
Just as employment growth did not reduce unemployment rates in every country, the expansion of formal employment was not always accompanied by a reduction in underemployment, since part of the growing labour supply could only find work in low-productivity, low-quality jobs.
The rate of underemployment diminished in Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador and Peru, among other countries, but rose in Chile and in urban areas of Colombia, El Salvador, Honduras and Mexico.7 As mentioned earlier, the upturn in economic activity translated primarily into new job creation, while nominal wages rose only slightly, in a context of low or falling inflation.
Real wages rose modestly in the region as a whole, by a weighted average rate of 0.9% and a median of 0.2% for 11 countries.
Thus, the downturn in real wages in the previous two years (measured on a weighted-average basis) was halted, but there was no significant recovery in purchasing power.
The main exception was Argentina, where wages began to regain the ground they had lost in terms of purchasing power.
Nonetheless, even though average real wages are estimated to have grown by nearly 9% over the year as a whole, their value is still 8% below its 2000 level.
In the other two countries that are recovering from severe economic crises in which wages lost much of their purchasing power –the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay– average real wages fell again for the year as a whole.
The declining trend was levelling off, however, and in Uruguay, at least, year-on-year rates were positive from August onward.
Except in Argentina, as mentioned above, and in a general setting of modest increases in nominal wages, the trend of real wages was largely determined by the behaviour of inflation (see figure 4.10).
In fact, in most countries nominal wage increases appear to have been based mainly on expected inflation.
Given that the countries generally met their inflation targets for the year, except in a few cases where price rises slightly overshot the target, available data show only minimal increases in real wages.
Relatively high levels of inflation undermined workers’ purchasing power in some countries, including the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (as noted above), Costa Rica and, in particular, the Dominican Republic.
This last country is struggling to overcome a serious crisis in which inflation has risen dramatically, with negative consequences for real wages.
In brief, faster economic growth has fuelled brisk job creation in the vast majority of the countries, but has not yet had positive effects on wages.
The unemployment rate fell quite steeply for the region as a whole, although this reduction was seen in only some of the countries.
In others, employment growth was offset by an expansion of the labour supply.
The rise in employment levels has helped reduce the proportion of the population living in poverty from an estimated 44.3% in 2003 to 42.9% today, while indigence fell from 19.6% to 18.6% over the same period.8 Nonetheless, the labour-market situation remains very difficult in many countries, as indicated by persistent migratory flows.
GDP growth exceeded 8%, for a cumulative increase of over 18% since the low recorded in 2002.
Aggregate output is approximately 3% below the annual high posted prior to the severe crisis of the early years of this decade.
Unemployment is still high, especially if the jobs provided under special assistance plans are not taken into account, but there has nonetheless been a significant decrease in the jobless rate, which now stands at a comparable level to the rate registered prior to the most serious phase of the crisis.
This, in conjunction with a partial recovery of real wages, has contributed to a slight decline in the country’s high poverty and indigence rates.
The annual rate of inflation (measured according to the consumer price index) has risen somewhat but, at about 6%, is still moderate.
The expansion of economic activity has been buoyed by the maintenance of a high real exchange rate and an improvement in the terms of trade, which has also helped to back up fiscal policy (thanks to export tax receipts).
Another factor has been the perception that, despite the existence of unresolved issues in the aftermath of the crisis (such as the public debt), the economy is getting back to normal.
This feeling has paved the way for production and spending decisions based on time horizons that, while still limited, appear to be gradually growing longer.
The trade account has once again yielded a hefty surplus, although it is smaller than the figure posted for the preceding biennium.
The current account is also registering a positive balance equivalent to around 2% of GDP (even after computing the interest arrears on the external public debt).
This outcome, together with the downward trend in the outflow of capital from the private sector, has generated a persistent excess supply of foreign exchange which has been absorbed by publicsector purchases (a build-up of reserves by the central bank and acquisitions paid for with the national government’s financial surpluses).
This policy is one of the factors that has helped to hold the nominal exchange rate steady, which has translated into a moderate appreciation in real terms.
The central bank has issued bonds at lower interest rates in order to sterilize a portion of the money created by these acquisitions.
The means of payment have continued to expand, although more slowly than the year before.
The broader monetary aggregates have increased substantially, even though the low rate of return on time deposits has dampened the private sector’s demand for these instruments.
In contrast, public-sector deposits are up sharply, and banks have been moving out of their deficit positions and maintaining their liquidity.
Furthermore, despite the weakness of private-sector credit demand, the volume of bank financing has rebounded.
The public sector has generated the largest primary surplus (measured in terms of GDP) to be recorded in recent decades and is posting a sizeable financial surplus as well.
This trend has been underpinned by a steep upswing in revenues, with significant increases in receipts from taxes on domestic activity (in a 10-month time span, revenues from the profits tax jumped by over 60% and VAT receipts by more than 50%) and on imports; collections of export duties have also risen, but less sharply.
The national public sector’s primary expenditures (measured in terms of GDP) have climbed owing to an increase in transfers to the provinces, adjustments in retirement pensions and a sizeable upturn in capital expenditure.
A portion of the external assets built up by public agencies has had to be used to pay off credits owed to the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Relations between the Argentine government and the Fund have had visible ups and downs, even though the country has fully met its fiscal targets.
The authorities did not concur with some of the demands made by the Fund (one of which was for the government to generate even larger primary surpluses in the future) and, given the lack of agreement among the parties, the existing arrangement was suspended.
A new programme is to be negotiated The government drew up a proposal for a bond swap in order to replace the securities that it had stopped servicing in late 2001 (this outstanding debt, including interest, totals somewhat more than US$ 100 billion).
This proposal called for substantial debt reductions in both the debt principal and interest but, unlike the proposal put forward the year before, it recognized the interest arrears that have accumulated since payments were suspended.
The projected service on the restructured debt would amount, over time, to more than 3% of GDP, which is quite a high figure in terms of Argentina’s past fiscal record.
The government secured a swap agreement with local pension fund managers, but the formal submission of the offer to all creditors has been postponed until early 2005.
In addition to the restructuring of the public debt, which will surely have an influence on the future economic outlook, other contractual issues which arose as a result of the crisis remain pending.
These issues include those now under litigation in the wake of the conversion of debts into peso-denominated obligations.
The Supreme Court has ratified the constitutionality of these measures, but this has apparently not laid the legal controversy to rest.
Another topic of debate has been the operation of privatized public utilities and, in particular, the outlook in terms of future energy supplies, after signs of possible shortages appeared midway through the year.
In response, the government decided to create a public enterprise (with some shares perhaps to be held by private investors) in this sector.
The authorities also announced their intention to take advantage of higher fiscal revenues and other resources to boost investment in infrastructure.
Talks on the subject with the Government of China have covered plans for investments in such sectors as railroads, housing, hydrocarbons and communications.
Be that as it may, the vast majority of basic services are provided by the private sector, and although a number of temporary agreements have been reached regarding privatelyoperated utilities, systems that define future terms and conditions regarding regulatory schemes, investments, and rates and prices are yet to be established.
Trends in aggregate demand in 2004 have reflected a steep increase in private consumption, which is thus outpacing GDP growth.
Public consumption has risen very little, however, so the domestic savings/GDP ratio appears either to have held more or less steady or may perhaps have continued to rise.
Investment has rebounded in all the components of the capital formation process and has apparently topped 18% of GDP.
Construction has expanded once again (although less than in 2003) thanks to the use of liquidity built up by the private sector, in addition to higher public investment.
At the same time, an appreciable increase has been seen in acquisitions of capital goods, especially in the agricultural sector and in smaller businesses; a less marked rise in such acquisitions has also been observed among large enterprises.
A larger amount of land was planted with soybeans for the 2003/2004 crop year, but the harvest was smaller owing to bad weather.
The area planted with soybeans for the 2004/2005 crop year is expected to be about the same as last year’s, in view of the fact that international prices for this crop have declined.
Wheat output has risen considerably in 2004 and, although maize production is down, the area planted with maize for the current crop year is expected to have increased considerably.
Manufacturing output has risen by an estimated 10%, thereby regaining levels comparable to those recorded in 1999.
Activity in this sector slowed during the second quarter (perhaps, in part, owing to reductions in energy supplies), but then picked up again.
Noteworthy increases in production have been seen in the automotive, mechanical engineering, construction materials and chemical industries.
This response may in part reflect the influence exerted by the fact that labour has become relatively less expensive since the currency’s depreciation.
In the second quarter, the employment rate reached 39.4%, thus outstripping the high recorded for the 1990s.
Even if the computations factor out the people whose main source of employment is one of the assistance plans implemented in this area (who account for 2% of the population), the employment coefficient is still comparatively high.
The unemployment rate amounted to 14.8% in the second quarter (17.4% if the beneficiaries of job plans who are actively seeking work are not counted as employed) and is thought to have declined later in the year.
Following a steep drop in real wages during the crisis, stronger labour demand in the private sector has fuelled a recovery that has benefited both registered and informal workers.
Nominal wages have slipped somewhat in the public sector, but have remained in step with price variations.
The consumer price index (CPI) amounts to about 6% for 2004 as a whole.
As a result of higher domestic spending levels, rate hikes for privately-operated services have outpaced the general rate of price increases.
The real exchange rate has dipped slightly from its formerly high levels.
Late in the year, the Argentine peso’s real parity with the dollar has been nearly twice as high as it was when the convertibility regime came to an end.
The multilateral exchange rate has been even higher, given the dollar’s cumulative depreciation against the euro and the Brazilian real.
The country’s surplus on the balance-of-payments current account has narrowed considerably, but the fact that it has maintained a positive balance during an upswing in the business cycle is a noteworthy development.
The surplus on the merchandise trade account is smaller than it was the year before, but nonetheless appears to have topped US$ 11 billion (nearly 7.5% of GDP).
A significant increase in inbound tourism has boosted revenues, but there has also been an offsetting rise in Argentine residents’ expenditures in other countries.
An upturn in profit remittances has influenced the result on the income account.
Private capital flows are close to their equilibrium point, with a net outflow of some US$ 500 million being recorded for the first nine months of the year, versus an outflow of US$ 5.5 billion during the same period of 2003.
In all, foreign-exchange movements have resulted in a sizeable build-up in reserves.
The predominant factor in this result is the increase in prices, although towards the end of the year there have been some signs of a slowdown in this trend while volumes have apparently been picking up.
Clear differences are to be observed among the various categories of goods.
In the first nine months of the year, exports of agricultural manufactures (especially dairy products and meat) were considerably higher, while exports of industrial manufactures rose by 17%.
A particularly striking increase has been seen in imports of capital goods, which soared by almost 140% in the first nine months of 2004.
MERCOSUR has strengthened its position as an importer of Argentine goods to some degree, but even so, its share amounts to less than 20% and is therefore much smaller than it was a few years ago.
On the other hand, with a 37% share, MERCOSUR retained its traditional position as a major supplier of Argentine imports.
As a result, Argentina has run a deficit on its trade within the MERCOSUR area.
China’s growing importance as a market for the country’s exports (9% in the first nine months of 2004) has been one of the hallmarks of this period.
The Argentine government has sought to expand trade with this country, and letters of intent have been submitted that herald the opening of export markets.
In addition, China has now been granted market-economy status (a step that has given rise to apprehension in some local industrial sectors).
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela The political turmoil that had been observed in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in 2003 carried over into 2004.
The result of the recall referendum held on 15 August confirmed that the current President will remain in office until the end of his term in early 2007.
At the same time, strong economic growth over the year (18%) came close to restoring economic activity to the levels seen prior to the general strike that was called in late 2002.
The upswing was observed in all sectors, and its magnitude exceeded initial estimates.
The authorities announced that as of 1 January 2005 the local currency would be devalued from 1,920 to 2,150 bolívares per United States dollar.
A number of factors were at work in the expansion of economic activity in 2004.
First, the 2004 rate reflects a considerable statistical effect, since the first quarter of 2003 represented a very low basis for comparison, as shown by the fact that GDP in the first quarter of 2004 was up by a dramatic 32.8% over its level in the yearearlier period.
Fiscal policy continued to be openly expansionary; in the first half of the year public spending by the central government was up by about 60% in nominal terms in relation to its level in the same period of 2003.
Nonetheless, the overall fiscal deficit was slightly smaller than the year-earlier figure of about 4% of GDP.
In view of this situation, the government lowered the VAT rate from 16% to 15% as from 1 September 2004.
The tax on business assets was eliminated as from the same date.
The consequent drop in revenue from these sources was offset by the rise in receipts from oil sales and from other domestic taxes.
For the year as a whole the fiscal deficit of the narrowly defined public sector should come in at about 3.5% of GDP.
This shortfall was financed through domestic borrowing and an increase in the foreignexchange profits turned over to the government by the central bank.
Exchange-rate controls remained in place, but were loosened slightly.2 This was reflected in the parallel exchange market, in which the local currency tended to appreciate.3 In 2004 nominal interest rates continued on the downward trend begun in 2003.
There was a sizeable upturn in private credit extended by the banking system, the amount of which, in nominal terms, was 60% higher up to September 2004 than it had been up to December 2003.
Monetary aggregates continued to expand in nominal terms, though at much slower rates than in 2003.
Deposits in the banking system increased at a similar pace, with the exception of time deposits, which recorded an increase of 43% up to September 2004, compared to 22% in 2003.
The upturn in activity took place more or less across the board.
The economy expanded by 20.4% in the first three months of the year, driven by a 20% increase in non-petroleum activity (the fastest-growing sectors were manufacturing, construction, commerce, transport and financial services) and by a sharp rise in import duties (68.1%).
This smaller increase was due to the fact that production in 2004 showed no variation with respect to the final months of 2003.
Manufacturing also recorded a significant upswing in the first seven months of 2004 in comparison to the same period of 2003 (38%); the largest increases were seen in sectors linked to construction, machinery and equipment production and motor vehicle manufacturing.
Domestic demand also improved, rising by 28.6% in the first three quarters of 2004 in comparison to its level in the same period of 2003.
The upturn was driven by the rebound in investment, which was seen in both gross fixed investment and the replenishment of stocks.
Inflation, measured by the consumer price index, posted a substantial drop in relation to 2003, with a cumulative rate of 17.3% between January and November 2004, as against 27.1% in 2003.
This was attributable to the real appreciation of the exchange rate, developments in exchange-rate policy, the maintenance of price controls and the wider availability of goods as a result of the increased imports made possible by the release of larger amounts of foreign exchange.
The index of core inflation rose by 19.4% in the same period of With respect to the labour situation, the rate of unemployment dropped, to stand at 14.5% in September 2004 (down from 19.1% in January).
The rate of informal employment out of the total remained above 50%, however.
The general wage index was 14% higher in the first half of 2004 than it had been in December 2003; this represented a small rise in real terms.
The increase was mainly the result of wage hikes in the public sector (30% in the period), since private-sector wages rose by only 8.6%.
A negative rate indicates an appreciation on the currency in real terms. g Estimate based on data from January to October. h Average from January to October, annualized. 2 Foreign exchange became easier to obtain in the controlled market because the list of products that could legally be imported was lengthened and the travel quota was increased.
In addition, the Foreign Exchange Board (CADIVI) significantly increased the amount of foreign currency released daily. 3 In 2004 the price of the bolívar in relation to the dollar moved from 3,240 in February to 2,550 in September. 4 The central bank defines the index of core inflation as an alternative measurement of consumer prices.
The prices used in calculating the index are those of processed foods, textiles and clothing, non-energy industrial goods and services, as well as goods and services not subject to price controls.
External trade rallied strongly in 2004, with sharp increases in both exports and imports of goods.
The steep rise in exports (48.9% in the first three quarters of the year compared to the same period of 2003) was essentially due to the increase in international oil prices.
The upturn in merchandise imports (62.7% in the same period) reflected the low figures recorded in 2003, the wider availability of foreign exchange and a brighter economic outlook.
Even though imports climbed strongly in 2004, the robust performance of exports was enough to swell the merchandise trade surplus significantly (to US$ 23.2 billion, compared to US$ 16.25 billion in 2003).
As a result, in 2004 the current account surplus amounted to US$ 15.5 billion, or In October 2004 the central bank’s international reserves stood at US$ 22.68 billion, including the resources available in the macroeconomic stabilization fund.
These resources expanded to US$ 24 billion in July 2004, then declined as a result of the decision by Petróleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), with the agreement of the central bank, to institute a new foreign-currency account, in combination with the company’s external debt buyback operations and the increased flexibility of the regime regulating the sale of foreign exchange.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 81 Bolivia Bolivia’s political and social situation remained relatively stable throughout the year.
In July a referendum was held on the management of hydrocarbons, but progress towards the passage of a new law in that area has been stalled in the legislature, where this issue has been the subject of much debate.
The uncertainty surrounding the regulations governing this key sector of the economy has reopened conflicts within the region and has hindered the drafting of the budget bill for 2005, as part of the projected revenues will not be available until the hydrocarbons law has been adopted.
The level of activity, the fiscal situation and the balanceof-payments current account improved in relation to 2003.
Nevertheless, the country has not yet come close to emerging from the low-growth phase that began in 1998 or to overcoming the severe constraints it faces in the fiscal and monetary spheres.
The prospects for 2005 depend to a large extent on the consolidation of political and institutional stability, as well as a favourable international context, which was a decisive factor in 2004.
The country’s fiscal situation was significantly better in 2004 than it had been in 2003, when the non-financial public sector had run a fiscal deficit equivalent to 7.9% of GDP.
The pension system’s deficit –which accounts for most of this shortfall– stood at 4.9% of GDP in 2004.
About 69% of the fiscal deficit was covered through the use of external financing, particularly soft loans.
At the beginning of the year the country’s fiscal situation was critical, prompting the government to seek exceptional external financing in February.
As this initiative was unsuccessful, expenditure had to be contained and new taxes created.
The Congress adopted a financial transactions tax, which came into force in July and provided for certain exceptions.
Tax receipts increased owing to the growth of hydrocarbons exports and to the exceptional revenues received between March and May as a result of a tax amnesty programme (“perdonazo”).
This additional income, which exceeded the programmed amount, was used to increase public investment in infrastructure.
Over that period, restrictions on current expenditure led to a 12.6% decline in goods and services purchases and limited the growth of outlays for personal services to just 7.7%.
Owing to the delay in the disbursement of external funds, the treasury resorted to liquidity credits from the central bank, though without exceeding the limits agreed upon previously.
The complex fiscal deficit problem led to an increase in total public debt, which, according to estimates, amounted to US$ 8.032 billion, or 91% of GDP, as of late September; domestic debt has also grown rapidly and accounts for 39.7% of that sum.
Originally, the draft budget for 2005 envisaged a downturn in the deficit (to 5.5% of GDP) and additional revenues from the financial transactions tax, the hydrocarbons law and an increase in gas exports, as well as further spending restrictions.
In late November, however, the Congress returned the bill to the executive branch for redrafting.
The debate on the financial transactions tax and the referendum on hydrocarbons triggered another wave of deposit withdrawals, which reached a peak at the end of June (when deposits were down by US$ 300 million, or 11.6%, in relation to their level of late December).
By October the situation had begun to turn around, with the recovery of about US$ 60 million.
Owing to slack demand and the downturn in deposits, the credit portfolio also diminished (by US$ 160 million, or 6.3%, between late December and late October).
The central bank reacted to the deposit withdrawals by raising interest rates and injecting liquidity through guarantee credits and repo operations.
Between February and August the liquidity squeeze set off increases in virtually the entire interest rate structure; subsequently, these hikes were partially reversed.
As savings accounts in bolivianos are exempt from the financial transactions tax, there was an incipient de-dollarization of the monetary aggregates.
This positive effect of the tax is a first step towards reducing the economy’s high level of dollarization, which is the focus of measures currently being devised by the authorities.
As of late October the rate of nominal devaluation within the crawling-peg exchange-rate regime was much slower than in 2003, owing to the stabilization of the currencies of some of Bolivia’s main trading partners.
By the end of October the boliviano had depreciated against the dollar by 2.8% in real terms and by 4.4% in effective terms in relation to its value at the end of 2003.
In the first half of 2004 there was an upturn in activity, as shown by strong export growth and the stabilization of private consumption and gross capital formation.
These two variables, especially the latter, had suffered a serious deterioration in 2003.
In the first half of the year GDP and overall demand registered yearon-year increases of 3.3% and 4.4%, respectively.
The recovery scarcely involved domestic demand, which rose by only 1.2%, while exports grew by 15%.
Hydrocarbon extraction and refining and food production accounted for much of the expansion.
Agriculture was beset by weather-related and sanitary problems; for example, a drought reduced soybean yields.
In 2005 economic activity will continue to depend on external conditions, including the possible expansion of gas exports to Argentina and the behaviour of soybean prices, which have been slipping since the first quarter of 2004.
At the end of November the inflation rate with regard to December 2003 prices was 4.0%, which was higher than the target of 3.5%.
The rise in prices reflected shortages in the supply of agricultural products.
In the first half of the year the balance-of-payments current account recorded a surplus of some US$ 140 million, but the increase in deposit withdrawals resulted in a net outflow of capital.
These flows made a partial recovery late in the third quarter, with the result that the level of reserves stabilized.
Exports, meanwhile, jumped by 39% between January and August and will probably exceed US$ 2 billion for the year as a whole (as against US$ 1.571 billion in 2003).
The export boom was concentrated in a very narrow range of products: gas, fuels and soybeans, which account for two thirds of the growth posted in the first eight months of the year.
Some manufactured products (clothing, wood manufactures) grew briskly, but still represent only a small proportion of the export supply.
Tin and zinc benefited from higher international prices and regained some of their former pre-eminence as a share of external sales.
In line with the weakness of domestic demand, import growth was slight.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 83 In 2004 Brazil’s economy will post its best out-turn since 1994, with GDP growth of over 5%.
This growth is particularly significant in that it was achieved together with a current account surplus and in a framework of fiscal austerity and inflation control.
The merchandise trade balance will show a surplus of US$ 33 billion, with an expansion of about 30% over the year in terms of both exports and imports of goods.
Despite the large deficit on the income account, this outcome generated an unprecedented balance-ofpayments current account surplus of some US$ 11 billion (1.6% of GDP).
In the first three quarters of 2004 household consumption was up by 4% in relation to the year-earlier period, whereas in the first nine months of 2003 it had shown a cumulative decline of 2.4% in relation to the same period of 2002.
The fiscal accounts will post a public-sector primary surplus equal to 4.5% of GDP, bringing the nominal deficit below 3% of GDP and reducing net public debt to 54% of GDP, from 58.7% at the end of 2003.
This effect, combined with the impetus provided by external demand, boosted domestic output, with positive repercussions for employment and wage levels.
The manufacturing industry grew by 8% over the first nine months of 2004.
The economy added 1.7 million new jobs in the formal sector, and the unemployment rate eased from more than 13% in May 2004 to 10.5% the following October.
After having fallen off sharply in previous years, the employed population’s average income began to climb in the course of 2004, with the result that its level in the period July-October 2004 was 1.9% higher than it had been in the same period of 2003.
Completing this positive cycle, investment expanded by about 12%, improving considerably on its sluggish performance in 2003.
However, there is still no guarantee that gross capital formation will continue to expand, for two reasons.
First, in order to reach its inflation target for 2005, the central bank recently raised interest rates to bring the growth of demand into line with its assessment of the economy’s output potential, thereby forestalling the emergence of inflationary pressures.
Second, a number of structural reform initiatives aimed at improving the regulatory framework for infrastructure investment (to boost public-private partnerships, for example) or at facilitating the granting of credit and the definition of guarantees (a new legal framework for bankruptcies, for example) have yet to be adopted by the Congress.
For 2005 the central bank has announced that the inflation target, originally set at 4.5%, will instead be 5.1%, with an allowable deviation of two and a half points.
This revision was made in response to supply shocks and to the higher prices of fuels and derivatives and their expected impact on administered prices.
In 2004 the country’s economic policy continued to be geared to maintaining fiscal austerity and meeting the inflation target.
In terms of fiscal policy, the government changed the public sector’s primary surplus target by a quarter of a point, raising it to 4.5% of GDP, as a result of an increase in revenue (specifically, a real cumulative rise of 11% up to October) attributable to the economy’s expansion and higher receipts of taxes and contributions.
Particularly significant in this regard were the decision to make imports subject to the Contribution to the Financing of the Social Security System (COFINS) tax and the introduction of a new methodology, as part of the tax reform adopted in 2003, to reduce this tax’s “cascade” effect.
The social insurance system continues to account for most of the fiscal deficit.
Up to October its primary deficit amounted to 1.6% of GDP, slightly exceeding the 1.5% observed in the same period of 2003.
Total federal government expenditure rose by almost 8% in real terms up to October, mainly because primary current expenditure (not including personal expenditure) increased by nearly 20% in real terms.
The salient feature of monetary policy was the expansion of the means of payment (M1), which grew by about 30% in the 12 months ending in October 2004 (after having dwindled by 3.7% in the year-earlier period).
The behaviour of monetary liquidity in 2004 was linked to the expansion of total credit, which swelled by 19.7% in the 12 months ending in October, with increases of 26% in personal loans and 27% in business loans.
Directed credit using mandatory funds expanded by 12.8% over the same period.
In January 2004, for reasons related to its management of the inflation targeting system, the central bank halted the downward trend of the economic policy interest rate.
In March and April 2004 the declining trend resumed as the rate was reduced to 16% per year.
In September, however, the central bank reacted to the increase in the level of activity and to the pressures that international price hikes were exerting on fuel and derivative prices by announcing that it would begin a process of raising the economic policy interest rate; as a result, the rate stood at 17.5% per year in November.
The third pillar of Brazil’s economic policy was the maintenance of the floating exchange-rate regime, with limited central bank intervention.
The bank purchased foreign exchange in the amount of some US$ 2.6 billion in January 2004 and carried out smaller-scale operations in the remaining months.
Over the first 10 months of 2004 the country accumulated US$ 4 billion in reserves, which brought its total reserves, net of IMF liabilities, to US$ 22.2 billion.
In November the government announced that it would purchase some US$ 3 billion on the market so that it could meet its outstanding external debt obligations up to June 2005 without drawing on international reserves.
The improvement in the performance of productive activity spread to all sectors.
Agriculture continued its expansionary cycle, growing by 5.6% in the first three quarters of 2004 in comparison to the same period of 2003.
The biggest increase was observed in the manufacturing sector, which expanded by 7.4% in that period.
The segments of the manufacturing sector that achieved the largest increases in output were consumer durables and capital goods (26%), whose growth far outstripped that of intermediate goods (7.4%) and nondurable consumer goods (3.1%).
Growth in the service sector was led by commerce, which expanded by 8.1%, followed by other services, which were up by 5.5%.
Household consumption was up by 3.9% between January and September 2004 in comparison to the same period of 2003, thus returning to the level recorded in 2000.
Starting in the second quarter, this upward trend was accompanied by a steady increase in consumer confidence indices, which continued into the final quarter.
There was also a hike in gross fixed capital formation, whose level was 11.8% higher in the first three quarters of 2004 than it had been in the same period of 2003.
The rise was attributable both to increased investment in machinery and equipment (23%) and to an upswing in the construction sector (5.9%).
As a percentage of GDP at current prices, the investment rate is expected to stand at between 19% and 19.5%, thus recovering from the low level recorded in 2003 (17.8%, one of the lowest figures of the past few decades).
In October the unemployment rate in the main metropolitan areas fell to 10.5%, after having reached an unprecedented 13.1% in April.
There was an across-the-board increase in employment, with upturns of 6.5% in industry, 6.6% in construction, 5.7% in services and 1.2% in commerce.
The earnings of formal-sector employees increased slightly in real terms in the course of the year.
The trade balance will end the year with an estimated surplus of US$ 33 billion.
Three main factors account for this performance: an upsurge in sales to non-traditional markets such as China, Eastern Europe and other Latin American countries such as Mexico and Chile; increases in international commodity prices and in the volume of manufactures exports; and the renewed vigour of sales to Argentina.
In the period January-October the biggest upturns were seen in imports of fuel (47%) and consumer durables (28%).
Significant increases were also observed in imports of intermediate goods (27%) and capital goods (14%), as the level of economic activity rallied.
The current account balance will stand at an estimated US$ 11 billion (1.6% of GDP), reflecting the combined effects of the trade surplus and the expected widening of the deficit on the income account (to US$ 20.6 billion, from US$ 18.55 billion in 2003).
This larger deficit is due to the higher amount of net profit remittances, which totalled US$ 7.2 billion in 2004, as against US$ 5.1 billion in 2003.
Net foreign investment fell from US$ 9.9 billion in 2003 to US$ 7.1 billion in 2004 as a result of a large jump in Brazilian investments abroad, which amounted to US$ 9 billion.
Although Brazil’s international bond issues remained at the same level as in 2003 (about US$ 11 billion), the country’s private sector posted a net payment of external debt that reduced its international liabilities from US$ 75 billion in December 2003 to US$ 68 billion in August 2004.
In that month Brazil’s total external debt fell to US$ 203 billion, of which US$ 20.5 billion corresponded to short-term debt (taking into account inter-company loans, total debt amounts to US$ 221 billion).
Debt indicators have therefore improved; the ratio of external debt to merchandise exports fell to 2.5 in June 2004, as against 4.7 in 1999.
Brazil’s trade negotiations with the European Union, through MERCOSUR, did not come to fruition in 2004.
However, it signed an agreement with the Andean Community to consolidate the effort to strengthen South American integration.
It also sought to expand its markets through trade agreements (such as the ones signed with China and Viet Nam) and trade missions to countries in Asia, Africa and the Middle East.
In 2004 the Chilean economy turned in its best performance since 1997, driven once again by the continued buoyancy of exports, particularly copper, which did well in terms of both price and volume.
GDP grew at an estimated rate of 6% in real terms, almost doubling its 2003 growth of 3.3%.
The terms of trade were up by a substantial 19.6%, compared to only 5.8% the preceding year.
Record-high copper prices (US$ 1.49 per pound in October) were the main source of the expansion in the terms of trade and easily counteracted the negative effect of higher prices for petroleum, of which Chile is a net importer.
Inflation remained low, thus affording monetary policy makers additional degrees of freedom.
Although annual inflation was below the floor of the 2%-to-4% band established by the central bank, this authority raised the monetary policy interest rate twice, in line with trends in the rate controlled by the United States Federal Reserve.
Unemployment was still high, at 9.4% of the labour force in the period August-October 2004 (quarterly moving average).
This figure exceeded the 8.8% recorded in the same period of 2003.
Rising exports have been the main engine of GDP growth over the last five years.
In 2004 exports are estimated to have increased by about 14.5%, while domestic demand rose by more than 7%.
This latter development is attributable to a surge in investment, which jumped by about 10%, although this was not enough to bring it back to the record levels seen in the period up to 1998, when it had been equivalent to 27% of GDP.
Economic policy in 2004 was directed mainly at averting fiscal, external and price imbalances.
Within this framework, Chile achieved faster growth than in previous years, thanks to highly favourable terms of trade and strong international demand for its export products, in combination with a monetary policy geared towards economic expansion.
The most significant note of caution comes from the unstable international situation, since a deterioration of the currently propitious external conditions could affect Chile’s future expansion.
The main objective of fiscal policy continued to be the maintenance of a structural surplus equivalent to 1% of GDP.
The 2004 budget was based on GDP growth of 4.4% and a copper price of US$ 0.83 per pound, but these assumptions fell short of the levels actually achieved.
Accordingly, instead of a deficit of 0.1% of GDP, the central government’s fiscal accounts are on va em ent, perce ntage Preliminary overview of the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 87 estimated to have run a surplus of about 1.9%.
The government used the increased revenues from copper, as well as funds raised through the issuance of sovereign bonds, to prepay debt incurred at rates higher than the ones available today.
Monetary policy was implemented in a context of below-target inflation, highly favourable terms of trade and external demand, a swelling surplus on the merchandise trade balance, voluminous capital inflows and low country risk.
The central bank’s inflation target is 3%, with an allowable range of 2% to 4%.
Given the manoeuvring room afforded by the low rate of inflation (which was below the floor of the band up to October), the central bank lowered the monetary policy interest rate to help boost the economy.
However, it raised the rate to 2% in September and 2.25% in November, a few weeks after the United States Federal Reserve increased its interest rates.
The 12-month rate of variation in the supply of money held by private individuals was 19.2% in real terms in October 2004, while 12-month inflation was 1.9%.
The nominal annual rate of interest on one- to three-year deposits was 3.6% in October, and the 12month expansion of bank credit was 10.9% in August.
The proportion of non-performing loans in the financial system’s portfolio decreased from 1.6% in December In the course of the year the nominal exchange rate fluctuated between 559 and 650 pesos to the dollar, with no significant market intervention by the central bank.
Low interest rates provided the impetus for an upswing in construction and rises in durable goods consumption and investment.
Employment increased only slightly, however, by 1.3% in the first three quarters with respect to the same period of the preceding year, and was therefore the principal weak spot in the economy’s performance.
Wage employment grew at a faster rate of 2.7%, but this was partially offset by a decline in own-account employment.
The behaviour of real wages mirrored that of inflation, with larger increases early in the year and smaller ones in the second half, when price rises became sharper.
On average, real wages went up by 2% over the year as a whole.
As regards the external sector, the current account posted a surplus of US$ 2.268 billion in the third quarter, while the trade balance (f.o.b.) showed a surplus of nearly US$ 7.5 billion in October.
Up to that month, imports expanded by 22.9% and exports, by 49.3%.
Volume increases accounted for 12.3% of the growth in exports, while price increases accounted for 33%.
In 2004 the Colombian economy performed well, buoyed in particular by private investment and external demand.
Between January and September real GDP grew by 3.5%, equalling the rate observed in the same period of 2003.
For 2004 as a whole, real GDP will grow by Fiscal affairs remained the primary focus of debate, with the discussion of reform proposals aimed at creating conditions for reducing the country’s high level of debt.
In May negotiations began on the conclusion of a free trade agreement between the United States, Colombia, Peru and Ecuador.
The government has submitted a new social security reform proposal to the Congress.
The proposal has four main provisions, all of which are intended to enhance the system’s financial viability.
These provisions would eliminate special retirement regimes, end the practice of paying a fourteenth monthly pension benefit each year for new pensioners, establish a ceiling equivalent to 25 times the minimum wage for public-sector retirement pensions and bar workers from using collective bargaining to obtain social security conditions that are more advantageous than those provided under the general regime.
The fiscal accounts have behaved as programmed at the beginning of the year and are expected to meet the target for the consolidated public sector’s deficit, of 2.5% of GDP at the end of 2004 (compared to the 2.7% recorded in 2003).
The authorities conducted a number of transactions during the year to improve the maturity profile of the country’s domestic and external debt.
The intervention interest rate was reduced from 7.25% to 6.75% in the first quarter of the year and was kept stable in the following months, so that real interest rates remained at historically low levels.
By October the real deposit rate had reached 1.7% (12-month average), while the lending rate stood at 8.6%.
In November the growth of the means of payment (M1) was somewhat slower than it had been in the year-earlier period (12.1%, compared to 16% in 2003).
The monetary authorities adopted various measures over the year to slow down the peso’s revaluation.
Twelve-month inflation subsided from 6.5% in December 2003 to 5.4% in May 2004, partly because of a smaller increase in tradable goods prices as a result of the peso’s appreciation, but rose again in subsequent months.
Over the 12-month period ending in November inflation amounted to 5.8%, which was within the target range established by the monetary authorities (between The conditions prevailing in 2004 were conducive to growth in the Colombian economy, which was driven mainly by private investment and external demand.
In the third quarter, however, there was a slowdown in GDP growth because of the poor performance of agriculture and of mining and quarrying.
The fastest-growing sector was construction (8.6%), which was boosted by an upswing in building construction; next in importance were industry (5%), commerce (5%) and the financial sector (4%).
Investment was the main domestic factor propelling GDP growth, while private consumption, fuelled by an increase in durable goods consumption, made a recovery.
The average for urban areas (13 metropolitan areas) in the first 10 months of the year was 15.5%, compared to 16.7% one year previously.
The labour-force participation rate diminished (from 64.4% to 62.9%) and employment stagnated (53%).
Nationwide, the downturn in unemployment was more modest (from 14.4% to 13.9%), while the employment rate was down from 53.1% to 52.4% and the labourforce participation rate, from 62% to 60.9%.
Exports grew faster in 2004 thanks to high commodity prices and dynamic global demand, with the recovery of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela being particularly significant.
In the first nine months of the year total exports swelled by 22%.
The biggest boost came from non-traditional exports to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (147%) and, to a lesser degree, from those to Ecuador (20%).
Traditional exports (coffee, oil, coal and ferronickel) benefited from higher international prices.
The United States was once again the main destination for Colombian exports (40% of the total), followed by the Andean Community countries (19%) –primarily the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (9%)– and the European Union (14%).
Meanwhile, total imports grew by 17% in the first nine months of the year.
Most of this increase was accounted for by raw materials and intermediate goods for industry (24%), followed by capital goods for industry (12%).
Purchases of consumer goods increased by 14%, with consumer durables up by 23%.
The current account deficit is expected to close the year at 1.4% of GDP, improving on the 1.7% posted in 2003.
The deficit on the non-factor services balance and higher external debt payments are estimated to have been offset by an increase in net transfers, especially family remittances, and by the trade surplus.
The balance-of-payments capital and financial account should close the year with a surplus on the order of US$ 2.8 billion (2.6% of GDP), which will be enough to finance the current account deficit of US$ 1.3 billion and to increase international reserves by US$ 1.5 billion.
There were substantial capital inflows, in the form of both short- and long-term debt, and a smaller outflow of assets abroad, in both the public and private sectors.
In turn, thanks to higher levels of investment in petroleum, hydrocarbons and mining, foreign investment inflows amounted to US$ 2.3 billion.
The extension of the country’s IMF programme, which expires in January 2005, will boost confidence still further and will help Colombia to consolidate the progress it has made in fiscal and financial matters.
The Ecuadorian economy grew briskly in 2004, reflecting an increase in oil extraction by private companies.
The expected slowdown is due to projections of lower growth in private-sector oil production.
The rapid expansion brought about a modest improvement in the employment situation.
In addition, inflation continued to fall in 2004, reaching levels similar to the ones seen in developed countries.
This, together with the depreciation of the dollar on international markets, resulted in an improvement in the country’s exchange-rate competitiveness.
In the first half of 2004 the non-financial public sector recorded an overall surplus of US$ 358.9 million, thanks to a 15.4% increase in revenues compared to the figure posted in the first half of 2003, notwithstanding an 18.5% rise in expenditure.
In particular, there was a 32.7% increase in oil export revenues and a 22.1% upturn in income tax receipts.
With respect to expenditure, it should be noted, first, that there was a nominal 18.8% rise in payroll expenditure compared to the level observed in the first half of 2003.
That year the proportion of total public spending under this item was the highest in the last 10 years (34.7%), and this proportion is unlikely to diminish significantly in the near future, with the result that the authorities will have less budget flexibility.
Second, pension outlays increased in the first half of 2004: central government transfers rose by 48%, while other public-sector entities’ transfers to the private sector climbed by 55.1%.
In addition, in mid-2004 the Ecuadorian Social Security Institute raised pension levels and the Congress increased the minimum pension.
Third, Ecuador’s continued dependence on oil revenues is a cause of concern.
Lastly, the decision to resort to domestic borrowing to finance the fiscal deficit entailed a significant increase (50.6%) in interest payments under this heading, albeit from a low initial level.
Following the expiration of its stand-by arrangement with the International Monetary Fund in April 2004, Ecuador did not enter into another arrangement with the Fund because the reforms required by that institution could not be implemented, mainly for political reasons.
Inflation eased and bank liquidity rose substantially (the sum of sight deposits and quasi-money in private banks increased by 15.3% between October 2003 and October 2004).
By September 2004 benchmark interest rates on loans and deposits had declined to 11.7% and 3.5%, respectively.
As of October 2004 private banks kept 9.8% of their total assets (US$ 835 million) in non-resident securities.
Similarly, deposits held abroad as a percentage of total assets reached a maximum (12.7%) in January 2004, after which they declined to 10.3%.
At the same time, private banks increased the supply of credit in 2004, possibly owing to the steady increase in funds available for lending, as well as to the more attractive returns on loans (particularly consumer loans) in comparison to foreign asset holdings.
In the first half of 2004 GDP was 8.2% higher than it had been in the same period of 2003, mainly because of an increase in oil production by private companies following the coming on stream of a heavy crude oil pipeline in September 2003.
Other sectors that enjoyed robust growth in 2004 were financial intermediation (after several years of stagnation following the 1999 crisis) and services other than commerce.
Inflation continued to trend downward in 2004; between November 2003 and the same month of 2004 the consumer price index went up by only 2%.
The depreciation of the dollar on international markets in 2004 in the context of substantial fiscal and current account imbalances in the United States, together with the significant decline in inflation in Ecuador, brought about an improvement in the country’s exchange-rate competitiveness, measured by its real effective exchange rate.
Thus, in the first 10 months of 2004 this rate increased (depreciated) by an average of 4.3% to stand at a level 6% lower than the historical average for the period January 1992 to December 1998 (prior to the 1999 crisis).
Nevertheless, owing to an increase in the labourforce participation rate, the unemployment rate rose to an average of 11.1% in the first 10 months of 2004.
With respect to the external sector, the balance-ofpayments current account, which had started to improve in the last quarter of 2003, continued to strengthen.
The balance on this account moved from a deficit of US$ 233 million in the first half of 2003 to a surplus of US$ 70.3 million in the same period of 2004.
The performance of oil sales more than offset the downturn in non-oil exports.
Among the non-oil exports that did increase were shrimp (11.2%), after a number of bad years, and fresh flowers (9.5%), while exports of bananas and manufactures diminished.
This pattern consolidates the position of crude oil as the country’s chief export.
Oil sales leapt by 47.1% in terms of volume and 74.3% in terms of value as a result of the hike in the price of crude.
The value of imports rose by 16.7%, reflecting higher prices for various products, as well as higher volumes in several categories.
In addition, in the first half of 2004 the balance-of-payments financial account deteriorated sharply, from a surplus of US$ 215.9 million to a deficit of US$ 268.4 million.
This essentially reflected a sudden 50% slump in foreign direct investment (from US$ 1.0285 billion to US$ 513 million), which, in turn, was due largely to the completion of the heavy crude oil pipeline.
These decreases were observed despite the extremely favourable conditions for petroleum activity: soaring oil prices and excess transport capacity through the above-mentioned pipeline.
Lastly, there was an increase in outflows under the heading of errors and omissions, from US$ 67.8 million in the first half of 2003 to US$ 238.9 million in the same period of 2004.
The net result of the financial movements described above was a slight increase (US$ 56.4 million) in freely available reserves in the first half of the year.
In 2004 the Paraguayan economy grew at a rate provisionally estimated at about 2.8%.
The country thus completed its second consecutive year of growth, and this positive trend is expected to continue in 2005, with an expansion of about 3.5%.
The upturn in the level of economic activity was accompanied by a decline in the inflation rate.
This solid performance by the real sector of the economy has taken place in an orderly macroeconomic environment sustained by significantly healthier fiscal accounts and the prudent management of monetary policy.
The central government’s primary surplus at the end of 2004 is estimated at some 1.9% of GDP, which represents a substantial improvement over the figure posted at the end of 2003 (a surplus of 0.9% of GDP).
These three taxes –together with the fuel tax, receipts of which rose by 51%, reflecting the oil price hike– accounted for almost 90% of the increase in tax revenues.
From the standpoint of the monetary and financial markets, the consolidation of a process of public confidence-building, which began when the current administration took office, had a positive effect on the demand for money.
As the expansion of this demand was enough to absorb the increase in the amount of money issued by the central bank, there was a slowdown in the growth of monetary regulation instruments and, in particular, a sharp decline in their yields, from 12.85% per year in late 2003 to 4.28% in October 2004.
The driving force behind the expansion of the monetary base was the upsurge in international reserves, which totalled nearly US$ 1.2 billion; this was more than double the value recorded in mid-2002, when reserves had reached their lowest ebb (some US$ 530 million).
However, the fact that this increase in demand has been relatively concentrated in more liquid assets, such as notes and coins and demand deposits, poses a problem in terms of channelling these resources into the financing of productive activity.
Although the real downturn in bank credit to the private sector –which had continued for more than three years– has now been halted, there are no clear signs that this trend is reversing itself.
This situation undoubtedly constitutes a significant constraint on the economic recovery process.
Central bank intervention in the foreign-exchange market stabilized the value of the guaraní and kept its real parity at an appropriately competitive level.
The real effective exchange rate appreciated in the first few months of the year, but this was more than offset by a depreciation that began in June and continued until October, when the real parity of the guaraní was 4% above its level at the end of 2003.
In relation to the dollar, the currency depreciated by less than 2% in real terms, but in relation to the currencies of Paraguay’s MERCOSUR partners, the real exchange rate increased by somewhat more than 7% in the same period.
The estimated 2004 growth rate is attributable primarily to the performance of goods-producing sectors, especially those that produce agricultural goods.
Upturns in livestock activity and in certain crops made up for the negative effects of the weather problems that affected soybean production early in the year, whose repercussions on total GDP are calculated at more than a full percentage point.
Industrial activity, driven by the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 93 performance of the meat-packing segment, followed the general trend of the agricultural subsector.
The performance of the service sector, whose growth is estimated to have fallen short of the overall average, was based essentially on an increase in electricity generation and on more vigorous activity in the areas of commerce and finance, as these activities account for a large proportion of the total.
The cumulative variation in the consumer price index (CPI) reached 1.3% over the first 10 months of the year, as against the 6.9% recorded in the same period of 2003.
The behaviour of overall inflation in the course of the year was influenced by the opposing trends observed in two groups of products: downward pressure from food prices (especially for fresh foods) and upward pressure from fuel prices.
For the year as a whole the CPI variation is estimated to have ranged from 2% to 2.3%, while the average of the monthly CPI values posted in 2004 was about 4.3% higher than the corresponding average for 2003.
In the first 10 months of the year exports were up by 28% in relation to their level in the same period of 2003 and by 14% in relation to their level for 2003 as a whole.
This buoyancy in external sales can be traced to international price hikes and the maintenance of a high real exchange rate.
However, exports were highly concentrated in terms of both the products that make up the export basket and their target markets.
Imports grew even faster than exports, presumably spurred by the upswing in economic activity.
Total external purchases in the first 10 months of 2004 were 40% higher than the figure for the year-earlier period and 17% higher than the figure for the whole of 2003.
As a result, in the first 10 months of the year the trade balance registered a deficit of US$ 756 million, whereas in the same period of 2003 the deficit had stood at US$ 433 million.
Although no employment data are available for 2004, that year’s estimated growth and the prospects for 2005 can be expected to result in a decline in the unemployment rate and a degree of improvement in the country’s high poverty indices.
In the medium term, however, Paraguay’s economy will have to meet a more demanding target, considering that, between now and 2010, it needs to grow by more than 4% a year just to bring per capita GDP back to 1995 levels.
The Peruvian economy grew by 4.6% in 2004, surpassing both its 2003 performance and the expectations that had prevailed early in the year.
This outcome was due to extremely favourable external conditions and the macroeconomic stability achieved in recent years.
The expansion was led by exports and private investment, which grew by 12.5% and 8.7%, respectively, over the first three quarters.
As a result of the export boom, the merchandise trade surplus widened and the balance-of-payments current account deficit narrowed to 0.3% of GDP.
Private consumption, the biggest component of overall demand, expanded more moderately (by 3.1%), given that employment increased only slightly and average real income held steady.
Inflation slightly overshot the upper limit of the band set by the central bank, mainly because of the high price of oil.
In 2005 export growth will probably slow down, but private investment, which is still low in historical terms, is expected to pick up and private consumption is likely to expand faster, with the result that GDP growth will again come in at about 4%.
This was made possible mainly by the behaviour of central government revenue, which rose by some 8% in real terms (in the first three quarters) as a result of higher receipts from general sales tax (following a rate increase in August 2003) and income tax, as well as the imposition of a financial transactions tax beginning in March.
Public spending grew very moderately in the first six months and, despite an upturn later in the year, declined as a proportion of GDP for 2004 as a whole.
To finance the deficit and outstanding amortization payments, the government resumed the issuance of bonds on international markets (for a total of US$ 500 million) in April and floated its first euro-denominated bond issue (for 650 million euros) in October.
Around the middle of the year cumulative 12-month inflation exceeded the upper limit of the band; in response to this and to external trends, the authorities raised the benchmark interest rate in August and October by a total of half a point, bringing it to 3.0% in October.
Thanks to macroeconomic stability and the solid performance of the external sector, the local currency strengthened and, between December 2003 and October 2004, the bilateral and multilateral real exchange rates fell by 4.2% and 3.8%, respectively.
One of the most buoyant sectors was the manufacturing industry, which posted growth of 5.6% during the first three quarters, largely as a result of an increase in textile exports and an upturn in fishmeal production, but also thanks to a rise in domestic-marketoriented production.
The mining and hydrocarbons sector continued to benefit from booming external demand, and recorded growth similar to its 2003 rate.
Investment in this sector and in construction generated a rise in gross fixed capital formation.
Moreover, the Camisea natural gas field came on stream and began to reverse the downturn in hydrocarbons production.
The fishing sector recovered from the sharp contraction it had suffered in 2003, with growth of 24% in the first nine months of the year.
Over the same period construction, services and the production of electricity, gas and water grew at rates of over 4%.
Since the upturn in private consumption was moderate, commerce grew by only 3%, while agriculture declined by 2% as a result of adverse weather conditions.
In the first half of the year the consumer price index (CPI) rose faster on account of higher prices for oil and other commodity imports (such as wheat), along with the impact of the drought on food prices.
Inflation subsequently fell to 3.95% in November, and is expected to approach the upper limit of the band set by the monetary authorities (3.5%) towards the end of the year.
In the first nine months of the year formal-sector urban employment grew by 2.4%, which helped to push up the employment rate slightly.
However, as labour-force participation also rose, the unemployment rate again showed little change.
Although average labour income went up slightly, it lost purchasing power owing to the increase in inflation.
Export value shot up by more than a third, to US$ 12 billion.
The leading traditional exports were minerals, sales of which soared by about 50% thanks to sharp price hikes and, in the case of some products (such as copper and lead), volume increases.
The expansion in non-traditional exports was across the board, with significant upturns in agricultural and fishing products, textiles and chemicals.
Favourable trends in the prices of the country’s export products offset the rise in the price of petroleum, with the result that the terms of trade improved for the third year running.
As a result, the merchandise trade balance expanded considerably, and is estimated at about US$ 2 billion for the year as a whole, compared to US$ 730 million in 2003.
Although the impact of this development on the current account was limited by an increase in profit remittances, the current account deficit nonetheless shrank from 1.7% of GDP to a slightly negative balance.
The overall balance therefore closed the year with an estimated surplus of 0.8% of GDP, despite a slight reduction in the financial account surplus (including errors and omissions).
At the end of October international reserves exceeded US$ 12 billion, as against US$ 10.2 billion in late 2003.
Public and private external debt declined as a percentage of GDP to stand at 45.4% in September (compared to 49.1% at the end of 2003).
Peru’s relatively low country-risk rating improved its conditions of access to bond markets, given that the spread on its debt instruments (January-October average) was 368 basis points, down from an average of 429 basis points in 2003.
In conjunction with the national elections, the citizenry also voted (65%) for mandatory State control of drinking-water and sanitation services. 1 Data collected in 1999 showed that 48% of the country’s young people between the ages of 15 and 19 had left school.
The new administration undertook to devise a package of measures to deal with the urgent social problems besetting the country.
In 2004 Uruguay’s growth again surpassed the most optimistic expectations, yet some 76,300 of its 3.4 million inhabitants live in indigence; poverty has doubled over the past four years, bringing the poor population to 850,000; and 40% of the country’s workers have no social security coverage.
The Presidentelect has announced that his administration’s first action will be to adopt a national social emergency plan (costing an estimated US$ 100 million) aimed at reintegrating drop-outs into the educational system and guaranteeing the entire population a basic level of food security.1 Economic activity registered solid growth throughout the year, buoyed by favourable regional and international conditions.
In contrast to the situation in 2003, growth was driven by both exports and domestic demand, which were up by 18.8% and 15.9%, respectively, in the first nine months of the year in relation to the year-earlier period.
The fastest-growing component of domestic demand was gross investment, which swelled by 31.2%, while final consumer spending went up by 14.2% and private consumption, by 16.3%.
The higher level of private spending was financed with private savings and a recovery in the credit-card segment, as bank credit has yet to rebound.
The upturn was observed in all sectors, with particularly strong growth in manufacturing (25.1%) and in commerce, restaurants and hotels (22.7%).
Growth is predicted to reach about 6% in 2005, since the Uruguayan economy will be hurt by the slowdown in Argentina and the somewhat less favourable international environment (interest-rate hikes and high crude oil prices).
Fiscal policy was eased somewhat in 2004, given the recovery of government revenues as a result of increased economic activity and stricter control of tax evasion.
In August the authorities adopted major changes to the tax regime, including reductions in the tax rates applicable to industrial and commercial income (IRIC), agricultural income (IRA), commissions (ICOM) and contributions to social security financing (COFIS), and nem ent percentage of eliminated the increases in payroll tax (IRP) that had been announced in 2002.
Noteworthy in this connection was the improvement in the central government’s accounts, which ran a surplus equivalent to 1.4% of GDP, after having posted a 0.2% deficit in 2003.
This positive change took place at the expense of public enterprises, whose surplus shrank from 3.4% of GDP in 2003 to 2.1% in 2004, mostly because of larger outlays on energy purchases.
In the context of the fifth review under the country’s standby arrangement with IMF, completed in October 2004, the authorities undertook to raise the public sector’s primary surplus target from 3.3% to 3.4% of GDP; by September this target had, in fact, been met.
The overall public-sector balance was equivalent to -1.5% of GDP, which represented an improvement over the -3.1% recorded in 2003 and the target of -2.9% agreed upon with IMF.
By the end of September gross public debt had dropped to 96% of GDP.
With respect to fiscal policy, the authorities do not plan to increase the tax burden, but they will have to deal with a number of outstanding issues, including reform of the tax system and of pension funds for police, military and bank personnel, as well as the Large Taxpayer Unit to be set up within the Tax Administration Department.
In the second quarter of 2004, with a view to making monetary policy more contractionary (to achieve the inflation target) and also more flexible, the central bank adopted a target range rather than a precise target figure for the monetary base.
The authorities, in turn, made more active use of repo operations (introduced in April) and began to offer forward contracts for the purchase and sale of dollars on the market.
In the third quarter the monetary base amounted to 12.848 billion pesos, which was practically in the middle of the target range, and continued to follow a downward trend.
The means of payment (M1), in contrast, were up by 8.8% in real terms with respect to the same period of 2003.
In October the Banco República began to repay in advance the third tranche of reprogrammed deposits (US$ 773 million, or 40% of total deposits), which had originally been scheduled for repayment starting in June 2005.
In terms of exchange-rate policy, Uruguay continued to implement a flexible exchange-rate regime.
As the monetary authority purchased all the foreign exchange needed for the year during the first six months, the price of the dollar increased until June.
Over the first eight months of the year, the country’s competitiveness, as measured by its real effective exchange rate, dipped by 6%.
Following the entry into force of its free trade agreement with Mexico, Uruguay signed a reciprocal investment protection agreement with the United States.
The Uruguayan government also proposed that the two countries should work out an agreement to avoid double taxation.
Price variations were negative in October ( 0.33%) and November ( 0.26%), with the result that inflation over the 12 months ending in November stood at 8.20%.
Given that no public utility rate increases were foreseen for the rest of the year, the authorities probably met their 2004 inflation target of between 7% and 9%.
In October wholesale prices of domestically produced goods fell for the third consecutive month (by 0.32%), having accumulated a 6.4% increase since the beginning of the year and a 7.8% increase over the previous 12 months.
The average wage index climbed by 10.7% over the 12 months ending in October.
This suggests that employment levels are finally responding to the growth in output.
In the external sector, data up to August show that export value in dollars (f.o.b.) rose by 32.8% with respect to the same period of 2003, totalling US$ 2.121 billion, while import value (c.i.f.) climbed by 40.8%, reaching US$ 2.215 billion.
Meat, which remained the chief export product in 2004 (24.9% of the total), surged by 65% in current values.
Lastly, Uruguay benefited from the upgrading of its credit rating from B- to B by the risk-rating agencies Fitch and Standard & Poor’s.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 101 Mexico and Central America Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 103 Costa Rica’s real gross domestic product (GDP) is estimated to have grown by 4.1% in 2004, which is 2.3 percentage points lower than the 2003 rate.
This slowdown was mainly due to a downturn in external sales of microprocessors produced by the Intel plant.
Exports and international tourism nonetheless continued to be the main sources of growth.
The country’s economy was also hurt by the impact of soaring international prices for oil and certain industrial commodities.
These price hikes were largely to blame for the increase in domestic costs and prices (13.3%), the faster depreciation of the colón and the wider trade deficit.
Added to this were the uncertainty generated by the delay in the adoption of fiscal reforms, the investment fund crisis and the lack of parliamentary support for the executive branch’s initiatives.
Moreover, the political and social climate deteriorated in the wake of serious allegations of corruption involving prominent political figures.
Central government finances were kept under control thanks to the containment of expenditure.
The fiscal deficit is therefore expected to stay close to its 2003 level of 2.9% of GDP.
In the face of strong inflationary pressure and a worsening imbalance in the external sector, monetary policy was tightened in the second half of the year, with the result that credit grew more slowly than in 2003 and interest rates tended to rise.
Despite the problems besetting the external sector, the balanceof-payments current account deficit, as a percentage of GDP, will be lower than the 2003 level of 5.5%.
One of the reasons for this improvement was the decline in the repatriation of profits and dividends as exports stalled.
The merchandise trade deficit widened considerably, however, and there was a dramatic loss of international reserves.
According to ECLAC estimates, in 2005 GDP will grow by 3.5% and inflation will subside to 10.5%.
In the fiscal sphere, the central government deficit could reach between 3.5% and 4% of GDP, while the balanceof-payments current account deficit will be equivalent to about 4% of GDP.
Under the monetary programme, economic policy was geared towards controlling the fiscal deficit, reducing the balance-of-payments current account deficit and achieving the inflation target.
The central government’s deficit was kept under control even though the administration’s tax reform proposal has not yet been adopted by the Legislative Assembly, which has been debating it for nearly three years.
The deficit was kept in check thanks to a large increase in current revenues as a result of better tax administration and the lingering effects of the Fiscal Contingency Act implemented in 2003.
On the expenditure side, wage increases were smaller and public investment in social programmes and infrastructure was trimmed.
In the first half of 2004 policy measures were aimed at creating monetary conditions consistent with a 9% annual increase in prices and a smaller balanceof-payments current account deficit.
However, higher inflation and tensions in the external sector prompted the central bank to tighten monetary policy at the end of July.
Specifically, it decided to raise the short-term interest rate (from 12.65% to 13.15%), increase the 10% legal minimum reserve requirement by two percentage points (to 11% in September and 12% in October), speed up the devaluation rate (from 15 to 17 céntimos per day) and engage more actively in openmarket operations.
Twelve-month inflation stood at 13.3% in November, exceeding the 11% target set in the monetary programme and representing an eight-year high.
The factors that produced this outcome included soaring hydrocarbon prices, adjustments in certain public utility charges and higher prices for some products, particularly agricultural goods.
The growth of GDP was based on a 3.9% expansion in exports, including a sharp upswing in international tourism, and a 3% upturn in domestic demand as a result of a 3.1% rise in consumption, which offset a 6.1% decline in gross fixed investment.
The bestperforming area of the economy was the service sector (up by 5.4%), especially transport, telecommunications (particularly mobile telephones and Internet service) and financial services.
Goods production, on the other hand, edged up by a mere 1.8% on account of slowdowns in agriculture (caused by reduced rice and bean production) and in manufacturing (due mainly to lower exports of Intel microprocessors and decreased textile production).
Despite the economy’s growth, there was no significant reduction in the open unemployment rate at the national level.
It should also be pointed out that adjustments to nominal minimum wages were barely sufficient to offset price increases.
Partial data on the external sector’s performance indicate that the balance-of-payments current account posted a deficit of 4.7% of GDP, which was lower than the 5.3% recorded in 2003.
The deficit on the merchandise trade balance widened to 8.6% of GDP (compared to 6.5% in 2003).
Losses of international reserves amounted to some US$ 100 million and were attributable to smaller net capital inflows and to the prepayments made on series B Brady bonds (US$ 214 million).
Given the 30% slump in exports of Intel microprocessors, the expansion of external sales was based primarily on exports of other non-traditional products such as medical equipment and pharmaceuticals, in addition to exports of agricultural products, especially coffee, bananas, sugar, pineapples, melons, plants, flowers and foliage.
Import growth, meanwhile, was led by raw materials and intermediate goods, owing to a 31.5% increase in the oil bill and to external purchases by freezone firms.
Imports of capital goods shrank (by 10.8%) in the light of lower investment spending.
This rate fell short of the projected growth target (2.3%), with the result that per capita output again remained stagnant.
Although domestic demand was boosted by an increase in family remittances (to a sum equivalent to 16.2% of GDP), the contractions observed in external demand (which was down by 3% in the maquila sector) and public investment (-23.7%) had a negative impact on growth in 2004.
Nominal deposit and lending rates continued to descend throughout the year, but average annual inflation increased to 4.5% –which was almost two and a half percentage points higher than the preceding year’s rate (2.1%)– because of the hike in international oil prices.
The current account deficit was equivalent to 4.5% of GDP and was mainly the result of a 10.8% trade gap.
Projections for 2005 point to GDP growth of about 2.0%, a fiscal deficit of 0.7% of GDP and lower inflation.
According to forecasts, the current account deficit will decline as a result of an increase in goods and services exports (generated by the United States-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA)), lower international oil prices and a further upturn in family remittances.
The aim of reducing the public debt, which currently stands at 47.6% of GDP, poses a significant challenge for the coming year.
The central government deficit was equivalent to 1.3% of GDP, compared to 2.7% in 2003 (or 3.1%, if social security liabilities are included).
Tax revenues were up by 0.4%, boosted in particular by higher receipts of income tax (2.1%) and VAT (0.5%).
Tax receipts should continue to rise, given the fiscal reform carried out at the end of 2004, which included amendments to the tax code and to the laws governing customs matters, VAT and income tax.
Nontax revenues fell by 3.3%, with the result that the national tax burden rose to 12.2% of GDP.
Total expenditure was down by 8.7% in real terms, owing in particular to a downturn in capital expenditure (-29.9%), especially real investment (-44.8%), while current expenditure showed a real contraction of 1.2% –notwithstanding a 10.2% increase in debt interest payments– because wages were not increased.
Meanwhile, the non-financial publicsector deficit declined from 2.1% of GDP to 0.7% (or Annual figures. nye rte Une nt pe rce ntage 2.5%, if the cost of pensions is included), while total real income was down by 0.2% and expenditure diminished even faster (-7.5%).
A disturbing element of recent economic trends has been the continued high level of public debt, at 40% of GDP; of this total, 28% consists of external debt and 12%, of domestic debt.
Total public liabilities up to September 2004, including both the financial and nonfinancial public sectors, were equivalent to 47.6% of GDP.
Nominal interest rates continued to fall, to the point where rates on 180-day deposits became negative in real terms (-1.2%), while rates on loans of up to one year stood at 1.8% in real terms.
The monetary aggregate M3 suffered a real contraction of 2.4%, but its main components behaved in different ways: demand deposits increased by 2% in real terms, while savings deposits decreased by 1.8% and foreign-currency deposits dipped slightly.
The Superintendency of the Financial System imposed a rule requiring the commercial banking system to maintain liquid assets equivalent to 6% of total deposits.
This, together with the liquidity reserve, constitutes a contingency fund of almost US$ 2 billion.
Most of the increase (72%) was due to higher international oil prices, which raised transport costs, the price of legumes and vegetables and electric power rates, all of which eroded the competitiveness of exports.
The nationwide unemployment rate rose from 6.9% to 7% and, as wages were not increased, the purchasing power of the minimum wage fell by about 4.3%.
Two components of overall demand had a negative impact on the economy: a downturn in exports of maquila products and a slide in public investment (-23.7%), as private investment, though sluggish, rose by 1.5% despite the prevalence of low interest rates.
As a result, the main engine of economic growth was the expansion of private consumption (3%), which was buoyed by the rising inflow of family remittances.
The most notable feature of overall supply was the growth of imports of goods and services (5.4%).
The branches of economic activity that posted the fastest growth were manufacturing (2.4%), mining (2%), agriculture (1.8%), basic services (2.6%) and commerce (1.8%).
These advances were offset to a large extent by a drop in construction activity (-3.1%).
The balance-of-payments current account showed a deficit of 4.5% of GDP, which was almost half a percentage point lower than the 2003 figure.
Family remittances continued to provide the economy with significant breathing room, as they totalled some US$ 2.54 billion, exceeding their 2003 level by 20.2%.
This was enough to cover approximately 78% of the deficit on the balance of trade in goods and services and on the income balance, and also boosted private consumption and strengthened the domestic market.
This agreement is expected to stimulate exports and investment, especially in non-traditional areas, ethnic products and agriculture.
In contrast, exports of non-traditional goods grew by 11%, while those of traditional goods expanded by 18%, boosted by a 22.6% upturn in coffee exports due to higher international prices.
Net inflows of foreign direct investment amounted to US$ 389 million, much of which was attracted through the sale of shares in the formerly State-owned telecommunications firm.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 107 For the fourth year in a row the Guatemalan economy posted a modest rate of growth (2.6%).
External demand was slack and the terms of trade worsened because of the increase in petroleum prices.
Family remittances rose to a new annual record of 10.8% of GDP.
Together with increased inflows of other types of capital, this triggered a sharp appreciation of the local currency starting in the second quarter.
The new government authorities dealt with the ongoing fiscal crisis by drastically cutting public spending, since the changes made to the tax regime in mid-year proved insufficient.
As a result, the deficit narrowed from 2.3% to 1.3% of GDP.
Year-on-year inflation was 9.2% in November and, with economic growth sluggish, the rate of employment showed no significant change.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit was 4.1% of GDP, but the deficit on the balance of trade in goods and services reached a high The authorities’ projections for 2005 point to GDP growth of 3.2%, inflation of 4% to 6%, a fiscal deficit of 1.8% of GDP and a current account deficit of about 4% of GDP.
One of the main problems facing the administration that took office in January 2004 was the sharp deterioration in the fiscal accounts the year before.
This was in addition to the increase in the price of petroleum and the appreciation of the quetzal.
The fiscal problems that had carried over from 2003 became worse in early February, when the Constitutional Court decreed a suspension of the tax on commercial and agricultural enterprises (IEMA).
Public spending was therefore cut in 2004, mainly in the area of investment.
The Congress was presented with six tax reform proposals, four of which it adopted in mid-year.
Current expenditure dropped by 12.5% in real terms, owing mainly to smaller outlays on goods and services and a decline in current transfers.
Capital expenditure was also down in real terms, by 21%, given the late adoption of the public investment programme and uncertainty about how revenues would perform.
The monetary authorities attempted to cope with the rise in international oil prices, their impact on inflation and the appreciation of the exchange rate without undermining the economic recovery.
In order to slow the expansion of the money supply, the authorities increased the amount of their open-market operations by 10% in 2004 with respect to 2003, and the government deposited 6.9 billion quetzals in the Bank of Guatemala.
Interest rates on 28-day certificates of deposit were raised from 4.5% to 5.6% in June, and the rate on 91-day instruments went from 5.8% to 6.1% in October.
The result was that monetary aggregates showed little real variation, with M1 contracting by 2% and M2 expanding by 1.3%.
Domestic credit to the private sector went up by 3.5%, while domestic credit to the public sector dropped by 23%.
The quetzal appreciated in real terms from April 2004 onward, driven by a large inflow of financial resources into the economy, mainly in the form of family remittances, short-term capital (16% of GDP) and unrecorded inflows.
Guatemala’s wider interest-rate spread with respect to its main trading partners and the redemption of foreign currency-denominated treasury bonds in the second quarter were also factors in the appreciation.
The central bank bought US$ 239 million in foreign exchange on the market, authorized the issuance of dollar-denominated certificates of deposit and coordinated bond issues with the Ministry of Public Finance.
The government helped to contain the money supply by increasing its deposits with the Bank of Guatemala.
Although public consumption fell by 6.2%, private consumption climbed by 3.5% and gross investment, by 8%.
In terms of sectors, upturns were observed in basic services (6.8%), agriculture (2.9%) and industry (2.4%), while construction dropped sharply (11.5%).
In November 2004 the cumulative variation in the consumer price index was 8.6% over the year, as against 5.2% in the same period of 2003.
Twelve-month inflation, at 9.2% (5.8% in the 12 months ending in November 2003), exceeded the annual target of 6% established by the Bank of Guatemala, owing in part to higher international prices for petroleum and petroleum products.
The labour market showed little net variation in 2004, as positive developments in some areas offset the sharp downturn in the construction sector.
In comparison to their 2003 levels, real minimum wages rose by 2.8% in agriculture and by 1.2% in the other sectors.
Non-traditional exports were up by 21%, with natural rubber, food products and clothing performing particularly well.
Traditional exports climbed by 3%, led by coffee –whose 9% increase was due primarily to higher prices, since the volume exported actually dropped– and bananas, whose export volume rose.
In contrast, sugar and cardamom exports declined because of a steep fall in export volumes.
Imports of capital goods (consisting mainly of inputs for agriculture and industry) jumped by 18.5%, while imports of consumer and intermediate goods climbed by 14%.
The merchandise trade balance posted a deficit of US$ 3.517 billion, while the income balance remained close to its 2003 level.
This partially offset the above-mentioned deficits, bringing the deficit on the current account to US$ 1.1 billion.
Inflows into the capital and financial account totalled US$ 1.34 billion, of which US$ 330 million came from bonds issued by the government.
Reserve assets increased by US$ 235 million, placing the stock of international reserves at US$ 3.413 billion in mid-November.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 109 The Honduran economy grew by 4.3% as a result of better external conditions and higher domestic demand, which in turn caused a widening of the external deficit.
The fiscal deficit narrowed, but inflation stopped falling for the first time in six years (owing mainly to external factors) and the labour-market situation continued to deteriorate.
The signing of a three-year agreement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in February and the conclusion of negotiations on the United States-Central America Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) improved economic expectations and created a more investmentfriendly environment.
Honduras will probably reach the completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative in the first half of 2005.
This will enable it to obtain external debt relief of almost US$ 1 billion and to use those resources to support its poverty reduction strategy.
Lastly, in the framework of the Honduras Consultative Group, over US$ 1.4 billion was pledged to help finance that strategy.
It is possible that economic growth will again exceed 4% in 2005.
The economy still faces ongoing risks, however, such as continued high international oil prices and the rise in international interest rates.
In the domestic sphere, the pressures that typically arise in an election year could undermine compliance with the IMF agreement, especially in terms of maintaining fiscal discipline.
Thanks to the three fiscal reforms adopted in the preceding biennium, the government was in a better position to carry out the fiscal adjustment called for in the IMF agreement.
Although the central government deficit shrank from 5.9% of GDP to 3.5%, the adjustment amounted to no more than 1% of GDP.
This was because the full cost of the Financial Strengthening of Agricultural Producers Act (1% of GDP) was imputed to the 2003 fiscal year, even though payments under the Act are to be made over a 10-year period.
Total income swelled from 19.6% to 20.4% of GDP on the strength of increases in direct and indirect tax receipts (of 24% and 14%, respectively) and better oversight of taxpayers.
Wages stopped rising as a proportion of expenditure, and capital expenditure grew by 8% in real terms.
Although the provisions of the monetary programme were adhered to in the first six months, the hike in international oil prices reversed the downward trend of inflation starting in the second quarter.
The central bank responded by raising the level of mandatory investment (reserve requirement) and lowering the cap on borrowing.
Given the abundant liquidity in the financial system and the time lag with which monetary policy operates, these measures were not reflected in interest rates or inflation until the end of the year.
Nominal interest rates continued to follow their downward trend of recent years.
Lending rates fell from Credit to the private sector posted a 4% increase in real terms, with a particularly sharp rise (of almost 20%) in foreign-currency loans.
Four laws concerning the institutional framework, which were envisaged in the IMF programme, were adopted in 2004 and included reforms of the regulations governing the financial system, the central bank, the National Banking and Insurance Commission and the Deposit Insurance Fund (FOSEDE).
Further steps were taken to modernize monetary and exchange-rate policy instruments, consolidate the comprehensive oversight of the financial system, enhance the efficiency of the financial safety net and strengthen mechanisms for the prevention of money laundering.
Given that the lempira continued its nominal depreciation, in keeping with the inflation differential, there was practically no variation in the real exchange rate against the dollar.
The central bank used the system of public auctions to absorb the considerable inflows of foreign exchange from exports, maquila activity, tourism and remittances.
As for trade policy, apart from the progress made with regard to CAFTA, some definite steps were taken towards the completion of the Central American Customs Union in terms of liberalizing intra-group trade, operating joint customs houses and adopting a common external tariff.
The Central American countries agreed to work with the European Union on an extensive bilateral trade agenda, which is expected to result in the conclusion of a free trade agreement in the near future.
Honduras also announced its intention to negotiate a free trade agreement with Taiwan Province of China.
The revival of domestic demand, combined with booming external demand, generated a 4.3% increase in economic activity.
Consumption grew faster than output on the strength of its private component, which was bolstered by copious remittances that shot up by almost 30%.
Investment continued the recovery begun the preceding year, and gross fixed capital formation is estimated to have swelled by nearly 20%.
Construction was again the most buoyant sector (10%), boosted by public and private projects, mainly in the energy and telecommunications sectors.
Agriculture improved its performance, particularly in terms of coffee, bananas, sugar, legumes and vegetables.
The growth of manufacturing was due largely to an upturn in the maquila industry.
Tourism was the standout among the other sectors, growing by 20%, while mining stalled.
Towards the end of the year consumer prices showed a rate of increase of about 9% –compared to the 6.5% to 7% that had been programmed at the beginning of the year– as a result of soaring international oil prices.
The sectors that contributed the most to the increase in prices were transport, education and housing, water, electricity, gas and other fuels.
Minimum wages went up by 9.7% in April, which represented a real decline of 1.6% for the year as a whole.
The unemployment rate went from 5.4% in May 2003 to 5.9% twelve months later, while the rate of underemployment more or less held steady, even though the maquila industry added nearly 10,000 new jobs.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit widened from 3.8% to 6.6% of GDP.
Traditional exports reversed their declines of recent years, posting an 11% upturn thanks to the strong performance of the coffee and banana sectors and to higher prices for certain products.
Non-traditional exports continued to rise (5%), while maquila-sector value added was up by 15%.
Imports of capital goods soared by 27% and accounted for most of the increase in merchandise imports.
The import value of electrical machinery, apparatus and equipment jumped by 40%, followed by base metals and base metal manufactures, which grew by 25%.
Imports of consumer goods, raw materials and intermediate goods, on the other hand, grew by about 10%.
Net foreign investment remained at the level seen in previous years (US$ 200 million).
Net international reserves rose by US$ 130 million, while the external debt balance increased by about 8%.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 111 After three years of sluggish growth, the Mexican economy made a recovery in 2004, owing mainly to increases in external demand and, to a lesser extent, in domestic demand.
GDP is estimated to have risen by 4.1%, the highest rate since 2000.
Export growth accelerated; upturns in employment, credit and remittances stimulated consumption; and improved expectations spurred investment, which in turn boosted output and employment.
Monetary discipline failed to prevent inflation from overshooting the target (3%, within a band of 2% to 4%).
This was the result of weather-related factors and the high international prices of certain raw materials and of oil, although the oil price hike strengthened public revenues, thereby facilitating the achievement of the fiscal target.
Growth in 2005 is forecast at 3.6% owing to the loss of momentum in the world economy and, especially, in the United States.
The price of oil is expected to stabilize at a level below the one observed in 2004, and this will erode the windfall revenues that have bolstered Mexico’s public finances in recent years.
The government is projecting inflation of 3% and a current account deficit of 2.1% of GDP.
In 2004 economic policy continued to be guided by the principles observed in previous years: fiscal discipline and monetary stringency in a context of exchange-rate flexibility.
Between January and October publicsector revenues were up by 4.7% in real terms in relation to their level in the year-earlier period, on the strength of a 13.2% increase in oil revenues, which represented 35% of the total.
Non-oil revenues, on the other hand, edged up by only 0.5% as a result of a 6.1% rise in VAT receipts and a 1.8% decline in income tax receipts.
Budgetary expenditure climbed by 3.3%, boosted by higher current expenditure (1.3%) and capital expenditure (14.0%).
Non-budgeted expenditure was up by 3.5% and consisted mainly of revenue distributions to the states and financial costs.
Although real debt interest payments went down, the financial costs associated with initiatives to support bank debtors and savers increased, as did the additional distributions that were made to the states when oil revenues exceeded the budgeted amount.
Under the fiscal mechanism set up to distribute such revenue, in the period up to October the states received 8.18 billion pesos (about US$ 723 million) and Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) received 12 billion pesos (about US$ 1.062 billion).
PEMEX will have to use these resources in the framework of new legislation aimed at enhancing transparency in the use of such funds.
The public sector’s financing needs, which encompass all of its activities, regardless of whether the entities carrying them out are public or private, were equivalent to about 2.6% of GDP, or 3.2% excluding exceptional income such as profits of the Banco de México or privatization proceeds.
As for the law on expenditure, the Chamber of Deputies amended the executive branch’s proposal so extensively that the latter may refuse to endorse it.
The interest rate on bank financing therefore climbed from 4.91% in February to 8.07% at the end of November.
In addition, financial institutions were ordered to create, in December, a monetary regulation deposit totalling 50 billion pesos (about US$ 4.386 billion) to complement the corto.
In 2005, after having used the corto for eight years, the Banco de México may replace this instrument with a benchmark interest rate.
The monetary base expanded by 9.1% in real terms between October 2003 and October 2004, in a continuation of the remonetization of the economy that had begun in 1995.
In September total financing received by the private sector was 1.6% higher, in real terms, than it had been one year earlier.
Bank credit increased by 3.7%, while credit granted by non-bank institutions, which supply over 15% of total domestic credit, grew by 20.1%.
Consumer loans continued to grow briskly (by 34.6%), boosted in part by financing extended by department stores and car dealers.
Throughout 2004 there were brief episodes of sharp volatility in the foreign-exchange market, mainly as a result of expectations of further interest-rate hikes in the United States.
The peso recovered after these episodes, so that the net result was a 12-month nominal depreciation of 2.1% as of late November and a slight real appreciation against the dollar.
In early December the net variation in international reserves was US$ 2.507 billion, which brought the balance to US$ 60.592 billion; the increase was due to higher oil revenues.
The Banco de México continued to slow down the accumulation of international reserves by applying a mechanism created for this purpose, under which its sales of foreign exchange amounted to US$ 5.722 billion as of early October.
The economic buoyancy that had been in evidence at the end of 2003 continued to gather momentum in 2004, as GDP was 4% higher in the third quarter of 2004 than it had been in the same period of 2003.
In the first half of 2004 the year-on-year expansion of external demand reached 12.4%, while that of domestic demand was 3.1%, thanks to an improvement in the employment situation and higher inflows of remittances.
Private consumption rose by 4.6% over that period, after having fallen for three consecutive years.
Gross fixed capital formation was up by 5.1%, while government consumption retreated by 2.8% after six quarters of positive growth.
One factor that contributed to the recovery of fixed capital formation was the increase in external demand, which fostered higher investment in imported and domestically produced machinery and equipment, as well as in construction.
Boosted by the economic recovery in the United States, manufacturing grew by 3.9% in the first nine months of 2004, thereby reversing the negative trend of the previous three years.
This growth was led by the base metals industry (7.1%); metal products, machinery and equipment (5.6%); other export-related manufacturing (5.8%); and textiles (1.5%).
Also worthy of note is the modest recovery, spurred mainly by domestic demand, of the automotive industry (with year-on-year growth of 0.9% in the period January-August), given this segment’s importance for output, employment and the generation of foreign exchange.
Between January and September the construction industry grew by 5.1% (as against 3.3% in 2003) thanks to housing construction and public works.
Agriculture continued to perform well, and the upward trend in basic services was boosted by private consumption and public spending.
Inflation over the 12 months ending in November was 5.4%, which was above the 3% target set by the monetary authorities.
The behaviour of inflation was determined mainly by external factors, such as the higher international prices of commodities such as oil, but also by domestic factors.
Non-core inflation, at 6.8% in November, outpaced underlying inflation (3.6%) and was due to increases in the prices of agricultural products (especially tomatoes, beef, poultry and eggs, among on Unem ent percentage of Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 113 others), administered prices (gasoline, electricity, gas), negotiated prices (transport) and education.
The increased economic activity in 2004 paved the way for an upturn in employment, although the open unemployment rate climbed from 3.2% in JanuaryOctober 2003 to 3.8% in the same period of 2004.
Employment in maquila activity increased (by 3.5% in January-August), but is still below the levels recorded in 2000.
Informal employment expanded and job quality declined, as reflected by the higher number of shortterm jobs registered with the Mexican Social Security Institute.
The year-on-year growth rates for the period January-October were 14.6% for exports and 14.4% for imports.
This generated a US$ 3.92-billion deficit in the merchandise trade balance, which was 9% higher than the deficit recorded in 2003.
The increase in oil exports (27.9%) reflected high petroleum prices (the price of the Mexican mix rose by 31% between January and October) and an increase in volume (7.8%).
Despite its economic recovery, Mexico continued to lose market share in the United States, mainly to China.
As of August 2004 Mexico’s share was 10.2% (half a percentage point lower than in 2003), whereas China’s was 14.2% (1.3 points higher than the preceding year’s level).
The faster export growth triggered a rise in imports: between January and October foreign purchases of capital goods were up by 9.8%; those of intermediate goods, by 15.2%; and those of consumer goods, by 14.2%.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit is estimated at US$ 7.2 billion in 2004, or 1.1% of GDP.
Trade in goods and services posted a deficit of US$ 11.1 billion, in addition to the US$ 13.1-billion deficit on the income account (which includes net payments of interest and profits).
The massive US$ 17billion surplus on the current transfers balance (consisting mainly of family remittances) practically offset the payments recorded on the income account and reduced the negative balance of trade in goods and services by US$ 3.9 billion.
Gross foreign investment reached approximately US$ 16 billion (compared to US$ 11.247 billion in 2003), including US$ 4.2 billion from the sale of Bancomer to Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA).
Nicaragua In 2004 the Nicaraguan economy continued to follow the growth trend that had begun in 2003.
Real GDP expanded by 4%, exceeding its 2003 rate by 1.7 percentage points.
Higher international prices for petroleum and some industrial commodities, however, had an impact on economic activity and were largely to blame for the rise in inflation, which went from 6.6% in 2003 to 10% in 2004.
The country’s economic performance also reflected the consequences of the political tensions associated with the municipal elections held in November.
In 2005 GDP is expected to show real growth of 3.5%, and inflation will probably come in at about 6%.
Economic policy was consistent with the financial support programme agreed upon with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in December 2002.
The fiscal balance (excluding grants) exhibited a smaller deficit, and this facilitated compliance with the monetary policy targets for inflation and the exchange rate.
Although the balance-of-payments current account deficit widened, higher capital inflows helped to boost international reserves.
In 2004, on reaching the completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, Nicaragua began to make arrangements with various creditors to formalize the HIPC debt relief for which it had become eligible.
By August some 57% of the total amount of debt relief to be provided (US$ 6.2 billion) had been written off.
The fiscal policy results were a key determinant of the country’s macroeconomic performance.
The central government’s current revenues grew by 15.9% and the tax burden increased to 16.2% of GDP.
There was also an upturn in grants, which amounted to 4.7% of GDP.
Accordingly, total income went from 21.1% of GDP in Meanwhile, total expenditure fell from 23.1% of GDP to 21% as a result of a significant decline in interest payments (15.2%).
Total expenditure thus showed only a slight increase (2.5%), despite a wage hike, the granting of subsidies to the transport sector, larger allocations to universities and municipalities and higher capital expenditure.
Consequently, the fiscal balance (cash basis, including grants) went from a deficit of 2% of GDP in 2003 to a surplus equivalent to 0.5% of GDP in 2004.
The government transferred resources to the central bank in an amount equivalent to 4.7% of GDP.
The payment was made out of the proceeds of the sale of the government’s stake in the Nicaraguan Telecommunications Company (ENITEL).
In monetary affairs, the central bank maintained its policy of applying daily mini-devaluations consistent with a pre-announced annual devaluation rate to serve as an anchor for inflationary expectations.
However, the devaluation rate was lowered from 6% to 5% in order to help bring down inflation, given the extent to which the economy is dollarized and prices are indexed to the exchange rate.
At the same time, the central bank used open-market operations to reduce its domestic debt, and this paved the way for an increase in financial intermediation at lower interest rates.
The structure of the credit portfolio reveals brisk growth in housing, consumer and business loans.
The 4% increase in GDP was due to both an increase in exports (9.4%) and an upturn in domestic demand (4.6%).
The latter variable was influenced by a rise in investment (6.7%), especially public investment, and an increase in private consumption (4.3%) triggered by larger inflows of family remittances, higher real wages and the growth of consumer and housing loans.
On the supply side, the growth of output mainly reflected an upswing in agriculture and higher value added in manufacturing, especially among free-zone firms and in construction and mining.
Service activities Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 115 also contributed to the economic recovery.
Inflation, at 10%, was more than three percentage points higher than it had been in 2003.
The faster price increases were due to short-term factors –such as the rises in fuel and transport costs, rate adjustments for certain basic services and a temporary hike in the prices of some agricultural products due to supply factors– rather than to a deterioration in monetary conditions or an increase in domestic expenditure.
Preliminary official data show that the country’s economic growth has had a favourable impact on employment and on the real average wage.
In June the authorities raised the minimum wage by 8.8% in most sectors of activity, except in the central government, where the increase The recovery of economic activity was accompanied by a larger imbalance in the external sector.
This was due to the substantial widening of the trade deficit, since the deficit on the income account narrowed slightly in view of lower interest payments and a 13.9% rise in family remittances.
Higher net capital inflows, including foreign direct investment, made it possible to finance the balance-of-payments current account deficit, boost net international reserves and improve the foreign-exchange backing for the monetary base.
The increase in exports reflected both a recovery in sales of traditional products and the expansion of sales of non-traditional products, as well as strong growth in net exports from companies in the free trade zones (especially maquila firms in the textile industry) and in tourism earnings.
There were large increases in external purchases of capital goods (17.5%), owing to the expansion of public and private investment, and in imports of raw materials and intermediate goods (19.7%), which mainly reflected higher purchases of petroleum and petroleum products (32.3%).
Purchases of consumer goods expanded considerably (8.3%), boosted by an increase in imports of non-durable goods (10.5%).
Panama In 2004 the Panamanian economy grew by 6%, posting its best performance in six years.
This was made possible by the positive effects of external demand and, to a lesser degree, by fiscal stimuli that boosted domestic demand.
Inflation remained low despite soaring oil prices, but unemployment was still high.
The State’s financial position became weaker, while the external deficit fell to only 0.3% of GDP.
In contrast to the pattern observed in the preceding three years, the traditional mainstays of the country’s development –the Panama Canal, the Colón Free Zone and the international banking centre– turned in an exceptional performance.
This, together with the rapid expansion of new sectors, including ports, tourism, telecommunications and rail transport, resulted in a high level of economic growth.
As 2004 was an election year, the outgoing administration afforded an additional boost to the economy.
The new authorities, who took office in September, were elected by a wide margin, which gave rise to more optimistic economic expectations.
The current government inherited a number of challenges, however, such as fragile public finances, a high level of debt, a deficit in the Social Security Fund and high unemployment.
Conditions are expected to remain positive in 2005, with buoyant external demand.
The authorities have announced a fiscal adjustment, however, which will slow the expansion of domestic demand, limiting GDP growth to about 4.5%.
The interest-rate hike and the high price of oil will have little effect on growth.
One of the first actions taken by the new administration was a reform of tax accounting in favour of a more orthodox system.
According to the new calculations, the government’s deficit was US$ 700 million, equivalent to 5.3% of GDP, compared to the 2.2% obtained from calculations using the previous methodology.
The authorities therefore announced that in 2004 the deficit would exceed the cap of 2% of GDP stipulated in the Fiscal Responsibility Act.
This imbalance was the consequence of a spending increase of close to 10% in real terms, at a time when income was up by less than 5%.
The expenditure cuts (totalling US$ 360 million) that had been announced by the outgoing administration were only partially carried out.
In order to deal with the fragile fiscal situation, the new authorities announced a budget for 2005 that would reduce the deficit to 3.6% of GDP.
The adjustment measures include a new tax reform, financial restructuring of the Social Security Fund, downsizing of the State payroll and improvements in tax collection.
The Social Security Fund ran an operating deficit for the third consecutive year.
Meanwhile, the government increased its debts with its suppliers to more than US$ 300 million.
Public debt rose by 13%, in part because of a US$ 600-million international bond issue in November, which was intended to pre-finance the 2005 budget.
The resources consumed by interest payments amounted to about 20% of total revenues.
In the area of trade policy, negotiations were held with a view to concluding a free trade agreement with the United States, Panama’s most significant trading partner.
The banking sector continued to recover from the problems it had encountered in the preceding biennium, assisted by the improved economic circumstances of its South American customers and by domestic demand.
Profits grew by 6% and assets expanded slightly (by 2%) after two years of contraction.
In an environment of high liquidity, the quality of assets continued to improve and the proportion of non-performing loans out of the total portfolio diminished from 2.3% to 1.8%.
With interest rates falling, the demand for credit rose by 6% after having Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 117 declined for two straight years.
Specifically, the demand for domestic credit increased by nearly 10%, driven by mortgage and corporate demand, while the demand for external credit continued to fall, albeit more slowly.
The high rate of GDP growth was the result of vigorous external demand.
The significant increase in world trade had a positive impact on the international services offered by Panama.
Domestic demand, in contrast, grew by slightly more than half the growth rate of GDP, and was led by public and private investment.
The downturn in the manufacturing industry is a cause of concern, as 2004 was the fifth straight year of negative growth.
The other sectors posted positive rates, albeit with wide variations between them.
Agriculture continued to grow by about 4% despite a contraction in the banana sector.
Livestock-raising (poultry, beef and pork) posted good results, as did pineapple, melon and watermelon production.
Construction continued to perform well, but its growth was more modest than in 2003.
Trade and tourism increased by about 7%, in part because of the expansion posted by the Colón Free Zone (25%).
This upsurge was made possible, after various years of setbacks, by the high growth recorded by the Free Zone’s Andean customers, especially petroleum exporters.
Port and railway activity benefited from the upturn in world trade, increasing by 25% and 33%, respectively.
The same was true of the Panama Canal (10%), whose earnings exceeded the US$ 1billion mark for the first time.
As usual, consumer prices showed a low rate of variation (2%), despite the increase in international oil prices.
This reflected declines, over the first four months of 2004, in the prices of food and beverages, clothing and footwear and miscellaneous goods and services.
At mid-year, however, the wholesale price index showed an increase of 7%, which could push up the consumer price index.
The labour-market situation did not change substantially, notwithstanding the economy’s strong growth.
The gap narrowed because the growth of exports (13%) exceeded that of imports (9%).
Merchandise exports and imports reversed the downward trend they had exhibited for several years as a result of the contraction in the Colón Free Zone.
In 2004 total merchandise exports went up by 17%, with increases in both exports from the Colón Free Zone (17%) and “national” exports (15%).
Among exports in the latter category, the biggest upturns were seen in non-traditional products such as pineapples, melons and watermelons, and also in tuna, fresh fish, shrimp larvae and cattle.
The export value of bananas went down, however, despite higher international prices.
Merchandise imports grew by 8% and were also driven largely by the performance of the Colón Free Zone (13%).
The balance of trade in services showed a positive result of US$ 1.26 billion, in view of strong growth in the Panama Canal, ports and tourism.
The income balance, in contrast, posted a deficit of US$ 780 million.
It is estimated that the financial account recorded a negative balance of US$ 500 million in 2004, compared to a surplus of US$ 25 million in 2003.
Contributing factors included a drop in foreign direct investment, which went from US$ 790 million in 2003 to US$ 470 million in 2004, and a reduction in external deposits in the international banking centre.
The authorities adopted a looser monetary policy aimed at increasing domestic credit in order to stimulate aggregate demand, thereby boosting economic growth.
Inflation rose owing to the higher international price of oil and to price increases stemming from the constraints on aggregate supply that resulted from the hurricanes.
Increased spending on health care and medical services also contributed to the overall upturn in prices.
The deficit on the balance-of-payments current account was more than offset by the surplus on the capital and financial account, which also made it possible to increase the stock of international reserves.
Revenues have dropped on account of the reduction in the tax base for levies on trade and international transactions (65% of total tax revenues) through the granting of tax exemptions for certain imported products.
Another factor that will continue to erode revenues is the downturn in the number of visitors in the wake of the hurricanes.
The country’s public debt totalled US$ 2.034 billion in September 2004; of this amount, 14% consisted of external debt.
In order to prevent the emergence of unsustainable balance-of-payments deficits and relieve pressure on the stock of international reserves, the central bank continued to apply a tight monetary policy in the first seven months of the year.
This resulted in an increase in external assets and a consequent rise in bank deposits, which tripled between September 2003 and September 2004.
The expansion of bank deposits was accompanied by a smaller rise in commercial bank loans to the private sector (6%), despite the implementation, starting in August 2004, of a more flexible monetary policy aimed at boosting economic growth.
Domestic credit was directed primarily towards meeting the demand for personal loans and loans for the purchase of residential properties.
In these circumstances, the banking system’s liquid assets rose by 21% in relation to its liabilities.
Excess reserves amounted to 180 million Bahamian dollars at the end of September, which represents a 16% increase over the 2003 figure.
Even though tourism was the sector most badly affected by the hurricanes (with losses estimated at 3% of GDP), the 11% increase in the number of tourists in 2004 was of decisive importance in making up for the setback caused by the ravages of nature.
Moreover, a generous amount of resources has been allocated to aid the tourism industry’s recovery and growth.
The performance of construction reflected the buoyancy of activities related to the development of hotels, industries and housing, and this sector may have expanded faster than it did in 2003 as a result of reconstruction projects.
In the housing segment alone, reconstruction needs are estimated at some US$ 69 million.
The authorities of the Bahamas estimate that the country’s GDP grew by just over 1% in 2004, even though hurricanes Jeanne and Frances hit the country in September, causing losses equivalent to 7% of GDP.
The positive growth rate can probably be attributed to increased spending by tourists, whose numbers rose as a result of better economic conditions in the United States and the euro’s appreciation against the dollar.
Transport and telecommunications suffered serious losses (US$ 99 million), as did other sectors linked to tourism (US$ 104 million).
In the fishing sector, however, the impact was less severe, as losses amounted to US$ 45 million.
The current account deficit, which was 50% wider than the preceding year’s imbalance, was due to increased imports of goods and services for rehabilitation and reconstruction activities and to the rise in international fuel prices.
Exports were temporarily weakened not only by reduced demand for tourism services, but also by a decline in the output of the country’s leading export products.
The factors that contributed to the capital and financial account surplus included smaller outlays by the banking sector, a downturn in payments on external liabilities and a decline in the flow of resources from real estate sales.
Overall balance 60 111 ... b Twelve-month variation to August 2004. c Data to September. d Rate on three-month time deposit. e Rate in September. f Weighted average rate on loans.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 123 Barbados In 2004 the Barbadian economy recorded its strongest growth (3%) since 1998, thanks mainly to the buoyant performance of tourism-related activities and other service sectors.
This vigorous economic activity was reflected in an increase in the demand for imports of consumer and capital goods.
This, in turn, generated higher central government customs revenues, which, together with the limited increase in public expenditure, helped to reduce the fiscal deficit.
The central bank adopted a neutral policy and, despite a decline in the financial system’s liquidity, the management of the monetary aggregates did not vary substantially.
A contraction in the supply of food products and the rise in international oil prices pushed inflation up slightly.
The overall balance-of-payments out-turn was negative owing to the sharp increase in imports and the loss of export competitiveness.
As foreign direct investment inflows, some of which went to the tourism sector, were insufficient to finance this deficit, the authorities had to draw down the stock of international reserves.
In 2005 the Barbadian economy’s growth is expected to be between 3% and 3.5%.
The reduction in the government deficit, from 3% in 2003 to a value very close to the fiscal target of 2.5% of GDP in 2004, was due to the expansion of indirect tax receipts as a result of stronger demand for imports (particularly of motor vehicles), which more than made up for a slide in receipts of direct taxes.
The latter phenomenon resulted from cuts in the income tax rates applicable to corporations (from 37.5% to 36%) and individuals (from 22.5% to 20% in the case of the basic rate); in addition, the tax base for the individual income tax shrank because the tax exemption threshold was raised.
The growth of public expenditure was outpaced by that of fiscal revenues because of a contraction in capital outlays, which offset the expansion of current expenditure.
This expansion was related to increases in transfers and subsidies and, to a lesser extent, in payroll expenditure.
Transfers rose because the resources provided to the Queen Elizabeth Hospital, which is no longer administered directly by the central government, are now included in this category.
The central government’s total debt declined slightly (from 73% of GDP in 2003 to 71% in 2004), thanks to a reduction in the external debt stock from 27% to 25% of GDP over the same period.
The financial system recorded a contraction in international reserves during the year, on account of the significant increase in imports and a moderate upturn in deposits.
Credit demand rose by 6% between January and September 2004 because of the faster pace of economic activity.
Some of this credit was used for the purchase of real estate and motor vehicles.
This helped to increase the loan-deposit ratio, which led to a decline in liquidity.
In this context, commercial banks’ demand for treasury bonds slackened, triggering a rise in the yields on these bonds, from 0.64% in January 2004 to 2.14% in September.
Agriculture posted negative growth as sugar production declined for the fourth straight year, owing to unfavourable weather conditions.
Growth in manufacturing stagnated (at -1% in 2003 and 0.1% in 2004), despite substantial upturns in the chemical, beverage and non-metallic mineral subsectors, since these increases were more than offset by a contraction in the food subsector.
The upswing in the growth of the transport, storage and communications sector (from 1.3% in 2003 to 3.2% in 2004) reflected strong import growth and the liberalization of the telecommunications sector.
Construction benefited from remodelling works at the airport and from the building of the Hilton Hotel.
Tourism continued to recover from the negative impact of the events of 11 September 2001.
The number of visitors increased by 10% between January and September 2004 (as against 7% in the same period of 2003).
The number of cruise-ship passengers rose by 32% as a result of an increase in stopovers.
The unemployment rate declined from 11.6% to 9.6% over the same period.
The service sector and the transport and communications sector were the main sources of job creation.
The overall balance of payments was negative because the capital and financial account surplus was too small to offset the current account deficit.
As a result, the level of international reserves held by the central bank went down.
The current account deficit was due to the negative trade balance, which outweighed the positive performance of the non-factor services account.
Merchandise imports were up by 11%, partly because of the rise in international oil prices.
Includes hidden unemployment. sugar produced and exported and to a deterioration in the international prices of the main traditional exports.
The performance of the capital and financial account reflected foreign direct investment in the tourism sector, public utilities and real estate.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 125 Belize Belize’s robust economic growth in 2004 (7%) was due primarily to strong upturns in tourism (30%), agriculture (12%) and construction (8%), while consumer prices edged up slightly.
In the external sphere, external debt servicing payments generated a negative overall balance that was financed with international reserves.
Growth in 2005 is predicted to be between 4% The economic expansion was not sufficient to offset the fiscal deficit of 11% of GDP in fiscal year 2003/2004, given that tax receipts fell short of the authorities’ projections and expenditure was higher than planned.
The fiscal deficit target of 3% of GDP set by the government for fiscal year 2004/2005 is therefore unlikely to be met.1 Current outlays increased as a result of higher spending on wages and salaries, pensions and interest payments on the public debt.
These payments amounted to 11 million Belize dollars (BZ$) for domestic debt and BZ$ 77 million for external debt.
Despite an increase in loans (BZ$ 19 million), external financing fell short of requirements and net inflows of such financing were negative because an amount of BZ$ 32 million was paid into the sinking fund.
The central government’s domestic debt rose by 4.4%, reaching BZ$ 270 million, and was financed in part with a 13% increase in central bank loans over the preceding year’s level.
The external debt stock, on the other hand, shrank by 4.2%, to BZ$ 1.443 billion.
The monetary base contracted in 2004 as a result of a 32% drop in net external assets, which offset a 20% rise in net domestic credit.
Nonetheless, a fivepercentage-point reduction in the legal reserve requirement (from 24% in 2003 to 19% in 2004) increased the money multiplier, thus facilitating the growth of the money supply.
In the first nine months of the year the narrow money supply increased by 3% (compared to 0.5% in the same period of 2003), while the broad money supply expanded by 8% (as against 3.7% in the year-earlier period).
The larger money supply resulted in lower interest rates, which boosted the demand for loans for productive activities.
Credit was up by 10% in the primary sector, 20% in the secondary sector and 24% in the tertiary sector.
As a result, these three sectors received 13%, 28% and 44%, respectively, of total loans granted.
Credit to the sugar subsector swelled by 49%, and loans to electricity, gas and water services shot up by 62%.
Agriculture expanded by 12% in response to good weather conditions, efficiency improvements in production processes and higher international prices for some of the main export products.
Construction, which grew by 8.1%, benefited from the liquidity conditions prevailing in the economy.
The performance of tourism reflected a jump in cruise-ship arrivals (66% in the first nine months of the year compared to the same period of 2003), which exceeded the half-million mark.
The number of longstay tourists rose by only 5.4% over the same period.
Inflation was up slightly (just over 3%) owing mainly to the hike in the international price of petroleum.
In terms of the components of the consumer price index, the biggest rise was in the provision of basic services.
The cost of transport and communications rose by 6%, while beverage and tobacco prices went up by 2.4%. 1 Belize’s fiscal year runs from April to March.
The deficit on the overall balance in the first half of 2004 amounted to US$ 9 million.
The current account balance improved over this period thanks to a smaller deficit on the merchandise trade balance and the satisfactory performance of non-factor services.
Exports were hurt by a downturn in the international prices of certain export products, including sugar, but imports declined as well, notwithstanding the rise in petroleum prices.
The services account posted higher earnings as a result of the strong expansion of tourism activity, but the deficit on the factor services balance also grew over this period.
Despite the improvement in the current account, a deterioration in the surplus on the capital and financial account resulted in a negative overall balance.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 127 Cuba In 2004 the growth of Cuba’s gross domestic product (3%) picked up speed for the second year running, in adverse conditions created by the worst drought in 40 years and the onslaught of two hurricanes, which seriously affected the production sector’s performance.
Added to this was a crisis in the national electric power and energy system and the worsening of external difficulties, owing especially to the restrictions on travel to Cuba by Cuban citizens living in the United States and on the sending of family remittances from that country.
GDP is expected to grow by 5% in 2005, buoyed by tourism services and an increase in the production of nickel, oil and gas, although projections also point to a smaller 2004/2005 sugar cane harvest and a further erosion of the terms of trade.
The Cuban economy has been undergoing a process of far-reaching structural reform for over a decade, ever since the collapse of the socialist system in Europe and the disintegration of the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA).
These events deprived the country of its traditional export markets, sources of imported goods and services and external financing opportunities, all of which had an immediate impact on its externalsector accounts.
The new situation forced the authorities to undertake a major restructuring of the economy in order to create conditions for enhancing Cuba’s participation in the global economy and to promote the recovery of its production sector, after the severe slump in activity in the early 1990s.
The pillars of this restructuring process have been the opening of the economy to foreign direct investment, the development of the tourism sector, the expansion of mining activities, the legalization of the possession of foreign exchange and the creation of a network of dollar shops to absorb foreign exchange, mainly from family remittances.
Meanwhile, the protracted United States embargo continues to hobble the country’s development.
In 2004 the Cuban economy was still suffering from structural problems such as a shortage of foreign exchange, distortions in the relative price system due to the overvaluation of the official exchange rate and the lack of convertibility, the two-tier monetary and exchange-rate system and market segmentation, the poor performance of the sugar industry and efficiency problems in public entities.
Starting in mid-2003 foreign exchange was concentrated in the hands of the central bank through the establishment of exchange controls and the wider circulation of the convertible Cuban peso (CUC), which became the only means of payment in transactions between cuban entities that were previously denominated in dollars or other foreign currency.
Under new monetary and price measures introduced by the government, in mid-2004 the prices charged at hard-currency shops were raised, and in November the circulation of the United States dollar was prohibited and the convertible peso became the sole legal tender.
Since then, the exchange of dollars for convertible pesos has pushed up the level of international reserves considerably, thereby easing the shortage of foreign exchange.
By virtue of this measure, everyone, including foreign visitors, must pay a 10% surcharge on cash purchases of convertible pesos with dollars.
This surcharge does not apply to purchases made with other hard currencies.
In addition, the convertible peso’s official parity with the United States dollar has remained unchanged.
Lastly, there are no restrictions on the population’s foreign exchange holdings or on bank deposits.
They do not affect the operations of foreign companies that do business on the island, nor do they limit the use of credit and debit cards, and their negative impact on international tourism has been minimal.
Most of Cuba’s trade, foreign investment and tourism activity take place with countries members of the European Economic and Monetary Union and the United Kingdom.
Current revenues rose by 9.6%, but capital inflows were down by 6.7%.
Tax receipts expanded by 11.6%, with higher revenues from both indirect taxes (17%) and direct taxes (3.7%).
The intake from circulation and sales taxes increased by 18% and that from service taxes, by 6.8%.
There was also an increase in social security contributions (5.3%) because more workers took part in the programme to improve business practices and the tax rate was raised (from 12% in 2003 to 12.6% in 2004).
Profit tax receipts went up by 4.8% thanks to an increase in production.
With regard to government spending, capital and current expenditure rose by 15.2% and 10.4%, respectively.
Current expenditure included increased outlays on social well-being and assistance (20.5%), education (16%), culture and art (16%) and health (11.9%), under the initiative to strengthen social programmes.
In the production sector, there were upturns in international tourism services (10%), construction (7.2%), mining (4.6%) and government services (4.2%).
Electricity, gas and water services, on the other hand, posted a 5.2% decline.
International tourism’s 10% expansion was driven by international promotional efforts and an increase in the number of hotel rooms (to 45,000 units, an 8.2% rise); hotel occupancy rates and tourists’ average length of stay also increased.
Consumer prices in local-currency shops went up, but the increase remained in the single digits (3%).
The rise in petroleum prices was passed through to agricultural products and to private own-account labour costs, which are subject to competition, as well as to merchandise sold in hard-currency shops.
In the case of regulated markets and basic electricity, gas and water services, however, the increase in costs was not passed on to consumers thanks to budget subsidies.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit declined to 0.3% of GDP in 2004 as a result of a smaller deficit on the balance of trade in goods and services and an increase in net current transfers, which are estimated at about US$ 1 billion.
Net factor service payments rose because of an increase in international interest rates and the repatriation of profits generated by foreign investment.
Despite the significant increase in international petroleum prices, the trade gap narrowed.
This was due to the expansion of earnings from services, especially tourism and telecommunications, and to the fact that the growth of exports outpaced that of imports.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 129 After having slipped by 0.4% in 2003, economic activity in the Dominican Republic expanded by 1.8% in 2004, exceeding the projections made at the beginning of the year.
Although business in the free-trade zones stagnated, external demand for tourism services and for national merchandise exports was strong.
Domestic demand, however, was limited owing to the lingering effects of the banking crisis experienced Both the exchange rate and prices stopped rising in the second quarter.
The review of the standby arrangement which the country had signed with IMF in 2003, the presidential elections held in May and the subsequent change of government in August contributed to a turnaround in economic expectations.
By the end of the year the local currency had recouped part of the steep depreciation it had accumulated, the rate of inflation had begun to slow down and the very high interest rates on the central bank’s investment certificates had subsided.
Nevertheless, the non-financial public sector and the central bank posted large deficits, and arrears were accumulated in external debt servicing.
Unemployment did not worsen, thanks to the expansion of informal activities, but real wages declined.
The country is expected to sign a new standby arrangement with IMF at the beginning of the year.
This should help to strengthen financial stability and reduce inflation considerably, thereby boosting domestic demand.
The new administration has given priority to stabilizing the economy, concluding a new arrangement with IMF and reducing the fiscal deficit.
Accordingly, it adjusted public spending and implemented a fiscal reform in September.
The non-financial public sector ran a deficit of 3% of GDP, in contrast to the 0.2% surplus agreed upon with IMF, while the quasi-fiscal deficit was equivalent to 4% of GDP.
The central government deficit, measured on an accrual basis, amounted to 2.7% of GDP, as compared to 3.8% in 2003.
Measured on a cash basis, however, the balance showed a surplus of 2.4% of GDP (as against 1% in 2003) due to a series of delays in expenditure.
The temporary taxes imposed at the beginning of the year and the tax reform implemented in September raised the central government’s real income by 6%.
The bulk of this increase came from indirect taxes, especially excise taxes (the rate of the tax on the transfer of goods and services rose from 12% to 16%) and surcharges on foreign trade.
Receipts from direct taxes, on the other hand, went down. a Annual figures. ro ent perce ntage of EAP Real expenditure diminished by 3.5% as a result of a contraction in public employment and downturns in real wages and debt-servicing payments, but transfers swelled by more than 80% owing to increases in electricity and gas subsidies.
The external debt stood at slightly over US$ 6.4 billion, exceeding the figure recorded at the end of 2003 by 7.2%.
The accumulation of debt-servicing arrears prompted the government to negotiate with the Paris Club.
After the review of the country’s arrangement with IMF in February, further steps were taken to absorb the excess liquidity created by the central bank’s large-scale intervention in the 2003 banking crisis, whose cost amounted to 20.5% of GDP.
The issuance of central bank investment certificates jumped by 70% and, in May, the required investment ratio for multi-purpose banks was raised from 5% to 8% and a ceiling was imposed on total loans from the banking system to the public sector.
The interest rate on these investment certificates increased from 35% in late 2003 to 59.7% in June 2004, after which it fell gradually until it reached 29.8% in November.
In addition, the authorities extended the terms of these instruments and sought to diversify them by issuing certificates pegged to the consumer price index (CPI), the United States dollar and the rate on United States Treasury notes.
In October money creation was down by almost 9% in real terms with respect to its level in the same month of 2003.
Domestic credit was down by 25%, while money and the broader monetary aggregate M2 had contracted by 4% and 13.1%, respectively.
There was no significant variation in banks’nominal interest rates as a result of the exchange rate and price turbulence, but both deposit rates and lending rates were negative on average, in real terms.
The country’s freely floating exchange rate reached a maximum of 54 pesos to the dollar in February, compared to 37.5 pesos at the end of 2003.
Subsequently, once measures were taken to tighten the money supply and the prevailing uncertainty began to be dispelled, the exchange rate declined gradually and, towards the end of the year, stood at about 30 pesos to the dollar.
Export-oriented economic activities were buoyant, while domestic demand continued to flag; specifically, downturns were observed in construction (-4.0%) commerce (-2.7%), financial services (-0.8%) and the electricity, gas and water sector ( -21.1%), in which electricity generation continued to be insufficient.
On the other hand, there were upturns in agriculture (4.8%, despite the damage caused in September by hurricane Jeanne), mining (3.0%) and manufacturing (2.5%), while communications continued to grow vigorously.
Twelve-month inflation stood at 35% in December 2004, compared to 42.7% the preceding year, reflecting a definite decline from March onward.
Figures for October show that the biggest price increases were in hotels and restaurants (48.1%), food, beverages and tobacco (37.5%) and furniture and accessories (37.4%).
An employment survey conducted in April revealed that the labour-force participation rate had risen to 55.3% and the employment rate, to 45.9%.
Open unemployment fell to 5.1%, but broad unemployment increased from 16.4% to 17.0%.
Minimum wages were adjusted by 10% in January and 30% in November; in the latter month other wages were adjusted as well.
In real terms, the purchasing power of wages declined again in 2004.
The balance-of-payments current account ran a US$ 1.1-billion surplus (5.9% of GDP), the negative balance of factor payments narrowed and remittances continued to grow.
Foreign direct investment exceeded US$ 450 million, but private capital movements were negative.
The expansion of merchandise exports (4%) was slower than it had been in 2003.
External sales of nonfree-trade-zone products increased by 27%, owing especially to exports of ferronickel (which accounted for 22% of the total), tobacco and molasses.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 131 free-trade-zone products contracted by 1.5% owing to the garment sector’s reduced competitiveness.
At the country’s ports, there was an upturn in sales of goods to cruise-ship passengers.
The value of imports of petroleum and petroleum products grew by 20% as a result of the rise in international prices.
Increases were also observed in imports of cast iron and steel products, agricultural inputs, vegetable fats and oils, certain consumer durables, pharmaceutical products and medicines.
Up to August tourist arrivals totalled 2.7 million people, a 7.1% increase over the number recorded in the same period of 2003.
The contributing factors behind the increase in tourist arrivals included the worldwide economic recovery, the Dominican peso’s real depreciation against the dollar and the dollar’s loss of value against the euro.
Guyana The dip in economic activity that Guyana had experienced in 2003 was reversed in 2004.
The economy grew by 1.5% (compared to -0.6% in 2003), boosted by improvements in agriculture and by a buoyant construction sector, since the mining sector succeeded only in posting a smaller decline.
The stronger economic performance resulted in a slight upturn in tax receipts.
Thanks in part to the implementation of administrative measures, the government had enough resources to finance higher capital expenditure and even to reduce the fiscal deficit (from 7% of GDP in 2003 to 5% in 2004).
Increases in aggregate demand and in oil prices on international markets pushed up the rate of inflation.
In the external sector, the balance-of-payments current account position deteriorated, as imports rose more sharply than exports.
The increase in imports was due mainly to purchases of materials and equipment for road infrastructure, the expansion of production facilities in the sugar sector and mining activity.
The central government’s fiscal deficit diminished, thanks mainly to a nominal increase in current income (36% of GDP) and, to a lesser extent, the containment of increases in current expenditure (33% of GDP), particularly on wages and salaries (12% of GDP).
This resulted in a current account surplus (4% of GDP) that was large enough to finance part of the programme of public investment projects.
External debt servicing increased slightly to represent 43% of public revenues in 2004 (compared to 42% in 2003) and 15% of exports of goods and non-factor services.
In the sphere of monetary policy, the authorities continued to pursue their traditional objectives of price stability and exchange-rate sustainability.
Commercial bank deposits increased in 2004 –with sight deposits rising by 24% and time deposits, by 5%– and exceeded the growth of credit demand (1%), whose level remained almost unchanged despite lower interest rates.
As a result of this stagnation, there was a build-up of liquidity in the commercial banking system.
In early 2004 the ratio of free reserves to mandatory reserves rose to 64%, and this excess was reinvested in external assets (39%).
Narrow money and broad money expanded by 9% and 19%, respectively (as against 8% and 11%, respectively, in 2003).
To complement the macroeconomic stance taken in 2004, the authorities continued to implement a reform programme designed to improve the country’s production structure and institutional framework.
Efforts were geared mostly towards restructuring the traditional primary sector to enhance its productivity and competitiveness, increase the profitability of investment in physical capital and improve the quality of investment in human capital.
The growth of the agricultural sector (6%) reflected increases in the production of sugar (8%) and rice.
The latter segment benefited from structural reforms and the higher yields that resulted from an increase in the area under cultivation.
The smaller downturn in the mining sector (-9% in 2003 and -5% in 2004) was the net outcome of lower value added in the bauxite sector and higher levels of gold production.
Construction benefited from an increase in the government’s capital expenditure on infrastructure and housing.
The current account deficit swelled from 12% of GDP in 2003 to 16% in 2004, as the growth of imports outpaced that of exports.
The expansion of imports was driven by the rise in international oil prices and an increase in purchases of the materials, equipment and machinery needed for the expansion of production Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 133 facilities in the sugar and mining sectors.
The upturn in exports reflected higher external sales of gold, rice and sugar (which rose by 9%, 23% and 15%, respectively).
The surplus on the capital account was due to disbursements corresponding to the official assistance received by Guyana under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
In 2004 these funds were insufficient to make up for the deficit on the overall balance of payments, which amounted to US$ 6 million.
Haiti In 2004 the Haitian economy faced a series of political and social upheavals that led to the President’s resignation on 29 February, the deployment of a multinational force in the country, the formation of a transitional government and the launching, in June, of the United Nations Stabilization Mission in Haiti (MINUSTAH).
The precarious economic situation seen in previous years was worsened in 2004 by the political and social instability.
GDP contracted by 3% and per capita GDP declined for the fifth consecutive year (-4.7%).
This slump was partially mitigated by the growth of exports and an increase in current transfers to US$ 1.031 billion (equivalent to 25% of GDP).
These transfers included, in addition to family remittances, international assistance provided in response to the natural disasters (floods) that struck the country in May and September, causing the large-scale loss of human life.
By signing an Interim Cooperation Framework (ICF) with the country’s provisional authorities in July 2004, the international donor community and financial institutions undertook to provide US$ 1 billion in assistance over a two-year period.
The high hopes raised by this initiative have yet to be fulfilled, however, as external contributions fell far short of the US$ 221 million that was to have been supplied in fiscal year If the agreed disbursements are made, the prospects for economic recovery in 2005 will be brighter.
Nonetheless, the toll taken by the natural disasters of May and September has not yet been fully assessed and will probably have a significant negative impact.
Another worrisome factor is the high level of violence, especially in the capital city, which is jeopardizing the fragile political and institutional situation, the implementation of economic and social programmes and the conduct of legislative, municipal and presidential elections in 2005.
Should the crisis continue, Haiti’s already alarming levels of poverty and deprivation could become still worse.
The transitional government’s economic policy focused primarily on restoring some degree of macroeconomic stability.
By the end of December 2003 the huge fiscal deficit had already exceeded the level budgeted for the entire fiscal year, prompting the new authorities to cut back public administration expenditure by 5.7% in real terms.
Economic activity was at a virtual standstill in February and March, with the result that revenues fell by 7.5%.
In September civil-service wages were raised by an average of 33% to make up for losses of purchasing power.
The monetary authorities maintained a tight policy to curb the bouts of inflation experienced in early 2004.
Total liquidity in the economy diminished in real terms; M1 and M2 shrank by 16% and 11%, respectively, despite a gradual decline in the benchmark interest rate (the rate on central bank bonds) from 27.8% in April to 7.6% at the end of the year.
This reduction did not pass through to commercial banks’ nominal lending rates, which held steady (at 33% for local-currency loans) or even rose slightly, in the case of dollar loans (from 12.5% in October 2003 to 14.5% in the final months of the year).
This further stifled credit to the private sector, which contracted by 12.2% as the climate of uncertainty discouraged the extension of and demand for such credit.
The gourde rose in value, essentially because of the relative abundance of foreign exchange from remittances.
The central bank took advantage of the gourde’s appreciation to replenish its reserves, and bought about US$ 100 million in foreign exchange between April and September.
The external debt stock Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 135 increased by US$ 29 million to reach US$ 1.316 billion, and arrears in servicing payments amounted to US$ 72 million (as against US$ 51 million in 2003).
Public investment outlays dropped significantly (by 12%) and private investment declined more moderately, with the result that total investment contracted by 3%.
Average from January to October, annualized. 21% in real terms), but was not sufficient to prevent a 5% decline in consumption.
There were severe energy shortages that improved only slightly in the second half of the year, and total thermal and hydroelectric power generation contracted by 15.5%.
Consumers were particularly affected by this problem between January and June, as the cumulative decline over this period amounted to nearly 60%.
Inflation was relatively well controlled (22%), despite increases in the international prices of petroleum products.
The authorities will probably resort to subsidies of some kind to keep the economic situation from worsening.
The value of exports grew by 12%, owing mainly to a 10% increase in unit values, while sales from maquila activities rose by 4.4%, despite a 7.2% decline in volume.
The value of imports was up by 8.6%, but their physical volume was down by 5%.
The terms of trade deteriorated by 3% because of sharp increases in the prices of hydrocarbons (19%) and other imported commodities, including rice (49%), wheat (6%), chicken meat and offal (21%), milk (46%) and edible oils (4%).
Remittance inflows were once again the main source of equilibrium in the balance-of-payments current account.
External contributions (though meagre) and, in particular, the central bank’s foreign exchange purchases helped to reconstitute net international reserves (including commercial banks’ mandatory foreign-exchange deposits), which at the end of the fiscal year were equivalent to 42 days’ worth of imports.
Jamaica The Jamaican economy grew by 1.9%, in a slowdown from the 2.3% recorded in 2003, owing to the destructive impact of hurricane Ivan on the southern and south-western parts of the island in early September.
Total damage is estimated at US$ 580 million (8% of GDP); the sectors hardest hit were agriculture, water and electricity, and transport, storage and communications.
Losses in production sectors amounted to 13.375 billion Jamaican dollars (J$), while losses in social sectors totalled J$ 12.729 billion.
The government pursued its efforts to strengthen fiscal management, and interest rates continued to fall.
The smaller current account deficit (10% of GDP) reflected strong export performance, especially in the first half of the year.
The imbalance was easily covered with financial inflows from bond issues and with external inflows associated with the natural disasters.
As a result of these inflows, there was an increase in net international reserves.
Tax revenues reflected the economy’s growth in the first eight months of the year and the full application of the package of fiscal measures adopted in 2003.
Receipts were eroded very little by the effects of the hurricane, as the areas and activities that suffered damage are not significant contributors.
Current expenditure remained constant as a proportion of GDP (33%), as its main components (interest payments and payroll expenditure) did not change.
With respect to wages, the agreement reached between the government and the Jamaica Confederation of Trade Unions on public-sector wage and employment restraint was implemented with effect from 1 April 2004 to 31 March 2006.
Interest payments on the domestic debt (which accounts for 75% of total debt) became more moderate owing to the monetary authority’s commitment to reducing interest rates.
The rise in expenditure in connection with hurricane Ivan will be financed with grants and soft loans.
The stable macroeconomic conditions enabled the Bank of Jamaica to narrow the range of interest rates on its 90-day repurchase instruments (from 18% in 2003 to 14% in 2004), which lowered the cost of domestic debt servicing and open-market operations.
Meanwhile, the commercial banking system’s adaptation to the credit expansion policy resulted in a decline in the weighted real interest rate on loans, from 1 Jamaica’s fiscal year runs from April to March.
The manufacturing sector (-0.8% in 2003 and 4% in 2004) was able to meet higher demand thanks to an improvement in its productivity, with the result that its growth was affected only slightly by the hurricane (the rates posted in the sector were 4.7% before the disaster and 4.2% afterward).
Mining performed well (growing by 4.9% in 2003 and 9.1% in 2004) because of favourable external conditions and higher capacity utilization at aluminium and bauxite production plants.
The electricity and water sector (4.7% in 2003 and 2.2% in 2004) was affected by electric power outages caused by the hurricane.
The transport, storage and communications sector grew by 2.6% in 2004 (as against 3.6% in 2003) and posted losses attributable to the temporary interruption of freight and passenger traffic, a downturn in traffic volume and higher costs associated with the use of alternative means of transport and communications.
Construction activity (1.2% in 2003 and 3.4% in 2004) reflected the implementation of government infrastructure projects and reconstruction activities.
Tourism, which had recovered from the effects of the terrorist attacks of September 2001, was affected by the temporary closure of some hotels owing to the effects of hurricane Ivan.
Temporary constraints on productive activities as a result of the hurricane were most evident in labourintensive sectors, including the banana segment, which temporarily shed 8,000 jobs.
Under the agreement between the government and trade unions, wage growth was limited to less than 3% a year.
Data to October. f Includes hidden unemployment. g Official estimates. h Average from January to October, annualized. situation) was amply offset by a surplus on the capital and financial account.
The growth of merchandise exports (11%) resulted from the combination of higher international prices for mineral products, an upturn in external demand and the negative effects of the hurricane on agricultural and mining activities.
Import growth sped up (to 9%) owing to the reconstruction initiatives, the substitution of imports for lost domestic output and the hike in international oil prices.
The surplus on the non-factor services balance reflected the brisk growth of tourism activity despite the temporary interruption in the flow of visitors.
Current transfers increased by 17% as many of the people affected by the hurricane received financial support from relatives living abroad.
The capital and financial account ran a surplus owing to the issuance of over US$ 250 million in bonds, an increase in financial flows associated with the reconstruction and rehabilitation activities and an upturn in insurance and reinsurance payments.
Suriname Suriname’s economic growth, at 4%, was slower than it had been in 2003 (5.6%).
The expansion was based on a 5% upturn in the primary sector (which had grown by 1.1% in 2003) and, in particular, a mining boom.
The performance of the country’s leading mineral products was boosted by an increase in FDI and higher export prices.
The performance of agriculture varied from one segment to another, while construction benefited from projects to expand production capacity in the mining sector, especially the gold subsector.
The fiscal balance deteriorated owing to higher current expenditure and, to a lesser extent, an increase in capital outlays on infrastructure.
In the area of monetary policy, the growth of the monetary aggregates was brought into line with that of nominal GDP.
This kept liquidity and the exchange rate relatively stable, thereby facilitating a substantial decline in inflation.
Slower import growth and strong export performance helped to narrow the external current account deficit.
In 2004 the balance of the central government’s fiscal operations was negative (at 56 million Suriname dollars).
The significant reduction in the fiscal current account surplus (from 48 million Suriname dollars in 2003 to 16 million in 2004) was due to an increase in the payroll, since interest payments, particularly on the external debt, declined from US$ 11 million to US$ 9 million.
In general terms, the aim of monetary policy was to create conditions for reducing inflation from nearly 30% in 2003 to 10% in 2004 and to keep the Suriname dollar stable.
The legal reserve requirement continued to be one of the main economic policy instruments.
The authorities reduced the reserve requirement for localcurrency deposits from 35% to 30% in order to boost the demand for loans.
The 5% reduction in the banking system’s lending rates as of September 2004 may also stimulate this demand and, ultimately, private investment as well.
In view of the low demand for loans, banks used their assets to invest abroad.
Meanwhile, the authorities raised the legal reserve requirement for foreign-currency deposits from 18% to 23% in order to contain the exponential growth that these deposits had shown in 2003 and part of 2004.
The exchange rate remained stable throughout 2004 at approximately 2.65 Suriname dollars per United States dollar.
Banana exports continued to rise, but rice production contracted owing to technical and financial difficulties.
This sector benefited from an increase in foreign investment, favourable international prices and the expansion of production facilities, which had a positive impact on the construction sector.
The oil and natural gas subsector performed well in view of higher international prices and the expansion of refining facilities.
Inflation dropped steeply, from 26% in 2003 to 13% in 2004, owing mainly to exchange-rate stability and despite a moderate increase in transport and communications costs due to an increase in international prices for inputs.
The current account deficit fell from 18% of GDP in 2003 to 13% in 2004, as imports lost momentum (because of the slower economic growth) while exports picked up speed.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 139 Gross domestic product 3.0 5.6 4.0 Non-financial public-sector fiscal balance / GDP -7.0 0.2 ...
Trinidad and Tobago The economy of Trinidad and Tobago expanded by 6.2% in 2004, driven by the energy sector, which had been boosted significantly by the inauguration of the Train 3 liquefied natural gas plant the preceding year.
The inflation rate rose because of increases in food prices, especially at the beginning of the second half-year, while unemployment continued to trend downward.
In the external sector, the overall balance of payments was positive, since the current account surplus –reflecting the effect of higher petroleum prices on exports in general– outweighed the deficit on the capital and financial account.
The economy is expected to grow by 5% to 6% in 2005, boosted mainly by the energy sector and by higher income resulting from the improvement in the terms of trade.
As in the preceding fiscal year, the fiscal accounts ran a surplus, largely because higher petroleum prices pushed up tax receipts.
The central bank’s decision to lower the reserve requirement for commercial banks facilitated the financial management of fiscal policy.
It also paved the way for interest rate cuts designed to stimulate demand for loans and economic growth.
The government posted a surplus in fiscal year 2003/ 2004, as it had in the preceding period.
This was largely a result of higher corporate tax revenues (which account for almost 50% of fiscal income) due, in turn, to the rise in the prices of petroleum and petroleum products.
Another factor that contributed to the surplus, albeit to a lesser extent, was the collection of taxes from individuals employed in the 108 firms and businesses in the pay-as-you-earn system.
Revenues from taxes on goods and services transactions (VAT and specific taxes) also rose, thanks to the dynamism of economic activity.
The bulk of expenditure (92%) was accounted for by the higher current expenditure that resulted from an increase in transfer and subsidy payments arising from past-due commitments (subsidies to oil companies, transfers to government enterprises and statutory boards), debt servicing and disbursements for social programmes.
Despite the surplus on the fiscal accounts, the central government’s debt stock climbed from 49% to 53% of GDP in fiscal year 2003/2004, as a result of its decision to issue TT$ 1.16 billion in bonds to sterilize part of the liquidity increase generated by the lowering of the reserve requirement.
The government also took advantage of the drop in nominal interest rates to restructure its debt by extending maturities.
The stock of external debt declined with the payment of a portion of outstanding obligations.
The repo rate on discounting operations remained unchanged from the year before (5%).
When the policy was first implemented, the reserve requirement was lowered by four percentage points (from 18% to 14%).
In September 2004 a second phase began, with a further reduction from 14% to 11%.
The expansionary monetary policy enabled the government to finance certain fiscal operations and gave commercial banks manoeuvring room to lower interest rates in order to stimulate demand for credit.
The prime rate, which had remained at 9.5% for the first nine months of the year, dropped to 8.75% in October, while nominal demand for loans expanded at rates of over 16%.
The central bank kept a close watch on the monetary aggregates to ensure that they were meeting the needs of the real economy, and accordingly carried out sterilization operations several times in the course of Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 141 the year.
In 2004 the authorities introduced a single-price auction system based on the submission of purchase orders prior to the auction for government bonds administered by the central bank.
The purpose of the new system is to facilitate the creation of a secondary market for trade in public debt.
The exchange rate remained stable, at TT$ 6.29 per United States dollar, despite pressures in the exchange market caused by the activities of regional corporations seeking to raise capital on the local bond market.
The energy sector grew by 11% thanks to an increase in natural gas production in the course of the year and despite the slower expansion of activities in the areas of exploration, drilling and refining.
However, two subsectors (petrochemicals and natural gas processing) continued to grow apace, at rates of about 15% in both cases.
Agricultural value added declined (-20%), chiefly because of a heavy slump in the sugar sector (-43%) caused by unfavourable weather conditions, technical problems, the poor quality of the sugar cane and labour disputes.
Food, beverages and tobacco reflected higher levels of activity among producers of poultry, tobacco and non-alcoholic beverages, while the performance of the assembly industries reflected expansions in construction materials, iron and steel.
Inflation rose slightly, owing mainly to an increase in the prices of food products (10% between August 2003 and August 2004).
Underlying inflation (which does not include food prices) was only 2% in that period.
The government has taken a number of steps to try to slow these increases, including a zero VAT rate on certain foods and a reduction in the tariff surcharge on chicken and turkey imports from 86% to 40% between October and November.
The balance of payments posted a surplus as a result of a positive current account balance that offset the deficit on the capital and financial account.
The current account reflected the positive impact of an increase in the value of exports, which resulted from the rise in the international prices of petroleum and petroleum products.
Manufacturing exports also contributed to this surplus, albeit to a lesser degree.
The deficit on the capital and financial account was attributable to payments on external obligations, bond issues and the sustained expansion of Trinidad and Tobago’s financial sector into other Caribbean countries in the form of direct investment.
Countries members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) 1 The economic recovery that the countries members of OECS had begun to experience in 2002 slowed down in 2004 as a result of the damage inflicted by two natural disasters in the second half of the year.
The second was the earthquake that ravaged Dominica at the end of November.
In general, the tourism and agricultural sectors bore the brunt of the devastation caused by hurricane Ivan.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Saint Lucia lost 20% and 40% of their banana harvest, respectively, and their hotel and yachting subsectors suffered losses equivalent to 10% of GDP.
In Grenada, whose economy was practically destroyed, losses are estimated at more than double the preceding year’s nominal GDP, and their effects resulted in downturns in both output and employment.
Most of the impact was concentrated in infrastructure, especially housing, given that 89% of the country’s total housing stock was damaged, at an estimated cost of 1.4 times the nominal GDP.
Despite the effects of the disasters, the OECS governments were nonetheless able to maintain a prudent fiscal stance characterized by tax measures aimed at increasing fiscal revenues and by the containment of public spending.
In the countries hardest hit by the hurricane, however, the fiscal out-turn worsened.
The external deficit posted by the OECS member countries increased because their exports lost competitiveness while the value of their imports rose, given the higher price of oil on international markets.
The deficit was financed with official and insurance inflows and with foreign direct investment, part of which was channelled into the development of the tourism sector.
The fiscal deficit of Antigua and Barbuda as economic growth boosted public revenues.
This additional income offset the increase in public spending necessitated by social initiatives involving higher outlays on transfers, unemployment insurance and pensions.
In compliance with the target set in its Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility (PRGF) arrangement with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Dominica achieved a fiscal deficit of 4% of GDP by reducing tax exemptions and public spending, raising the retirement age and broadening the tax base.
Hurricane Ivan aggravated the fiscal situation in Grenada, whose deficit reached 12% of GDP on account of non-recurrent expenditure and plummeting tax receipts.
The government has taken steps to reorient its expenditure and, at the same time, to enhance efficiency.
The government of Saint Kitts and Nevis brought down its deficit (from 7% in 2003 to 6% in 2004) through cutbacks in current expenditure, higher tax receipts as a result of tax hikes, the broadening of the tax base and the elimination of fiscal incentives.
Saint Lucia’s fiscal deficit widened because of efforts to shore up aggregate demand by expanding fiscal outlays, particularly capital expenditure.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines also saw its fiscal deficit worsen as a result of higher capital expenditure, despite the adoption of a series of measures to boost tax receipts.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean  2004 143 In most of the States members of OECS, liquidity expanded in 2004 in line with the nominal growth of their respective output figures.
At the aggregate level, total monetary liabilities grew by an average of 13% between September 2003 and September 2004.
Saint Kitts and Nevis recorded the biggest increase in monetary liquidity (21%), while Dominica posted the smallest (9%).
The faster expansion of liquidity was mainly attributable to a jump in the growth of domestic credit (30%).
Construction and public utilities showed the highest increases in demand for commercial bank loans (62% and 50%, respectively), while private demand for credit (50% of the total) was associated with financing for property purchases (housing construction and renovation) and other personal loans.
In a context of favourable macroeconomic conditions, the upward trend in activity in the OECS countries was based on the buoyancy of construction and tourism.
Construction benefited from reconstruction and conversion projects, while tourism-related activities bounced back from the effects of the 11 September 2001 events and recorded a significant increase in the number of visitors (both cruise-ship passengers and long-stay tourists).
The increase in the OECS countries’ aggregate output was due to the impressive economic growth seen in Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Saint Kitts and Nevis.
However, it was also affected by the negative repercussions that the natural disasters had on economic activity in Dominica and, especially, in Grenada.
The performance of agriculture reflected unfavourable trends in international commodity prices, adverse weather conditions and the uncertainty surrounding the future of preferential trade agreements.
In Grenada, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, weather-related problems sharply reduced the output of bananas, nutmeg and other traditional agricultural products.
Manufactures stalled because of higher production costs and low levels of competitiveness.
This sector was also affected by domestic and external bottlenecks in the agricultural sector, which tend to limit growth in the supply of certain manufactures.
Construction was boosted by the high levels of liquidity in most of the OECS economies, the increase in capital expenditure in some countries and the positive effects of reconstruction and rehabilitation activities.
Tourism-related activities made a full recovery in most of the OECS countries.
According to the most recent available information, the number of visitors increased by 16% in Antigua and Barbuda, 6% in Dominica, 4% in Saint Lucia and 11% in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
In Grenada, tourism will contract significantly owing to the damage suffered by hotel facilities and the steep reduction (90%) in the number of hotel rooms.
Aggregate inflation climbed from 0.6% in 2003 to 1.4% in 2004, owing mainly to higher international oil prices, the tax measures adopted by most of the member States and the weakness of the United States dollar.
The overall external deficit of the OECS members was equivalent to 22% of GDP and was offset by foreign direct investment inflows (16% of GDP) and, to a lesser extent, capital transfers (6% of GDP) and portfolio investments (2% of GDP).
The current account balance primarily reflected a widening of the merchandise trade deficit.
This, in turn, resulted from the import growth propelled by higher international oil prices and by the natural disasters, which triggered larger external purchases of raw materials, inputs and capital goods.
External sales were hobbled by the leading export products’ loss of competitiveness and by the natural disasters’ adverse effects on export capacity.
The services trade balance benefited from the upturn in tourism, even though the sector was temporarily undermined by the damage to tourism infrastructure (especially in Grenada and Dominica) and, on the demand side, by the suspension of international flights and the resulting downturn in the number of longstay visitors.
The current account was calculated using official information from the balance of payments.
Total net capital inflows correspond to the capital and financial accounts, plus errors and omissions, and the use of IMF credit and loans and exceptional financing.
Includes reinvested profits. b In accordance with the fifth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual, all transactions between non-financial direct investment enterprises and their parent companies and affiliates are included in direct investment. c Preliminary figures. d For 1999, includes the value of the investment by REPSOL in Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales.
Part of this amount corresponds to the purchase of shares in the company held by non-residents.
In the balance of payments, the value of those shares is reflected as a debit under the portfolio investment item. e From 1998 onward the figures are not comparable, since up to 1997 no official records were kept. f In 2001, includes the Citigroup investment in Banamex; in 2004 includes investment in Bancomer.
Latin America is showing a synchronized economic slowdown at the country and sector levels.
In contrast to previous years, in 2019 growth in economic activity is slowing in 18 of the 20 countries of Latin America, and in 23 of the 33 countries of the Latin American and Caribbean region as a whole.
The slackening of domestic demand has been accompanied by low aggregate external demand and more fragile international financial markets.
Added to this scenario are the growing social demands and pressures to reduce inequality and improve social inclusion, which have emerged unusually forcefully in certain countries of the region.
The macroeconomic panorama of the last six years (2014–2019) shows a tendency towards slowing economic activity, with falls in per capita GDP, investment, per capita consumption and exports, and a sustained decline in the quality of employment.
In these circumstances, the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean are set to grow at an average rate of 0.1% in 2019.
Although the growth projections for 2020 show an improvement with respect to 2019, they remain subdued, with the countries expected to grow at an average rate of 1.3%.
If this projection is borne out, the seven years from 2014 to 2020 will have been the slowest economic growth period in 40 years.
This comes in a global context of low growth and increasing vulnerability, with no significant positive catalysts expected.
Coordinated, expansionary domestic economic policies are therefore needed to boost countries’ growth.
The main economic policy challenge is preventing the region from falling into economic and social stagnation, while maintaining progress on macrofinancial stability and debt sustainability.
Despite the constraints on policy space today, most countries in the region —unlike in earlier periods— have historically low inflation and relatively large international reserves.
Furthermore, most can still draw on international financial markets, amid historically low international interest rates.
These conditions are amenable to the implementation of macroeconomic policies to stimulate aggregate demand.
Reactivating growth in Latin America and the Caribbean under the current economic conditions will require fiscal and monetary policy to play a stronger role throughout the economic cycle, with instruments that allow for better coordination between these two policy areas, to achieve common objectives.
Evidently, the capacity and space that each country has to pursue such policies is determined by its specific macroeconomic and social conditions.
The role of fiscal policy should be approached in light of its three traditional functions: stabilization, provision of public goods, and redistribution.
In this regard, an active fiscal policy should focus on economic reactivation and on reducing structural inequalities, while keeping public debt on a sustainable path.
This will provide the fiscal sustainability needed for the increased public spending on investment and social policies required by the region.
Fiscal sustainability is closely linked to economic growth, productivity and, of course, to the strengthening of public revenues through higher tax bases and burdens.
This can be achieved by making the tax structure more progressive; by strengthening personal income tax and property taxes; by reducing tax evasion (which amounts to around 6.3% of the region’s GDP); by re-thinking tax expenditures (3.7% of the region’s GDP), and by developing a new generation of taxes related to the digital economy, the environment and public health.
Improvements in the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of spending are also fundamental to sustainability.
Turning to monetary policy, efforts must be coordinated with fiscal policy to stimulate economic activity, while also addressing exchange-rate volatility and managing any financial risks that may arise.
To this end, monetary authorities must continue to strengthen the macroprudential instruments at their disposal. 12 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Executive summary A.
The international context As noted earlier, the challenge of reactivating economies has arisen in a global context of low economic growth.
In 2019, the world will grow by just 2.5% —the lowest rate of expansion since the global financial and economic crisis— owing to the widespread slowdown in both developed and emerging economies.
From the perspective of Latin America and the Caribbean, the slowdowns of its two main trading partners, the United States and China, is particularly significant.
The countries of the region are exposed to lower growth rates in these two countries not only through their exports but also through commodity prices, as China and the United States are major players in the global markets for the commodities exported by the region.
Global economic activity and global trade are weak, and the risks are skewed to the downside.
Trade tensions have affected confidence and investment in some economies with sectors that are heavily exposed to international trade, putting growth at risk not only in the near term, but also in the medium term.
The projected growth rate of 2.5% for 2019 is forecast to be repeated in 2020, with a slight upturn in emerging economies other than China.
The slowdown in developed economies is expected to extend to the United States which, despite being in the longest phase of expansion in its history, is set to grow by less than 2.0%.
World trade has been progressively weakening amid trade tensions that have persisted, despite some fluctuations.
Between January and September 2019, the volume of global trade fell 0.4% compared to the same period in 2018.
In 2020, the volume of world trade is expected to grow by 2.7%, with a marked downward bias should trade tensions continue.
The trend in commodity prices —a key factor for the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean— shows an across-the-board decline of around 5.0% in 2019.
The downward trend is forecast to continue in 2020 for most of the commodities exported by the countries of the region.
In terms of international financial markets, global debt has risen to record levels, driven in part by the low interest rates of major central banks.
In the second quarter of 2019, the level of debt was equivalent to 320% of global GDP.
This increase in debt has occurred across the board in terms of both countries and sectors.
Government debt in developed countries has climbed particularly significantly, as has non-financial corporate sector debt in emerging countries.
Apart from the absolute levels of indebtedness, the growing percentage of negative-yielding debt represents another risk for global financial stability.
The external sector Latin America’s current account deficit remains relatively steady at around 2.0%.
While the deficit on the income account has widened, owing to lower income from returns on foreign direct investment (FDI) and higher interest payments on debt, this has been offset by growth in remittances.
This will hurt disposable income and the fiscal accounts of commodity-exporting economies.
However, the Caribbean and Central America are benefiting from lower prices for energy, food and other commodities.
In the first half of 2019, Latin America —excluding Argentina— experienced an increase in financial flows as a result of a recovery in deposit and credit flows, which offset lower FDI and portfolio flows.
However, if Argentina is included, total financial flows to the region fell by 7%.
In a context of low international interest rates, bond issues began to increase from the second quarter of 2019 onward.
Debt issues expanded by 20% in the first 10 months of this year compared to the prior-year period, reaching a total of US$ 103 billion.
The increase is attributable to the 83% rise in issuance by companies in the non-financial corporate sector and the 28% rise among banking entities.
In contrast, sovereign bond issues have fallen slightly (-0.3%), owing to a high basis for comparison in 2018, while quasi-sovereign bond issues declined by 13%, and supranational issues dropped by 30% in the first 10 months of the year.
A number of countries that had not issued in 2018 —El Salvador, Guatemala and Jamaica— have returned to markets with sovereign issues and others —Ecuador and Peru— are attempting to improve their debt profile.
Overall, the region’s sovereign risk has followed a downward trend in 2019, albeit with very varied performance between countries.
Economic activity In the first half of 2019, Latin America’s GDP ground to a halt, with growth coming down from 1.34% in year-earlier period to 0%.
Of the 20 Latin American economies, 18 recorded a slowdown compared to the previous year, the exceptions being Colombia and Guatemala.
At the sector level, the slower growth is attributable to a contraction in several sectors—including manufacturing, construction and commerce—adding to the ongoing decline in mining over recent years.
Each of the components of demand —private consumption, government expenditure and investment— show negative annual variations, thus curtailing GDP growth.
Only foreign trade contributed positively to GDP growth, primarily owing to a contraction in imports, as growth in exports was limited.
In terms of domestic demand, there was a significant decline in inventories, which have been shrinking since the first quarter of the year, at faster rates than in previous years.
In the first half of 2019, the slump in inventories shaved 0.5 of a percentage point off GDP growth.
In addition to the decline in inventories, gross fixed capital formation decreased by 1.5% in the first half of the year, accumulating three consecutive quarters of falls.
This result is attributed to the drop in investment, both in construction and in machinery and equipment.
Consumption, both public and private, has been one of the hardest hit components of demand.
The downturn in public consumption has come at a time when the governments of the region are tending towards fiscal adjustment, with a focus primarily on reining in fiscal accounts rather than using fiscal policy to boost GDP growth.
While the economies of South America specialize in producing commodities —particularly oil, minerals and food— those of Mexico and Central America are mainly tied to the pace of growth in the United States.
In the second quarter of 2019, the economies of South America contracted on average by 0.26%, down from the 1.0% growth of the previous year.
In the same period, the economies of Central America grew at a rate of 2.8%, 1.5 percentage points less than in the second quarter of 2018.
Growth in Central America and Mexico combined came to 0.6% in the first half of 2019, well below the 2.2% recorded in the prior-year period.
Similarly, growth in the English- and Dutch-speaking Caribbean slowed by 0.3 of a percentage point in 2019 from 1.8% in the previous year.
Employment and wages In 2019, weak economic activity has brought a widespread deterioration in the labour market among the countries of the region, manifested in a worsening of a number of variables.
On average, the national unemployment rate rose from 8.0% to 8.2%, adding around 1 million people to those out of work and bringing the total number of job-seekers in the region to 25.2 million.
The deterioration in the labour market can also be seen in the estimated expansion of 3.0% in own-account work for the region as a whole, as opposed to the 1.5% growth in wage employment.
The number of wage earners increased slightly, but generally by less than the number of employed and non-wage earners, yet another indicator of deterioration in the composition of employment.
Increases in hourly underemployment and informal labour have also been quite widespread among the countries of the region.
Although the gender gap with respect to the employment rate continued to narrow in 2019, a sharp increase in the female participation rate widened the gender gap in the unemployment rate.
In addition, in a context of weak labour demand, there are signs that many of the new paid jobs found by women are of poor quality.
Average real wages for those in registered employment have increased slightly in most cases.
In Argentina, quickening inflation has resulted in a substantial decline in wages, and in Brazil the average real wage for those in registered employment has fallen slightly, despite lower inflation.
In Mexico, meanwhile, the average real wage for those in registered employment has undergone the biggest rise since 2002, in part owing to a substantial hike in the minimum wage.
However, the prevailing policy in the region’s countries has been to raise minimum wages only just above inflation.
Thus, the median year-on-year increase in the real minimum wage in the countries, calculated for the first three quarters of the year, was only 0.8%, the same rate as in 2018, which marked a break from the more significant increases of the preceding decade.
Economic growth projections give no reason to expect high-quality job creation to pick up in 2020.
While the situation varies from country to country, the overall picture is expected to be one of continuing deterioration in employment composition in terms of occupational categories, underemployment and informality.
In countries with low and stable inflation, meanwhile, real wages for those in registered employment are expected to remain broadly unchanged.
Measured as a weighted regional average, it is estimated that the unemployment rate could rise slightly from its 2019 level, reaching around 8.4%. 15Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2019 Executive summary E.
Fiscal policy By end-2019, the primary balance of the central governments of the region is expected to average -0.2% of GDP, compared to -0.4% in 2018.
This narrowing of the primary deficit reflects the contraction in primary expenditure.
Total public revenue in Latin America is projected to remain at around 18.1% of GDP, a similar level to 2018.
However, these revenues could be affected by the slowdown in economic activity and lower prices for non-renewable natural resources.
Total public spending is also forecast to remain stable in the region in 2019, at around 20.9% of GDP.
In terms of the components of expenditure, current primary expenditure and capital spending are both set to decline by 0.1 GDP percentage points compared to 2018.
In addition, interest payments are projected to increase by 0.1 GDP points relative to 2018.
At the end of the second quarter of 2019, the gross public debt of the central governments of Latin America averaged 43.2% of GDP, 1.3 GDP points more than year-end 2018.
Public debt has grown in both South and Central America, and at June 2019 it stood at around 45% and 41% of GDP, respectively.
Meanwhile, the Caribbean countries continue to consolidate a downward trend in their gross public debt, which dropped from 71.7% of GDP in 2018 to 69% at the end of the first half of 2019.
Fiscal policy must look beyond short-term challenges, to address the region’s structural problems, including insufficient capacity to mobilize resources for development, weak redistributive muscle, shortcomings in the provision of public goods and services, and a limited institutional framework for countercyclical measures.
In addition, one of the most important challenges is to formulate fiscal policy that helps revive economic activity and meet social demands to reduce inequality. 2.
Prices and monetary and exchange-rate policies During the first 10 months of 2019, average inflation in Latin America and the Caribbean fell to historically low levels, easing by 1.2 percentage points to 2.4% in October 2019, down from 3.6% a year earlier.1 This trend in the regional average reflects reductions in year-on-year inflation rates in 19 of the region’s countries.
Considering the different subregions, year-on-year inflation decreased by 1.0 percentage point in the South American economies, from 3.3% in October 2018 to 2.3% in October 2019.
In Central America and Mexico, the year-on-year rate declined from 4.2% to 2.7% in the same period, while in the non-Spanish-speaking Caribbean economies it fell from 3.0% to 2.5%.
In terms of the components of the inflation index, the food products group recorded an increase from 2.8% in October 2018 to 3.3% in October 2019, while tradable goods inflation rose from 2.5% to 2.7% in the same period.
Core inflation remained unchanged at 2.7%, whereas inflation in non-tradable goods and services eased to 2.1% in September 2019 from 4.3% a year earlier. 1 The regional and subregional averages exclude Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Haiti, because they consistently have much higher inflation than the rest of the economies in the region.
Including them would distort the representativeness of the regional inflation dynamic. 16 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Executive summary The declines in inflation, together with prolonged and widespread slowdowns in aggregate domestic demand in the region —especially in consumption and investment— led monetary authorities to adopt expansionary policies in the first 10 months of 2019.
The lower inflation so far this year provides additional space to implement expansionary monetary policies, although it also reflects the severity of the activity slowdown.
Smaller depreciations and less currency volatility in the region in 2019, compared to the previous year’s experience, have also allowed governments to adopt somewhat more aggressive demand stimulus policies.
Nonetheless, the uptick in both variables in the second half of the year may presage additional risks in the future.
Monetary policy has tended to be expansionary, with reductions in policy rates in countries that use that variable as their main policy instrument.
Among most of the region’s economies whose main policy instrument consists of controlling the growth rates of monetary aggregates, base money growth accelerated in the first three quarters of 2019 relative to its end-2018 pace.
Initiatives aimed at boosting aggregate demand intensified in the second half of 2019, since only four central banks had reduced their policy rates in the first six months of the year.
Despite this predominantly expansionary monetary policy, domestic credit to the private sector has tended to contract in the region in real terms, except in economies that use the interest rate as the main monetary policy instrument.
In these countries, real lending to the private sector is still growing, but at an ever-slower pace.
In economies that use monetary aggregates, the slowdown in this variable since the third quarter of 2017 has steepened and, in the third quarter of 2019, a contraction of 0.5% was recorded.
In the non-Spanish-speaking Caribbean economies, domestic credit to the private sector recorded low but positive growth rates in 2018 and also in the first quarter of 2019, but has flatlined since the second quarter.
With regard to exchange rates, in the first 11 months of 2019, 13 (out of 18) of the region’s currencies depreciated against the dollar in nominal terms.
Annualized rates of depreciation were generally lower on average in 2019 than in 2018.
In 2019, the region’s currencies were generally more stable, especially in the first half of the year, with less volatility in 11 of the 18 economies that have adjustable rates.
In the first 11 months of 2019, the region’s international reserves shrank by US$ 6.3 billion, a drop of 0.7% relative to their end-2018 level.
In the first seven months of the year, the region’s reserves grew by 4.5% (US$ 39.328 billion).
This trend in reserves was driven mainly by larger interventions in the foreign-exchange markets in the second half of the year to ease pressures on exchange rates and external deficits.
Challenges and prospects for Latin America and the Caribbean in 2020 In 2019, the region has faced an unfavourable external scenario in terms of economic growth and world trade.
The international scenario in 2020 is expected to remain similar to that of 2019, albeit with a bias towards increased uncertainty and vulnerability.
This will have a particularly strong effect on the economies of South America, which export these products, via a deterioration in their terms of trade and, as a knock-on effect, less disposable income and lower tax revenues from extractive activities.
Added to this is the slowdown in their two main trading partners: the United States —which will grow less than 2% in 2020— and China, which will post a growth rate of under 6% in 2020, its lowest rate in 30 years.
In addition to the sluggishness associated with declining economic activity and global trade, 2020 will bring considerable uncertainty, given the ongoing risks on financial markets.
The worldwide accumulation of debt, driven in part by major central banks’ low interest rates, is outpacing the growth of global income and has reached record levels.
This upswing has been seen across all sectors, and the significant portion of global debt that is denominated in foreign currency in emerging economies —and in Latin America— leaves such economies more exposed to changes in monetary policies in the major economies, which can have major impacts on the balance sheets of financial agents and their ability to service debt.
Apart from the absolute levels of indebtedness, another risk factor for the global economy stems from the growing percentage of negative-yielding debt (currently estimated at some US$ 17 trillion, or 20% of global GDP).
This increases the vulnerability of global financial stability, as low or negative returns on “safe” assets push investors to seek higher returns, driving up demand for riskier assets.
As a result, returns tend to level out, no longer properly reflecting assets’ different risk profiles.
Geopolitical risks —and specifically the tensions between Hong Kong (Special Administrative Region of China) and China that have intensified in 2019— also remain a factor, as do processes currently under way whose implications for the world economy are not yet clear, such as Brexit and the unknown nature of future relations between the United Kingdom and the European Union.
The international outlook for 2020 is no better than it was in 2019, and it is not possible to rule out new bouts of greater volatility and deteriorating financing conditions, which may go hand in hand with a further slackening of economic activity in various regions, including Latin America and the Caribbean.
In addition, this weak economic growth has been accompanied by mounting social conflicts and social demands in some countries of the region.
This has prompted cuts to their projected growth rates for year-end 2019 and for 2020.
Amid these difficult external conditions and a slowdown that encompasses 18 of the 20 economies of Latin America and 23 of the 33 economies of the Latin American and Caribbean region overall, in 2019 the region is expected to remain on a low-growth path, with GDP projected to edge up by just 0.1%.
No recovery is forecast for 2020, the expectation being of a similar rate of global growth (see figure I.1).
The slowdown has been widespread in 2019, affecting both developed and emerging economies.
The developed economies are expected to post growth of 1.7% this year, down from the 2.3% of 2018.
The emerging economies are expected to grow by 3.9% in 2019, compared with 4.5% last year.
Growth in the developed economies is projected to continue slowing in 2020 (to a rate of just 1.5%), while the emerging economies should regain a little of their momentum (with growth of 4.3%), which would leave the average global growth rate similar to that of 2019.
The economic slowdown in the developed economies in 2020 will extend to the United States, which —despite still being in its longest expansionary phase ever— is expected to grow by less than 2% as the effects of the tax reform that stimulated the economy in 2018 and part of 2019 dissipates further.
Japan’s economy will also slow, with growth of just 0.5% in 2020, partly as a result of a weakening external sector and slacker consumption, the latter owing to the increase in the consumption tax that the government brought in on 1 October after twice postponing it to avoid adversely impacting activity levels.
Economic activity is also expected to suffer in the United Kingdom in 2020, with growth of 1%, as a result of the prolonged uncertainty over the process of withdrawal from the European Union (Brexit), which has been affecting investment in the country.
This will be supplemented by the expected continuation of loose monetary policy in economies where there is scope for it (the group of emerging economies in general has more leeway than the developed ones).
This is the case, for example, with India, which was affected in 2019 by problems in the non-bank financial system (with effects on investment and consumption) and should return to normal next year, growing by about 7 tenths of a point more than this year.
It is also the case with the emerging economies of Europe (where the Russian Federation and Turkey will perform better in 2020), the Middle East and Central Asia, sub-Saharan Africa and some Latin American countries, such as Brazil and Mexico (see chapter VIII).
China is differently placed, since what is still a gradual slowdown began there almost a decade ago.
Recently released data show growth in the third quarter of 2019 (6% year on year) at its lowest in 30 years.
Looking beyond the average global growth rate, something that is important in terms of impact on the countries of Latin America is the fact that their two main trading partners, the United States and China, will experience a slowdown in both 2019 and 2020.
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean are exposed to slower growth in these two countries not only through the trade channel but also through commodity prices, as China and the United States are major players in global markets for the commodities exported by the region.
The volume of world trade fell in 2019 to September (latest figure available) in comparison with the same period in 2018 (-0.4%).
For 2020, the World Trade Organization (WTO) is forecasting an increase of 2.7% in the volume of world trade, with a considerable downward bias if trade tensions continue (WTO, 2019).
In terms of countries and regions, China, whose trade has been affected by the trade war, and the rest of the emerging Asian economies, which contributed most to the increase in trade volume in 2017 and 2018, have been the biggest contributors to its decline in 2019 (see figure I.3).
The biggest drop has been in energy products (the price of crude oil has fallen by 11.5% in 2019 from its average level in 2018), while agricultural product prices have fallen by 3.5% and those of metals and minerals by 1.3%.
The prices of many of the commodities exported by Latin American and Caribbean countries are expected to fall again in 2020.
Many economies in the region that export these commodities, especially those in South America, are being negatively affected by these declines, since they mean lower export prices and lower tax revenues from extractive activities.
For agricultural products, price levels in 2020 are expected to be only slightly lower than in 2019.
However, a fall of almost 2% is expected in 2020 for metals and minerals, which have a large impact on some South American countries that are major exporters, as a result of reduced dynamism in the economies of large importers such as China.
These increases have been associated mainly with major developments in the trade and technology war between the United States and China, which was at its most fraught in May and August (see figure I.4).
Financial volatility has moderated since late September, however, on perceptions of possible progress in negotiations to curb the escalation of the trade and technology war between China and the United States.5 5 Emerging market volatility, as measured by the VXEEM index, has not moderated in this way.
This is because the Chinese stock market makes up the majority of the index weighting and its prices are highly correlated with stock prices in Hong Kong (China), a region that is still going through a time of financial stress and volatility.
Following the same logic, the CBOE also produces the VXEEM index, which measures volatility in emerging markets, while Deutsche Börse and Goldman Sachs produce the V2X index, which does the same for the eurozone.
During the periods of great uncertainty and financial volatility in 2019, there was a sharp increase in demand for the long-term sovereign bonds of countries regarded as safe havens (i.e. those perceived as least risky).
This led to a rise in the prices of these assets and hence a reduction in their rates of return.
Almost 90% of this debt is denominated in euros and yen.7 In the United States, bond yields did not turn negative in 2019, but increased demand for long-term assets led to an inversion of the yield curve.
This came at the height of the tension caused by the trade and technology war and by uncertainty about the medium-term health of the United States economy, for example in August (see figure I.6).
Past yield curve inversions have usually been associated with a subsequent recession, and this led a number of analysts to take this development as a possible sign of recession to come.
Since late September, in line with the evolution of other financial indicators as discussed above, the United States yield curve has ceased to be inverted at the different maturities.
Low or even negative returns on safe assets have prompted yield-seeking in the form of demand for riskier assets.
Most of this debt is sovereign and a minority is corporate. 8 See T.
The market expects the interest rate to remain in this range in 2020, with a probability of 70.5%.9 9 Probability data retrieved from Bloomberg on 18 November 2019.
The European Central Bank (ECB) also reduced its reference rate by 10 basis points in September, to -0.5%, and restarted its asset purchase programme for a total of 20 billion euros per month, which is likely to increase to 30 billion euros from the second half of 2020.
For its part, the Bank of Japan has stated that it will continue with its quantitative easing policy consisting of the purchase of government securities.
Furthermore, although it has held its reference rate steady at a negative level (-0.1%), it considers that it still has room to lower it to even further.
However, the Bank of Japan must weigh the benefits and costs of such reductions, as negative rates for prolonged periods are having adverse effects on the profitability of financial institutions (see chapter II).
Central banks in many emerging economies have also loosened monetary policy in the face of a global growth slowdown and worse-than-expected national performance.
Among others, Brazil, India and Mexico have cut their policy rates, while China has implemented various monetary easing policies in recent months.
In addition to reducing reserve requirements for financial institutions as a way of injecting liquidity into the 29Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2019 Chapter I market, in November the Bank of China lowered its “reverse repo” rate, i.e. the rate it charges banks for short-term liquidity, from 2.55% to 2.5%.
While this is a small reduction, it marks the beginning of what is expected to be a cycle of further cuts to this rate.
In addition, as a way of reducing borrowing costs for companies and thus reactivating the economy, it also lowered the one-year “loan prime rate”.
This serves as a benchmark for the rates at which banks lend to companies, and it was cut in August, September and November.
Overall, out of a total of 20 monitored central banks, including those of the world’s largest economies, 24 policy rate rises were seen in 2018 (and only 5 cuts), while in 2019 the trend has been the opposite, with 28 rate cuts (and 3 increases) up to September (see figure I.8).
In addition to the policy efforts made by central banks, some announcements have been made by authorities regarding fiscal injections to stimulate economies.
This is taking place as part of a renewed debate on the more active role that fiscal policy should play at a time when the effectiveness of looser monetary policies is reaching its limit in several economies.
Liquidity was driven by the United States (whose liquidity expanded by 4.1% in the second quarter of 2019), with the dollar accounting for 75% of global liquidity in 2019.
However, euro liquidity, which accounted for close to 25% of the global total, grew by just 0.7%.
The liquidity indicator was obtained by converting debt denominated in euros and yen to United States dollars, using the average exchange rate for the relevant quarter, weighted by the size of debt denominated in dollars, euros and yen.
Trends in dollar-denominated liquidity can be attributed to the recovery of the United States banking sector, reflecting the solid performance of that country’s economy, currently in the longest growth run in its history.
In the second quarter of 2019, the profitability (measured as return on equity) of all insured depository institutions in the United States stood at 12%, a record for the banking industry as a whole in more than 15 years.
Similarly, the growth rate of assets —which tends to track growth in lending— reached 4.2%, the highest rate since 2015.
The expansion of bank credit has been severely limited by financial disintermediation because of the role that non-bank financial institutions (including mutual funds, insurance companies, pension funds and sovereign wealth funds) have assumed in lending.
The estimated total assets of these institutions outweighed those of the banking system in 2018 (US$135 trillion and US$ 127 trillion, respectively) (McKinsey, 2018).
These companies have replaced the banking system in financing through the banking and capital markets.
Global debt continues to rise, hitting a new record The increase in global liquidity has gone hand in hand with an increase in global debt, which continues to climb, reaching a record US$ 251 trillion in the second half of 2019.
This is equivalent to 320% of global GDP, suggesting that debt is growing faster than GDP and income.1 Debt is projected to exceed US$ 255 trillion by the end of 2019.
Government and non-financial corporate debt, which together account for 56% of total debt, contributed most to the increase in global debt.
The breakdown of sectoral debt by advanced economies and emerging and developing economies shows that, in advanced economies, debt is concentrated in central government (US$ 52.1 trillion), followed by the financial sector (US$ 49.8 trillion) and the non-financial corporate sector (US$ 43.2 trillion), representing 29%, 27.7% and 24.1% of total debt in the second quarter of 2019.
Finland, France and Japan are among the developed countries that have seen the steepest increase.
A significant share of debt issues by emerging economies come from State enterprises.
According to the Institute of International Finance (IIF) (2019), 50% of the debt of non-financial corporations in emerging and developing economies was issued by State-owned enterprises.
This poses major challenges for fiscal policy and limits the space for deploying countercyclical fiscal policies in a context of low growth.
The financial sector outside the United States has accumulated dollar-denominated debt in excess of US$ 15 trillion.
These institutions are usually financed through short-term instruments and are therefore vulnerable to changes in risk perceptions.
However, they do not have access to a lender of last resort to provide emergency financing in the event of a credit squeeze.
The debt stock denominated in foreign currency accumulated by the non-bank sector outside the United States, the eurozone and Japan is estimated at 19% of global GDP.
At the subregional level, the GDP share of foreign-currency debt is similar in Africa and the Middle East (19%), Asia (18%), Latin America (22%) and emerging Europe (21%).
A regional comparison shows that Asia has the highest debt-to-GDP ratio and that its debt has increased (from 261.8% to 267.1% of GDP between 2018 and 2019), on the back of household and government debt, which rose from 47.3% to 49.7% of GDP and from 50% to 52.7% of GDP, respectively, over the same period.
The most indebted Asian economies include Hong Kong (Special Administrative Region of China), Singapore, the Republic of Korea and China, with figures of 477.2%, 470%, 320.3% and 303.9%, respectively, of GDP in the second quarter of 2019 (see table II.1).
First, in a low-growth context —China posted its lowest growth rate in more than three decades in 2019, the third quarter being the weakest of the year— bond market defaults began to rise sharply in the first quarter of 2018 and this continued into 2019.
Similarly, the impact of low growth on liquidity is reflected in the performance of the financial system.
The second risk factor for China is the rebound in 2019 of the shadow banking sector owing to the slowdown in economic growth, after it had declined in 2018.
This sector accounted for 45% of bank loans in the second quarter of 2019 and 39% in the third quarter.
Data for selected Latin American countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico) show that Chile and Brazil have the highest debt-to-GDP ratios, with debt amounting to 224.2.1% and 199.9% of GDP, respectively, in the second quarter of 2019 compared with 208.4% and 195.4% in the prior-year quarter.
Chile is second only to China in terms of indebtedness among developing countries.
Brazil’s debt levels are largely due to government debt (88% of GDP in 2019), while Chile’s are attributable mainly to the non-financial corporate sector (101% of GDP in 2019).
The largest issuers of debt in Chile are the natural resources (copper and nitrates) and aviation sectors.
The breakdown of debt by currency (foreign or local) shows that just over 30% of non-financial corporate sector debt in Chile is issued in foreign currency (United States dollars), while the bulk of Brazil’s government debt (96%) is denominated in reais.
As in Brazil, government debt in other Latin American countries is denominated largely in local currency: this is the case in Chile (87.4%), Colombia (77.8%) and Mexico (82.7%).
This pertains essentially to government bonds (US$ 16 trillion) and, to a lesser extent, corporate bonds (US$ 1 trillion).
In a breakdown of bonds by yield, recent estimates for August 2019 show that negative-yielding bonds account for 35% of government bonds (20% of global GDP) (see figure II.4).
The breakdown by country and region shows that the largest holdings of negative-yielding bonds occur in Japan and Europe (including Sweden, Finland, Germany and the United Kingdom).
In the United States, while yields have declined, they remain positive (see table II.2).
For regulatory reasons, pension funds must ensure that their asset portfolios contain a certain proportion of liquid and safe assets, such as government bonds, that are less susceptible to market fluctuations.
A 2018 worldwide study of public pension funds covering the period 2008–2016 found that domestic government bonds represented, on average, 28% of their total assets (Hentov and others, 2018, p. 5).
According to data from the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), the asset value and investment rate of return of pension funds declined in 2018, particularly in countries with negative yield government bonds (see table II.2).
To prevent a mismatch in their balance sheets, some pension funds have been compelled to invest in securities that offer higher returns and therefore carry higher risk, including junk bonds.
The downturn has led some of these traditionally conservative investors to assume a higher risk profile.
One alternative is to invest in government bonds with longer terms to maturity to avoid loss of capital upon maturity.
There is a positive correlation between the term of a bond and its risk, as the longer the term to maturity, the greater the impact of an interest rate change.
Because yield-seeking through bond portfolio diversification and lengthening evens out yields for any type and quality of bond, this tactic can lead to risk underestimation.
Furthermore, the value of higher-risk and longer-term bonds is especially sensitive to changes in interest rates and therefore carries a greater risk of potential capital loss.
Low interest rates and negative yield also have a negative effect on banks’ profitability, as seen in the eurozone.
A representative sample of the 50 largest European banks showed that return on equity (ROE) (measured as post-tax profit to average total equity) and the cost of equity (calculated as the ratio between post-tax profits and average capital) stood at 6.6% and 8.5%, respectively in 2017, compared with 7.2% and 8% in 2018 (see figure II.5).
The increase in profitability is not attributable to better banking performance but to lower litigation costs, reduced loan loss provisions and lower taxes.
The 25% of banks at one extreme of the sample showed ROE of at least 8%, while the 25% at the other extreme achieved ROE of less than 3%.
Similarly, over 20% of European banks surveyed estimate their cost of equity to be above 10%, while around 10% of them estimate it at below 8% (de Guindos, 2019).
The situation in European banks raises concerns with regard to financial stability.
For one, the gap between returns and cost of equity limits the generation of capital —and, consequently, of reserves to cope with unexpected shocks— as well as the ability to create credit.
These factors are important in a context of low growth, such as that now prevailing in the eurozone.
For another, banks may have incentives to venture into territory of greater risk which, given today’s interconnectedness, may lead to potential systemic risks.
Global monetary and fiscal policy implications There are a number of vulnerabilities in the global financial system and its current operating rationale significantly limits the scope and impact of countercyclical fiscal and monetary policies.
First, a large segment of financial intermediation (the financial system outside the United States and the non-banking financial sector operating outside the United States, the eurozone and Japan) depends on short-term financing, which can fluctuate in response to shifts in risk appetite and market perceptions.
Second, the growing importance of the non-bank financial sector in financing in the most developed countries limits the depth and extent of financial intermediation in the banking sector.
At the same time, global debt has built up to record levels, driven in part by the low interest rates of major central banks.
The increase has occurred across all sectors (households, non-financial corporate sector, government, and non-financial sector), with a particularly large rise in government debt in developed countries and in the non-financial corporate sector in developing countries.
Even so, there is a significant share of State-owned enterprise debt in non-financial corporate sector debt in emerging economies and Latin America.
Mounting public sector debt has placed considerable constraints on countercyclical fiscal policymaking.
Moreover, the fact that a significant part of global debt in emerging economies, as well as in Latin America, is denominated in foreign currency means that changes in monetary policies elsewhere in the world can have major impacts (such as a mismatching effect) on the balance sheets of financial agents and their ability to service debt.
Quantitative easing policies have considerably narrowed the interest rate spectrum and driven government bond yields into negative territory in several eurozone countries.
This has eroded the profitability of the non-bank financial sector (including pension funds) and commercial banking, resulting in more aggressive —and riskier— financial strategies.
A particular case in point is the demand for higher-risk, longer-maturity bonds, fuelled by negative rates of return on government securities, which has pushed up the prices and lowered the yield of these riskier bonds.
Yields have thus become more homogeneous and are failing to accurately reflect the risk profile of the respective bonds.
In addition, the riskiest and longest-term bonds are precisely the most sensitive to changes in interest rates.
On the one hand, the deficit on the income account widened to 3.3% of GDP in 2019, with lower income from direct investments abroad, in the case of Brazil, and higher interest payments, associated with greater levels of indebtedness in several of the region’s economies.
In addition, although the surplus on the goods trade balance and the deficit on the services trade balance have remained constant at 0.4% and 1.0% of GDP, respectively, these are the result of contractions in both exports and imports, amid weakening external demand and domestic activity.
Meanwhile, steadily rising remittances from emigrants, which in 2019 broadened the transfers surplus to 1.8% of GDP, have helped to partially offset the worsening balance on the income account.1 This regional panorama is the outcome of uneven trends from one country to another.
Of 19 Latin American countries, the current account balance improved in nominal terms in 11 and worsened in 8; however, all the countries faced the adverse effects of global slowdown (declines in global trade and in commodity prices), added, in some cases, to difficult domestic conditions.
Among the countries where the current account balance improved are Argentina and Nicaragua, where the trade balance adjusted owing to a deterioration in domestic absorption, with a considerable contraction in import volumes.
However, in another group of countries, mainly the exporters of raw 1 The rest of the compensation effect comes from marginal improvements (decimals) in the goods and services balances. 46 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter III materials, exports have contracted and the current account deficit has worsened.
Amid a slowdown in external and domestic demand, both exports and imports of goods contracted in 2019, leaving the trade surplus relatively stable In 2019 the surplus on Latin America’s goods trade account remained at the same level as in 2018 (0.4% of GDP).
However, this overall trend masks very different patterns in the region’s largest economies.
On the one hand, developments in Brazil and in the hydrocarbon- and mineral-exporting countries (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Colombia, Peru and Plurinational State of Bolivia) had the effect of worsening the regional trade surplus, because the fall in their exports eroded the trade balance.
On the other hand, the improvement of the goods trade balances of Argentina, Mexico and, to a lesser degree, Central America operated in the other direction.
In the case of Argentina, the improvement in the balance reflected a fall in imports, while in Mexico and Central America it was the result of stronger exports.
The fall in commodity prices mentioned in chapter I (see table I.1) has translated into lower export prices (-2.8%) for most of the region’s net exporters of commodities (see figure III.2).
The worst affected countries have been the exporters of hydrocarbons and mining products, whose export prices have dropped by 7% and 5%, respectively, while exporters of agro-industrial products have seen a 3% fall in these prices.
By volume, the region overall showed a slight rise in exports (0.6%), although not evenly among the subregions.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia has seen a decrease in natural gas production since 2014; this trend steepened in the last quarter of 2018 and into 2019, with a year-on-year drop of 22% in the first seven months. 3 Mexico became established as the largest trading partner of the United States in 2019.
As a result of the decline in export prices for energy products, industrial minerals (copper, zinc, tin and lead) and some key agricultural products (coffee, maize, soybean and soybean products), Latin America’s terms of trade are expected to fall by 1.4%, thereby reversing the recovery seen in the two preceding years.
The drop in commodity prices has particularly hurt those economies whose non-tax income relies on these products.
In some countries, the deterioration in the terms of trade has been mitigated by lower import prices, because of drops in the prices of main inputs (oil and oil products, natural gas, steel and other industrial inputs).
By country grouping, the worst affected by the terms-of-trade downturn are the hydrocarbon exporters (-5.0%), owing to price falls of 11.5% for oil and 15% for natural gas, and the exporters of mining products (-3.2%), as the worsening external conditions have hit the prices of industrial metals.
The evolution of the terms of trade has been neutral at 0.1% in the countries that export agro-industrial products and in the Central American economies, as in both cases import and export prices fell to an equivalent extent.
Exports of services were down (by 0.6%), amid slowing global economic activity.
Although revenue from inbound tourism has risen, this has been offset by a fall in exports of other services.
The figures available to the second quarter show that the lacklustre growth in international trade was reflected in zero growth (0%) in transport services in Panama, including Canal-related services.
According to figures available to the second quarter of 2019, transport-related services (freight and insurance) were down by 2%, reflecting the fall in goods imports as regional activity slackened.
Spending on outbound tourism was down (by 4%), owing to uncertainty over the growth in the larger economies (Brazil, Mexico and Argentina).
Imports of other services also contracted (by 5%), mainly reflecting weak domestic activity in Argentina (where this category of imports shrank by 32% in the first half of 2019).
Generally speaking, profit remittances abroad declined in the case of the commodity-exporting countries, especially the exporters of mining products and hydrocarbons, reflecting lower profits of foreign firms in those countries as a result of the drop in commodity prices.
In some cases, however, the effect of increased interest payments has been stronger, owing to the high indebtedness of several economies in the region.
This took the surplus on the transfers account to its highest level in relation to GDP since the global financial crisis of 2008, as well as a record in absolute dollar terms (around US$ 93.7 billion).
This reflects the consolidation of transfers as the main source of income on the current account, and is also a warning sign of the region’s growing vulnerability to potential restrictive immigration policies in the main economies of origin of these flows.
The main component, flows of migrant remittances, rose by 9% in nominal terms in the main receiving countries, partly as a result of continued economic growth in the emitting economies (mainly the United States and Spain), although this flow has begun to show signs of slowing in more recent months, as these economies lose momentum.
According to data available for 2019, remittances to Mexico —the region’s largest recipient with over a third of all inflows— climbed by 9% in nominal terms over the year.
If Argentina is included, however, the region’s total net inflows were US$ 71 billion, a fall of 7% with respect to the first half of 2018.
In the first half of 2019, net FDI flows were down by some US$ 13 billion, with no significant variation if Argentina is included.
Net portfolio flows fell slightly (by US$ 500 million), a figure that does change drastically when Argentina is included, in which case the net contraction in these flows is US$ 16.7 billion in relation to the prior-year period.
Lastly, other investment flows were the only category to show an increase, of almost US$ 24 billion (the amount is similar when Argentina is included), owing both to lower asset formation (mainly loans and deposits) abroad and to higher foreign borrowing.
Bond issues on international markets have begun to rise in a context of low international interest rates as of the second quarter of 2019 Debt issues on international financial markets by economies of the region expanded 20% year-on-year in the first 10 months of 2019, totalling US$ 103 billion.
Different dynamics were seen across the various countries (see figure III.6), notably in El Salvador, Guatemala and Jamaica, which returned to the markets with sovereign bond issues in 2019 after an absence in 2018. 12 In the cases of Brazil and Chile the information includes up to the third quarter of 2019.
These figures do not include data for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Nicaragua or the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as no information is available for the second quarter of 2019 for these countries.
Panama, Peru and Paraguay also increased their debt issuance, all by over 100%, generally in the form of sovereign and quasi-sovereign bonds.
Countries whose debt issues fell in the January–October period in 2019 included in particular Argentina, where issues shrank by 88% year-on-year, and in August the deepening of the crisis virtually closed the country’s access to international debt markets.
By sector, the overall 20% rise in debt issues reflects an increase of 83% in those by non-bank private firms (the main sector, with 42% of total issues) and growth of 28% in issues by bank entities.
Conversely, sovereign bond issues were down by 0.3%, owing to a high basis for comparison in 2018, as a result of a number of issues —totalling US$ 9 billion— by Argentina early that year.
Quasi-sovereign bond issues were down by 13%, reflecting lower issues by Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, while supranational issues have fallen 30% in the first 10 months of the year.
A trend to watch in the debt market in 2019 is the ground being gained by green bonds.
Between January and October, green bond issues came to US$ 4.623 billion, representing 4.5% of all issues in this period.
These bonds, intended to finance environment-related projects, reflect six issues made in Brazil, Peru and Chile (the first country to issue green sovereign bonds).
This is evidence of stronger orientation towards climate-related issues and testifies to an interest in investing in projects that emphasize environmental stewardship.
Lastly, a breakdown of bond issues by currency shows a marked preference for the United States dollar.
Of all issues made between January and October 2019, in dollar equivalent, 85% —almost US$ 87.178 billion— were denominated in dollars.
The rest was denominated mainly in euros (6% of total issues, equivalent to US$ 6.645 billion).
Notable were issues made in Peruvian soles, for a total of US$ 3.640 billion (4% of the total issued), including sovereign and corporate bonds, and other small issues made in Brazilian reais and Colombian pesos, which help to reduce exposure to exchange-rate risk.
In keeping with the high levels of financial volatility seen in May and August 2019, the region’s sovereign risk also showed large rises in those months, but eased thereafter In December 2018 the region’s sovereign risk stood at 568 basis points, the highest level since early 2016, as measured by the Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBIG) for Latin America.
It has trended down in the course of 2019, with interruptions during episodes when higher uncertainty and financial volatility at the global level had an impact on the index —as occurred in the months of May and August (see figure III.7).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela showed the highest country risk at the end of October, at over 15,000 basis points, followed by Argentina, with an index at around 2,200 basis points in the August–October quarter, reflecting the uncertainly associated with the country’s political scenario and ability to meet its international payment obligations.
A number of countries, including the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Chile, have seen their risk rating deteriorate in the past few weeks as a result of political and social tensions, while Ecuador’s risk rating surged in November after the country’s Congress failed to pass tax reform act.
The exceptions to this predominant trend were Colombia and Guatemala (see figure IV.1).
In the first half of the year, Latin America’s GDP stagnated, with zero growth, down from 1.34% in the prior-year period.
In terms of activity, the slowdown is attributable to more sectors shrinking —manufacturing, construction and commerce— adding to the ongoing decline in mining over recent years.
In subregional terms, both South America and Mexico and Central America show clear declines in growth rates in the early quarters of 2019 compared with the average growth rate of the prior year, despite the dissimilar characteristics of these economies (see figure IV.2).
While the economies of South America specialize in producing commodities —particularly oil, minerals and foodstuffs— those of Mexico and Central America are mainly tied to the pace of growth in the United States.
In the second quarter of 2019, the economies of South America contracted on average by 0.26%, down from the 1% growth of the previous year.
In the same period, the economies of Central America grew at a rate of 2.8%, one and a half percentage points less than in the second quarter of 2018.
This deterioration is expected to continue in the second half of the year, given the uncertainty generated by events such as the closure of the local sovereign debt market, the dollarization of portfolios and the outflow of dollar deposits from banks, which have led to the adoption of exchange control measures and rescheduling of public debt.
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, lower hydrocarbon production (a 23% fall in the case of natural gas) is behind the sharp slowdown in growth in the first half of the year (3.1%).
In Brazil, although activity —particularly investment— grew slightly more than expected (1% annually) in the second quarter, consumption levels remain low.
Moreover, the social security and structural reforms adopted are not expected to have a sufficient impact to boost growth in the second half of the year.
In Chile, the decline in exports owing to lower agricultural and mining output and a weakening of domestic demand set the tone of the growth in the first half of 2019 (1.7%).
In the second half of the year, economic activity is expected to slow as a result of the effects on the commerce and the transport sectors of the various demonstrations seen over the last quarter.
Meanwhile, Colombia’s economy expanded by 3% in the first half of the year, with good performance in each of the components of expenditure, building on the expansion recorded in the year-earlier period.
In Ecuador, the contraction in domestic demand was offset by an increase in the contribution of net exports, allowing for slight growth of 0.4% in the first half of the year.
As in other countries in the region, there were protests in Ecuador over social discontent, which impacted economic activity for the rest of the year.
Paraguay faced adverse climatic factors that affected its agricultural output 59Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2019 Chapter IV (soybean), construction and power generation and resulted in an economic contraction of 2.6% in the first half of 2019, which is expected to be offset in the second half of the year.
In Peru, GDP growth slackened to 1.8% in the first half of the year, well below the 4% seen in 2018.
This slowdown in economic activity is explained mainly by the impact of passing events that affected primary production.
Once the effects dissipate, the forecast higher public spending should allow for a moderate acceleration in the second half of the year.
In Uruguay, activity contracted slightly in the first half of the year (-0.1%) —partly owing to the more adverse environment linked to trade relations with Argentina and Brazil— mainly affecting industry and commerce.
Lastly, the GDP of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela shrank by 26.8% in the first quarter, with declines in all sectors of activity.
In Central America, growth rates in Costa Rica and Honduras fell in the first two quarters of the year, owing to slower consumption growth and a drop in investment.
In the Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Guatemala, this was the result of a smaller rise in net exports and a weakening of domestic demand.
In contrast, Guatemala and Panama maintained growth rates similar to those of 2018.
In Guatemala this was the result of private consumption continuing to contribute to growth, while in Panama the construction, transport and financial services sectors all played a part.
Lastly, in Mexico, GDP contracted by 0.8% in the second quarter, hit by a sharp drop in investment and, to a lesser extent, in consumption.
The low rate of public budget execution and greater uncertainty caused by trade tensions have affected the country’s performance.
During the last quarter of 2019, social demands have led to demonstrations in a number of economies in the region, especially in South America.
While the size and repercussions of these protests vary from country to country, there is no doubt that they could affect the path of economic activity in the short term.
For almost a decade, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) has put equality at the centre of development.
Now, it is once more apparent that urgent progress is needed to build welfare States, based on rights and equality, that give citizens access to comprehensive and universal systems of social protection and to essential public goods, such as quality health and education, housing and transport.
The stagnation of regional GDP is attributable to marked declines in all components of domestic demand In terms of domestic demand, there was a significant reduction in inventories, which have been shrinking since the first quarter, at faster rates higher than in previous years.
In the first half of 2019, the slump in inventories shaved half a percentage point off GDP growth.
The downturn in inventories is difficult to explain, but it may be reasonably assumed that it reflects producers’ and importers’ reaction to greater global uncertainty caused by heightened trade tensions and repeated cuts to growth forecasts, meaning that they had potentially accumulated surplus stock based on outlooks that proved overoptimistic compared to actual demand.
This result is attributed to the drop in investments, both in construction and in machinery and equipment.
The downturn in public consumption has come at a time when the governments 60 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter IV of the region are tending towards fiscal adjustment, with a primary focus on reining in fiscal accounts rather than on boosting GDP growth through fiscal policy.
While public consumption contributed half a percentage point to growth in previous years, in the second quarter of this year it shaved a fifth of a point off growth (see figure IV.3).
Available indicators and the performance of the related fundamentals both indicate that this path will be maintained.
In the retail trade, sales of durable and non-durable consumer goods have continued to decline.
Thus, both retail (linked to consumption) and wholesale (partly linked to investment) show slowing growth.
The data for the most recent moving quarters show a deterioration in the employment market.
Although employment has risen and the unemployment rate has fallen slightly, wage employment creation declined, and own-account work increased.
The result has been a worsening of employment quality and a drop in average income.
In addition, the structure of employment has changed, with jobs in the most productive sectors shifting to the least productive sectors.
Other factors that may have affected consumption are the pattern in income owing to worsening terms of trade, the decrease in domestic credit and the rise in the cost of imported goods, as a result of currency depreciation in a number of countries.
With respect to foreign trade in goods and services, unlike in 2017 and 2018, net exports contributed positively to GDP growth in the first half of 2019.
There was also a strong upturn in agriculture in the second quarter, an isolated event caused by the low level of the comparable second quarter of 2018 in Argentina, when the sector shrank by 31% owing to drought (see figure IV.5).
This negative performance stems primarily from the unbroken slumps in mining in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Mexico, which have lasted for 22 and 21 quarters, respectively.
Added to this are the intermittent declines seen in the rest of the mining countries in the region, and in Argentina, Chile and Peru in recent quarters.
By contrast, 11 other economies saw their annualized inflation rate rise; but only Barbados and Saint Kitts and Nevis recorded increases of more than 1.2 percentage points. 1 The regional and subregional averages exclude Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Haiti, because they consistently have much higher inflation than the rest of the economies in the region.
In Central America and Mexico, the year-on-year rate fell from 4.2% to 2.7% in the same period, while in the non-Spanish-speaking Caribbean economies it came down from 3.0% to 2.5%.
Among countries not included in the regional and subregional averages (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Haiti), inflation ticked up in two cases: in Argentina, the rate increased from 45.5% in October 2018 to 49.7% twelve months later; and, in Haiti, it rose from 15.1% to 19.5% in the same period.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, however, year-on-year inflation eased in the first 10 months of 2019, but it was still 39,113.8% in September.
The inflation dynamic shifted down from April 2019 onwards For the purposes of analysis, April marks a clear turning point the path of inflation in 2019.
As figure V.1 shows, monthly inflation, at both the regional and subregional levels, rose between December 2018 and April 2019 but has fallen since.
In April 2019, the regional year-on-year inflation rate was 3.6%, with increases recorded in 20 countries.
Since then, the region’s annualized inflation rate has dropped by 1.1 percentage points, with lower rates in 21 countries.
An intensification of the widespread slowdown in economic activity, in conjunction with differences in the dynamics of exchange rates and energy prices, help explain the heterogeneous behaviour of inflation during the year.
Rep. of) Central America and Mexico excluding Haiti 67Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2019 Chapter V For most of the region’s economies, inflation as of October 2019 is at historically low levels In October 2019, 21 economies had annual inflation rates of less than 3%, four more than a year earlier.
This is the largest number of countries with inflation rates this low in the region since the 24 recorded in 2009 (see figure V.2 below).
The slackening pace of inflation observed in 2019 to date, and its low levels in most countries of the region, provide revealing and useful data.
While they indicate the severity of the slowdown in regional economic activity, they have also made it possible to adopt expansionary monetary policies.
The highest and fastest rising inflation rate was recorded in the food category, while the pace slackened among services Year-on-year inflation in the food products group increased from 2.8% in October 2018 to 3.3% in October 2019, while tradable goods inflation rose from 2.5% to 2.7% in the same period.
Rep. of) Food product inflation Goods inflation Core inflation Services inflation As in the case of the general index, the various components of the CPI diverged during the course of 2019, although rates have generally tended to decline since April.
Between December 2018 and April 2019, food product inflation increased by 1.4 percentage points, before dropping back 1.3 points between April and October.
Tradable goods inflation rose by 1 percentage point between December 2018 and April 2019, before declining by 1 percentage point between then and the following October.
Services inflation rose by 0.2 percentage points between December 2018 and April 2019, and then fell by 1.2 points between May and October.
The composition of employment by occupational category has worsened as a result of weak wage employment creation, especially where formal employment is concerned, and a rise in hourly underemployment and informality.
At the same time, national unemployment rates have risen moderately in most of the countries, with the regional total rising from 8.0% to 8.2%, which comes on top of an increase of 1.8 percentage points since 2014.
At the same time, real wages for those in registered employment are slightly higher overall, although they have not risen everywhere.
The employment rate has risen, but unemployment has not fallen After falling sharply up to 2016, the employment rate gradually began to recover from 2017.
However, as will be seen later, this increase in the employed proportion of the working age population has not been driven by any revitalization of the demand for labour.
Rather, it reflects the need of many households to generate money, even if it is in poor-quality occupations.
The increase in the employment rate has thus been paralleled by a roughly proportionate rise in the participation rate, from 62.4% to an estimated 62.6%.1 At the regional level, therefore, the slight increase in employment has not produced a fall in the unemployment rate, which has instead gone up from 8.0% to 8.2%.
The predominant pattern in the region has been of a small increase in unemployment, with the median rate for 18 countries up by 0.4 percentage points, reflecting a rise in 13 countries, a decrease in 4 and almost no change (+/- 0.1 percentage point) in 1 (see table A1.19 in the statistical annex).
The sharpest increases in the unemployment rate have been in Costa Rica and Argentina (first half), while unemployment has fallen in three Caribbean countries (the Bahamas, Belize and Jamaica) and Brazil.
With the moderate increase in the unemployment rate and the expansion of the labour force, it is estimated that the number of unemployed in Latin America and the Caribbean must have risen by around 1 million, bringing the total number of people seeking work in the region to 25.2 million.
Thus, the absolute number of unemployed (although not the unemployment rate) has reached a new high.
Data for a small group of countries that have quarterly information available indicate that unemployment held fairly steady during the first two quarters of the year, but with a rising trend that accelerated in the third quarter (see figure VI.1). 1 See tables A1.18 and A1.20 of the statistical annex for the evolution of participation and employment.
As figure VI.2 shows for the group of 17 countries, the female labour market participation rate at the national level increased sharply in the first three quarters of 2019, while the male rate contracted.
In recent years and decades, the national institutions responsible for measuring the labour market have extended the coverage of their measurements.
Of the countries in the region that carry them out regularly, only Argentina does not include rural areas.
Accordingly, this reason for excluding open unemployment from the analysis for the national total no longer applies.
The second reason for excluding open unemployment in rural areas from the measurement was more structural in nature and more complex.
The countries of the region can be differentiated by the structure of their labour markets: in countries with a large proportion of the population living in rural areas and a high proportion of the employed working in the agricultural sector, there is a marked difference between urban and rural labour markets.
Specifically, the latter are determined in these countries by the production dynamics of the agricultural sector, where labour demand tends to be highly seasonal.
Thus, for example, in countries such as Guatemala and Peru, the rural open unemployment rate averaged 1.3% and 0.8%, respectively, in 2018.
This situation tends to change with urbanization and the diversification of the rural production structure.
Urban labour markets are becoming increasingly important as a source of income because of internal migration, but these trends also affect people who remain in rural areas, for various reasons.
In more urbanized countries, consequently, the gap between urban and rural unemployment rates is tending to narrow.
In Chile, for example, this rate averaged 7.3% in urban areas and 4.6% in rural areas in 2018.
The integration of urban and rural labour markets may be even stronger in countries with a high population density: the unemployment rate was actually higher in rural areas of El Salvador than in urban areas in 2018 (6.9% and 6.1%, respectively).
The historical characteristics of rural labour markets still apply in several countries of the region, where open unemployment rates are a weak indicator of the situation in these markets.
However, in view of increasing integration between urban and rural labour markets and the fact that approximately 80% of the region’s population live in urban areas (and these dominate national figures), this and future editions of the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean will present national unemployment rates.
The regional open unemployment rate for the region as a whole in 2019 is estimated at 8.2% (9.3% for urban areas and 2.8% for rural areas).
In many cases, much of the increase in women’s employment has occurred in low-quality jobs.
For example, women’s hourly underemployment in Brazil was up by 0.7 percentage points on average in the first three quarters of 2019 relative to the year-earlier period (the increase for men was 0.3 percentage points).
In Mexico, another country that has registered a large increase in female employment, 57.5% of new jobs for women consisted of own-account work or unpaid family work, whereas the figure for men was only 16.5%.
In addition, both the weighted average and the median change in unemployment rates at the national level show the rate rising by more for women than for men, thereby widening the gap between the two sexes.
A further deterioration in the composition of employment The increase in the employment rate has not been the result of a significant upturn in demand for labour.
For the seventh year running, wage employment, whose creation reflects this demand, has expanded by less than own-account work, most of which reflects the earning needs of lower-income households.
As a weighted average of the countries with information available, 3 wage employment increased by 1.5% between the first three quarters of 2018 and the same period in 2019, while own-account work grew by 3.0%.
The characteristics of these activities generally differ from those of own-account work, but suitable measurement and labour and social regulation instruments have not yet been developed.
Given that the vast majority of domestic workers are women, it may be inferred that some of the expansion in the female employment rate reflects an increase in employment in this category.
Lastly, unpaid family work has contracted in most of the countries, which may be attributed to a decline in employment in the agricultural sector (see figure VI.3).
Employment in the agricultural sector has declined in 9 of the 12 countries for which information is available, the only exceptions being Brazil (with a very small increase of 0.3%), Ecuador and Peru.
This continues the recent trend, since agricultural employment was already falling by 0.4% annually between 2013 and 2018.
This evolution is significant, given that employment in this sector has historically behaved countercyclically in Latin America and the Caribbean, and would thus be expected to increase in the current phase of low growth and weak generation of non-agricultural employment.
Although there is no evidence for the cause of this change in trend, the situation may indicate that the campesino economy, which had been at the core of the countercyclical behaviour mentioned, no longer has the same capacity to partially offset weak non-agricultural job creation.
This upturn has slackened in 2019, as indicated by the decline in the weighted average and stagnation in the median of the countries’ manufacturing employment growth rates.
A median rate of just over 1% shows that the progress with employment quality achieved between the mid-2000s and the mid-2010s as a result of the generation of new registered jobs and the formalization of existing informal jobs has now come to a standstill (see figure VI.4).
The median result is due to a mixed evolution at the country level.
However, growth in Chile, Mexico and Peru, at rates exceeding 2%, is still above the regional median.
By contrast, growth in this type of employment has picked up slightly in Brazil, El Salvador and Uruguay, albeit at still-modest rates.
Comparing the growth of registered wage employment with that of overall wage employment reveals two situations.
In Chile, Mexico and Peru, registered employment is increasing by more than total wage employment, indicating that formalization policies in these countries are still having some success.
As may be seen in figure VI.5, hourly underemployment increased in 8 of 11 countries with data available.
It held steady in two countries (+/- 0.1 percentage points) and fell in only one.7 Median hourly underemployment in these countries increased by 1.0 percentage point. 7 The data in figure VI.5 that show a reduction in hourly underemployment in Peru are for Metropolitan Lima.
Overall urban underemployment (hourly and income underemployment) in Peru increased by 1.0 percentage point between the periods October 2017 to September 2018 and October 2018 to September 2019.
As can be seen in figure VI.6, this indicator of low-quality employment has risen in 7 of 11 countries with information on labour informality, held steady in 2 and fallen in another 2.
The median rate of informal employment in these countries has increased by 0.4 percentage points.
The case of Mexico is interesting, as there a slight drop in informal employment has coincided with an increase in the informal sector’s share of employment, something that is explained by weak economic growth.
Real wages for those in registered employment have increased slightly overall Average real wages for those in registered employment have continued to increase slightly in most cases.
In Argentina, quickening inflation has resulted in a substantial decline, and in Brazil the average real wage for those in registered employment has fallen slightly, despite lower inflation (see figure VI.7).
In Mexico, meanwhile, the average real wage for those in registered employment has shown the biggest rise since 2002, in part due to a substantial hike in the minimum wage.
This rise (12.0% in real terms between January–October 2018 and January–October 2019) is an exception in a year when the prevailing policy in the region’s countries has been to raise minimum wages only just above inflation.
Thus, the median year-on-year increase calculated for the countries in the first three quarters of the year was only 0.8%.
This maintained the dominant pattern of 2018, when the median increase in real minimum wages was also 0.8%.
The trend that had prevailed until then was thus interrupted in those two years: between 2005 and 2015, these medians averaged 2.3% and the minimum wage increased by more than the average wage overall (see figure VI.8).
Although the employment rate has increased in 2019, indicators such as the composition of employment by occupational category, registered employment, hourly underemployment and informality show a clear deterioration or slackening relative to previous advances.
These data show that the increase in employment has been due more to the earnings needs of households than to dynamic labour demand.
The open unemployment rate has also increased in most of the countries.
Small increases in average real wages for those in registered employment have been the norm, although not universally.
In addition, the deterioration in the composition of employment has meant that these workers account for a smaller proportion of all those employed.
Measured as a weighted regional average, it is estimated that the unemployment rate could rise slightly from its 2019 level, reaching around 8.4%.
Fiscal policy Fiscal policy management continues to prioritize deficit reduction, but has become more complex owing to the current regional context The latest projections for end-2019 see fiscal consolidation continuing in Latin America.
As shown in figure VII.1, the primary balance of the central governments of the region —as a proxy for the fiscal effort— is expected to average -0.2% of GDP at year-end, compared to -0.4% in 2018.
The narrowing of the deficit reflects the contraction of primary expenditure (total expenditure excluding interest payments), which in 2019 is forecast to reach 18.3% of GDP, compared to the year-earlier figure of 18.5%.
Total revenues, on the other hand, are likely to remain stable relative to GDP around the previous year’s level of 18.1%.
However, revenues could shrink owing to the progressive deceleration —and in some cases outright contraction— of the tax intake seen over the course of the year, compounded by the impact of falling prices among non-renewable natural resources, particularly in the second half-year.
Total expenditure is expected to decrease by less than primary expenditure, owing to higher interest payments, given rising levels of public indebtedness.
Despite the trend of the primary balance, the overall deficit is expected to narrow slightly to an average of 2.8% of GDP, owing to higher interest payments.
The persistence of large overall deficits of around 3% of GDP has fuelled significant demands for financing via increased public borrowing. 84 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter VII Considering the Latin American subregions, although primary deficit reductions are to some extent synchronized, the other main fiscal indicators are trending differently.
In the countries of Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico, the primary surplus is expected to increase to 0.2% of GDP, two tenths of a percentage point up from the previous year (see figure VII.2).
The narrowing of the average primary balance for the countries in this group mainly reflects lower primary expenditure, which is expected to come in at 16.3% of GDP, as against 16.4% in 2018.
Nonetheless, the expected increase in interest payments could boost total expenditure to 19.0% of GDP in 2019, compared to the previous year’s figure of 18.9%.
Total revenues are also expected to fall slightly to 19.7% of GDP in 2019, compared to the year-earlier 19.8%, reflecting developments in monthly revenues and income obtained from non-renewable natural resources.
Total expenditures, on the other hand, are set to contract for the third consecutive year, owing to a combination of primary expenditure cuts and stability in interest payments.
As a result, the overall deficit is set to narrow to 3.1% of GDP, from the previous year’s 3.3%.
In the Caribbean, fiscal policy continues to be constrained by measures to reduce the high level of debt.
The primary balance is forecast to remain in surplus at the 2018 level (1.6% of GDP), while the overall balance will be in deficit by 1.1% of GDP, compared with a deficit of 1.2% in 2018 (see figure VII.3).
At the same time, primary expenditure is expected to increase to 25.6% of GDP, up from 25.3% in the previous year.
Total revenues are set to rise by 0.2 GDP points, to 27.2% of GDP.
On the one hand, there is increasing need for active fiscal policies to help revive economic activity.
On the other, pressures are mounting for public spending to address the social demands associated with reducing inequality.
At the same time, however, fiscal space is limited by the structural challenges facing the region’s fiscal policy, including insufficient capacity to mobilize resources for development, weak redistributive muscle, shortcomings in the provision of public goods and services, and a limited institutional framework for countercyclical measures.
Public debt has grown in both South and Central America, and as of June 2019 it stood at around 45% and 41% of GDP, respectively.
Argentina and Brazil have the region’s highest debt-to-GDP ratios, at 80.7% and 78.7% of GDP, respectively.
Meanwhile, the Caribbean countries continue to consolidate a downward trend in their gross public debt, which had dropped from 71.7% of GDP in 2018 to 69% at the end of the first half of 2019 (see figure VII.4).
During this period all the countries of this subregion reduced their debt-to-GDP ratio, with the largest contractions observed in Jamaica (5.9 points of GDP), Grenada (5.2 points of GDP), Guyana (3.7 points of GDP) and Suriname (3.6 points of GDP).
In all these countries the debt-to-GDP ratio is rising, whereas in others, such as Argentina, Mexico, Panama, Nicaragua and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, this ratio is now falling after climbing between 2017 and 2018.
In the case of Argentina, a decline of 5.3 GDP points in gross public debt between the fourth quarter of 2018 and the second quarter of 2019 reflects the trend growth of nominal GDP in a context of high inflation.
Trends between end-2018 and June 2019 have contributed to the continuous rise —by 13.4 percentage points of GDP— in the level of debt in Latin America since 2011, when gross public debt had fallen to a low of 29.8% of GDP (see figure VII.6).
By contrast, the Caribbean countries are holding steady on downward path in gross public debt begun in 2018.
The behaviour of gross public debt over the course of the year has been marked by a rising quarterly trend, particularly in the second half of the year (see figure VII.7).
This partly reflects an acceleration in the execution of public expenditure towards the end of the year, which could generate greater demands for financing since the revenue flow does not pick up in line with expenditure.
Of the 16 countries in this group, only Brazil and Uruguay are expected to see their debt interest payments decline relative to GDP.
The countries likely to record the greatest increases in interest payments are Costa Rica (+0.7 percentage points of GDP), Colombia (+0.5 percentage points), Ecuador (+0.4 points) and Argentina (+0.3 points).
Despite these trends, Brazil, Argentina and Costa Rica remain the three Latin American countries with the highest interest payments, representing 4.7%, 4.0% and 4.2% of their GDP, respectively.
In the Caribbean, interest payments are forecast to decline by a tenth of a percentage point, from 2.8% to 2.7% of GDP between 2018 and 2019.
Suriname (-0.6 percentage points of GDP), Barbados (-0.5 points) and Guyana (-0.3 points) are expected to record the largest reductions.
Public spending holds relatively stable Although, on average, public spending has held relatively stable in the region, a disaggregated analysis shows that containing public outlays remains the main pillar of fiscal consolidation in some of the region’s countries.
As shown in figure VII.9, the projected slight reduction in total public spending in Latin America —which in 2019 is expected to come in at 20.9% of GDP, compared to 21.0% in 2018— is due to the reduction forecast in South American countries.
Total expenditure is set to decrease by over one percentage point of GDP in Argentina and Brazil.
In the latter case, as noted above, this reduction mostly reflects a decrease in interest payments.
As in the previous case, in Latin America as a whole it is expected to edge down from 15.3% of GDP in 2018 to 15.2% in 2019 — owing to a slight reduction in South America to 17.4% of GDP from the previous year’s 17.7%, which was the lowest level since 2014.
This mainly reflects expenditure cuts in Argentina (by more than 1 percentage point of GDP) and in Brazil (by 0.3 points) as a result of cuts in subsidies and other transfers.
Thirdly, capital expenditure is projected to retreat in 2019, both in absolute terms, as noted above, and relative to GDP.
In Latin America as a whole, capital expenditure is expected to represent 3.1% of GDP, its lowest level since 2007 and only slightly above the 2000–2006 average of 2.9% of GDP (see figure VII.10).
In this case, capital expenditures in Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico are set to fall to 3.3% of GDP, compared to 3.5% in 2018 and 3.8% in 2017.
The pattern in the Caribbean differs from the projection for Latin America.
As figure VII.9 shows, total expenditure is expected to rise slightly in 2019 to 28.3% of GDP, compared to the previous year’s 28.2%.
This mainly reflects an expected rise in capital spending to 3.7% of GDP compared to 3.5% in 2018.
Current primary expenditure is also projected to grow on average, but with wide variations between countries: significant increases in the Bahamas, Barbados, Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago, being offset by decreases in Grenada, Saint Lucia and Suriname.
The trend of public expenditure can also be analysed through the real variation of its components.
As shown in figure VII.11, the real year-on-year increase in total central government expenditure in Latin America is expected to be less than 2% on average in 2019.
To curtail the growth of total outgoings in the face of rising interest payments, governments have adopted measures to freeze primary expenditure growth.
This is expected to vary by 0.9% year-on-year, owing mainly to a contraction in capital spending.
The growth of primary current expenditure (comprising operating expenses and transfers, among other items) is expected to slow to 1.8% year-on-year, the lowest rate since 2003.
Over the course of the year, several countries, including Chile and Mexico, announced economic stimulus packages that include measures to boost investment and the social agenda, among other aims.
In Jamaica, the primary surplus target was downgraded from 7% to 6.5% of GDP, in order to increase social spending and invest in infrastructure.
Nonetheless, these types of measures are not expected to become widespread in 2020.
Government intentions, as reflected in draft budgets, do not indicate further growth in public spending.
Similarly, no significant changes are expected in the level of public revenue in Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico (16.5% of GDP), or in South America (around 19.7% of GDP, due to the effect of rounding).
However, this result partly reflects the implementation of a number of tax reforms and measures, as well as an influx of exceptional revenues during the year.
Tax revenues are expected to remain stable at 15.5% of GDP in Latin America as a whole, since on average, tax receipts for the year to August are the same as in the year-earlier period (see table VII.1).
However, different situations are revealed when the countries in each subregion are considered separately.
In South America, the tax burden in Colombia has increased during the year to August, to 7.5% of GDP compared to 7.2% in the year-earlier period.
This is partly due to the changes introduced —particularly with respect to income tax withholding— under the Financing Law of 2018 (Law No. 1943).
By contrast, the tax burden in Uruguay eased, as weaker economic growth generated lower VAT and income tax revenue.
A similar scenario applies in Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico, where the tax burden has remained stable despite a sharp slowdown in the growth of revenue from the main taxes.
In Costa Rica tax revenue increased following implementation of the tax reform passed in 2018.
In Mexico, total revenues increased in the first eight months of the year, owing mainly to a rise in receipts from the special tax on production and services (IEPS) applied to the sale of gasoline and diesel, as the government withdrew its interventions to smooth variations in the price of these goods.
Other revenues (non-tax income, capital income and grants) in Latin America are expected to decrease slightly in 2009 to a level of 2.6% of GDP, compared to 2.7% in the previous year.
As shown in figure VII.13, however, in the year to August the trends varied across countries.
The increase in Colombia is explained by growth in Ecopetrol’s financial surpluses and by the transfer of profits from Banco de la República as from 2019.
The increase in Uruguay is explained by the transfer to the Social Security Trust Fund (FSS) of funds accumulated by the “cincuentones”, together with surpluses generated by the Energy Stabilization Fund.
In Brazil, the reduction is due to the high base of comparison with the previous year, when the country received exceptional revenues related to new contracts signed during the recent round of oil auctions.
In Chile, lower revenues from the National Copper Corporation (CODELCO) reduced the “Other revenues” category.
In Ecuador, revenues related to oil exports were down, and in Mexico oil revenues fell, both for Petróleos Mexicanos (PEMEX) itself and in terms of the revenues received by the federal government.
In the Caribbean, total revenues are expected to continue to grow in 2019, although by less than in 2018.
The increase in total revenues, to 27.2% of GDP compared to the previous year’s 27.0%, reflects the trend of tax revenues.
In the Bahamas, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago, in particular, the tax burden could rise by more than one percentage point (in the latter country boosted by a tax amnesty). 97Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2019 Chapter VII B.
Moreover, lower inflation so far this year provides additional space to implement expansionary policies, although it also reflects the severity of the activity slowdown.
Smaller depreciations and less currency volatility in the region in 2019, compared to the previous year’s experience, also make conditions more conducive to somewhat more aggressive demand stimulus policies.
Nonetheless, the uptick in both variables in the second half of the year may presage additional risks in the future, especially given the uncertainty generated by electoral scenarios and the demonstrations that have been taking place across the region.
Monetary policy rates were lowered in 7 of the 10 economies that use this variable as the main monetary policy instrument, and there were no changes in two others: Colombia and Guatemala (see figure VII.14).
Honduras, in contrast, was the only country where the central bank raised the policy rate, in January 2019, and it has held it stable ever since.
This rate-cutting dynamic intensified in the second half of 2019, since only four central banks had reduced their policy rates in the first six months of the year.
In six of the seven rate-cutting countries, policy rates were lowered more than once; and in seven economies the October 2019 levels are at a five-year low.
Although they are presented as a single group, the non-Spanish-speaking Caribbean economies have varying degrees of freedom to expand their monetary aggregates, depending on their exchange-rate regime.
Rep. of) (right scale) Argentina Nicaragua 100 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter VII In the cases of Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Nicaragua, the monetary base trended differently from those of other countries in the region, with slower growth in the Argentine and Venezuelan cases and outright contraction in Nicaragua.
The slacker demand for money, owing to weaker economic activity and political and electoral uncertainty, has boosted demand for foreign exchange.
As a result, the reduction in international reserves has been one of the main drivers of the base money contraction in these economies in 2019.
Although the behaviour of lending rates has varied across the region, credit to the private sector is tending to contract Despite the authorities’ efforts to increase liquidity in most of the Latin American and Caribbean economies in 2019, lending rates vary considerably throughout the region.
Rep. of) (right scale) 101Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2019 Chapter VII Domestic credit to the private sector is tending to contract in the region in real terms, except in economies that use the interest rate as the main monetary policy instrument.
In these countries, real lending to the private sector is still growing, but at an ever slower pace.
Since then, however, credit growth has slackened from 6.1% in the first quarter of 2019 to 5.4% in the third quarter.
In economies that control monetary aggregates, the slowdown in the growth of this variable since the third quarter of 2017 has intensified, and, in the third quarter of the year, credit to the private sector contracted by 0.5%.
In Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the contraction in lending to the private sector gathered pace in 2019, and in the third quarter of the year it was down by 22.2% in Argentina and by 82.8% in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
As with other variables analysed in this document, both the rate of depreciation and exchange-rate volatility vary across subregions.
The currencies of the South American economies weakened by an average of 15.5%, with Argentina, Chile and Uruguay posting double-digit depreciations.
The currencies of the Central American economies depreciated by an average of 5.2%, and by over 25% in the case of Haiti.
In the non-Spanish-speaking Caribbean, the average depreciation was 2.1%, with the Jamaican currency losing 9.04%.
Five economies —Costa Rica, Guatemala, Guyana, Mexico and Trinidad and Tobago— recorded nominal appreciations, while the Mexican peso was the only currency in the region to strengthen in both 2018 and 2019.
As figure VII.18 shows, while the South American economies showed the greatest volatility in exchange rates in 2019, they also showed the largest decline in volatility, except Paraguay and Peru, where exchange rates became more volatile.
The Central American currencies were more stable than those in the south; and, although the indicators were similar to those of 2018, these economies also saw volatility ease in 2019.
In the non-Spanish-speaking Caribbean countries, volatility levels remained broadly constant in Trinidad and Tobago and Suriname, with a bias downward in the first case and upward in the second, but there were significant variations in the cases of Jamaica (up) and in Guyana (down).
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the process of making the official exchange rate more flexible was consolidated in 2019, by eliminating the exchange controls that had been in place since 2013.
Auctions are now held at the foreign-exchange desk of the Central Bank of Venezuela to determine the exchange rate.
With the new currency regime in place, the spread between the official exchange rate and the parallel market rate has all but disappeared.
In terms of the real effective exchange rate, 13 of the region’s currencies appreciated between September 2019 and September 2018.
In absolute terms, however, the sharpest falls occurred in Argentina, Brazil, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay, all of them losing in excess of US$ 1 billion.
This trend in reserves was driven mainly by larger interventions in the foreign-exchange markets to ease pressures on exchange rates and external account deficits.
In the case of Argentina, the funds transferred to the Central Bank of the Argentine Republic by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were also a significant factor.
International reserves grew in 18 countries in 2019, with the Bahamas, Barbados, Ecuador, El Salvador and Panama recording the largest relative increases of more than 20%.
In absolute terms, Colombia, Mexico and Peru accumulated the most, with increases in excess of US$ 4 billion.
In 2019, the reserves-to-GDP ratio has remained stable —edging just 0.1 of a percentage point above the 2018 level of 16.5%— reflecting the combination of the loss of reserves in the year to date and a reduction in the region’s nominal GDP.
World economic activity and global trade are weak, and risks are skewed to the downside.
Trade tensions have shaken economic actors’ confidence and depressed investment in some economies that have a high degree of international trade exposure, thereby endangering not only current growth but medium-term growth as well.
The effect of these two economies’ slackening pace of growth is being felt by the countries of the region not only via trade but also in the form of lower prices for raw materials, since both China and the United States are major buyers on the world markets for the region’s commodity exports.
The prices of many commodities are expected to fall further in 2020.
Against the backdrop of this sharp, widespread downturn, the effectiveness of monetary and fiscal policies as tools for reactivating the economy is subject to various constraints in differing contexts.
The usefulness of monetary policy for this purpose is, in particular, coming to an end in a number of developed economies, and in those where reference rates are already in negative territory, it is becoming increasingly important to weigh the benefits and costs of further reductions.
Prolonged periods of negative rates are eroding the profitability of banking and non-banking financial institutions and putting these economies’ overall financial stability at risk.
Nevertheless, fiscal policy’s ability to jump-start economic activity in various developed and developing nations is constrained by their hefty public debts and fiscal deficits.
In addition to the sluggishness associated with slumping economic activity and global trade, the year 2020 will be a time of considerable uncertainty given the risks that continue to be faced on various fronts.
The accumulation of debt on international financial markets, driven in part by major central banks’ low interest rates, is outpacing the growth of global income and has reached record levels.
While, in the short run, the United States Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank of Japan are expected to maintain an expansionary monetary policy, the possibility of repeated episodes of heightened volatility and a deterioration in financing conditions for emerging markets, including those of Latin America and the Caribbean, cannot be ruled out.
In China, high debt levels, in conjunction with potential risks for both the official and the shadow financial system, have the authorities on the alert, and they have also had to proceed with caution in order to avoid triggering a sharper slowdown in the economy.
Generally speaking, the resolution of the mounting financial risks faced by China in recent years has been very slow in coming.
In its latest financial stability report, issued in late 2018, the People’s Bank of China estimated that, at year’s end, 13.5% of the country’s nearly 4,380 financial institutions, mostly rural and smaller institutions, were rated as “high risk”.2 The shadow banking sector expanded in 2019, after having shrunk in 2018.
Apart from the absolute levels of indebtedness, another risk factor for the global economy stems from the growing percentage of negative-yielding debt.
In September 2019, the Bank for International Settlements estimated the total level of negative-yielding bonds at some US$ 17 trillion, or 20% of global GDP, which represented a threefold increase over the figure for October 2018.
In line with mounting concern about the soundness of the world economy, trade tensions and the other risk factors mentioned earlier, the demand for the long-term sovereign bonds of what are considered to be “safe-haven” countries —that is, those viewed as being safer or more secure— surged during the year.
This triggered reductions in bond yields to the point where they turned negative in a number of countries (e.g.
The negative repercussions of these trends for global financial stability are transmitted through various channels.
One of those channels is a reduction in the profitability of non-bank financial institutions such as insurers and pension funds, which need to invest in secure, liquid long-term assets to counterbalance their claims.3 Another arises when low or even negative yields from secure assets trigger a search for higher yields that generates a demand for higher-risk assets.
Cases in point in 2019 have included the public bonds of countries such as Greece —where yields for some shorter-term instruments have also slipped into negative territory—4 and the growing demand for high-yield corporate bonds, whose yields have, despite their name, dropped below zero in some cases.
Even some junk bonds are trading at negative rates in the face of increased demand.
Geopolitical risks —and specifically the tensions between Hong Kong (Special Administrative Region of China) and China that have broken out in 2019— also remain a factor, as do processes currently under way whose implications for the world economy are not yet clear, such as Brexit and the unknown nature of future relations between the United Kingdom and the European Union.
In the light of all the above, it is not possible to rule out new bouts of greater volatility and deteriorating financing conditions, which may go hand in hand with a further slackening of economic activity in various regions, including Latin America and the Caribbean.
The economic performance of the countries of the region will thus be determined, to some extent, by the effectiveness of the domestic monetary and fiscal policy tools that they can deploy in order to navigate this complex international landscape.
On the monetary policy front, authorities in the region continue to grapple with the trade-offs between stimulating aggregate demand and averting a build-up of macroeconomic instability, although the protracted and widespread slowdown in aggregate domestic demand has prompted the central banks of some economies to relax their monetary policy stance.
Low inflation during the first half of 2019, coupled with less exchange-rate volatility, gave the authorities more scope for lowering interest rates.
In 2020, however, the uptick in both of these variables that began in the second half of 2019 —owing to the uncertainty spawned by upcoming elections and social conflict in a number of countries— could leave less leeway for expansionary monetary policies.
In fact, a number of countries in the region that are running large fiscal deficits or have high levels of public debt have instead opted to embark on fiscal consolidation processes in a bid to improve their primary balance and thus stabilize their public debt.
An additional constraint on fiscal space in the coming year stems from the fact that fiscal revenues could be hurt by the more sluggish pace of economic activity and lower commodity prices.
Against this backdrop, a reduction in tax receipts could translate into a sharper cutback in public expenditure or a larger deficit in countries subject to these factors.
The growth of quasi-sovereign debt (the debt of State-run or State-owned corporations) is also reducing the scope for countercyclical fiscal policy in some countries of the region (see the discussion of international liquidity in chapter II).
Finally, a number of countries in the region have been overtaken by mounting social conflicts and, in some instances, political crises.
This has prompted downward revisions of their projected growth rates for the close of 2019 and for 2020.
The updated projections prepared by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) for 2020 are shown below.
Low growth rates will remain widespread in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2020 The Latin American and Caribbean region is expected to remain on a low-growth path in 2020, with GDP projected to edge up by just 1.3%, which would be the region’s seventh consecutive year on a low-growth curve.
This growth slump is attributable both to a less favourable external environment and to a steep drop in domestic demand in various economies.
The growth rate for the Central American subregion5 is projected to rise by two tenths of a percentage point in 2020 (2.6%), with these economies thus maintaining a rate of expansion quite similar to the one recorded in 2019, except that the contraction of activity in Nicaragua will be milder.
Meanwhile, Mexico’s growth rate for 2020 is expected to be 1.3%, in contrast with the zero growth seen in 2019.
For Central America and Mexico as a group, a greater expansion of domestic demand is expected, with both private consumption and investment playing a larger part than before in driving that growth.
The contribution of exports of goods and services will be smaller, however, as a result of the more sluggish United States economy and the slower growth of world trade (see figure VIII.2).
Finally, the English- and Dutch-speaking Caribbean economies’ growth rates will jump by more than 4 percentage points over their 2019 level to 5.6%.
This slowdown will continue into 2023, meaning that the growth rate for the coming year will be significantly lower than in 2022.
The sharp slowdown in growth has been accompanied by continued inflationary pressures.
Although inflation is not expected to accelerate, it will remain high in 2023, influencing monetary policy measures, especially policy rates in the region.
On the fiscal side, although the primary deficit has narrowed, debt levels are still high.
Fiscal space may therefore be expected to continue to determine public spending patterns.
Added to these macroeconomic complexities are a decline in creation of formal jobs, a rise in informality, stagnation or falls in real wages, drops in investment and growing social demands.
All this puts pressure on macroeconomic policy, which must reconcile efforts to promote economic recovery through investment and job creation, on the one hand, and to control inflation and pursue fiscal sustainability, on the other.
Not only is the region’s internal situation complex, but the global panorama has continued to deteriorate and growth forecasts for world economic activity and trade have both been cut.
Global GDP growth projections have been lowered, primarily in response to the effects of the Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine.
Growth is now expected to be 3.1% at the end of 2022, compared with the rate of 4.4% projected before the war.
The slowdown is expected to intensify in 2023, with world GDP growing by 2.6%.
Advanced economies are forecast to grow by 0.6% and emerging and developing economies by 3.7%.
Regarding the main trading partners of Latin America and the Caribbean, the United States is expected to grow by 1.9% in 2022, more than 2 percentage points below the forecast before the war.
An even sharper slowdown is forecast for 2023, with growth of just 0.7%.
For the eurozone, growth of 3.2% is forecast for 2022, as the bloc’s activity has proven more resilient than originally anticipated.
However, the effects of the war in Ukraine will be reflected more strongly in next year’s growth rate, which is forecast to slow sharply to just 0.3% (2.4 points less than forecast before the war).
Lastly, in China, growth is expected to be 3.3% in 2022 —the lowest rate in more than four decades— and slightly higher in 2023 (4.4%).
Based on the expected decline in global economic activity, projected world trade volume growth in 2023 was lowered from the figure of 3.4% given in April to just 1.0% in October.
The invasion of Ukraine last February, and the effect this has had on food and energy prices, accentuated inflationary trends that were already apparent in 2021.
Producer and consumer price indexes increased across the board in 2022, in some cases hitting levels not seen for decades.
In this context of high inflation and a risk of expectations becoming unanchored, the global monetary policy response has been the most synchronized in several decades, with the largest number of simultaneous policy rate hikes since at least 1970.
Among the major central banks, the United States Federal Reserve had raised its policy rate by 375 basis points by November 2022, putting it at 4.0%; the European Central Bank (ECB) set its rate at 1.5% in October; and the Bank of England had raised rates 275 basis points in 2022 to 3.0% by November.
In all three cases, further rate hikes are expected until at least mid-2023.
In addition to higher monetary policy rates to reduce available liquidity, since early 2022 major central banks have also been shrinking their balance sheets, which reached unprecedented sizes in 2020 in the context of the crisis of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic.
For example, the Federal Reserve has adopted a 12 Executive summary Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) monetary strategy of quantitative tightening, part of which is reinvesting the principal of maturing long-term treasury bonds only to the extent that they exceed a monthly cap of US$ 60 billion, starting in September 2022.
ECB decided to end net bond purchases in July 2022, although it will continue to reinvest the principal of bonds when they mature.
The Bank of England began quantitative tightening in early November 2022, when it started selling government bonds.
In recent months, commodity prices in general, and food and energy prices in particular, have been falling.
This downtrend is expected to continue in 2023, but the prices of some commodities will nevertheless remain above 2021 levels.
Specifically, in 2023 the prices of energy goods are forecast to be over 40% higher than in 2021 and prices for food 11% higher.
However, in the case of base metals and minerals, prices are expected to be 17% lower than in 2021.
In addition to energy and food inflation easing, global supply chain disruptions —another of the supply-side factors that drove inflationary pressures from late 2020 onward— have also abated in recent months.
For advanced economies, inflation is projected to close 2023 at 4.4%, while for emerging and developing economies, the projection is 8.1%.
Even though these rates are almost 3 and 2 percentage points lower, respectively, than in 2022, they are still much higher than the average rates for the decade prior to the pandemic (2010–2019): 2.0% in advanced economies and 5.1% in emerging and developing economies.
Global financial conditions have tightened, financial volatility has increased in both emerging and advanced economies, equity markets in much of the world have fallen sharply, risk appetite has declined, capital outflows from emerging markets have intensified, and the dollar has appreciated significantly worldwide.
On fixed-income markets, yields for the long-term bonds of countries considered risk-free benchmarks —such as the United States and Germany— have climbed sharply in response to inflationary pressures and the resulting tightening of monetary policy.
Higher bond yields for these countries, together with diminished risk appetite, have pushed up the cost of financing for other economies.
As a result of these higher financing costs, cross-border lending and debt issuance have been in decline since the fourth quarter of 2021.
In fact, between December 2021 and June 2022, global growth in cross-border lending slowed from 6.8% to 1.2%, while in developing and emerging economies it slowed from 7.4% to 3.8%.
Over the same period, growth in international debt issuance at the global level declined from 5.5% to 1.2%, and for the developing world from 9.0% to 5.5%.
Rising global borrowing costs are also increasing the risk of financial stress among some emerging market and developing economies, which over the past decade have accumulated debt at the fastest pace in more than half a century.
In 2022, the balance of payments current account deficit is expected to expand for the region as a whole to 1.9% of GDP, continuing the upward trend seen over the past three years.
This larger deficit is primarily explained by a slight deficit in the goods balance.
Most of this growth —14 percentage points— will come from rises in export prices, while volume growth will be more modest, at 6%, given the weaker economic growth in the region’s key trading partners.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Executive summary 13 The situation is similar for goods imports, which are set to increase in value by 24% in 2022.
Of this rise, 18 percentage points are expected to come from higher prices of imports and the remaining 6 percentage points from larger volumes.
In 2022, terms of trade in the region are expected to fall by an average of 3.4%, reflecting a rise of 14% in export prices and 18% in import prices.
For example, a rise of 5.9% is projected for the Caribbean, and of 5.2% for the Andean Community countries, driven by higher prices for hydrocarbons, of which several members are net exporters.
At the other extreme, the largest fall is expected for Central America, -8.9% with respect to 2021, mainly because the subregion’s countries are net importers of energy and in several cases also of foodstuffs.
The deficit on the services balance is expected to narrow slightly in 2022, closing at -0.9% of GDP (compared to -1.0% of GDP recorded in 2021).
The income deficit, meanwhile, is projected to be larger in 2022, at -3.3% of GDP, due to increased repatriation of investment earnings and larger interest payments on debt.
Lastly, the transfer surplus is expected to continue to expand in 2022, mainly owing to further growth in migrant remittances to the region, which constitute the main item in this account.
In line with patterns in other emerging economies, financial flows to Latin America have declined in recent quarters.
As global financing conditions continued to tighten, Latin American and Caribbean debt issuance on international markets reached US$ 58.5 billion in the first 10 months of 2022, down 58% from the same period in 2021, and at an average rate almost 1.5 percentage points higher.
Latin America’s sovereign risk has increased over the course of 2022, reflecting rising global financing costs and heightened risk aversion.
Morgan EMBI Global Diversified Index, which measures the difference between the interest rate on debt commitments arising from bonds issued by emerging countries relative to the rate on United States bonds, which are considered the safest, reached an annual high of 525 basis points in September and subsequently eased to 447 basis points in mid-November.
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) estimates that the region’s overall external financing needs for 2023 will be around US$ 571 billion.
This amount reflects the countries needing to meet around US$ 462 billion in external debt repayments over the year and to finance a balance-of-payments current account deficit estimated at some US$ 109 billion.
In 2022, the region’s economies continued to grow (an estimated 3.7% for the year overall), albeit at a lower rate than in 2021 (6.7%), and all indications are that they will start to trend towards pre-pandemic growth rates in 2023.
The net external sector made a negative contribution to GDP growth, which appeared to be linked to a faster recovery of imports and weaker external demand.
Investment also contributed to GDP 14 Executive summary Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) growth in the first half of 2022, especially in the second quarter.
This trend is primarily a reflection of the rise in investment in machinery and equipment, which offset a drop in gross fixed capital formation in construction.
GDP growth is therefore projected significantly slower than in 2022, at an average rate of 1.3% for the region.
Labour markets in the region continued to recover in 2022, maintaining a trend that had begun in 2021 with the acceleration of growth and the easing of the health measures adopted to address the pandemic.
The labour force participation rate recovered to reach 62.9% by the end of the second quarter of 2022, 0.3 percentage points higher than in December 2021.
The number of employed was also up in the first half of 2022.
The unemployment rate fell from a third quarter high in 2020 of 11.5% to 7.0% in the second quarter of 2022, on the back of an increase in the number of employed and a recovery of the workforce absorption capacity.
Growth in the number of employed has been reflected in substantial rises in different sectors, with two-digit year-on-year percentage increases in activities such as commerce, restaurants and hotels (13.2%) and in the manufacturing industry (11.2%).
More than half of the jobs created in the second quarter of 2022 were in commerce, restaurants and hotels and in community, social and personal services, while 17.4% were in manufacturing.
The labour market recovery has not been robust enough to bridge the persistent gender gaps in indicators such as the labour force participation and unemployment rates.
By the end of the second quarter of 2022, the participation rate for women (52.1%) was 22.5 percentage points lower than for men (74.6%).
That same gap was 22.3 percentage points in the fourth quarter of 2019.
After rising for six consecutive quarters, real wages began trending downward, with the regional median falling by 0.6% in the second quarter of 2022.
The performance of the labour market in the region will depend largely on economic activity and inflation, as well as the limited space to adopt policies to drive aggregate demand.
The slowdown in GDP growth since the second quarter of 2022, which is expected to continue into 2023, is casting doubt on the possibility that labour indicators will continue improving in the region.
On the fiscal front, central government public revenues as a percentage of GDP are expected to increase in Latin America in 2022, contrary to previous projections.
Tax revenue posted strong growth, driven by income tax collection, which has offset slow expansion of revenue from goods and services consumption tax.
Weak growth in indirect taxes stems from dampened economic activity in the second half of the year and tax relief measures to address high inflation (such as exemptions for basic food basket items and fuels), which have depressed tax revenues.
In the Caribbean, growth in public revenues is expected to slow, although performance will be uneven across countries.
Central government public spending in Latin America is expected to continue declining in 2022 in line with fiscal deficit reduction directives in annual budgets.
Lower public spending is mainly the result of a reduction in current subsidies and transfers.
Although countries have taken steps to counter inflation which have affected public spending (food and energy subsidies), in most cases this has been offset by the progressive withdrawal of pandemic-related emergency programmes.
While a slight decrease in the level of capital expenditure is expected —relative to GDP— the implementation Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Executive summary 15 of adjustments towards the end of the year could lead to a sharper fall as countries seek to meet their fiscal balance targets.
Interest payments are being driven up by higher debt levels and deteriorating macrofinancial conditions.
The same trends are observed in the Caribbean, although capital expenditure is expected to rise in several countries of the subregion.
In keeping with these trends, the region is expected to post smaller fiscal deficits.
The primary deficit is forecast to return to pre-pandemic levels, at -0.5% of GDP in 2022 compared to the previous year’s -1.7%.
Deficit reduction in Latin America has been possible thanks to higher public revenue, which has also enabled countries to cut total spending by less than would otherwise have been required.
In the Caribbean, fiscal deficits will continue to shrink, but will remain larger than before 2020.
The primary balance could remain in deficit throughout the year, contrasting with the surpluses recorded over the past decade.
Gross public debt in Latin America fell over the first nine months of 2022.
The main driver of the improved debt-to-GDP ratio was growth in nominal GDP, since the nominal values of debt stocks were relatively stable through the year in several countries.
This could change by the end of the year as budget execution concludes in the fourth quarter.
In addition to concerns related to debt levels in the region, countries are facing less favourable macrofinancial conditions for refinancing public debt.
Rising interest rates, currency depreciations and heightened sovereign risk are expected to complicate the financing of government operations in 2023, which could hurt public spending.
The region is at a development crossroads that calls for a fundamental change in the fiscal policy paradigm.
The current macroeconomic foundations, which are characterized by slow growth and low levels of investment and productivity, are too weak to drive sustained, sustainable and inclusive growth.
Meanwhile, persistent structural development gaps —inequality, poverty, informality, and weak social protection, health and education systems, among others— are increasingly limiting the economic and social potential of Latin America and the Caribbean.
At the same time, the region, already highly vulnerable, is facing the existential threat posed by climate change.
Active fiscal policy will be needed to confront these challenges, in order to create the conditions to boost growth and investment, guarantee social welfare and build resilience to climate change.
However, given the intensive investment required to realize this agenda, it is crucial to implement measures to strengthen the fiscal capacity of the State and to incentivize private sector participation in development.
In turn, a stronger fiscal sustainability framework will be essential to ensure the viability of the public spending required to promote structural change in development patterns.
The framework should prioritize domestic resource mobilization, in particular through public revenues, which have historically been insufficient to meet the demands of public spending.
Tax collection in the region is low compared with that of the countries that are members of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and with that of other countries with a similar level of development.
Direct tax collection is low, in particular for personal income tax, which limits not only resource mobilization but also the redistributive power of the tax system as a whole.
Priority should be given to investments in programmes and projects with strong economic, social and environmental returns that create high-quality jobs, promote gender equality and drive transformation of the production structure.
ECLAC has therefore proposed a set of possible development drivers for the region: the energy transition, e-mobility, the circular economy, the bioeconomy, the health-care manufacturing industry, the digital transformation, the care economy and sustainable tourism.
Investments related to climate change adaptation and mitigation have particularly high development potential.
Proactive investments in these areas will produce considerable economic and social dividends, driving creation of dynamic and competitive economies and fostering long-term social well-being.
The pattern of rising inflation that began in mid-2020 in the region seems to be easing.
In fact, in recent months there have been signs of a slowdown in regional inflation, even though it is expected to remain relatively high.
In the first half of 2022, consumer price inflation at the regional level continued to accelerate, hitting 8.4% in June, the highest figure since 2005.
Once again, higher food and oil prices and heightened exchange-rate volatility drove these price trends in Latin American and Caribbean economies.
However, some changes in the direction of these variables in the second half of 2022, coupled with a sharp slowdown in economic activity, have brought average regional inflation down by 1.6 percentage points, to 6.8% in October, 0.2 percentage points higher than in December 2021.
At the subregional level, in October 2022, average inflation for the economies of South America was 8.7%, for Central America and Mexico 7.7%, and for the Caribbean 7.4%.
Inflation of tradable goods prices was a significant 3.6 percentage points higher than in December 2021, while inflation of non-tradable goods was 1.5 percentage points lower.
Trends in the prices of energy and food, which in many countries of the region are imported goods, have been key to the pattern in the general consumer price index.
Although food inflation has been accelerating since late 2018, the pace been quicker since the second half of 2020.
Notably, in July 2022, food inflation was 12.5%, the highest rate since the global financial crisis.
Energy inflation, meanwhile, peaked in November 2021 (17.6%) and since then has tended to slow; in October 2022, it was 9.7 percentage points lower than in Future inflation patterns in the region will be intricately linked to inflation in the rest of the world, as the determinants are very similar.
Based on an easing of food and energy prices and less tension in global supply chains, estimates suggest lower inflation in 2023.
In addition, the measures adopted by central banks and their impact on aggregate demand should also lead to lower inflation in the future, in keeping with the slowdown in the second half of 2022.
Despite all of this, inflation is forecast to remain above pre-pandemic levels in 2023.
Several central banks in the region have also indicated that they expect inflation to be close to the ranges set in their monetary programmes by mid-2024.
Through to November, most of the central banks that use the monetary policy rate as their main instrument raised it substantially, to levels near those seen during the global financial crisis.
The policy rate hikes were accompanied by declines in base money growth.
As a result, lending rates have risen, while real domestic credit to the private sector has maintained the low growth registered since the pandemic.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Executive summary 17 Because of the deterioration in conditions —slower GDP growth, falling real wages, rising inflation and higher interest rates— credit quality worsened and, between December 2021 and the third quarter of 2022, 17 of the 32 economies analysed reported increases in the non-performing loan rate.
Monetary authorities have also faced greater financial volatility over first 11 months of 2022 as a result of the change in the monetary policy stances of developed economies, the resulting tightening of international financial conditions, a stronger dollar, and capital movements in and out of the region’s economies.
This heightened financial volatility and currency depreciation have been particularly significant since the second quarter of 2022 for the economies of the region with floating exchange rates that use the monetary policy rate as their main instrument.
As a result of efforts to stabilize exchange rates and reduce the impact of their volatility on macrofinancial stability, including the knock-on effect on inflation, some central banks in the region have made active use of international reserves, which shrank by 7.2% overall in the region.
However, the current level of international reserves remains higher than the average registered between January 2010 and December 2019.
The prospect of lower inflation in 2023 —owing to slower rises in the prices of food and energy, the easing of certain global supply problems and lower demand— should reduce the pressure for monetary authorities to raise monetary policy rates further.
However, because the abatement in inflation will be gradual and prices will remain high in historical terms, no major changes to monetary policy are expected.
Nevertheless, other factors, such as the pace of the economic slowdown, international financial market volatility and the resulting exchange-rate fluctuations, will shape monetary policy and extent to which macroprudential tools —including international reserves— are used to preserve macrofinancial stability.
Once again, monetary authorities will face the challenge of maintaining the policy space to mitigate damage to variables such as investment, which would hurt GDP trajectories over the medium and long terms, and to prevent higher inflation and disproportionate exchange-rate fluctuations from further eroding purchasing power and accentuating inequalities.
The climate change dimension should therefore be included in macroprudential regulatory frameworks and in the design of available instruments in the region, to fine-tune the targeting of sectors, agents or activities that may be more exposed, to address the systemic aspect of the risk posed by climate change, and to maintain financial stability.
In a complex macroeconomic context of mounting uncertainties, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean are on course to grow by 3.7% in 2022, less than half the 6.7% recorded in 2021.
This slowdown in growth reflects a tapering off of the rebound effect seen in 2021, a weaker global economy, greater uncertainty on international financial markets, a downturn in aggregate demand in the countries of the region and tighter macroeconomic policy.
With these growth estimates for 2022 and 2023, the region would complete the decade 2014–2023 with average growth of 0.9%, which is below —less than half, in fact— even that of the “lost decade” of the 1980s during the external debt crisis.
The growth rate now expected for the full year of 2022 is 3.1%, as opposed to 4.4% before the war began.
In 2023, the rate is expected to slow further, with global GDP growth of 2.6%.
The advanced economies are forecast to grow by 0.6%, and emerging and developing economies by 3.7% (see figure I.1).
While these forecasts do not yet suggest a global recession,1 the International Monetary Fund (IMF) has estimated that more than one third of the world economy will enter a technical recession2 sometime during 2022 or 2023.
Among Latin America and the Caribbean’s main trading partners,3 GDP growth of 1.9% is forecast for the United States, more than 2 percentage points below the pre-war forecast.
The decline in real disposable income is continuing to dampen consumer demand, and higher interest rates are also constraining spending, especially in the sectors that are most sensitive to rate hikes, such as investment in residential property.
Growth is forecast to slow to just 0.7% in 2023, down 1.5 percentage points from projections prior to the war. 1 A global recession has been defined as an annual contraction in global real GDP per capita.
While this projection is 0.8 percentage points below that given by the Commission prior to the war, activity has proven more resilient this year than originally forecast and the effects of the war in Ukraine will be reflected more strongly in next year’s growth rate.
For 2023, the European Commission projects a sharp slowdown —with growth of just 0.3% (2.4 percentage points less than forecast before the war)— in a context of high uncertainty, erosion of households’ purchasing power, and natural gas supply problems related to the war (European Commission, 2022).
Lastly, in the case of China, the slowest growth rate in more than four decades is expected, at 3.3%, against a backdrop of a weakening real estate sector —which accounts for around one fifth of the country’s economic activity— and lockdowns under the country’s zero-COVID policy.
In early November, some of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) restrictions were eased and a set of measures to shore up the real estate sector was also announced.
Therefore, growth can be expected to accelerate in the coming year, with projected growth slightly topping the rate for the current year (4.4%).
Growth in 2023 should also be supported by economic policy measures for a total of up to 2% of GDP to bolster infrastructure investment.
In line with the expected slowdown in overall economic activity, the World Trade Organization (WTO) has lowered its projection for world trade volume growth in 2023.
WTO now expects a rise of 1% next year, when in April of this year it had projected growth of 3.4% (see figure I.2) (WTO, 2022).
Import demand will be affected as growth slows in the major economies and as monetary policy tightening affects spending in the economic sectors most sensitive to interest rates.
Another factor with the same effect is the gradual return of previous consumption patterns in advanced economies, which are moving away from goods and back to services, after doing the opposite during the pandemic (Curtis and MacAdam, 2022).
The Russian Federation’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022 and the resulting international sanctions accentuated these trends by pushing commodity prices up further —mainly energy and food— and adding to supply problems.
Producer and consumer price inflation rates increased across the board in 2022.
In some cases, they reached levels not seen in several decades.4 In a context of high inflation and a risk of expectations becoming unanchored, the monetary policy response has also been the most synchronized globally in several decades, with the highest number of simultaneous policy rate hikes since at least 1970 (see figure I.3).
Among the major central banks, from January to November 2022 the United States Federal Reserve raised policy rates by a total of 375 basis points, to a range of 3.75% to 4.00%.
In Europe, the European Central Bank raised the benchmark marginal lending facility rate to 1.5% in October, while the Bank of England raised rates by 275 basis points to 3% between January and November 2022.
Thereafter, in the case of the United States, gradual reductions are expected in the second half of the year, while in the eurozone rates are 4 In the United States, consumer price inflation peaked in June 2022 at 9.1%, the highest rate in four decades.
In the United Kingdom, rates are expected to be stable in 2023 (see figure I.4).
In addition to raising policy rates to reduce available liquidity, the major central banks have been shrinking their balance sheets since the start of 2022, after they reached record sizes owing to responses to the COVID-19 crisis (see figure I.5).
The implied interest rates in overnight indexed swaps (OIS) at 21 November 2022 are used.
In particular, Obstfeld (2022) speculates that central banks (especially those of richer countries) may be “underestimating the speed with which inflation could fall as their economies slow.
And, as often is the case, by simultaneously all going in the same direction, they risk reinforcing each other’s policy impacts without taking that feedback loop into account.
This trend is explained by the global economic slowdown and the appreciation of the United States dollar worldwide, and, in the case of food, by the agreement reached in July to unblock Ukrainian grain exports.
However, the timing and extent of price declines for different products have been different, owing not only to different supply conditions, but also to each product’s different reaction to weaker demand.
In the case of energy commodities, the price of Brent petroleum peaked last June and has fallen 22% since then.
However, in October 2022 energy prices were still 9% above the pre-war level of January (see figure I.6).
Meanwhile, the price of natural gas in Europe, affected by the drop in supply from the Russian Federation and by the actions of several countries to restore inventories, reached record highs in August 2022.
Since then, the natural gas price has fallen substantially, as inventories reached target levels and demand eased, although in October it was still 38% above its pre-invasion level (see figure I.7) (World Bank, 2022).
In the case of base metals, the slowdown in China’s economy, the main source of demand for several of these materials, drove the downward trend in prices from the peak in March.5 By October, prices were already down 32% from the level in January, before the invasion by the Russian Federation.
Finally, in the case of food, prices peaked in May, but had fallen 13% by October.
The energy commodity index is expected to fall by 11% from its average level in 2022 and the non-energy commodity index is expected to fall by 8% (see table I.1).
Brent petroleum is forecast to fall by 12% (to an average of US$ 92 per barrel in 2023) and base metals and minerals by 15%, in both cases mainly reflecting slow growth in the global economy and particularly in China’s economy.
Lastly, in the case of agricultural goods, the World Bank projects a 5% drop, assuming that Ukraine is able to continue to export grain.6 Despite the expected falls in 2023, price levels for some basic goods will remain well above the levels recorded in 2021, before the war.
This relationship has been apparent both historically and during the recent period of inflationary acceleration (Ozge and others, 2022).
As a result of restrictive monetary policies and their effects on activity, as well as less supply-side pressure, inflation levels are expected to decline in 2023 in both advanced and emerging economies.
In the case of the United States, inflation eased over the four months to October, reaching 7.7% in that month compared to a peak of 9.1% in June.
In the eurozone, although inflation is not yet slowing, it is expected to peak towards the end of 2022 and begin to ease at the start of 2023, as it is in the United Kingdom (see figure I.9).
Option prices rise when volatility is higher because investors are willing to pay more for protection.
Equity markets in much of the world have fallen sharply in 2022, affected by inflationary pressures that led to expectations of increasingly restrictive monetary policies, as well as by a worsening global economic outlook.
At the country or regional level, the MSCI USA Index was 17% below the level it had reached at the end of 2021; the MSCI Europe Index was 10% below; the MSCI China Index was 33% lower; and the MSCI Japan Index was just 1% lower. 8 This was compounded by recent financial tension in the United Kingdom.
The new Government of the United Kingdom announced a fiscal package in September that included an unprecedented support plan to reduce household energy payments, plus a 45-billion-pound tax cut to stimulate economic growth.
This raised doubts about the country’s fiscal sustainability, as it was not clear where the resources to finance the stimulus package would come from.
The result was a historic depreciation of the pound against the United States dollar and large rises in yields for United Kingdom government debt (gilts).
Capital outflows from emerging markets have intensified (see figure I.12) and the dollar has appreciated significantly worldwide (9% in the year to 14 November, according to the BBDXY index having reached its highest level since the early 2000s in September (see figure I.13).9 This could lead to valuation gains in certain sectors of economies with long foreign currency positions.
However, it heightens the financial vulnerability of sectors and economies with a higher debt dollarization rate (see the chapter on international liquidity).
In Germany, in the same month, it reached a high not seen since 2011.
In Europe, for example, sovereign yields have soared in Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain (see figure I.15) because more restrictive monetary policy will drive up the governments’ financial costs.
The yield spread between the bonds of these countries and United States treasury bonds (as measured by the J.
For that same period, the growth rate of the monetary base plummeted from 30.9% to -15.3% in the United States, from 11.7% to -3.3% in Japan, from 16.5% to 9.3% in the United Kingdom and from 35.6% to 3.9% in the eurozone (see table II.1).
Monetary policymakers have used their most traditional tool ––short-term interest rate hikes–– to curb price pressures generated by stronger aggregate demand and by higher prices for imported goods and inputs.
In 2022 (up to November), the United States Federal Reserve raised the federal funds rate six times, boosting it from 0.25% to 4.00%, while the European Central Bank and the Bank of England raised their reference rates three times and seven times, respectively (see chapter I for an analysis of the international situation).
The exception to this general pattern was the Bank of Japan, which did not change its interest rate.
In addition to short-term interest rates, the Federal Reserve has used the fairly uncommon monetary strategy known as “quantitative tightening”, which entails reducing the Federal Reserve System’s balance sheet as a means of helping to raise long-term interest rates.
It is doing this by capping the reinvestment of the principal portion of long-term Treasury bonds when they mature at US$ 60 billion per month from September 2022 on.1 1 At the same time, the Federal Reserve committed to a US$ 35 billion cap on the reinvestment of mortgage-backed securities per month starting in September 2022.
The Bank of England embarked on a quantitative tightening exercise in November 2022 by starting to sell off government bonds.
Finally, the Bank of Japan has not formally announced that it is adopting a quantitative tightening strategy, although empirical data point to a reduction in its assets and liabilities.
The United States Federal Reserve is the world’s most important central bank and has a decisive impact on international monetary policy.2 Data for 2020 and 2021 indicate that 60% of the world’s international reserves are held in dollars.
By comparison, 21% of the world’s total international reserves are denominated in euros, 6% in yen and 2% in renminbi (see figure II.1), while 5% are denominated in pounds sterling.
In fact, the available empirical information indicates that 33% of Treasury bond holdings (equivalent to US$ 7 trillion) are in the hands of government or private foreign investors.
Along the same lines, half of all dollar bills and coins (the equivalent of approximately US$ 950 billion) are held by non-residents.
The available information also indicates that half of the world’s GDP corresponds to countries that use the dollar as an anchor for their currencies.
By comparison, just 5% of global GDP is generated by countries for which the euro acts as an anchor currency.
The dollar is also the chief means of exchange in international trade and international finance.
According to estimates based on international trade invoicing data, between 1999 and 2019 the dollar accounted for 96% of international trade invoicing in Latin America and the Caribbean, 74% in the Asia-Pacific region and 79% in the rest of the world.
More recent data indicate that dollars were bought or sold in 88% of all foreign exchange transactions (BIS, 2022b).
In financial markets, about 60% of foreign-currency deposits and claims (loans) are denominated in dollars, whereas no more than 15% are denominated in euros.
Approximately 60% of all foreign-currency debt issued in the world’s capital markets is denominated in dollars as well.
Tighter global credit conditions have made external finance more expensive and have reduced the availability of financing on local markets The above figures show how important a role is played by the mechanisms that transmit the monetary policy position of the United States to the global economy and the economies of the developing world.
More restrictive monetary policies at the international level have made external finance more expensive, increased the balance sheet restrictions of institutions holding dollar-denominated debt and reduced their appetite for risk (Hofman, Mehrtotra and Sandri, 2022).
All this affects the different sectors of the economy, including the government and the non-financial business sectors, as well as the financial sector itself.
Figures II.2 and II.3 track the growth rates of cross-border credit and debt issues on international markets from the second quarter of 2020 to the second quarter of 2022.
These rates began to slow in the final quarter of 2021, with the rate of variation in cross-border credit at the global level weakening from 6.8% in December 2021 to 1.2% in June 2022, while the corresponding rates for developing and emerging economies fell from 7.4% to 3.8%.
This tighter monetary policy has influenced not only international borrowing conditions in emerging markets but also local borrowing conditions.
The available empirical information on emerging and developing economies reflects price declines for sovereign and corporate debt denominated in foreign and local currencies (see figure II.4).
This stylized fact can be accounted for by the major role that foreign investors have come to play in local debt markets in many developing economies.
Global liquidity conditions, as reflected in nominal exchange-rate variations, alter the yield for foreign investors of securities denominated in the local currency.
A depreciation ––whether actual or expected–– of the local currency against an international reserve currency translates into actual and expected capital losses that increase the risk exposure of foreign investors holding local-currency securities.
According to the available empirical data, a widespread appreciation of an international reserve currency and means of exchange (in this case, the dollar) can have an amplifying effect on risk conditions in local-currency securities markets.
Tight monetary policies can generate financial instability The combination of short-term interest rate hikes and quantitative tightening policies can have significant repercussions for the stability of financial markets worldwide.
These repercussions may be transmitted through the effect of those hikes and policies on corporate and Treasury bond markets and through the asymmetrical effects of monetary policy.
As was to be expected, the increase in short-term interest rates has had a negative impact on the corporate bond market, which is one of the chief sources of financing for the business sector.
Between October 2021 and October 2022, the index of the value of the corporate market plunged by approximately 20%.
According to some sources (Smith, 2022), corporate bond yields doubled in the space of one year.
It is a composite of a wide range of indicators, including measures of primary market issuance and pricing, secondary market pricing and liquidity conditions, and relative pricing between traded and non-traded bonds.
The situation in the United States Treasury bond market could be another source of financial instability.
That market, which is currently valued at nearly US$ 25 trillion, is the biggest and most important government securities market in the world.
It is the main source of financing for the United States government and is the main point of reference for estimating borrowing costs for a wide range of assets.
As noted earlier, as part of the quantitative tightening policy being applied by the United States Federal Reserve, it has capped reinvestment of the principal portion of Treasury bonds when they mature at US$ 60 billion per month.
As this means that the Federal Reserve’s demand for Treasury bonds will be lower, the private sector (mainly investment banks) will have to take up the slack between bond supply and demand.
Otherwise, an excess supply of Treasury bonds would depress their price and thus raise their yield and this, in turn, would add to that market’s liquidity constraints, especially for heavily indebted agents and those that have been hurt by the short-term interest rate hikes.
However, even if the private sector (investment banks) do take up the slack between bond supply and demand, the stronger demand for financing that this would involve could put pressure on the interest rates for other types of instruments.
Yet another consideration is that the quantitative tightening policy may have uneven effects relative to the impact that quantitative easing had.
Those quantitative easing policies resulted in a substantial expansion of the world’s major central banks’ balance sheets.
This means that there will be much less liquidity than there should be when credit and liquidity conditions become more restrictive as a consequence of the adoption of a quantitative tightening strategy.
As a result, this strategy may have a much bigger impact than expected on the price of credit (short- and long-term interest rates) and on liquidity, thereby destabilizing financial markets, as occurred when the Federal Reserve experimented with a quantitative tightening strategy in 2019 but then had to backtrack because of the liquidity crunch that it triggered.
Conclusion The tight monetary policies adopted by the world’s major central banks, particularly the United States Federal Reserve, have limited the supply of international liquidity, pushed up its cost and increased the level of sovereign debt risk and non-financial corporate sector risk for developing countries, including those in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Given the importance of nominal exchange rates as an international transmission mechanism and the developing world’s position in the international market, international credit conditions also influence local-currency securities markets and, accordingly, the financing that they provide.
International liquidity constraints can lead to slower growth in developing economies by depressing the most dynamic components of aggregate demand: exports and investment.
Slackening growth rates in developing economies will be reflected in a weaker demand for their exports.
In addition, a more expensive dollar will also curb the supply of international trade credit and, through that transmission channel, diminish the volume of international trade.
What is more, a more expensive dollar makes government and non-financial corporate balance sheets more fragile owing to mismatches between foreign-currency assets and liabilities, and this may interfere with investment plans.
Yet another factor is that an increase in sovereign risk tends to spill over into the non-financial corporate sector.
Rajan (2022), “Liquidity, liquidity everywhere, not a drop to use - Why flooding banks with central bank reserves may not expand liquidity”, Working Paper, NYU Stern School of Business.
Sandri (2022), “Global exchange rate adjustments: drivers, impacts and policy implications”, BIS Bulletin, No. 62, 1 November.
Duguid (2022), “Fed’s faster ‘quantitative tightening’ adds to strain on bond market”, The Financial Times, 14 September.
This trend is rooted in the goods trade balance, which has been worsening since 2020 and, in 2022, is expected to report a deficit for the first time since 2015; the balances of services, income and current transfers measured as a share of GDP, meanwhile, have remained relatively stable.
A slight deficit is projected in the 2022 goods balance, for the first time in seven years, as imports rise faster than exports in value terms The value of goods exports from Latin America and the Caribbean will rise by 20% in 2022, representing a slowdown from the 28% growth recorded in 2021.
Most of this change —14 percentage points— is on account of rising export prices, while volume growth, at 6%, will be more modest and in line with the lower economic dynamism of the region’s main trading partners (see chapter I, which analyses the international context).
In Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean, increases in export value occurred alongside increases in export volumes.
Of that increase, 18 percentage points are the result of rising import prices, with increased import volumes accounting for the remaining 6 percentage points (see figure III.3).
There is little variation from one subregion to the next, and nearly 70% of the change in import values can be explained by changes in price levels.
A 3.4% drop in the terms of trade is forecast for 2022, albeit with differences among subregions The region’s terms of trade are expected to fall by an average of 3.4% in 2022, as a result of a 14% increase in export prices and an 18% increase in import prices.
For example, a positive change of 5.9% is forecast for the Caribbean and —thanks to rising prices for hydrocarbons, of which several of its members are net exporters— an increase of 5.2% is projected for the Andean Community countries (see figure III.4).
Imports of services are expected to expand by 28% in 2022, in line with the forecast growth in goods imports and, by extension, imports of transport and other associated services.
Among those exports, developments in the tourism sector are worthy of particular note.
In 2022, tourism to the region benefited from the easing of restrictions imposed during the coronavirus disease (COVID-19) pandemic and also, in the months of June and July, from the summer 50 Chapter III Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) season in the northern hemisphere, which supplies most of the region’s tourists.
As a result, international tourist arrivals to South America rose by 371% in the first seven months of the year compared to the same period the previous year, followed by arrivals to Central America (up 129%) and, finally, to the Caribbean (up 50%) (UNWTO, 2022).
Despite the rise in tourist arrivals across the region, however, the figures are still well below pre-pandemic levels.
While the Caribbean and Central America report smaller shortfalls compared to the first seven months of 2019 (-18% and -20%, respectively), the gap for South America is significantly larger (-54%).
Compared to 2021, a larger income balance deficit in absolute terms is forecast for 2022, due to increased remissions of investment earnings and higher interest payments on debt The current account’s income balance deficit is estimated to reach 3.3% of GDP in 2022.
While as a percentage of GDP this result represents an improvement over the 3.4% deficit recorded in 2021, in absolute terms (current dollars) the deficit is expected to rise by close to 8%.
The increase in the deficit is due to the fact that foreign companies established in the region have increased their profit remittances to their parent companies abroad, as they have benefited from the higher prices of the commodities they produce.
In conjunction with this, the increase in the deficit is also because countries are paying higher interest on their external debt, due to both increases in the amounts owed and higher interest rates.
The trend is expected to be similar in most of the countries, in that they will close the year with a double-digit growth rate.
Particularly notable is Nicaragua, with a remittance revenue growth rate of 45% (up to September 2022), followed by Guatemala and Honduras, with increases of around 20% (as of October and August 2022, respectively).
They are followed by Ecuador, Mexico and Peru, with increases in remittance revenues of almost 13% and 15% (from January to September 2022 in the case of Mexico, and from January to June for the other two countries).
Net direct investment flows totalled US$ 123.3 billion and continue to grow after the contraction imposed by the pandemic.
It should be noted that this increase is mainly explained by higher inflows of direct investment flows from non-residents, since outflows —that is, investments made by Latin American companies outside their countries of origin (i.e. trans-Latin companies)— have also risen in recent quarters.
Portfolio investment flows posted a deficit of US$ 16.9 billion, breaking the surplus trend that had characterized their results over recent quarters.
This evolution was on account of divestments carried out by non-resident investors, which resulted in reduced liabilities in the region.
This downward dynamic is expected to have continued in the region during the third quarter of 2022, according to the preliminary indicator of net financial flows prepared by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) (see figure III.6).4 The evolution of this indicator is similar to that of the financial flows.
In particular, it shows outflows in 2020 as a result of the pandemic, a recovery in 2021 and, as described above, the subsequent slowdown in net capital inflows in 2022.
Concerns about global inflation, the war in Ukraine, the United States Federal Reserve’s tighter monetary policy stance and the strength of the dollar all contributed to higher financing costs.
The biggest slowdown in debt issuance was reported in the corporate sector, which had been the main driver of the region’s international debt issuance since 2009.
Over the first 10 months of 2022, issuing by private banks and private non-bank entities fell 3 “Errors and omissions” is included. 4 This indicator, based on monthly figures, allows the behaviour of financial flows to be examined prior to the quarterly publication of official balance of payments data.
For an explanation of how it is constructed, see Carvallo and others (2018).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter III 53 by 78% and 69%, respectively, compared to the same months in 2021.
Quasi-sovereign corporate issuance fell by 55%, sovereign issuance by 46% and supranational issuance by 31%.
Sovereign issues accounted for more than half of the region’s total international debt issued over the January to October 2022 period (see table III.1).
Taking sovereign and corporate issuances together, Mexico, Chile and Brazil were the top three issuers in the region over the first 10 months of 2022.
The three countries accounted for 64% of the region’s total debt issued during that period.
Mexico was the main issuer, with a 28% share of the total, followed by Chile (19%) and Brazil (17%).
Mexico and Chile were the two largest sovereign debt issuers in the region, jointly accounting for more than half of the total sovereign debt issued (see table III.2).
Around 65% of the revenues from sovereign debt issuing over the first 10 months of 2022 were used to manage liabilities and to cover national budget funding needs.
This rise came after the region’s EMBI remained stable during 2021, at levels somewhat lower than those registered before the onset of the pandemic.
The indicator, which measures the difference between the interest rate on a country’s debt commitments and that of the United States —considered the safest of harbours— peaked at 525 basis points in September 2022 and subsequently eased down to 447 basis points in mid-November.
That result is 66 basis points above the 381 points registered at the end of 2021 and 112 points above the January 2020 level, before the onset of the pandemic.
As usual in the region, sovereign risk levels differ from one country to another.
There are cases where the EMBI runs high, such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where it stands at 45,000 basis points; Argentina, at around 2,300; and Ecuador, at Uruguay is the country with the lowest risk level in the region: its EMBI stands at around 130 basis points and its evolution remained relatively stable throughout the year.
Chile and Peru also enjoy low levels, as well as similar and stable dynamics over the course of the year.
Slightly higher levels are found in Brazil and Costa Rica, but with the particularity that these are the only two countries where the EMBI trended downwards over the year.
The credit ratings of the region’s countries improved during the first half of the year, as the pressures that the pandemic had brought to bear on them began to ease.
After nine years in which the number of negative reviews from rating agencies exceeded the number of positive actions (considering changes both in credit ratings Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter III 55 and in recommendation bias), positive actions over the first half of 2022 outnumbered the negative by two.
These positive actions, according to the rating agencies, were on account of improvements in fiscal positions, while the negative actions reflected economic vulnerabilities and financial risks.
This slight improvement was only temporary, however, and in the second half of the year, the region’s credit quality generally trended downwards.
In September and October there were six negative actions and only one positive action.
The net total of actions is the difference between total positive rating actions and total negative rating actions.
A figure below zero indicates that the number of negative actions exceeded the number of positive actions over the period. a Up to October.
In other words: In turn, the balance of the capital and financial account can be expressed as the sum of the net increase in external liabilities (NIEL) and the net decrease in external assets (NDEA).
The more negative the current account balance and the greater the amortization of liabilities maturing during the year, the greater will be the inflows of external financial flows needed to cover both items without the country using its international reserves or suffering an adjustment in its balance of payments current account.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter III 57 If financial inflows of at least that magnitude do not materialize during 2023, the countries will have to use their international reserves to make up the shortfall.
UNWTO (World Tourism Organization) (2022), World Tourism Barometer, vol. 20, No. 5, September. 7 It should be noted that some countries have liquidity lines with multilateral institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), and these are not included in the calculations.
The alternative to using international reserves is for countries to be forced to reduce their requirements by adjusting the current account deficit.
Such an adjustment, in a context where external demand will remain weak in 2023, would most likely not occur through increased exports, but through a recessionary adjustment of domestic absorption and, consequently, of imports.
Thus, after the second quarter of 2021, Latin America’s year-on-year growth rates steadily and gradually decelerated: from 16.3% in that quarter to an estimated 3.2% in the third quarter of 2022 (see figure IV.1).
A slowdown in the growth rate can be seen from the third quarter onwards, however, on account of the unfavourable context in the region, and while economic activity continued to expand, it did so at a rate of 0.7%, slower than the results of recent quarters (see figure IV.2).
Monthly economic activity indicators for the third quarter of 2022 show a general deceleration among the region’s countries (in 12 of the 15 countries for which this information is available), with year-on-year growth rates below those recorded in the previous quarter.
Second quarter Two thirds of the economic growth in the second quarter of 2022 is because of the recovery of pre-pandemic levels, i.e. the rebound effect As of the second quarter of 2022, Latin America and the Caribbean’s GDP exceeds pre-pandemic levels.
A breakdown of its increase compared to the corresponding quarter of 2021 indicates that more than two thirds is the result of efforts to return to pre-pandemic levels (i.e. the rebound effect), while the remaining third reflects an increase in activity above those levels (see figure IV.4).
In the second quarter of 2022, however, those sectors recorded variations of 0.1%, 4.7% and 0.7%, respectively, with which they fell back below pre-pandemic levels of activity.
In contrast, the net external sector made a negative contribution to GDP growth, on account of both rising imports and —due to the slowdown in GDP growth among the region’s main trading partners— weaker external demand.
Private spending, public spending and gross fixed capital formation -30 Public spending -15 -40 Private spending Gross fixed capital formation -20 -50 (right scale) B.
Exports and imports Exports -30 Imports The negative contribution of inventory changes (see figure IV.7) continues, with two consecutive quarters of contraction.
This reflects deteriorating expectations, which indicate conservative production increases: since constraints on production capacity are not expected if demand increases, there is no need for higher inventories.
Over that period, the annual growth of this aggregate (6.7%) accelerated (see figure IV.6).
With this, private consumption contributed more than three fifths of GDP growth in the second quarter (see figure IV.7).
A rebound in investment can also be seen, especially in the second quarter of 2022.
This trend is mainly on account of increases in machinery and equipment, which offset the drop in construction investment.
It should be noted that business confidence indicators have deteriorated (see figure IV.8) and this factor, together with higher production costs, could exacerbate the trend towards a slowdown in economic activity and, especially, in investment.
On the supply side, these include the persistent disruptions that have affected global supply chains, with all their consequences for the availability of goods worldwide, and higher prices for commodities, especially energy and food.
The economies of Latin America and the Caribbean are highly exposed to the pass-through of upward pressures on international commodity prices to domestic prices.
Moreover, the impact of these external supply factors is amplified by exchange-rate fluctuations caused by international financial volatility.
Inflation has also been explained by demand-side factors, such as the significant fiscal and monetary efforts made in 2020 and 2021 to reactivate economies in the post-pandemic phase and the various social programmes implemented in an effort to support the consumption of the households most affected by the crisis.
Overall, these factors contributed significantly to the increase in inflation between the second half of 2020 and the first half of 2022.
However, recent changes in the trajectory of oil and food prices on international markets and the considerable slowdown in domestic aggregate demand in the region have led to a reduction in regional inflation in the second half of 2022, which nevertheless remains relatively high.
Regional inflation trended upward in the first half of 2022 In the first six months of 2022, the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, like those of the rest of the world, experienced an acceleration of the inflationary process seen since June 2020, when average inflation in the region, excluding countries with chronic inflation, stood at 1.8%.
Inflationary pressures intensified between December 2020 and December 2021, with the variation in CPI increasing by 3.7 percentage points from Regional inflation continued to rise in the first half of 2022, reaching 8.4% in June, the highest level since 2005.
Food and oil price increases, greater exchange-rate volatility and monetary expansion again drove these price trends in the Latin American and Caribbean economies.
In June 2022, the average inflation rate was 8.7% in the South American economies, 7.7% in Central America and Mexico and 7.4% in the Caribbean.
These values were 7.1 percentage points, 5.6 percentage points and 5.6 percentage points higher, respectively, than the May 2020 levels, and were in all cases higher than those recorded during the global financial crisis.
Average inflation in the different subregions has been on a downward trend since the second half of 2022.
However, these processes started at different times and have varied in intensity.
In the English-speaking Caribbean economies, inflation peaked at 7.8% in April 2022, since when it has declined by 0.6 percentage points.
Average inflation in the South American economies peaked at 8.7% in June 2022, with a drop of 2.4 percentage points by October.
Inflation peaked latest (August 2022) in the economies of the group comprising Central America and Mexico, at 8.3%, which was 0.2 percentage points higher than in October 2022 (8.1%).
At the country level, table V.1 shows that inflation increased in 26 countries between December 2021 and October 2022 and decreased in another 7.
Six countries in the region had double-digit inflation rates in December 2021: the countries with chronic inflation (Argentina, Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of), Cuba, Haiti and Suriname) plus Brazil.
As of October 2022, there are nine countries in this situation: those with chronic inflation plus Chile, Colombia, Honduras and Nicaragua.
These differences in inflation patterns between the region’s economies are explained by their different degrees of trade and financial integration, dependence on food and energy imports, the speed and magnitude of monetary policy adjustment, the severity of the slowdown in domestic aggregate demand, and exchange-rate movements.
Inflation has risen by differing degrees across the various components of the consumer price index, increasing most for tradable goods, especially energy and food A breakdown of headline inflation into goods inflation and services inflation shows, first, quite different trends in its various components.
While tradable goods inflation has risen by a significant 3.6 percentage points from its December 2021 level (6.7%), non-tradable goods inflation is 1.5 percentage points down on its December 2021 value (6.3%) (see figure V.3).
Another feature shown in figure V.3 is the how different the trends of these variables were over the course of 2022.
While both CPI components increased in the first half of the year and tended to decline in the second half, the strength of these movements was very different.
Tradable goods inflation increased by more than non-tradable goods inflation in the first half of the year, while the latter has fallen more sharply in the second half.
Between July and October 2022, non-tradables inflation declined by 1.2 percentage points, from 6.0% in July to 4.8% in October, while tradables inflation declined by 0.7 percentage points.
Breaking down the trend in CPI into food inflation, energy inflation and core inflation —which excludes the more volatile components of CPI— shows that both energy and food inflation have been well above the headline index, albeit with different patterns.
Food inflation has been rising since late 2018, but the pace of increase has tended to intensify since the second half of 2020.
In the case of energy, this upward movement began in March 2021.
Food inflation in July 2022 was 12.5%, the highest value since the global financial crisis.
Energy inflation has also tended to be higher than headline inflation, as shown in figure V.4.
The values for core inflation in August and September 2022 were the highest for this variable since 2005, topping by 2.5 percentage points the level reached in November 2008 (4.8%) in the context of the global financial crisis.
Although inflation fell in the second half of 2022, it is expected to remain above pre-pandemic levels in 2023 The future trends in inflation in the region will be intricately linked to what happens to global inflation, since their determinants are very similar.
As mentioned in the discussion of the international context (see chapter I), lower commodity prices, especially energy and food prices, are expected for 2023, as is a lessening of stresses in global supply chains.
Moreover, the actions taken by central banks and their impact on global and regional aggregate demand should also mean lower inflation in the future, consistent with the decline in inflation rates during the second half of 2022 (see figure V.5).
In the region, demand factors that may have played a role in 2020 or 2021 do not look set to be key drivers of the future pattern of inflation, given the ongoing downward revisions to GDP and aggregate demand estimates for 2023.
In addition, several central banks in the region have indicated that they expect inflation to return to their monetary programme target ranges in mid-2024.
The easing of health measures adopted to address the pandemic and the subsequent reopening of economies in 2021 set labour markets on the path to recovery, which, as noted, has been uneven, slow and, until very recently, only partial (ECLAC, 2021 and 2022; ECLAC/ILO, 2021 and 2022).
The recovery of labour markets has continued in 2022 and, two years after the pandemic outbreak variables such as employment and unemployment rates have returned to pre-crisis levels, while others, including participation rates, are yet to recover entirely from the massive pandemic-induced shock.
The improvement of certain key labour indicators no doubt reflects a combination of effects related to the easing of all pandemic-related health measures and lockdowns as well as renewed labour demand in sectors that were badly affected during the crisis and have managed to recover.
Likewise, factors such as higher inflation and subsequently depressed wages, a decline in support programmes for households due to more limited fiscal resources and high levels of household debt in a context of rising interest rates may have spurred a willingness and need among working-age people to enter the labour market.
Participation rates continued to recover in the first half of 2022 but remain below pre-crisis levels Among the most notable changes caused by the pandemic is a decline in labour participation rates.
At the close of the fourth quarter of 2021, the average regional participation rate stood at 62.6%.
Although it increased, the participation rate was still 0.8 percentage points lower than pre-crisis levels.
The recovery of the participation rate continued in the first half of 2022, reaching 62.9% by the second quarter.
Despite this two-year rally, the participation rate in the second quarter of 2022 stood 0.5 percentage points lower than the 63.4% observed in the fourth quarter of 2019.
Growth in the number of employed in Latin American and Caribbean economies picked up again in 2022 As with labour participation, the number of people employed in the region recorded an unprecedented contraction in the second quarter of 2020, down 13.7% from the fourth quarter of 2019.
As economies reopened and production processes stabilized, employment levels climbed in the region, with very significant quarter-on-quarter increases in the third and fourth quarters of 2020 and more moderate growth in 2021 (see figure VI.2).
By the fourth quarter of 2021, after six quarters of growth, employment in the region returned to pre-crisis levels.
While the number of people in employment continued to grow in the first half of 2022, the pace slowed significantly in the first quarter of the year (0.3% down from the fourth quarter of 2021) before accelerating in the second quarter (to 2.3%).
This indicator has also grown steadily following the contraction recorded in the second quarter of 2020.
The increase in the number of people employed during the second quarter of 2022 pushed the employment rate up 1.3 percentage points to 58.5%, a level comparable to those recorded prior to the pandemic.
In the first half of 2022, the unemployment rate rose to 8.2% in the first quarter, up from 8% at the end of the fourth quarter of 2021.
It then fell 1.2 percentage points in the second quarter to 7% (see figure VI.4). 1 As emphasized in the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2020, the sharp fall in participation rates at the height of the pandemic in 2020 skewed unemployment rates, which were low in the second and third quarters of 2020.
In the first half of 2022, the employment recovery was reflected in increased employment activity in most sectors The growth in the number of employed persons in 2022 has been reflected in significant year-on-year increases in employment figures in various sectors of economic activity.
These year-on-year increases were double-digit in sectors such as trade, restaurants and hotels (13.2%) as well as manufacturing (11.2%), though the recovery of the latter has been less buoyant (see figure VI.5).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VI 83 Over half of the jobs created in the second quarter of 2022 were in the trade, restaurants and hotels, and community, social and personal services sectors.
The largest relative increase in the first half of 2022 was in the domestic service category A breakdown of the recovery in employment by occupational category positions domestic work as the fastest growing category in the second quarter of 2022, up 16.7% from the year-earlier period (see figure VI.6).
This category registered the largest contraction during the pandemic, falling 30.5% between the second quarter of 2019 and the same period in 2020.
It has also been one of the slowest to rebound, with year-on-year growth only observed as of the second quarter of 2021.
The wage earner category is another that has recovered significantly, registering average year-on-year growth of 10.8% in the first half of 2022, with 11.1% in the second quarter and 10.5% in the first.
On average, own-account work grew 5.4% in the first half of 2022, at rates of 6.6% and 4.2% in the first and second quarters, respectively.
Contrary to domestic and wage-earning work, the annual growth rate of own-account work has slowed since the second quarter of 2021, making it the first of the three categories to return to pre-crisis levels.
Informal employment is on the rise, driven by normalization of economic activity in the region A notable feature of the pandemic was the decline of informal employment due to the severe mobility restrictions imposed to counter the pandemic.
As figure VI.7 shows, this meant that the proportion of people working in the informal sector fell to 46.7% in the first half of 2022, down 2.5 percentage points from the first half of 2019.
The reopening of economies in 2021 prompted an uptick in the number of informal workers and the labour informality rate rose to 48.5%, up 1.8 percentage points from the first half of 2020.
Accelerated inflation pushed down average real wages in the second quarter of 2022 After growing for six consecutive quarters, average real wages in the region fell in the second quarter of 2022 (the median rate of change for this variable is -0.6% in the countries that reported this figure).
Trends in the second quarter of 2022 were nothing like those observed in 2021, when real wages grew 1.7% on average and the 2.1% in the first quarter of 2022 (see figure VI.8).
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VI 85 Gender gaps in key employment indicators have tended to narrow but there are greater asymmetries than before the crisis While the main labour market indicators in the region’s economies have recovered, this improvement has been uneven between men and women.
Unemployment rates dropped from their pandemic peaks, but more so for men, and the unemployment gap —the female unemployment rate relative to the male unemployment rate— has widened (see figure VI.9).
Analysis of trends in gender gaps recorded in the fourth quarter of 2019, when female unemployment stood at 9.2% (2.5 percentage points higher than the male rate, which was 6.7%), shows that the pandemic drove up unemployment rates considerably.
In the second quarter of 2020, the female unemployment rate rose to 12.1%, while the male unemployment rate stood at 10.4%, reflecting a narrowing of the gender gap in this indicator.
In that quarter, male unemployment was 3.7 percentage points higher than in the fourth quarter of 2019, and female unemployment was up 2.9 percentage points.
As the region’s economies opened up, the gap widened with the male unemployment rate falling faster than the female rate.
By end-2021, the unemployment gender gap stood at 3.0 percentage points, with 9.7% of women and 6.7% of men unemployed.
In the second quarter of 2022, the gap narrowed to 2.6 percentage points, with 8.5% of women out of work and 5.9% of men.
Despite this decrease, the gap remains wider than it was prior to the pandemic.
Unemployment rates for both men and women are the lowest they have been since the fourth quarter of 2019. 86 Chapter VI Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Women were also more affected than men by the impact of the pandemic on another variable: participation.
As seen above, participation has globally improved, but as is the case with employment, the recovery has been uneven.
Here too, movement restrictions adopted during the pandemic significantly reduced male and female participation rates, but relative changes indicate that the gender gap narrowed in the second quarter of 2020, when women’s labour force participation rate was 22 percentage points lower than men’s (65.4% for men and 43.4% for women) (see figure VI.10).
The revival of economic activity in the region, the reopening of schools, and the waning health crisis have pushed up participation rates, but again, the pace of recovery differs between men and women.
In the second quarter of 2022, the male participation rate exceeded pre-pandemic levels, whereas female participation levels have not yet recovered.
Labour market outlook Labour market outcomes in the region will depend heavily on GDP performance and inflation.
The impact of a very difficult economic context, characterized by a slowdown in global economic activity, growing inflationary pressure, more volatile exchange rates and less room for expansionary policies, suggests a further slowdown in GDP.
The better-than-expected performance in the first half of 2022 drove down the regional unemployment rate significantly.
Nevertheless, the slowdown which began in the second half of 2022 and will continue in 2023 raises doubts as to the likelihood of ongoing improvements in employment indicators.
This type of scenario opens the door to higher levels of unemployment and informal work, together with an even larger drop in average wages.
Fiscal policy Public revenues have shown a stronger performance than expected, driven by tax collection Despite the pressures to respond to inflation, public spending growth is generally being contained Fiscal deficits are narrowing as spending falls and revenues hold steady Public debt is falling but remains at high levels B.
Fiscal policy Public revenues have shown a stronger performance than expected, driven by tax collection Despite the complex macroeconomic context in the region, public revenues in Latin America have continued to rise in 2022, after reaching an all-time high in 2021.
The strong performance of total revenues reflects the performance of tax income, and the forecast is based chiefly on high rates of growth in tax collection —at constant prices— in the first half of the year, compared to the prior-year period.
Tax revenues were driven by the recovery in economic activity —although the rate of growth came down—, the rise in imports and the good performance of revenues from income tax.
However, a steep slowdown began in the third quarter, in line with economic activity during the second half of the year and the progressive impact of the tax relief measures adopted to counteract inflation and protect household purchasing power.
Revenue from other sources (non-tax, capital and foreign grants) will remain stable on average, although there are large differences between countries in this respect.
Income tax collection has been the main driver of tax revenues in the first nine months of the year (see figure VII.2).
This category posted high rates of growth in most of the countries, varying between 15% and over 20%.
It is interesting to note that income tax collection revenues not only showed strong growth over the previous year, but also stood well above the levels posted in the same period of 2019, before the pandemic.
The rise in 2022 chiefly reflected the results of the annual declaration for fiscal year 2021.
In countries such as Brazil, Chile and Peru, this trend owed much to the rise in earnings of oil and mining companies in 2021 (Federal Treasury of Brazil, 2022; DIPRES, 2022; SUNAT, 2022a).
This factor was especially important in Peru, where the income tax exercise yielded a historic take, driven largely by the mining sector, whose tax payments were up by 157.3% and represented 43% of the total take (SUNAT, 2022b).
The individual figures may not sum to the total owing to rounding.
The figures for 2022 are projections and correspond to official estimates or modified budgets.
Meanwhile, the collection of goods and services consumption taxes was less dynamic in the first nine months of the year.
There was a sharp slowdown —in constant prices— in the take from value added tax (VAT) in several countries (see figure VII.3).
This reflected several factors, including the high basis for comparison of the year-earlier period, the slowdown in private consumption and the application of tax relief measures aimed at offsetting the rise in inflation to protect household purchasing power.
This last factor also heavily influenced the collection of excise taxes on fuels, which contracted strongly in several countries, notably in Argentina (-27.2% in the first nine months of the year), Honduras (-29.0%) and Peru (-30.5%).
These factors undermining the collection of VAT were offset in part by the takings from the tax on imports, which contributed over half of the growth in VAT in several countries.
Ecuador Panama Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VII 95 Although income from other sources is expected to remain stable in 2022, up to September the situation was very uneven from one country to another (see figure VII.4).
The rise posted in Brazil reflected signing bonuses from the second round of bidding for the transfer of rights auction in February, higher non-tax revenues from petroleum extraction given higher international oil prices and production, and dividends remitted to the central government by Petrobras (0.3% of GDP) (Federal Treasury of Brazil, 2022).
Meanwhile, in Chile there were strong capital revenues from the State share in lithium sales, as set out in the contracts with the firms Sociedad Química y Minera de Chile (SQM) and Albemarle (DIPRES, 2022).
Colombia saw substantial dividends remitted to the central government by Ecopetrol, amounting to 0.7% of GDP in the first half-year, compared to 0.1% in the prior-year period (Ministry of Finance and Public Credit of Colombia, 2022).
In Ecuador, income from oil exports rose significantly on the back of higher prices in the international market.
Conversely, income from other sources declined significantly in Argentina, where revenues from central bank profits in 2021 were not received again in 2022.
Notably, in 2022, the Governments of Chile and Colombia presented tax reform proposals aimed at expanding the collection base and making taxes more progressive (see box VII.1).
In both countries, the proposals are viewed as a pillar for building a new social compact that fosters greater equity, with a view to closing a series of structural gaps in terms of income distribution and social protection.
The proposal, which was adopted on 11 November 2022, underwent some adjustments, especially with respect to the new mechanism created to tax windfall income from oil and coal exploitation.
After intense debates in Congress, it was finally decided to adopt an income tax surcharge for the extraction of oil and coal, based on a progressive scale linked to international prices.
In the case of oil, the scale will range from 5% to 15%, and will be applied when the price exceeds the average price of the last 10 years by 30%.
The same scale will be applied in the case of coal, but when the price exceeds the average price of the last 10 years by 45%.
In addition, the initial proposal to prevent the deduction of royalties on these activities from tax bases was upheld.
The reform in Colombia also includes the creation of a single table of marginal rates for all types of personal income (work, capital, pensions, dividends or occasional earnings), while keeping each exemption and deduction regime separate.
This is intended to align the taxation of income from work and capital income.
The reform also reduces the global nominal ceilings of exempt income and deductions for people with monthly income of more than 13 million Colombian pesos (Col$), which will allow the effective tax rate to be raised from 1.4% of higher incomes.
Complementing and reinforcing the taxation of higher-income taxpayers, the wealth tax that had been in force since 2019 was made permanent, with a scale of progressive marginal rates of between 0.5% and 1.5% for net wealth exceeding Col$ 3.0 billion (US$ 600,000).
With regard to corporate income, the Government of Colombia intends to undertake a review of preferential treatment in order to align effective rates between the economic sectors, which currently mainly benefit certain service activities (including financial services) and construction.
However, the tax benefits enjoyed by the education, health and environmental protection sectors will be maintained, in line with the priorities defined in the government programme.
Other notable measures are the reform of the carbon tax, in force since 2016, to broaden the related tax base, and the creation of new taxes on sugary drinks, ultra-processed foods with a high content of added sugars and single-use plastics.
The measures described, as well as others contained in the reform, should generate an estimated collection of Col$ 21.5 trillion in 2023 (equivalent to 1.5% of GDP), gradually reaching Col$ 24.4 trillion in 2026 (equivalent to 1.4% of GDP) (see table below).
In the first year, most (52.5%) of the additional tax resources will come from the taxation of oil and coal exploitation, though this share should gradually decrease in line with medium-term forecasts for the prices of these commodities.
Direct taxation of individuals and companies should increase steadily as the distortions created by the various exemption regimes are regularized.
The remaining measures are focused mainly on strengthening the of National Taxes and Customs Department (DIAN) to combat tax avoidance and evasion.
The grounds of the original proposal include, firstly, significant changes to income tax for people in the higher income brackets and stronger taxation of capital income.
On the one hand, the reform would increase the marginal rates of income tax for those with monthly income exceeding 4.03 million Chilean pesos and create a dual system to replace the existing semi-integrated system, in order to separate the taxation of companies from that of its partners, and thereby differentiate the tax treatment of labour and capital income.
The reform also introduces a capital gains tax equivalent to 22% of company dividends or withdrawals.
Starting in 2024, equity earnings from stock market instruments will be taxed at the same 22% rate, compared with 10% today.
The government proposes to alleviate the tax burden on lower-income households, by making rental costs tax deductible, up to a maximum of 450,000 pesos per month, and to do away with the exemptions currently applied to the rental income of owners of “affordable housing” (Decree with Force of Law No. 2 (DFL-2)).
Another notable measure is the creation of a substitute tax on retained profits, which is intended to encourage the withdrawal of these profits from firms.
One of the pillars of the reform proposal, with the aim of making the tax structure more progressive, is the introduction of a net personal wealth tax.
The marginal tax rate will be up to 1% of net worth of over US$ 4.9 million, and 1.8% in the case of net worth over US$ 14.7 million.
The government’s intention is to review tax exemptions for investment funds and for some corporate tax items, and to establish new preferential treatment for care activities and for research and development (R&D).
Lastly, the heart of the reform in terms of its collection impact is the drive to combat evasion and avoidance through changes to various legal bodies, registration of final beneficiaries and anonymous reporting, among other measures.
Together with heavy investment in institution-building of the tax oversight agencies, affording them new attributes and resources for pursuing their institutional goals, Chile aims to advance with a medium-term plan capable of translating these new tools into annual targets.
These oversight actions will generate additional resources equivalent to 0.4% of GDP in the first year of implementation.
The reform proposal estimates a net collection effect of 0.6% of GDP in 2023, rising to 3.3% of GDP in 2026 (see table below).
This is evident in the performance of tax revenues, which, on average, will decline in relation to output, but have nevertheless shown strong growth in several countries over the first nine months of the year (see figure VII.5).
In these cases, income tax revenues have done much to drive tax collection.
In Trinidad and Tobago, income tax collection expanded by 85% at constant prices in the first eight months of the year, boosted by the rise in payment of corporate income tax by oil companies (Ministry of Finance of Trinidad and Tobago, 2022).
Similarly, there was a rise in payment of corporate income tax in Belize, which offset income forgone as a result of the measures adopted to stabilize fuel prices (Central Bank of Belize, 2022).
Conversely, tax collection is expected to fall in 2022 in relation to output in Guyana —owing to the considerable real-term output growth in output of over 50%—, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Suriname.
Revenues from other sources will also post a decline, although this is mainly due to the decrease anticipated in revenues from the citizenship-by-investment programme in Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VII 99 Despite the pressures to respond to inflation, public spending growth is generally being contained The stance on fiscal policy, and in particular on public spending, has been heavily impacted by the complex macrofinancial environment in the region in 2022.
The countries had expressed their intention to continue reducing public spending relative to GDP in the budgets adopted at the end of 2021, with a view to closing fiscal gaps and ensuring public debt sustainability.
However, they have come under increasing pressure in 2022 to take steps —via public spending— to soften the impact of rising inflation on purchasing power.
This has translated into an increase in outlays on goods and services and a smaller-than-budgeted contraction in grants and current transfers.
Estimates have been revised over the year in light of these pressures, but they nevertheless continue to point to a reduction in total spending in Latin America (see figure VII.6).
These estimates appear to be borne out by the evolution of primary spending in the first nine months of the year.
However, the deterioration in macroeconomic fundamentals could lead to cuts in other budget items not related to counter-inflationary policies.
Key in this regard is capital expenditure, whose execution tends to be concentrated in the last quarter of the year and which has been the main variable of fiscal adjustment over the past decade.
These outlays have contracted in several countries in the first nine months of the year (see figure VII.7).
In some cases, this may be attributed to the gradual withdrawal of emergency measures adopted to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic.
This is the case in Chile, for example, there several programmes that had been created or expanded in 2021, such as the universal emergency family income (IFE) (DIPRES, 2022) were terminated.
However, this factor was mitigated in some countries by outlays on measures to counter inflation, such as food grants and mechanisms to stabilize fuel prices, which kept grants and transfers at a similar level to 2021.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VII 101 By contrast, grants and current transfers expanded significantly in several countries during the first nine months of the year (see figure VII.7).
In some cases, this is due to measures to counter inflation, particularly larger outlays on energy subsidies.
In the case of the Dominican Republic, the rise in outlays on the electricity subsidy stands out (DIGEPRES, 2022).
However, it is important to note that the variations in some countries reflect atypical factors.
In Brazil, for example, outlays on the wage bonus rose, as a result of the operational changes made to the programme (Federal Treasury of Brazil, 2022).
In Ecuador, the increased outlays were due to a substantial increase in transfers to social security institutions, particularly the Ecuadorian Social Security Institute (IESS) (Ministry of Economy and Finance of Ecuador, 2022).
With regard to capital expenditures, although a slight decline is expected in 2022, this could be altered by budget changes in the fourth quarter, when most spending execution is concentrated.
The performance of these outlays in the first nine months of the year reflects very different situations in the countries (see figure VII.8).
El Salvador stands out for the contraction in capital transfers, due to a reduction in transfers for investment projects (Ministry of Finance of El Salvador, 2022).
Honduras shows the effect of the reorganization of the executing bodies that manage public investment projects, as well as the liquidation of certain trusts that finance investments (Ministry of Finance of Honduras, 2022).
Conversely, dynamic capital expenditures in Colombia were partly due to resources channelled from other budget lines to finance investment projects, as part of a countercyclical policy (Ministry of Finance and Public Credit of Colombia, 2022).
Notable in the Dominican Republic was the high level of execution of several housing and transport projects, such as the expansion of the Santo Domingo metro (DIGEPRES, 2022).
After a slight decline in 2021, interest payments are projected to increase in 2022.
In line with these forecasts, interest payments were up in most countries in the first nine months of the year (see figure VII.9).
These payments have been driven by a significant increase in indebtedness between 2020 and 2021, as a result of the countries’ efforts to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, as well as various macrofinancial factors, such as currency depreciation and interest rate rises.
In this connection, the increase in Brazil reflects the impact of the rise in the monetary policy rate —the Selic rate reached 13.75% in September, compared to the 6.25% at the same point of the previous year— as well as the significant share of short-term debt in total debt (Central Bank of Brazil, 2022).
In Colombia, interest payments were pushed up by inflation-indexed public debt securities, as well as the higher interest rates on sovereign bond issuance (Ministry of Finance and Public Credit of Colombia, 2022).
Outlays on interest payments began to climb in Argentina and Ecuador, after declining significantly in recent years as a result of debt restructuring processes.
The Caribbean subregion is also expected to see a decrease in public spending in 2022, in line with a fiscal consolidation policy aimed at keeping the public debt in check (see figure VII.10).
Unlike the situation described for Latin America, however, an increase in capital expenditures is expected in most countries.
This has been partially confirmed by the figures for the first nine months of the year.
Primary spending expanded significantly in Guyana, mainly due to advances in the execution of large infrastructure projects.
However, Barbados posted a significant contraction in primary spending, mainly owing to lower capital expenditures as a result of the high basis for comparison the previous year, when the country recapitalized its National Insurance Scheme (Central Bank of Barbados, 2022).
With regard to primary current spending, although a reduction is expected for the year overall, several countries have registered an increase in subsidies and transfers as a result of measures to alleviate the impact of rising inflation on the population.
In this connection, Belize has made outlays on new subsidies and has reinstated the full amounts of civil servants’ wages, which had taken a 10% cut in 2021 as a fiscal austerity measure (Central Bank of Belize, 2022).
Year-on-year variation in interest payments at constant prices, January–September 2021 and 2022 B.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VII 105 Fiscal deficits are narrowing as spending falls and revenues hold steady Although the macrofinancial environment has made managing fiscal policy more complex, the countries are broadly expected to meet the targets for fiscal deficit reduction established in their 2022 budgets.
In some cases, this forms part of the targets set under fiscal rules that have been reinstated after being suspended in 2020 (ECLAC, 2022).
The primary deficit will narrow to an estimated 0.5% of GDP, from 1.7% of GDP in 2021, driven by the gradual reduction of public spending in relation to output, owing to scheduled withdrawals of the emergency measures adopted in 2020 and 2021.
However, this last factor has been partly offset by the higher level of disbursements on subsidies adopted in several countries to counter inflation.
In addition, stronger-than-expected public revenues, have opened up additional fiscal space which, in turn, could ease the adjustments potentially needed to budget ceilings to achieve fiscal targets.
This trend towards reduction of fiscal deficits is repeated in the group comprising Central America, Mexico and the Dominican Republic, as well as in South America (see figure VII.12).
A contraction is expected in public spending in South America, along with the rise in public revenues, which should lead to a significant adjustment in fiscal balances.
Conversely, in the group of Central American countries, Mexico and the Dominican Republic, fiscal deficits are expected to post a slight reduction, 106 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) but will remain higher than before the pandemic.
This is mainly due to the dynamics of public spending, which will remain relatively stable, partly reflecting the magnitude of disbursements for energy subsidies among the countries in this group.
However, these forecasts may vary depending on the execution of public investment projects and capital transfers, which tend to be the main variable of adjustment in the final months of the year, especially in Central America, Mexico and the Dominican Republic.
Central America (6 countries)a, Mexico and the Dominican Republic -3.2 Total spending (left scale) 5 -5 Primary balance -6.3 (right scale) Overall balance 0 -10 (right scale) B.
Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VII 107 Fiscal deficits in the Caribbean are expected to narrow in 2022, driven by a drop in public spending.
However, the public accounts are set to remain further in deficit than before the crisis, increasing the pressure for countries to adjust spending or increase revenues, in order to generate primary surpluses to ease debt dynamics (see figure VII.13).
Contrary to expectations for Latin America, public revenue will fall in GDP terms in the Caribbean, limiting the impact of lower public spending on the fiscal balance.
However, these averages are heavily influenced by outliers, such as those for Guyana and Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Public debt is falling but remains at high levels During the first nine months of 2022, central government gross public debt in Latin America shows a widespread fall in relation to output (see figure VII.14).
In September, gross public debt stood at 51.2% of GDP on average, 1.9 percentage points lower than at the end of 2021 (53.1% of GDP).
The decrease is mainly due to the denominator effect, in a context of significant nominal GDP growth.
This dynamic was evident in Brazil, where output growth generated a large reduction of the country’s debt in relative terms, enough to compensate for the impact of the increase in accrued nominal interest (Central Bank of Brazil, 2022).
In Colombia, too, the decrease in public debt in relation to GDP is mainly due to the denominator effect, which offset the depreciation of the national currency (Ministry of Finance of Colombia, 2022).
In the case of the Caribbean, central government gross public debt was 77.8% of GDP in June 2022, 8.0 percentage points below the level at end-2021 (85.8% of GDP) (see figure VII.15).
As in the case of Latin America, the rebound in economic growth produced a strong denominator effect, as public debt levels in absolute terms remained relatively stable during the first half of the year.
Guyana in particular stands out, as the country’s output will rise by an estimated 50% in real terms, as a result of the start-up of offshore oil production.
Conversely, indebtedness levels rose in Suriname, reflecting the impact of its currency devaluation on the debt stock denominated in foreign currency.
Central government gross public debt, by country, December 2021 and June 2022 a In the case of Guyana, the figures refer to the public sector.
Although the levels of public debt have decreased in relation to GDP in the region, they remain high and represent a source of vulnerability, given the current macrofinancial context.
In this regard, various domestic and external factors have a significant effect on the accumulation of public debt, such as the primary fiscal deficit, the output growth rate, the implicit interest rate and the exchange rate.
The complexity of managing public liabilities has been increased by a factor that is highly relevant for the region: the deterioration of domestic and international financial market conditions —with progressively rising interest rates— added to local currency depreciation and, potentially, reductions in credit ratings.
Importantly, these factors will affect interest not only payments on the existing debt stock —to the extent that countries have debt denominated in foreign currency or with variable interest rates—, but also payments on any new issues, which will be under less favourable financial conditions.
Specifically, over the past decade countries have contained public spending via cuts in capital expenditure, partly offsetting the rise in interest payments over the period.
Less favourable financial market conditions will pose challenges for the region with respect to the rollover of existing public debt.
The breakdown of the data by year of maturity show that the profile is weighted towards the short term, since 50% of the debt principal and interest payments (US$ 1.29 trillion, equivalent to 22.5% of 2022 regional GDP) falls due between 2023 and 2025.
Accordingly, 81% of the cumulative public debt service for the period 2023–2028 will be settled in local currency, while dollar-denominated debt will represent 14%.
However, this composition is strongly influenced by the structures of Brazil and Mexico, where local currencies represent the vast majority of debt service to be settled over the next five years.
When these two countries are excluded from the sample, credit obligations in local currency represent 46%, compared to 38% for those denominated in dollars and 12% for obligations in other currencies (see figure VII.17).
Regarding the structure of debt service for 2023–2028 by type of interest rate, fixed-rate securities represent 45% and securities with variable-rate securities, 36%.
The share of zero-rate coupons in the region is noteworthy, at 15% of the total.
When the sample excludes Brazil and Mexico —whose variable-rate debt service represents 43% and 46%, respectively— the composition of debt service in the region leans mainly towards fixed rates. 1 Figures to 8 November 2022.
At the country level, the composition of the debt service falling due within five years is somewhat mixed (see table VII.1).
In seven countries for which information is available, the share of foreign currency denomination is high, at 50% or more of the total debt service, while the share of variable rates is moderate.
These countries could be affected by exchange-rate risk, insofar as local currency depreciation could increase the financial cost of the debt.
According to Bloomberg data (accessed 8 November 2022), Chile’s SDRs represent US$ 39.975 billion in principal and interest for 2023–2028. 112 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) service is denominated mainly in local currency and at variable rates.
Conversely, in Colombia, Costa Rica, Honduras, the Dominican Republic, Peru and Uruguay, debt maturities for 2023–2028 include a large share of local currency (over 50%) and fixed rates, which should limit external risks relating to the exchange rate and to external monetary policy interest rates.
Countries that use the policy rate and have flexible exchange rates 4 Uruguay 2 Chile 0 Peru B.
Moreover, although regional inflation has moderated since July 2022, most central banks have continued to lift their policy rates; and of those that have done so, Brazil’s is the only one that did not intervene in the last four months of 2022.
In the first of these groups (economies that use the policy rate and have flexible exchange rates), the growth of the monetary base slumped from a monthly average of 17.5% in 2021 to 1.2% in 2022.
In economies that use the policy rate and have intermediate exchange rates, the average growth of the monetary base fell from 15.6% in 2021 to 5.2% in 2022; while in economies that use monetary aggregate targets and have intermediate exchange rates, the average monthly expansion dropped from 15.5% in 2021 to 1.3% in 2022 (see figure VII.19).
Interest rates on loans continued to climb in 2022, and domestic credit to the private sector maintained the low growth path it has been on since the pandemic As a result of a tighter monetary policy, interest rates on loans rose again in 2022, continuing the trend that has begun in mid-2021.
In this context of rising lending rates, burgeoning inflation and slackening economic activity, domestic credit is tending to flatline, with growth rates similar to those observed in 2021.
However, the graph shows that these remain well below the pre-pandemic levels.
Sluggish credit growth has gone hand-in-hand with a weakening of the quality of credit granted; and, between December 2021 and the third quarter of 2022, non-performing loan rates rose in 17 of the 32 economies analysed (see figure VII.22).
The three countries with the steepest increases in non-performing loans have also been laggards in terms of the recovery of economic activity, and two of them have chronic inflation problems.
Rep. of) Guyana 118 Chapter VII Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) Going forward, weaker economic growth and higher financial costs could lead to a further deterioration in credit quality.
As of September 2022, four economies in the region had non-performing loan rates above 12%.3 Also, falling house prices have reduced the value of assets typically used as collateral for mortgage loans.
Exchange rates have been more volatile and currencies have depreciated in most of the region’s economies The region’s monetary authorities have also had to cope with increased international financial volatility in the first nine months of 2022, resulting from the change in monetary policy stance in the developed economies.
This has been compounded by the consequent tightening of international financial conditions, the strengthening of the dollar, and capital movements to and from the region’s economies.
This greater volatility has been particularly accentuated in the second half of the year in the economies of the region that use the policy rate as their main instrument and have flexible exchange rates (see figure VII.23).
The extraregional real effective exchange rate has tended to appreciate in 2022 The dynamics of domestic and external inflation, combined with fluctuations in nominal exchange rates, both in the region’s economies and among its main trading partners, have caused the extraregional real effective exchange rate to appreciate in 2022.
Monetary, exchange-rate and macroprudential policy challenges in 2023 The prospects of more subdued inflation in 2023, resulting from smaller price increases among food and energy products, combined with the easing of some global supply issues and slackening demand, will ease pressure on the monetary authorities to hike monetary policy rates further.
However, as inflation will only decline slowly and prices will remain at historically high levels, no drastic changes in monetary policy are foreseen.
Nonetheless, other factors, such as the speed of the slowdown in economic activity, volatility on international financial markets and the resulting exchange-rate fluctuations, will condition monetary policy and the use of macroprudential instruments, including international reserves, to preserve macrofinancial stability.
In this regard, the significant repercussions that geopolitical conflicts such as the one in Ukraine, or crises such as the COVID-19 pandemic, can have on energy and food prices have recently become evident.
The need to hasten the transition to renewable energies and reduce fossil fuel dependency, especially in the advanced countries, has been emphasized in this connection.
The urgent need for a global “green” transformation could entail risks associated with abrupt capital Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VII 123 movements or excessive exchange rate fluctuations, thereby generating sources of systemic risk.
Accordingly, the region’s central banks urgently need to weigh the financial risks arising from climate change when defining the policy actions needed to preserve macrofinancial stability (see box VII.2).
Once again, the challenge for the monetary authorities involves creating the space needed to implement policies to mitigate these adverse effects on variables such as investment, which will affect the medium- and long-term path of GDP, and to prevent higher inflation and excessive exchange rate movements from continuing to erode purchasing power and accentuate inequalities.
Firstly, the transmission channels may be amplified by the geographic location and recurrence of climate shocks;a and, secondly, a structural shift towards sustainable and green activities would entail high costs for economies that rely heavily on crucial sectors of production, such as agriculture, natural resource extraction, transportation and construction.
The region’s monetary authorities are increasingly concerned to prevent and mitigate such risks, in order to preserve financial stability.
This makes it possible to include such concerns among the grounds for intervention, even if there is no explicit reference to climate change in the corresponding legal mandates (Dikau and Volz, 2021).
Considering that the primary objective of macroprudential policy is to achieve financial stability, one possible alternative might be to incorporate climate risks into the framework of macroprudential instruments already available in the region (D’Orazio and Popoyan, 2019; Masciandaro and Russo, 2022).
Financial systems are exposed to climate-change risks through various transmission channels, which can become sources of systemic risk and lead to situations of financial instability (Apergis, 2022; Ojea Ferreiro, Reboredo and Ugolini, 2022; Brunetti and others, 2021).
Climate-related financial risks are usually classified in two closely interconnected categories (Carney, 2015; TCFD, 2017).
On the one hand, “physical” risks —that is, the effects of more frequent and more severe extreme weather events — can exacerbate the vulnerabilities of financial institutions, owing to the costs and losses they generate by disrupting ecosystems and economic and social conditions.
Topics associated with the relationship between climate risks and financial stability are becoming increasingly important, along with issues that warrant special attention according to the economic and social challenges faced by each country.
Strengthen the macroprudential instruments available in the region to address climate risks.
The region’s countries have extensive experience in macroprudential policy, given their high exposure to frequent banking and financial crises (ECLAC, 2020 and 2021).
Climate-related financial risks tend to translate into traditional credit, market, liquidity and operational risks (BIS, 2021).
Thus, appropriately defining the macroprudential instruments available in the region to encompass climate risks would lead to better targeting of certain sectors, actors or activities; and, at the same time, it would make it possible to address the systemic dimension of the risk.
The menu of available instruments tends to focus on mitigating liquidity and capital risks, owing to the type of shocks that the region’s countries have had to face (see table below).
To illustrate this point, some of the proposals presented in different studies on the subject are discussed below.
Notes: The total number of macroprudential instruments in force in all countries was calculated, and the 17 countries with percentages above the median were selected.
In terms of mitigating liquidity risk, the liquidity coverage ratio could be adapted by considering a measure of asset quality linked to climate risk exposure, using a taxonomy based on international or regional standardsd (Baranović and others, 2021).
From a macroprudential standpoint, this would imply additional capital requirements to Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VII 125 address climate-related short-term liquidity problems.
Another alternative concerns bank reserve requirements, which are usually deployed in the region as a countercyclical macroprudential instrument.
Given the various ways in which the countries differentiate (by deposits and currency), it would be feasible to include an environmental dimension to encourage credits to be channelled under preferential terms towards “green” projects (Campiglio and others, 2018).
In terms of capital risk mitigation, there is still room to implement a countercyclical capital buffer, with the criteria for its activation altered by including climate risk factors (which are elevated in the case of loans to polluting sectors or activities).
The criteria would be related, for example, to the credit-to-GDP ratio, which is the usual benchmark.
Lastly, in the case of capital requirements, it would be important to weight risky assets using the mechanisms provided for in Basel III (Dikau and others, 2019; Lamperti and others, 2021).
In this regard, it would be appropriate to develop regional taxonomies and common guidelines for implementing macroprudential measures to mitigate climate-related financial risks, given the similarities in the set of instruments available to the countries of the region.
Volz, “Central bank mandates, sustainability objectives and the promotion of green finance”, Ecological Economics, vol. 184, June 2021; S.
Popoyan, “Dataset on green macroprudential regulations and instruments: objectives, implementation and geographical diffusion”, Data in Brief, vol. 24, June 2019; D.
Cahen-Fourot and others, “Capital stranding cascades: the impact of decarbonisation on productive asset utilization”, Energy Economics, vol. 103, November 2021; P.
Baranović and others, “The challenge of capturing climate risks in the banking regulatory framework: is there a need for a macroprudential response?”, Macroprudential Bulletin, vol. 15, European Central Bank (ECB), October 2021; E.
Campiglio and others, “Climate change challenges for central banks and financial regulators”, Nature Climate Change, vol. 8, No. 6, June 2018; F.
Baranović, I. and others (2021), “The challenge of capturing climate risks in the banking regulatory framework: is there a need for a macroprudential response?”, Macroprudential Bulletin, vol. 15, European Central Bank (ECB), October.
Battiston, S. and others (2017), “A climate stress-test of the financial system”, Nature Climate Change, vol. 7, No. 4, April.
Cahen-Fourot, L. and others (2021), “Capital stranding cascades: the impact of decarbonisation on productive asset utilization”, Energy Economics, vol. 103, November.
Campiglio, E. and others (2018), “Climate change challenges for central banks and financial regulators”, Nature Climate Change, vol. 8, No. 6, June.
Volz (2021), “Central bank mandates, sustainability objectives and the promotion of green finance”, Ecological Economics, vol. 184, June.
Popoyan (2022), “Realising central banks’ climate ambitions through financial stability mandates”, Intereconomics, vol. 57, No. 2, April. (2019), “Dataset on green macroprudential regulations and instruments: objectives, implementation and geographical diffusion”, Data in Brief, vol. 24, June.
Lamperti, F. and others (2021), “Three green financial policies to address climate risks”, Journal of Financial Stability, vol. 54, June.
After growth in Latin America and the Caribbean of 3.7% in 2022, the slowdown is expected to worsen, resulting in growth of 1.3% in 2023 amidst significant constraints, both external and internal.
These figures imply that, in the 10 years between 2014 and 2023, the region’s growth would be even slower than during the “lost decade” of the 1980s (see figure VIII.1).
At the global level, the war between the Russian Federation and Ukraine weighed on global growth —and external demand in Latin America and the Caribbean— in addition to heightening inflationary pressure, volatility and financial costs.
Domestically, the countries of the region are projected to once again face constrained macroeconomic policy space in 2023, both in fiscal and monetary terms.
In the area of monetary policy, rising inflation prompted the central banks of the region, like those of most other countries, to increase monetary policy rates, significantly in some cases, and to dampen the growth of monetary aggregates.
Although the anchoring of inflation expectations in the countries in 2023 should bring this process to an end, the effects of this restrictive policy on private consumption and investment are likely to intensify in 2023, given the lag in the monetary policy impact.
On the fiscal front, although the primary deficit has narrowed, persistently high levels of public debt in many countries mean that authorities are facing reduced fiscal space.
Some South American countries are expected to be particularly affected by lacklustre growth in China, the main market for their goods exports.
This is the case for Brazil, Chile, Peru and Uruguay, for which China accounts for more than 30% of exports (and more than 40% in the case of Chile).
South America is also projected to feel the effects of lower commodity prices and the impact of inflation on real incomes, with knock-on effects on private consumption and investment.
For the economies of Central America, weak growth in the United States, the main trading partner and primary source of remittances for the countries of the subregion, is projected to affect both the external sector and private consumption.
In this case, however, lower commodity prices will be a boon to these economies, as several are net importers of food and energy.
Lastly, the impacts of inflation on the economies of the Caribbean have not only weighed on real incomes and in turn, consumption, but also on production costs, which has weakened the competitiveness of both goods exports and tourism.
With the growth rates in 2022 and 2023, and almost four years after the start of the pandemic, 12 of the 33 countries of the region will still not have managed to recover the levels of activity seen in 2019 prior to its onset (see figure VIII.4).
Belize Guyana Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean • 2022 Chapter VIII 135 Labour market trends in the region are expected to be shaped by a complex macroeconomic context and a new economic slowdown Labour market trends in Latin America and the Caribbean will depend in large part on highly complex macroeconomic conditions.
At the same time, the repercussions of the current context of a global economic slowdown, growing inflationary pressure, greater exchange-rate volatility and less room for expansionary policies mean that slower GDP growth is once again expected in the region in 2023.
Stronger-than-anticipated economic growth in the first half of 2022 enabled a significant reduction in the regional unemployment rate, among other impacts.
However, the slower growth seen in the second half of the year, which is expected to extend into 2023, casts doubt on the possibility that the region’s labour indicators will continue to improve.
As such, by the end of 2022, the labour participation rate is expected to reach 62.6%, a recovery of 1.2 percentage points compared with the end of 2021.
For 2023, the labour participation rate is expected to increase again, by 0.5 percentage points, to close at 63.1%.
Despite the increases expected, at the end of 2023, the participation rate is forecast to remain below the 2019 rate of 63.3%.
In keeping with these labour participation trends and growth projections, the number of employed persons is expected to grow by 5.3% in 2022 and by 1.9% in 2023.
The extraregional real effective exchange rate index excludes trade with other Latin American and Caribbean countries. b A currency depreciates in real effective terms when this index rises and appreciates when it falls. c Preliminary figures. d Figures as of October.
The INDEC, within the framework of the statistical emergency declared in 2016, recommends disregarding the series published between 2007 and 2015 for purposes of comparison and analysis of the labor market in the Argentine Republic.
The 2016 annual figure is the average of the II, III and IV quarters. b New measurement as of 2016 through the Continuous Employment Survey (ECE), data not comparable with previous years.
Quarterly figures for 2019 and 2020 are with urban coverage. c New measurement as of 2012 through the Pesquisa Nacional por Amostra de Domicilios Continua (PNADC), data not comparable with previous years. d In this edition of the Labor Panorama, the series for Chile was adjusted from 2010 based on the 2017 census projections.
The series that appear in previous Panorama Laborales are based on the 2002 census. e Does not include hidden unemployment. f The figure for 2010 is the average of the III and IV quarters. g Does not include hidden unemployment.
The figure for the III quarter 2020 corresponds to the telephone survey conducted between September and October.
The average figures for the II quarter 2020 correspond to the months of April, May and June telephone-ECH; those for the III quarter correspond to the months of July, August and September telephone-ECH and those for the IV quarter are from October, November and December telephone-ECH.
New measurement as of 2015 using the Continuous National Continuous Labor Force Survey (ENCFT), data not comparable with previous years. p Figures for 2019 are preliminary and under revision. q The figure for 2018 corresponds to April.
The figure for the third quarter of 2019 and 2020 corresponds to the September survey and that for 2020 is by telephone survey. r Does not include hidden unemployment.
The annual average for 2020 corresponds to figures for the first, third and fourth quarters. s The figure for the first half of 2020 corresponds to data from the first quarter. t The annual average for 2020 corresponds to the I semester. u Weighted average.
The figure for 2020 corresponds to a telephone survey conducted between September and October.
The average figures for the II quarter of 2020 correspond to the months of April, May and June telephone-ECH; those of the III quarter correspond to the months of July, August and September telephone-ECH and those of the IV quarter are from October, November and December telephone-ECH.
The survey was not conducted in the II quarter (April) of 2020; the 2020 annual average corresponds to data from the I, III and IV quarters. t The figure for 2019 corresponds to the average for March, June and December; the figure for 2020 corresponds to the average for March and June. u Weighted average.
INDEC, in the framework of the statistical emergency declared in 2016, recommends disregarding the series published between 2007 and 2015 for purposes of comparison and analysis of the labor market in the Argentine Republic.
The average figures for the I quarter of 2020 are with national coverage and preliminary.
The figures for the II, III and IV quarters of 2020 are with urban coverage. c New measurement as of 2012 through the National Continuous Household Sample Survey (PNADC), data not comparable with previous years. d In this edition of the Labor Panorama, the series for Chile was adjusted from 2010 based on the 2017 census projections.
New series from 2013. e General index of hourly remuneration. f Manufacturing.
New series from 2015. g Average wage declared by workers registered with and paying into social security. h Average wage declared by private workers covered by social security. i Average wage declared by workers covered by social security.
As from 2013, corresponds to workers in small, medium and large businesses, in manufacturing, commerce and services. j Wage and salary index. k Average income in the formal sector.
While the latter were able to partially offset the downturn in prices by expanding the volume of shipments by 2%, domestic consumption in the region as a whole was flat, and gross investment declined.
The poor performance of domestic demand was the result o f a num ber o f different factors.
The 4% deterioration of the terms of trade and higher factor payments drove real per capita income down by 2%, and the effect this had on private demand was magnified by pessimistic expectations.
In addition, in keeping with a trend that had been in evidence since the second quarter of 2000, macroeconomic policy was tightened.
With some exceptions -notably Chile, Mexico and several Central American and Caribbean countries- real variations in interest and exchange rates created less favourable monetary conditions than those seen in 2000 (see figure 1).
Nor was there any sign of a countercyclical management of fiscal expenditure, and the automatic stabilizing effect of a larger fiscal deficit was quite limited since, as a regional average, the deficit expanded by less than half a point of GDP.
On the one hand, the still fragile position of the financial sector in many countries of the region and tougher regulations prompted banks to adopt a very cautious attitude to fresh lending.
On the other, the recessionary environment and borrowers’ deteriorating asset positions dampened the demand for consumer and corporate loans.
As a result, demand remained slack even in countries where real interest rates had declined.
This cautious frame of mind was evidenced by public policy-makers as well, and the pace of structural and trade reform processes slowed.
Nevertheless, some advances were made, especially in connection with operating concessions for public u tilities and infrastructure works and in the area of fiscal policy reform.
The financial system was the main focus of reform initiatives, where efforts were aimed at improving the regulatory systems of national financial markets.
Despite these widespread difficulties in the domestic and external sectors of the region’s economies, they did not -apart from Argentina- fall victim to outright balance-of-payments or financial crises.
Although the Argentine crisis did have a contagion effect on neighbouring economies in the second and third quarters, financial and exchange-rate indicators for the fourth quarter of 2001 backed up the belief that the region’s economies had succeeded in de-linking themselves from the Argentine crisis.
In the fiscal arena, the authorities sought to compensate for the decline in revenues by curtailing their investment programmes and, on average, the Latin American and Caribbean countries’ fiscal deficits expanded somewhat.
This downward trend is attributable both to the countries’ success in controlling underlying inflationary factors and to lower fuel prices.
In some cases, however, the declines registered in monthly consumer price indices ceased to be good news and were instead seen as a sign that the countries were at risk of lapsing into a recession.
The steep reduction in growth hurt the labour market, and the employment rate fell by over half a percentage point.
Since the labour supply also shrank more sharply than it had at any time since 1990, however, the regional unemployment rate held steady at 8.4% of the economically active population.
Nonetheless, this figure is still one of the highest to be recorded in the last 10 years.
Sluggish production activity in 2001 also hurt wages, which stagnated or fell in real terms.
In contrast, wages in the manufacturing sector increased moderately on average, while they rose steeply in Mexico.
The current account deficit climbed to nearly US$ 53 billion (3.0% of regional GDP) within a context of real exchange rate appreciation.
The increases in the deficit remained within the bounds of each country’s external financing capacity, however, and in most cases the external shortfall rem ained below 4%.
The merchandise trade account ran a small deficit and net factor service payments rose.
Foreign direct investment diminished for the second year in a row, from US$ 64.8 to US$ 58.3 billions, but was still high compared to historical averages.
Official loans filled the gap left by the contraction of private capital flows.
Despite the fairly high level of capital inflows, however, net inward transfers were nil.
This virtual balance between inflows and outflows of financial resources has been maintained for the last three years and is a development that bears watching.
The prospects for inflows of foreign direct investment are not promising in either the short or medium term due to the prevailing level of uncertainty on international markets and the fact that the privatization drive in the region is nearing its end.
Given the prospect that these investments may decline and that net resource transfers may turn negative, it is becoming increasingly urgent for the region to implement the reforms needed to reduce its external vulnerability, build up its internal capacity to finance investment and social expenditure, and smooth out its economic cycles.
A t the same time, better finance fo r development for the region w ith in the present context o f globalization is required.
See ECLAC, Crecer con estabilidad: el financiamiento del desarrollo en el nuevo contexto internacional, Bogotá, ECLAC/Alfaomega, 2001.
The two previous crises occurred in Because all o f these crises have been the resu lt o f external shocks, attention is being focused on the channels through which these shocks are transm itted.
T he ir im pact is then, o f course, reflected on the balance-o f-paym ents trade and capita l accounts.
V iewed from th is perspective, the three crises have differed from one another in som e very s ign ificant ways.
The d ifferences have to do w ith these crises' vary ing degrees o f globality, which in fluences the relative im portance o f transm ission m echanism s in each.
This, in turn, has im plications for the consequent econom ic po licy responses.
It orig inated in a s ingle country (M exico) and was there fore transm itted through financia l rather than trade channels.
The devaluation o f the M exican peso in D ecem ber 1994 triggered capita l outflows from various countries and the virtua l suspension o f vo lun ta ry external financing but, ultimately, the on ly country o ther than M exico to be seriously affected was A rgentina, which then pulled U ruguay down w ith it.
Trade did, however, provide an ad justm ent m echanism fo r th is crisis w ith in an in ternationa l environm ent m arked by s ign ificant growth and m assive financia l assistance for M exico and A rgentina.
A s a result, the crisis on ly lasted fo r three quarters.
The cris is tha t broke out in Asia in the second ha lf o f 1997 falls into the m id-range in te rm s o f its orig in and scope.
The contagion effect transm itted through trade channels was considerable, but financia l channels played the greatest role in allow ing it to spread.
The trade-based effects chiefly took the form o f declin ing prices fo r a num ber o f the raw m ateria ls o f im portance to the region, such as petro leum , o ther m inerals and som e agricu ltura l products.
The financia l turbu lence tha t arose in Asia was heightened by the Russian Federation's m oratorium and currency devaluation in August 1998.
This led to a deepening o f the cris is in 1999, which left a tra il o f financia l instability in its wake tha t is still in evidence today.
On the o ther hand, the United S tates econom y's high growth rate had positive trade effects on M exico and Central Am erica, and the im pacts o f the crisis were consequently concentrated in the South Am erican countries.
Unlike its predecessors, the current crisis - tr ig g e re d by a severe slowdown in the world econom y tha t began in a country tha t has an overarch ing influence on global and regional econom ic a c tiv ity - is tru ly global in nature.
Trade has there fore been the principal channel for the transm ission o f th is crisis, which has been m anifested in slower growth or a contraction o f export vo lum es and in a downturn in raw m ateria ls prices tha t has hurt a m ajority o f the countries.
A s external financing tightened, it becam e necessary to cool down dem and by m eans o f w ha t am ounted to a procyclica l econom ic policy response.
Because o f the global nature o f the present crisis, m easures taken by the countries to boost external com petitiveness and galvanize dom estic dem and, no m atter how desirable and necessary they may be, w ill not be enough to achieve these ends.
A ll these factors point up the need to supplem ent national polic ies w ith in ternationa l and regional measures, based on a full understand ing o f the d ifferent e lem ents tha t are at stake in each case.
The tragedy o f S ep tem ber 11th in tensified the sym ptom s of recession tha t had appeared in the m ajor industria lized countries in late 2000 or early 2001.
A t the beginning o f Septem ber, a reactivation (2.7%, according to data from “Consensus E conom ics” ) o f the United States econom y in 2002 was still expected.
By October, however, hopes o f an early end to the recession in the United States had faded due to the severe deterio ration seen in consum ers' and investors' expectations, and analysts no longer expected growth in 2002 to be much stronger than the estim ate fo r respective ly according to the sam e source).
Accordingly, analysts believe tha t the w orld 's growth perfo rm ance for 2001-2002 w ill be the w orst in the last 30 years.
This ou tlook and its effect on in ternationa l trade drove down com m odity prices.
A fte r an initial spike when the news first broke, oil prices plunged by over US$ 5 per barrel in the first three weeks fo llow ing the attacks.
This trend was also exhib ited by the prices o f o ther raw m ateria ls which had been severely depressed even before S ep tem ber 11th.
The trade im plications o f these events were fe lt m ost keenly in Mexico, Central Am erica and the Caribbean.
In the Caribbean islands, where in ternationa l tou rism is a very im portant secto r o f activity, tou ris t reservations plum m eted by between 20% and 60% in October.
The hotel occupancy rate in Jam aica was on ly 11%, and a third o f all hotel room s in Cuba were closed.
A ir transport w as also hit hard by cancella tions o f reservations and, because o f the h igher costs associa ted w ith increased expenditu re on security and more expensive insurance prem ium s, cancella tions o f flights as well.
The financia l im plications o f this situation for em erging econom ies w ere another cause for concern in La tin Am erica, which is highly vulnerable to financia l cycles.
A fte r the attacks, the m arket collapsed in the main in ternationa l financia l centres.
R isk aversion increased, and the spreads on non­ investm ent-grade financia l paper w idened.
In the southern part o f the continent, th is more cautious attitude com plica ted an already very d ifficu lt situation in Argentina and added to the contagion o f ne ighbouring econom ies.
By early Decem ber, however, the m ost im m ediate effects o f the events o f S ep tem ber 11th had begun to recede.
The favourable turn taken by geopolitica l events and the coordinated im plem entation o f countercyclica l m acroeconom ic polic ies in the industria lized econom ies paved the way for a decline in in te rnationa l in te rest rates.
F inancial m arkets regained the ground they had lost since the crisis, and raw m ateria ls prices appear to have bottom ed out.
Thanks to the improved in ternationa l environm ent and to trade prom otion cam paigns in North A m erica and Europe, the ou tlook for the tou rism sector in the Caribbean were also grow ing brighter.
As the year drew to a close, the greatest d irect econom ic im pact on the region appeared to be tha t the in ternationa l econom y's reactivation had been pushed back by two or three quarters, the reby dim m ing the prospects for an early econom ic recovery in the region.
It is still too early to analyse the longer-term im plications for Latin A m erica.
The heightened uncerta in ty surrounding the w orld 's politica l and econom ic fu ture a could dam pen d irect and financia l investm ent flow s to em erging econom ies.
Latin Am erican econom ic authorities should be heedful o f th is situation and take steps to strengthen the ir countries ' dom estic capacity to finance investm ent.
External sector Trade served as the main conveyor belt for the transmission of the international economic crisis to Latin America and the Caribbean.
A steep drop in external demand caused the export earnings of most of the countries in the region to shrink.
All the countries saw a downturn in the prices brought by their products on world markets, and many were, in addition, unable to ship as large a volume of exports as the year before.
The impact on domestic demand of these reductions in earnings and in production led to cut spending on imports in many instances.
Import prices were also down, but in numerous cases the volume of imports was smaller as well.
Under these circumstances, it comes as no surprise that the merchandise trade account ran a deficit and the regional trade balance worsened.
This was due to lower interest earned following cuts in international rates and to wider spreads on interest paid, the effects of which could not be offset by a decline in no longer-rising profit remittances.
Current transfers (composed primarily of remittances from residents in the United States) slowly continued to climb despite moderate decreases in the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Paraguay.
This form of income has traditionally been important for the Central American countries as well as for Bolivia and Ecuador, but in 2001 it also figured prominently in such medium­ sized economies as Colombia and Peru.
These factors combined to push the deficit on the balance-of-payments current account up from its 2000 level of US$ 46 billion (2.4% of GDP) to some US$ 53 billion (3.0% of regional GDP) in 2001.
The bulk of this increase is attributable to a decrease in Venezuela’s surplus to less than half its former level, the expansion of Mexico’s deficit and the change of sign in Colombia’s current account as it slipped into a deficit position.
Most of the countries’deficits were moderate in size (below 4% of their GDP), with the only exceptions being Bolivia and a few Central American countries (see figure 2).
Net autonomous capital inflows were too meagre to cover the region’s current account deficit; in fact, even when supplemented by compensatory financing, it took the total gross sum of those inflows -for the third year in a row- just to service the external debt and cover the returns on foreign capital.
The plentiful inflows received by Mexico were not enough to offset hefty capital outflows from Argentina and Venezuela, which thus played a major role in this situation.
The volume of international trade was virtually flat in 2001 after having surged by over 12% the year before.
This was reflected in a sharp deceleration of the growth of shipments from Latin America and the Caribbean, thus becoming the main channel of transmission of the global crisis to the region (see figure 3).
Weaker world demand was also reflected in the prices of the commodities most sensitive to swings in economic activity, i.e., raw materials.
In 2000, price levels of some products had begun to move back up towards the levels reached before the Asian crisis, but by 2001 all or a good part of the ground they had regained was lost once again.
The prices of other products never recovered following the decline that they had undergone during the Asian crisis.
The prices of oil and of petroleum products were down by 20% from their high levels of the year before.
After having fallen steadily during each of the preceding four years, coffee prices plunged by a further 30%.
The average prices of non-fuel minerals and metals for the first 11 months of the year were 9% lower than the average for the whole preceding year.
In the case of agricultural raw materials, the drop amounted to somewhat more than 1%, although some products exhibited double-digit declines; wood pulp prices, for example, were down by nearly 30%, in sharp contrast to cowhides, whose prices rebounded by 50%.
The prices of numerous metals -including zinc, tin, aluminum, steel products, silver and copper- fell by over 10% (see figure 4).
Food products were the only category that showed an improvement, withstanding the effects of the excess supply which glutted the international market, although the rise in their average annual price was only enough to take it back up to its 1996 level.
These results were largely attributable to banana prices, which jumped by nearly 50%, and wheat prices, which climbed 10% but were still far below their pre-Asian crisis levels.
The outcome was a widespread decrease in export earnings, with the regional total for external sales of both goods and services slipping to little more than US$ 390 billion, or 3.5% less than a year earlier.
The Central American countries and the main oil exporters fared the worst.
The steep drop in the prices of their coffee and oil exports were compounded, in the case of Mexico and the Central American nations, by slackening demand in the United States, on which they are particu larly dependent for their exports of manufactures and tourism services.
Venezuela also had to cut back on its oil shipments as part of a joint policy agreed upon by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC).
In the specific case of services, the Caribbean basin countries’ earnings from tourism and travel were struck hard by the impact of the September 11th terrorist attacks in the United States.
Many countries reported decreases of between 20% and 60% in the number of tourists in September.
Several national airlines were operating far below full seating capacity, and in some cases flights had to be cancelled.
Tourism revenues are vital for the economies of many countries, from Mexico to the islands on the eastern fringe of the Caribbean.
Argentina and Brazil were two of the very few countries that managed to boost their export revenues, although the gains were smaller than those of the year before.
Their earnings were underpinned by sizeable increases in the volume of shipments (up by 9% in the case of Brazil and 5% in that of Argentina).
The economic adjustments made by both countries were an important factor in this connection, although these processes took different courses, with Brazil’s currency depreciating while in Argentina, domestic absorption was curtailed.
This difference between the two largest South American economies’ adjustment processes was also reflected in their imports, whose volume fell by 14% in Argentina but rose by 4% in Brazil.
This divergence was also evidenced within the region as a whole, although the slump in economic activity in most countries of the region was generally accompanied by a slowdown or reduction in both the volume and value of imports.
Against this backdrop, the surge in Ecuador’s imports, which climbed by two thirds, and the double-digit increase in Colombia’s were particularly striking developments.
For the region as a whole, the net effect of these differing trends was that merchandise import volume leveled off, in sharp contrast to the 14% increase posted the year before.
Even though prices declined for all the countries, the total value of their imports of goods and services slipped to less than US$ 414 billion, down 1.3% from the previous year.
While trade with the rest of the world languished, in tra reg io n a l trade , w hich p rim arily involves m anufactu res, expanded w ith in the A ndean com m unity and the Central Am erican Common M arket (see figure 5).
It was not so w ith intra- MERCOSUR trade, which shrank by nearly 10% in the firs t three quarters, while the M ERCOSUR countries’ trade with nations outside the region rose.
The share of intra-M ERCOSUR exports in total exports thus dropped to 17.5%.
Trade among the member countries of the Andean community, on the other hand, increased at an annual rate of 11%, whereas their total exports shrank by 8%.
Although the Central American Common M arket countries’ trade with the United States was off sharply, their mutual trade flows expanded to the point where they consolidated their position as the integration group with the highest percentage of intra-scheme trade (27% of the total).
Plummeting autonomous capital inflows Autonom ous cap ita l inflow s to L atin A m erica plunged from US$ 67 billion in 2000 to US$ 33 billion in 2001, with Argentina witnessing a sharp turnaround that left it with outflows of over US$ 20 billion, followed by a contraction in flows to Brazil.
As a result, capital inflows were lower than they had been even in 1999 (2.5% of GDP), when the region was being buffeted by the repercussions of the Russian moratorium.
Argentina and Venezuela both registered large capital outflows, and Brazil’s inflows thinned due to the decrease in inward foreign direct investment (FDI).
To compensate for this reduction, the International Monetary Fund disbursed a record sum of over US$ 16 billion to Argentina and Brazil.
Meanwhile, Mexico’s plentiful inflows of 2000 carried over into 2001 thanks to high domestic interest rates and steadily declining rates in the United States.
Most of the other countries’ capital inflows remained at levels close to those recorded As during the preceding year, capital movements mainly took the form of FDI, even though these investment flows slowed for the second year in a row.
Net equity investment was negative, and all of the proceeds from bonds and bank loans had to be used to amortize maturing debts.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 17 External financing for 2002 is received ahead of time, despite the Argentine crisis Sovereign bonds issued by Argentina in the first quarter amounted to US$ 1.5 billion, as compared to the US$ 13 billion taken in during 2000.
Since it was unable to obtain financing on voluntary debt markets, in June the government swapped US$ 30 billion in securities in order to lighten its public debt service burden in 2002-2003.
Late in the year, the government attempted to implement a new, comprehensive plan for restructuring the public debt at an annual interest rate of no more than 7%.
By the end of November it had completed a swap involving over US$ 50 billion in domestic obligations.
Most of the other governments in the region had met their targets for public bond issues on international markets by mid-year, with the biggest borrowers being Brazil, Colombia and Mexico.
After the events of September 11th, the governments of Chile, Mexico and Uruguay took advantage of their investment-grade ratings to offer issues that would bring in external financing for 2002.
The governments of Colombia, the Dominican Republic and Guatemala also floated issues, but at higher interest rates.
Placements by private firms in the region were few and far between, as risk-averse investors preferred sovereign debt securities.
External financing for the region remained unstable and continued to suffer from bouts of volatility (see figure 6).
External borrowing conditions have yet to return to where they were prior to the Asian crisis.
Average terms hovered around five years, and at the end of the year the cost of external finance was holding at around 16% per annum (see figure 7).
This rate was partly accounted for by deep discounts on Latin American external debt on secondary markets, on Argentine offers and, to a lesser extent, on Brazilian paper.
If these securities are factored out o f the calculations, then the average annual cost was around 11%, which was still quite high considering the sizeable reductions in international rates seen in 2001.
The cost fluctuated very little because the increase in spreads was offset by reductions in the rates on United States treasury bonds.
As of November, the countries whose position had deteriorated the most were Argentina (from 12.5% the other hand, saw an improvement in borrowing costs (from 13% to 10%) together with a reduction in its spreads.
Chile, Uruguay and Mexico continued to enjoy some of the lowest external borrowing costs in the region.
Since the external debt burden decreased by a smaller proportion than exports did, the indicator provided by the ratio between these two variables worsened in most of the countries.
Among the most heavily indebted nations, Bolivia, Brazil and Peru continued, as in previous years, to report debt/exports ratios of around 350%; Argentina’s ratio fell to 450% from its 1999-2000 average of 500%, while Nicaragua’s held at around 700%.
Foreign direct investment weakens Net FDI in the region shrank for the second consecutive year, falling from US$ 64.8 billion in 2000 to US$ 58.3 billion in 2001.
Factors helping to account for the decline included the repercussions of the worldwide slowdown and the fact that privatization programmes were nearing completion in most Latin American economies.
This downswing was quite widespread but was particularly sharp in Argentina, Brazil and Venezuela.
Chile, on the other hand, turned its negative inflow of the year before into a positive balance.
Ecuador received a record volume of FDI and Mexico was able to maintain the significant levels posted over the past few years, even if the inflows from the sale of BANAMEX to City Group (US$ 12.5 billion) are not included in the figures.
During 2001 equity capital was highly volatile, and the only country recording a net inflow was Mexico, thanks to the appreciation of the peso.
Brazil and Chile, whose currencies depreciated quite steeply during the year, registered net outflows of equity capital.
This was reflected in stock market quotations, with the regional stock index fluctuating around a mark 15% lower in November than the level posted a year ago (see figure 8).
Macroeconomic policy The sharp decline in economic activity during the course of the year, together with the increasingly gloomy turn taken by economic agents’ expectations as domestic and external events slowed the economy, highlighted the need for a rapid reactivation of growth in almost all countries of the region.
However, policy-makers wishing to embark on countercyclical policies of the sort used by developed countries had very little manoeuvring room.
The slowdown or outright contraction of economic activity had a direct impact on tax receipts, given the close correlation between tax revenues and domestic economic activity in the region.
At the same time, expenditure levels were driven up by the rising cost of servicing the domestic and external debt, whose upward trend was attributable to the dual effect of increased borrowing and climbing exchange rates.
While many countries resorted to increased external borrowing to cover their widening fiscal deficits, this was in fact a lim ited option, and they generally had to curtail investment expenditure as well; the result was a procyclical fiscal spending pattern.
Monetary policy-makers had to be mindful of the repercussions of the adverse external environment, which tended to strengthen external competitiveness, the dollarization of a large part of the public debt and of private contracts in certain countries and the possible impact of exchange-rate trends on domestic prices.
Early in the year, monetary policy was aimed at providing sufficient liquidity to underpin the hoped- for economic reactivation, but this strategy was of limited usefulness because the expected expansion of aggregate demand never took place.
Consequently, monetary policy had to be tightened up more and more as the year moved on.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 19 Because of the priority focus on coping with the adverse economic environment and the fact that considerable progress had already been made, the pace of the structural reform process slowed.
Privatization operations slackened as this process ran its course, and the emphasis shifted to the award of concessions, to regulatory m easures, and to the prom otion of competition.
The main focus throughout 2001 has been on fiscal reforms and on regulations to improve bank supervision and to control illicit capital flows.
Regional integration efforts were limited to the tariff reductions already provided for in existing subregional agreements, while within MERCOSUR, trade disputes arose and discordances between the different partners’ exchange regimes posed a problem.
There are therefore a number of lessons to be learned from the beginning of the new millennium.
First, the cyclical character of market economies was strongly evident, for both developing and developed countries.
Second, w ithin the fram ework of an essentially asym m etric international system, the developed countries have deployed the fu ll arsenal of countercyclical instruments that economic policy has to offer in a bid to counter the contractionary trend of their economies.
In contrast, developing countries, among them those in the region, ran into difficulties in their efforts to do so and will therefore need to work towards regaining the ability to wield the entire array of available economic policy instruments if they are to avert sharp cyclical swings.
Another important development was that the much- feared “contagion effect” of Argentina’s financial crisis faded.
This crisis erupted midway through the year and had initially caused turbulence in some neighbouring countries, especially Brazil and Chile.
By the end of the year, however, A rgentina’s financial troubles appeared to have been contained within its borders.
This also lessened the likelihood that the initial contagion of Brazil would have a “domino effect ” on the rest of the region.
Fiscal deficits widen as public revenues contract Public-sector shortfalls had lessened in 2000 thanks to an upswing in revenues, but in 2001 the deficit for Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole widened to 3.1% of GDP.
In a region where there is a close correlation between tax revenues and trends in economic activity, fiscal policy was directed towards reducing expenditure, especially on investment, and towards financing the imbalance with domestic and external funds in an effort to avoid threatening the stability of domestic prices (see figure 9).
Almost all the countries saw a downturn in government income, and especially in tax revenues; the only exceptions were a few countries, such as Colombia, the D om inican Republic and Ecuador, that had successfully in troduced tax reform s.
Tum bling international oil prices had a direct impact on the earnings of State-owned oil exporters, with Venezuela being the hardest hit.
In Mexico, even though non-oil income increased, the reduction in petroleum-based revenues revived the legislative debate concerning the introduction of a tax reform bill that, among other changes, would apply the value added tax to currently exempt basic consumer items, a proposal that has yet to win acceptance.
Colombia was less seriously affected because of its diversified tax structure, while the reduction in Ecuador’s earnings from oil exports was offset by domestic revenues from increased economic activity, improvements in tax adm inistration and slackening inflation.
In the case of Chile, lower copper prices had both a direct effect on State coffers and an indirect impact in the form of a slowdown in growth driven by the mineral sector.
This prompted the Argentine Government to take emergency measures during the third and fourth quarters which included a hike in the financial transactions tax, a reduction in tax exemptions and the postponement of cuts in the gasoline tax.
Brazil’s efforts to move towards fiscal decentralization and to strengthen its tax system under the Fiscal Responsibility Act were thwarted by the slowdown in domestic economic activity stemming from the unfavourable external climate.
The decrease in Paraguay’s tax receipts was fully covered by royalty payments from the binational hydroelectric dams.
In Uruguay, however, the decline in tax receipts kept the fiscal deficit high.
One of the main reasons for the upswing in current expenditure was the additional cost of debt servicing.
A generally tighter monetary policy was one of the factors that made it more expensive to service domestic debt, and this effect outweighed the relief provided by lower international interest rates.
Current transfers to distressed sectors, such as the coffee industry, and the transitional costs of pension reforms incurred by such countries as Bolivia, El Salvador and Uruguay also fuelled the increase in public expenditure.
Most governments resorted to cuts in capital expenditure in order to slow the increase in the deficit.
After two earthquakes hit the country, El Salvador had to undertake investments that it had not bargained for in order to repair the damage.
The large deficits incurred during the last four years, w hich were covered w ith borrow ed funds, have significantly raised the level of public debt.
In fact, the public debt has risen so steeply that there is now some question as to the viability of resorting to this course of action again in the medium term.
The public sectors of Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica and Ecuador, among others, have built up debt stocks equivalent to more than half or even as much as their total GDP.
Foreign-exchange markets exhibit a response capacity, despite some tensions The massive inflow of foreign capital throughout much of the 1990s caused the real exchange rate in many countries of the region to trend downward.
In an effort to prevent this trend from undermining their external competitiveness, some countries sought to place limits on the revaluation of their currencies by restricting liquidity, but the results of this were just the opposite of what they had expected, as domestic interest rates rose and capital inflows expanded.
The external environment in 2001 was a far cry from what it had been during the preceding period of abundant capital inflows and burgeoning world trade.
The recent trend towards the depreciation of local currencies has not, however, been as strong as the appreciation of those currencies had been during that period.
With very few exceptions (Brazil, Chile and Colombia, with flexible exchange regimes, and Uruguay with its crawling peg and flotation band), the currencies of the countries of the region strengthened against the currency basket representing their main trading partners (see figure 10).
The end result in terms of the countries’ real exchange rates was determined by a variety of factors.
The contagion effect of the Argentine crisis that predominated during a good part of the year tended to elevate the dollar’s value in Brazil and Chile in the second semester, in the context of greater liquidity.
In Colombia’s case the value of the dollar rose somewhat more slowly than domestic prices, while the real exchange rate improved as a result of the strong real appreciation of the currencies of Ecuador and, to a lesser degree, Venezuela.
The faster pace of devaluation in Uruguay made for an improvement in its real exchange rate in relation to many of its trading partners, but most of this gain was undermined by Brazil’s steep devaluation.
A total of 13 countries having a variety of foreign- exchange regimes saw their currencies appreciate, even though the international environment was less conducive to such a trend than in previous years.
El Salvador embarked upon the dollarization of its economy in 2001 by adopting the dollar as its unit of account, thus becoming the third country in the region to introduce a system of this type.
While these developments point to the fragility of the balance of payments, in almost all cases these difficulties remained within the bounds of the national authorities’ scope of action.
The considerable weakening of productive activity was, however, a negative counterpart to the way that external sector weaknesses were handled macroeconomically.
Renewed austerity in monetary policy In early 2001, favourable expectations regarding international and national economic conditions prompted a number of countries to ease their monetary policies in a move aimed at providing sufficient liquidity for the anticipated economic reactivation.
When the reactivation failed to materialize, the monetary authorities were left with very little manoeuvring room.
In a context of growing international uncertainty, particularly due to the effects of the Argentine crisis, the restrictions on supply generated by the energy crisis and the slowing aggregate demand, the dollar’s value rose substantially, raising the spectre of possible pressures on domestic prices.
In response to these new developments, the benchmark interest rate was raised once again.
Steps were also taken to curb the supply of foreign exchange on the market and to tighten liquidity by issuing dollar-indexed securities and increasing the percentage of deposits held in reserve in the banking system.
In Chile, spillovers from events in Argentina prompted the central bank to intervene in the foreign- exchange market.
These operations resulted in a contraction of liquidity that exerted pressure on the dollar and put the inflation target in jeopardy; nonetheless, the money supply expanded in real terms.
Other countries, such as Paraguay and Venezuela, also modified the money supply’s growth rate as the year progressed by conducting open market operations designed to boost interest rates.
Mexico, on the other hand, eased its monetary policy, which had been somewhat restrictive at the beginning of the year, while various Central American countries lowered their interest rates in an effort to boost the liquidity of their economies (see figure 11).
El Salvador Chile Venezuela a Most recent period for which data are available; figures deflated by the consumer price index.
Credit supply and demand remain weak The credit market was influenced by adverse supply and demand factors.
The continuing fragility of financial systems in many countries (Colombia, Ecuador, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Peru, some of which had substantial arrears) and pessimistic projections of economic growth tended to restrict credit supply.
At the same time, the gradual weakening of the region’s economies, coupled with the reduced borrowing capacity of private agents, also dampened the demand for credit, even though interest rates were declining.
Where credit supply exceeded private demand, the banking system allocated a portion of its resources to finance public- sector deficits.
Slower pace of structural reform The privatization process continued to taper off, mainly because of a natural depletion of stock.
Many countries are now implementing concession procedures that should give added impetus to cooperation between the public and private sectors.
A number of Caribbean countries adopted financial measures designed to curb illegal transactions, some countries tightened up bank supervision, and others introduced measures to broaden their capital markets.
Bucking the trend of recent years, both Argentina and Venezuela instituted capital controls.
Some groups made progress in the development of a regulatory scheme for macroeconomic policy coordination.
The marked differences between the exchange regimes of the two largest members, in the absence of mechanisms for providing acceptable means of compensating for disequilibria, severely hampered further progress. 4.
Domestic economic performance In 2001, the Latin American economies were faced with an increasingly hostile external environment as growth in world trade and in the United States economy dropped off sharply and international prices for raw materials fell.
Financial turbulence associated with declines in the world’s stock markets and uncertainty in the wake of the events of September 11th in the United States generally affected the world’s economies.
The regional economy deteriorates Economic activity barely expanded in Latin America and the Caribbean during this year, cutting short the promising recovery that had begun in 2000.
This deterioration became more and more evident as the year progressed, with world economic growth slowing and the crisis deepening in Argentina.
Output increased by 1.5% in the first semester, but fell by 0.8% in the second (see figure 12).
Thus, for the year as a whole, the region’s output expanded by 0.5% and per capita output declined by almost 1% (see figure 13).
National income was flat, given the worsening terms of trade and an increase in net outward factor payments.
Regional consumption stagnated and gross fixed investment was reduced 1%, exports increased by just over 2% and imports held steady.
Among non-tradables, construction was one of the hardest hit sectors, with activity down sharply in a number of countries.
The Argentine automotive industry plummeted and maquila activities, which have been very dynamic in recent years, took a turn for the worse in some countries.
The adverse trend in economic activity was regionwide, affecting both countries with high growth rates and countries that were in the process of recovering from the crisis of 1999.
The first group includes Mexico, whose economy stagnated in 2001 after five years of growing at an average annual rate of 6%, as the long- lasting economic expansion in the United States -which purchases 90% of Mexico’s exports- came to an end.
The Dominican Republic experienced only moderate growth, in contrast with its performance in recent years when it had recorded the region’s highest rates of expansion.
The downturn was largely attributable to adjustments implemented the previous year, a weaker performance by maquila industries and the setback experienced by the tourism industry after September 11th.
Cuba was battered by Hurricane Michelle, the downturn of tourism and sugar sector and its growth rate fell to 3%.
The Central American countries also saw their growth rates slacken, as external problems were exacerbated by a widespread drought that caused heavy losses in agriculture and by low prices for these nations’ traditional export products.
Costa Rica was also hurt by a lower level of activity in the high-technology electronics industry.
Most of the South American countries, which were badly hurt by the crisis of 1999, performed poorly again in 2001.
Brazil’s promising recovery was cut short by its energy crisis, by the adverse international economic climate and by the worsening economic and financial crisis in the region.
The Chilean economy also lost momentum, despite its sound economic fundamentals, owing to the difficult external environment.
In Colombia, the reactivation was halted by the continued weakness of internal demand and deterioration of the external context, with the exception of strong growth in exports to Ecuador and Venezuela.
Peru, which is emerging from a severe political crisis, performed poorly during most of the year.
The Bolivian economy stagnated as a consequence of weakness in both domestic and external markets.
Given the severe contraction of external financing and capital flight, the recession that Argentina has experienced for the last three years continued during the first semester and worsened during the second.
Despite adjustment plans that were put into effect, the fiscal deficit did not recede because tax receipts were down sharply.
Uruguay also moved into its third consecutive year of recession, as the problems generated by the devaluation of the Brazilian real and the worsening o f the Argentine crisis were aggravated by the reappearance of foot and mouth disease, which dealt a severe blow to the country’s livestock industry.
The exception to this gloomy picture was Ecuador, whose economy expanded rapidly in the first semester, although its high growth rate later tailed off as world oil prices dropped.
Venezuela turned in moderate growth as booming petroleum prices and a low real exchange rate drove up domestic demand steeply, even though imports also increased considerably.
Paraguay recorded a modest upswing in activity which made up the slight decline of the previous year.
The countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) recorded a lower growth rate in 2001 (1.3%).
In 2001 Jamaica experienced a growth rate of 3%, after a 5-year period of stagnation.
In late 2001, lower tourism revenues hurt the countries of the subregion.
Investment declined in 2001 The upturn in gross fixed investment which had begun in 2000 was reversed in 2001 by a downturn of 1%.
Bleak expectations and the steps taken to limit public spending bore part of the blame for this setback.
External saving increased for the region as a whole, but this was attributable to a limited number of countries, as the indicator showed no variation or declined in the rest.
The northern portion of the region, which had enjoyed a substantial increase in investment in 2000, saw this trend reversed in 2001.
This downturn was largely attributable to Mexico, where investment had expanded by almost 9% in 2000 but decreased by around 3.5% in 2001.
In the other countries, the results reflected meagre GDP growth and were thus generally quite poor.
In South America investment performed no better than in the rest of the region.
Chile and Brazil turned in modest growth rates that were far below their first-quarter results, which had generated strong expectations of an upswing in these economies.
Investment fell steeply once again in Argentina, Peru and Uruguay, after having dropped sharply in previous years as well.
By contrast, the recuperation of investment continued in Colombia, after plummeting in 1999, but has yet to regain its 1998 level.
Venezuela had little difficulty in continuing to increase investment, in particular public investment, thanks to its hefty tax receipts from petroleum exports in recent years.
Inflation down again In 2001 the rate of inflation in the region declined once again, falling to 7%.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 25 increased in only five.
The latter group included Brazil and Guatemala, where inflation was three or four percentage points above the 2000 figures.
Ecuador made the greatest improvement, with a drop of over 60 percentage points in its rate of inflation.
In 2001 only three economies had double-digit inflation and the highest rate of all was only 25%.
In Ecuador, the inflationary spiral of 1999 and early 2000 came to a halt following the dollarization of the economy.
The inflation rate then began to drop steeply, sliding to 25%, while producer prices fell significantly (-3%) in the first 10 months of the year.
Mexico also turned in a good performance, clearly signalling the consolidation of its stabilization process, with an annual inflation rate ofjust 5.4%, for the best result since 1971.
In Brazil, the outcome for the year was fairly positive, since the rise of around 20% in the exchange rate and the increases in fuel prices and public rates and charges translated into no more than a moderate upturn in inflation.
This was attributable to a slower economic growth rate, along with stricter monetary policies.
Chile, El Salvador and Uruguay once again posted very low and declining inflation rates.
In Chile, this was despite a significant rise -o f over 15%- in the exchange rate.
Panama continued to display its customarily low rate of inflation, and Bolivia and Peru had virtually zero inflation in 2001.
In Argentina consumer prices declined by almost 2% and wholesale prices by 6%, in a deflationary phenomenon attributable to the recession in the country.
Labour market worsens in 2001 The sharp reduction in growth adversely affected the labour situation in the region.
The employment rate dropped by more than half a percentage point, but unemployment held steady at 8.4% since the labour supply also shrank (see figures 16a and 16b).
Be that as it may, unemployment was still high in historical terms.
In the 1990s real wages had increased at an average annual rate of between 1.5% and 2%, but in 2001 wages were stagnant or fell in most of the countries for which information is available, even though in some cases progress in bringing inflation under control helped to buoy real wages.
Real manufacturing wages increased in almost all countries, with an average rise in the region of about 2%.
This was partly attributable to a decline in employment in the region’s largest economies, Brazil and Mexico.
The employment rate was also down in Chile and Argentina, but it remained practically unchanged in Colombia.
The behaviour of this indicator in the individual countries was mixed, however, as the labour force participation rate decreased significantly in the two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, but increased in another five countries.
Although the rate of unemployment remained stable at the regional level, major differences existed across countries.
Unemployment increased in 10 of the 15 countries for which information is available and it did so quite sharply -by one percentage point or more- in five of them (Argentina, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Peru and Uruguay).
The recession in the United States economy had a negative impact on job creation in Mexico’s export sector, and employment in maquila export activities declined for the first time in 15 years (-14% between Septem ber 2000 and Septem ber 2001).
The absorption of labour by the informal sector offset the negative trend recorded in export sectors to a large extent.
In Brazil, net job creation declined as a result of fairly slack GDP growth.
This was a reflection of a lower labour fo rce p a r tic ip a tio n ra te fo r the w ork ing -age population in major urban centres, probably owing to p eo p le ’s d iscouragem ent at the lack o f job o p p o rtu n itie s .
In A rgen tina , the em ploym ent coefficient decreased by one percentage point, with the greatest fall in the Buenos Aires metropolitan area.
In Chile, job creation in the formal sector had begun to weaken in the fourth quarter of 2000, and this trend pushed the unemployment rate up slightly -to 9.5%- in 2001.
The deterioration in the labour situ a tio n has been partia lly m itigated by the introduction of direct public employment programmes and subsidies for private employment which benefited about 1.5% of the economically active population.
Urban unemployment remained high in Colombia, with an average of 18.5% in the first ten months of 2001, compared to 17.2% a year earlier.
The overall labour force participation rate remained unchanged from its 2000 levels.
This rate was still higher than the long­ term trend, however, due to increased participation by secondary workers in response to a decline in household income.
In Ecuador, the rate of employment began to increase again in the second half of 2000, Unemployment fell from 14.1% to 10.9%.
The sluggishness of the labour market had an impact on wages, and the few countries for which information is available generally recorded no more than minimal variations and decreases in real average wages in formal activities.
Slight increases were recorded in Chile and Colombia (of 1.5% and 0.2%, respectively), and decreases of between 0.4% and 3% were posted in Brazil, Peru and Uruguay.
The only exception was Mexico, where wages were up by 5.5% thanks to lower-than- expected inflation.
Real wages in m anufacturing registered a more favourable performance, specially in Mexico; whereas the remaining countries experienced modest increases, with the exception of Uruguay where wages fell.
Weak growth expected in 2002 There is still a great deal of uncertainty surrounding the hoped-for reactivation of the Latin American and Caribbean economies in 2002.
The outlook for the international economy remains fairly unpromising in view of the problems facing the United States, as well as slower growth in the European economies and a worsening of the Japanese crisis.
Despite the strong decrease in international interest rates, the is no sign of a return of capital to developing countries, due to the existing high perception of risk.
Foreign direct investment, the principal mechanism of transference of capital to the developing world in the 1990s is in a period of retraction.
The situation in North America will affect Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, especially since trade with the United States is likely to remain slack and the situation will be compounded by a crisis in the tourism sector.
A modest reactivation is expected in Mexico and Costa Rica (see figure 17), however.
In South America, Brazil’s performance will likely pick up somewhat, thanks to exports stimulated by a favourable exchange rate and a revival of internal demand if exchange rate conditions permit the adoption of a less restrictive monetary policy.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 27 The Southern Cone countries as a whole will register a new fall in GDP, but one that is basically due to Argentina, where perspectives are not encouraging since it is expected to again register a contraction.
Chile, on the other hand, should continue to show modest growth and Uruguay should do better than in 2001.
The Andean Community will continue to expand its activity level, although only slightly.
Peru’s economy should benefit from a mining mega-project and the normalization of its domestic situation, while Venezuela should grow moderately.
Colombia should show an improvement in its performance next year, and Ecuador is likely to continue its recuperation, although at a slower rhythm.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 29 Argentina The difficulties facing the Argentine economy took a turn for the worse in 2001 as gross domestic product contracted for the third year running and the rate of unemployment -already high- rose again while price and wage deflation intensified.
Private external financing dried up completely, deposits dwindled and the credit supply shrank with sharp interest rate hikes.
The decline in domestic spending was reflected in imports but, given that exports expanded, the trade balance turned in a considerable surplus.
This significantly reduced the current­ account deficit, which was financed with reserves.
Growing interest on the country’s debt, declining receipts and drying up of credit sources placed severe pressures on fiscal policy.
Primary spending was reduced, but was this was not enough to prevent a widening of the government’s deficit.
As the value of public debt titles plummeted, scepticism grew about the government’s ability to meet its commitments.
In November the government conducted a swap of old debt for new issues with lower rates of interest.
In early December, facing a massive flight of deposits, the authorities imposed limits on the withdrawal of funds held in banks and on transfers of capital out of the country.
Macroeconomic instability forced the government credits, but then failed to meet its fiscal targets and to implement a series of mainly fiscal measures, which confidence began to seep away again.
The debate extended to other economic team proposed a programme to reduce public central aspects of policy, including the monetary regime spending, but this generated such fierce opposition that and regional integration (MERCOSUR). it could never be implemented.
After another ministerial In late 2000, as private funding began to dry up, the shuffle, the authorities announced a plan that involved government obtained a large package of official external creating a tax on current-account debits and credits and sectoral programmes that included tax reductions.
Efforts were made to strengthen public finances by devising an easily collectable tax, improving the competitiveness of local industries and boosting expectations of an upturn in activity.
Domestic demand did not react as had been hoped, however, and the government’s borrowing conditions worsened still further.
In response to concerns over public debt maturities, the government conducted a debt swap for about US$ 30 billion, mainly with local creditors, which extended the maturity of the debt but entailed paying higher rates of interest.
The authorities also established an “enhanced convertibility” scheme, which maintained the central features of the currency regime, such as the requirement for monetary liabilities to be covered by reserves.
According to the new scheme, the peso would become convertible at a fixed parity to a basket of currencies, consisting in equal parts of dollars and euros, contingent on the dollar-euro rate first reaching parity.
Most external trade transactions would be closed immediately at the basket price, which would entail a slight increase in the effective exchange rate, a lthough reim bursem ents on exports were simultaneously reduced.
After a brief respite following the debt swap, Argentina’s country-risk rating increased again and quickly became an everyday point of reference among the public: it soared from 700 points in January to 1,400 in July.
Bank deposits trended downwards at an ever faster rate and, in response to the threat of a run on the banks, the central bank extended emergency loans and reduced reserves.
Even so, credit contracted very sharply, while the public sector absorbed a growing proportion of lending capacity.
Around mid-year, it became evident that the government no longer had access to market financing.
In July the authorities set out to reduce the deficit to zero, by stringently restricting spending to the amount of incoming tax receipts.
Public sector wages and pensions of over US$ 500 per month were subject to cuts of 13%, with immediate effect, and contract spending was reduced substantially.
The government also negotiated an advance payment of tax with a group of large firms.
After lengthy discussions, in August an agreement was reached with IMF on an additional loan package, based on the zero-deficit plan and reform of the system of tax sharing with the provinces.
These measures caused a brief hiatus in the flight of bank deposits, but the severe credit contraction hurt economic activity and tax receipts.
Fiscal difficulties arose both at the national level and in the provinces, some of which began to issue payments -including wages- in bonds that circulated as “emergency money”.
The first stage of this initiative was conducted in the domestic market and involved swapping national and provincial securities for loans, which had a ceiling interest rate of 7% and guaranteed tax allocation.
The operation was considerable (US$ 50 billion), and it is estimated that annual interest payments will be reduced by about US$ 3.5 b illion .
P rovincial debt was reprogrammed as part of agreements that redefined the amounts and conditions of tax-sharing, part of which will be paid in treasury bills.
Despite the debt swap, in late November fiscal and financial affairs were extremely fragile.
The financial stranglehold on the public sector was reflected in the budget proposal for 2002, which envisaged a reduction in primary spending of around 1.4% of GDP.
The government was still to deal with difficult negotiations to restructure the external portion of public debt in bonds.
Deposit flight worsened, to the point that the government found itse lf obliged to im pose restric tions on withdrawals and on transfers abroad, but continued to rule out currency devaluation.
The domestic crisis deepened and the government stepped down in late December.
With the new decrease in 2001, GDP has fallen by around 7% over the last three years.
Investment has continued to decline, and the capital formation ratio is thus likely to have dropped below 16%.
The downward trend of demand and GDP became steeper in the second sem ester and translated into sharp decreases in manufacturing and construction output.
Cereals (particularly maize, sorghum and rice) and some oleaginous products (sunflower and groundnuts) declined, but a surge in soya output -o f more than 30%- was more than enough to compensate for this.
Despite climatic disturbances, the 2001/2002 season is expected to bring new increases in output.
In manufacturing the activities least affected by the economic crisis were certain sectors of intermediate goods that enjoy access to external markets.
By contrast, the metallurgy and machinery industries, especially the automobile sector, saw output fall considerably.
The contraction of demand helped to maintain the deflationary tend of consumer prices, which affected both goods and services.
Wholesale prices decreased appreciably, with sharp falls in primary products and more moderate declines in manufactured goods.
The employment ratio dropped by one percentage point, with a steeper decrease in Greater Buenos Aires, while the labour force participation rate increased slightly.
Employment increased in the localities of the in terio r overall, but trends were very uneven.
Reduced domestic spending generated an elastic response from imports, which recorded their lowest level since 1995.
The sales of primary commodities increased considerably across the board, especially oleaginous seeds.
By contrast, sales of agricultural manufactures declined, especially vegetable oils, whose exporters encountered access difficulties in a number of markets; and meat, which faced sluggish external demand because of outbreaks of foot and mouth disease in livestock.
External trade generated a considerable surplus -the highest since the early 1990s- with a turnaround of almost US$ 10 billion with respect to the deficit recorded three years earlier.
Consequently, and despite the widening of the deficit in the line of interest and earnings, the curren t-account deficit narrowed significantly, to record what may be the lowest percentage of GDP since 1996.
As financing conditions grew harsher, inflows have corresponded mainly to loans from international agencies and to direct investment -though this has weakened- while private capital has flowed out of the country and the portfolio of public debt titles held by non-residents has shrunk.
The pressure of demand for external assets has been reflected in a heavy loss of reserves.
Bolivia Bolivia’s zero-growth rate in 2001 was attributable to the weakness of domestic and external markets, despite the Economic Reactivation Programme.
A boom in the hydrocarbons sector was undermined by persistently low rates of investment and consumption.
Unlike previous years, the external sector was unable to provide the impetus to turn this situation around, as exports -particularly of minerals and soya products- were subdued by the slowdown in the world economy.
Estimates show that the fiscal deficit will remain around 4% of GDP, and that foreign direct investment flows will be similar to 2000.
Exports, by contrast, will have slackened, despite strong growth in sales of natural gas to Brazil.
Exports of mining products and non-traditional manufactures were particularly weak in 2001.
Sluggish domestic demand meant that imports decreased at a lower rate than exports, which generated a current-account deficit just slightly smaller than the 2000 figure.
The general inertia has also been reflected in a sharp decrease in the rate of inflation.
In late October the consumer price index displayed a cumulative annual rate of barely over 1%.
The central bank implemented a monetary programme directed at preserving liquidity in the financial system.
A comparison of monetary aggregates between November 2000 and November 2001 reveals a slight increase, of around 3% in most cases.
I II III IV I II III IV I II ill Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 33 International reserves remained on a sound footing at the end of 2001, at US$ 90 million down on the previous year’s figure.
This will allow Bolivia additional debt relief worth an estimated US$ 1.543 billion in nominal terms over the next 15 years.
The rate o f devaluation is subject to macroeconomic trends and to the rate of inflation.
The devaluation of approximately 0.5% per month implemented in March 1999 was maintained in 2001, w hich m eant that in late N ovem ber a nom inal devaluation of almost 6% had been accumulated.
The nominal depreciation o f the Brazilian and Chilean currencies, however, and the imposition of a currency surcharge on importers in Argentina -which amounted in practice to a depreciation o f the peso- generated an appreciation of almost 2% in the real exchange rate.
Bolivia’s sluggish economic activity in 2001 was the result o f downturns in almost all the sectors o f production.
In the first half o f the year output declined in mining, manufacturing, electricity, gas and water, construction, commerce and financial services.
A substantial expansion in crude petroleum and natural gas and communications was barely enough to offset this combined slowdown.
Natural gas output increased by 53% in the first semester of 2001, with respect to the same period o f the previous year, on the back o f increased exports to Brazil.
The telecommunications sector recorded a growth rate o f close to 10%, which was mainly attributable to an increase in national long distance traffic.
Few labour market statistics are available, but there are signs that in 2001 unemployment was over 7% and underemployment rose, which led the government to implement emergency employment programmes.
As labour market conditions took a turn for the worse, wages stagnated in the formal sector.
Bolivia faced adverse external conditions in 2001, as global demand ebbed significantly, which translated into sharp declines in demand for commodities.
In the first semester of 2001 foreign direct investment was slightly higher than the same period o f 2000 and continued to go primarily to hydrocarbons, commerce and services.
The value of imports fell, which was chiefly attributable to the slowdown in domestic activity, with the worst affected being capital goods, especially transport equipment and intermediate goods for industry and construction materials.
Exports also declined in response to the downshift in the world economy.
The only exception was sales o f hydrocarbons, in particular natural gas exports to Brazil.
A sharp downturn was recorded in the mining sector, in which a number o f products, such as silver and zinc, saw substantial falls in both price and volume o f shipments.
The value o f non-traditional products (soya, cotton and coffee) was down by over 10%.
It is therefore estimated that in 2001 the current-account deficit will be slightly less than the figure recorded in 2000.
In late August 2001 outstanding medium- and long­ term external public debt was US$ 4.477 billion, which was slightly more than the balance at 31 December 2000.
This may be attributed to increased commitments to multilateral creditors, as debt owed to bilateral creditors decreased.
These held back growth, further unbalanced the public accounts, choked external capital flows and increased exchange volatility.
GDP expanded by a meagre 1.7%, which was a considerably lower rate than the figure of 4.5% recorded in 2000.
According to the extended national consumer price index, inflation increased to reach a cumulative rate of 7% in November, which was higher than the official target of 6%.
The nominal public deficit increased to 8% of GDP (compared with 4.5% in 2000), while the current-account deficit widened from 4.2% to 4.7% of GDP owing to the exchange-rate effect.
External financing contracted markedly, with a drop of 34% in autonomous net capital inflows.
This decrease included even foreign direct investment, which has performed well in recent years.
Unemployment decreased to 6.3% in the period from January to October, which is 0.8 percentage points lower than the average rate for 2000.
Mounting uncertainty in the external markets and the resulting upward trend of the exchange rate led the central bank to reverse its policy of using interest-rate cuts to keep inflation on target.
The recessionary impact of higher nominal interest rates was exacerbated by energy rationing and by the substantial increase in the exchange rate (29% in the first semester).
In response to exchange rate volatility, in July the central bank announced the supply of an additional US$ 50 million per day until the end of the year, or a total of US$ 6 billion.
In August, the Brazilian government negotiated a new stand-by arrangement with IMF, to run until December 2002, which provided additional resources of about US$ 10 billion.
At the same time, the floor level of international reserves was renegotiated -down to US$ 20 billion- which freed foreign currency for exchange market intervention.
The events of Septem ber and the relentless deterioration of the situation in Argentina, however, exacerbated poor expectations.
The exchange rate rose by a further 10%, which represented a cumulative increase for the year of 44%.
In order to avoid new increases in the interest rate, which was already at 19%, in the two-month period September-October the central bank sold US$ 9.1 billion in exchange rate-indexed debt, which caused a severe impact on the state of fiscal affairs.
In addition, the b an k s’ reserve requirements on time deposits increased to 10%, which drained liquidity from the system.
Lastly, October saw the entry into force of measures that had been announced in July, which stipulated higher capital adequacy ratios on banks’ foreign-exchange exposure.
S low er grow th and higher exchange rates contributed to an improvement in the trade balance, which began to display a sizeable surplus in August.
As international interest rates continued to trend downwards and B raz il’s external borrowing conditions were increasingly differentiated from those of Argentina, expectations in the foreign exchange market improved, which generated a rebound in the exchange rate trend in November.
The cumulative increase in the price of the dollar to 10 December was therefore 21%, which was half of the figure recorded in September.
The state of fiscal affairs took a turn for the worse in 2001, despite a considerable consolidated public- sector primary surplus which, at 4.5% of GDP in January-October, outstripped the target.
The nominal deficit w idened considerably ; this was entirely attributable to nominal interest which was, in turn, a consequence o f devaluation.
B raz il’s currency depreciated by 4.9% of GDP, given that a significant portion o f public debt is indexed to the exchange rate or denominated in foreign currency.
The appreciation o f the real in the last two months of the year made it possible to mitigate this effect, but nevertheless the impact over the year as a whole was considerable.
The increase in the deficit pushed the net public debt to GDP ratio up from 49.4% in December 2000 to 54.8% in October 2001, though this trend eased at the year’s end.
Against this complex macroeconomic backdrop, trends in activity varied greatly between sectors.
Growth of 5.5% in the agricultural sector contrasted with stagnation in manufacturing, while services posted an intermediate result of 2.8%.
Within manufacturing, capital goods output increased by almost 13%, while the other subsectors stagnated or even slipped back (-1.8% in consumer durables).
On the supply side, the year was marked by an acute energy crisis that broke out in May, triggered by a severe drought in a country in which, after a decade of patent underinvestment, 93% ofthe electricity supply comes from hydroelectric sources.
This crisis forced a reduction of up to 20% with respect to the second quarter average of 2000 in power consumption by households, industry and commerce in the south-east and north-east o f the country.
The performance o f capital goods appears to have been associated with favourable trends in gross fixed capital formation, which were in turn a delayed response to output growth in 2000 and early 2001.
Between January and September investment accounted for 19.4% of GDP, compared with 18.4% in the same period of the preceding year.
This component of aggregate demand has heightened the positive impact o f exports and offset the negative effect of a contraction in aggregate demand.
It appears, however, that in the last quarter investment slipped back somewhat.
Owing to the subdued expansion of GDP, net job creation between January and September was 20% below the figure recorded in the same period of 2000.
In the second semester o f 2001, however, rates o f urban unemployment stabilized at around 6.3%, which was lower than a year earlier.
In 2001 inflation will be higher than in 2000, owing in particular to increases in administered prices (energy, telecommunications and petroleum), which are in turn attributable to the entry into force o f privatization contacts in a number o f these utilities.
In addition, agricultural prices have proven sensitive to currency depreciation, as exports account for a large share of some sectors.
Lastly, some firms attempted to recover profit margins by passing on the higher costs - in particular of imported inputs- to the final consumer.
Despite international disturbances, the external sector recorded a number o f advances in the current account and adverse results in the capital account.
In the first ten months ofthe year exports increased by 7.3% with respect to the same period of 2000.
This expansion was led by commodities, the sales of which were up by 24%.
From July on, power rationing and the downshift in the world economy combined to depress the value of exported manufactures and semi-manufactured goods.
The price effect became a constraining factor once again, with a drop of over 2% in exports as a whole.
This phenomenon was particularly marked in semi-manufactured goods (down by 13%) and commodities (down by 9%).
The crisis in Argentina also hurt manufacturing exports, with a decrease of 5.4% in total value in the third quarter, which accounted for 91% of the total decrease in exports of manufactures in this period.
Imports posted an increase of just over 4% in the first ten months of the year, led by capital goods and, to a lesser extent, consumer durables.
By contrast, the expansion of raw materials, intermediate products and fuels was slight.
This was 4% higher than the previous year, despite an improvement in the goods balance, which posted a surplus of US$ 1.5 billion.
The deficit on the factor account widened to US$ 22.7 billion, which was US$ 2.2 billion more than the 2000 figure, owing to interest payments and increased profit remittances.
Despite the relatively positive position of current transactions, the Brazilian economy faced external borrowing problems.
Owing to the deterioration of the international environment, net inflows from bond sales decreased in the period January-October from US$ 5.1 billion in 2000 to US$ 490 million in 2001.
Chile The Chilean economy -one of the most open in Latin America- will see its growth rate decline from 5% in 2000 to 3% in 2001.
The world economic slowdown has severely hurt terms of trade, which have fallen back by 7% and, as a result, gross domestic income will increase by a meagre 1%.
Despite the harsh international conditions, with an increase in the exchange rate and a reduction in the rate of interest, the authorities were able to generate monetary conditions conducive to reactivation in the medium term.
According to official estimates, total income will have dropped by around 7 GDP percentage points, owing to the effect of copper and petroleum prices, reduced flows of external capital and slower growth of export volumes than in a “normal” year.
The exchange rate increased markedly until October, keeping inflation at the top of the central bank’s target range (an annual rate of between 2% and 4%), although later a considerable drop in fuel prices brought the rate to 3.1% for the year as a whole.
The nominal exchange rate rose by 25% in the 12 months to October, which was equivalent to a real currency depreciation of 12%, taking into consideration variations in exchange rates and in prices in main trading-partner countries.
Although this adjustment is partly attributable to reduced inflows of foreign exchange and an expansion of domestic liquidity, for much of the year the nominal exchange rate shadowed the trend of A rgentina’s country-risk rating, which was a clear indication of a degree of contagion.
In response to the magnitude of the increase in the exchange rate, in August the central bank announced the sale of up to US$ 2 billion in reserves until December, thus ending the hitherto clean Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 37 float of the exchange rate.
The moderate response of the inflation rate to devaluation and the subsequent intervention of the central bank in the exchange market made it possible to keep the base rate of interest very low from June onwards (a nominal rate of 6.5%), after five consecutive cuts since the beginning of the year, which represented a total of 150 basis points.
In mid-November the exchange rate began to break free from the Argentine country-risk rating, which appeased fears that inflation would surge as a result of the exchange rate’s patent misalignment with forecasts made early in the year.
In October international reserves rose above US$ 14 billion, as the sale of close to US$ 800 m illion to the com m ercial banks as part of the intervention programme announced in August was offset by an increase in fiscal deposits in the central bank, which corresponded to the proceeds of a government bond issue.
In a move to bring the management of monetary policy tools into line with international practices, in August the central bank abandoned its system of setting a real daily interest rate in favour of a nominal rate regime.
With respect to fiscal affairs, income was 3.5% lower than the budgeted figure, which was a reflection of lower than-expected economic growth and the deterioration in the price of copper (the production of which is almost 50% State-owned).
The comparative autonomy of spending against a background of volatile income constitutes a distinguishing feature of the current fiscal policy and has had a significant stabilizing effect on the level of activity.
In October the government conducted a sovereign bond issue for US$ 650 million, with a spread of 256 basis points.
Part of this sum will go to the Copper Stabilization Fund to deal with the eventuality of a further deterioration in the price of the commodity in 2002.
The government obtained approval for a number of laws to which it attaches great im portance.
The legislation on unemployment insurance provides for the creation of individual funds for new contracts, so that a worker who becomes unemployed after contributing to the fund for a full year can accede for five months to unemployment insurance on a sliding scale.
The tax reforms include a law which tightens controls and should reduce evasion by just over one GDP percentage point in the medium term.
Another piece of tax legislation has altered the structure of income tax, by reducing the marginal rate on medium- and high-income bands, and progressively raising tax on corporate profits from 15% to 17%.
Capital market reforms have eliminated capital gains tax, lowered the tax rate on interest payments of fixed-income instruments for foreign investors and created tax incentives to encourage voluntary saving on the part of workers.
This legislation complements other initiatives, such as the Law on Public Share Offers and Corporate Governance (known as the OPAS legislation), and the completion of the capital-account liberalization process announced by the central bank in April.
In December a labour reform entered into force which entails tighter controls and a possible -though moderate- increase in the cost of laying off workers.
The promulgation of this legislation put an end to a prolonged debate between the government and representatives of the business community.
High risk premiums and constraints on commercial bank lending have exacerbated the difficulties of small and medium-sized firms, which partly accounts for the meagre growth recorded in manufacturing.
These factors have also contributed to the persistence of unemployment, which continues to be the A dm inistration’s main unresolved issue, standing at around 10% in the winter months for the third year running.
Employment programmes financed directly by the public sector or through subsidies to private employment created over 150,000 jobs, which helped to mitigate the deterioration in the labour market.
The value of exported goods will decline, mainly in response to the worsening of the price of copper -which fell by 12%- and of pulp, as export volumes increased by 8%.
The value of imports decreased by 3%, w ith decreases in consum er goods (-5%) and intermediate goods (-2%) and increases in capital goods (5% in value and just over 7% in volume).
A decrease of 7% in the price of petroleum accounts for a drop in the value of intermediate goods imports.
To October, foreign direct investment inflows stood at US$ 4.032 billion, which corresponded to purchases of local firms in late 2000 and large-scale mining projects.
Colombia In 2001 the Colombian economy failed to consolidate the slight upturn recorded in 2000 and weakened again.
Output will have expanded by 1.5% -more than a percentage point below the previous year’s figure of 2.7%- which means that the country has not yet recovered from the downshift experienced in the recession of 1999.
Despite an expansionary monetary policy, domestic demand weakened by a number of factors including unemployment and underemployment -which affect half of the economically active population- was unable to offset a downturn in external demand.
Terms of trade took a turn for the worse, especially the international prices of petroleum and coffee.
This, in combination with a downturn in crude petroleum production, hurt the external balance (-2.6% of GDP).
The fiscal balance improved slightly, to record a deficit of 3.3% of GDP.
M acroeconom ic policy became increasingly expansionary as the year progressed, in an effort to stimulate domestic demand in response to worsening external conditions.
In a context m arked by the downward trend of inflation and a stable exchange rate, the central bank cut the intervention rate it uses to manage liquidity seven times, from 12% at the beginning of the year to 8.5% in December.
In early December, the deposit rate (measured as the financial system’s average for 90-day fixed-term deposits) was 11.5%, which was two percentage points below the Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 39 January figure.
Lending rates did not display a significant decrease until the last quarter.
The total portfolio continued to shrink in nominal terms, but at a slower rate than early in the year.
In particular, from February on the contraction of the mortgage portfolio became gradually less severe.
The central government deficit decreased to a figure equivalent to 4.6% of GDP, compared with 5.6% in 2000, and the non-financial public sector deficit was down from 3.5% of GDP in 2000 to 3.3% in 2001.
The government’s narrower deficit is attributable to a nominal increase of 27% in tax receipts in the first three quarters, thanks to tax reforms that came into effect in January.
The tax ratio thus increased from 8.9% of GDP to 10.2% in this period, which enabled the government to increase overall spending by 18%.
The rest of the non-financial public sector deteriorated slightly, mainly due to a downturn in output and a decrease in petroleum prices.
The government and IMF arrived at an agreement to increase the upper limit of the target for the NFPS deficit from the initial figure of 2.8% of GDP to 3.3%.
In addition, the Administration obtained approval for reforms to the system of transfers to regional and local governments, and a project to reform the pensions system is to be discussed in Congress in 2002.
The government secured guarantees for its external borrowing requirements for 2001 and much of 2002, in order to avoid payment of a higher risk premium generated by the period of elections in combination with international financial instability.
The Administration also continued to diversify its sources of financing and restructured domestic public debt, which lowered the costs of external and domestic borrowing.
As a result of foreign exchange inflows obtained by the government, from June the exchange rate stabilized, and nominal currency depreciation at the end of November thus came to 4%.
The slowdown in the economy began in the final quarter of 2000 and intensified in 2001.
GDP growth from January to September was 1.4%, compared with 2.8% in the year-earlier period.
External demand, which was the driving component of aggregate demand in 2000, weakened during the year, while domestic demand continued to be sluggish, especially consumption.
The hardest hit sector was manufacturing, which declined by an average of 0.2% in the first nine months of the year, after expanding by 10% in 2000.
By contrast, construction and the financial sector displayed a slight upturn after several years of decline.
Despite the high average, the general trend was downward, as the unemployment rate decreased from a peak of 21% in January to 16.8% in October.
The overall labour force participation rate was similar to 2000, which was still higher than the long-term trend, owing to increased participation by secondary household workers in response to declines in household income.
Lacklustre domestic demand helped to keep the trend of consumer price increases at around 8% throughout the year, in line with the central bank’s target.
As a result of lower prices for agricultural and mining goods and smaller cumulative depreciation, from May on the wholesale price index (WPI) displayed less variation and the rate eventually converged with consumer price rises.
On the external front, the first nine months of the year saw an increase of 13.6% in imports and a decrease of 3.9% in total exports.
These trends had the effect of substantially reducing the trade surplus, which will bring the current-account deficit to around 2.6% of GDP for the year overall.
Due to both a downswing in international prices and reduced shipments, the export value of the main generators of foreign currency declined drastically (with hydrocarbons down by 28% and coffee by 33%) which resulted in a slump of over 18% in traditional exports.
By contrast, sales of non-traditional exports continued to rise (up 11%), led by exports to Venezuela (34%) and Ecuador (61%).
Capital inflows, particularly long-term funds, were more than enough to finance the current-account deficit.
The balance-of-payments capital account is set to close the year with a surplus of about US$ 2.9 billion, and international reserves will stand at US$ 10 billion.
Ecuador Spurred by investment in various areas, including the construction of a new oil pipeline, and by an upturn in household consumption, GDP in Ecuador grew by 5% in 2001, which, with the recovery in the preceding year, should bring it closer to the 1998 level.
Inflation declined to less than 25% or a quarter of the rate recorded in 2000, and public sector figures are expected to show a small surplus for the second consecutive year.
The marked decline in oil prices again exposed the economy’s vulnerability and resulted in an 8% deterioration in the terms of trade.
Moreover, difficulties continued to plague the banking and financial situation, while fiscal and social security reform remained a key issue on the agenda.
The funds provided by the International Monetary Fund under the programme adopted in April 2000 and scheduled to run until the end of 2001 were crucial for the central bank to consolidate the dollarization of the economy.
Operations for converting sucres to United States dollars were completed in June, while further steps were taken to whittle the bank cash ratio down to 4%.
In the first half-year, interest rates for dollars showed little variation, with the nominal annual rate on deposits remaining at around 7% and the nominal lending rate at around 15.5%; despite some fluctuations, by the end of the year, rates had declined by half of a percentage point, still remaining negative in real terms.
With the dollarization of the economy, the central bank exercised less control on the monetary base, as the latter included only bank reserves (cash reserves) and the issue of subsidiary coin in national currency.
As a result, the performance of the economy is more a function of fiscal policy.
The fiscal situation, which had already shown some progress in the preceding year, associated with the favourable movement in oil prices, showed further improvements thanks to the recovery and to modernization of the tax administration, that is, domestic factors.
In the first half of 2001, total non- financial public-sector revenue represented 28% of GDP, (compared with 26% in the corresponding period of the previous year - annualized figures); this figure reflects the substantial increase in tax collections and a slight rise in oil revenue, although oil revenue on exports actually declined.
The price of crude fell from US$ 25 per barrel in 2000 to US$ 20 dollars per barrel in January- September 2001 and continued to slide until late into Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 41 the last quarter.
It should be noted that a one-dollar decline in the average price for crude means US$ 7-8 million dollars per month in forgone revenues.
Despite the fact that the 12%-14% rise in VAT adopted by Congress in June was overruled by the Constitutional Court, internal tax collections actually increased.
There were fresh outbreaks in the prolonged crisis of the banking and financial system.
The collapse, in mid-2001, of the largest State-owned bank (Filabanco) was followed by the failure of the Banco del Pacifico; both of these liquidations gave rise to considerable quasi­ fiscal costs, which will have to be added to the costs of the bailout carried out previously.
Conversely, the private banking system displayed more favourable indicators and im proved their managem ent w ith a view to redeeming its non-performing loan portfolio, which, in September, accounted for 14% of its loans.
Under the IMF agreement, authorities pressed ahead with a series o f regulations fo r tigh tening up on banking adm inistration and financial supervision and, in particular, with a system for refinancing private debts.
Gross domestic product growth was fuelled by domestic demand and by the increase in oil supply.
Led once again by the private sector, gross fixed investment expanded by 30%, a record rate attributable in part to the construction of the Crudos Pesados oil pipeline (OCP); despite this, it remained below the 1998 level.
For the 2000-2001 biennium, private consumption is expected to show a cumulative recovery of about 5%, thus reversing by half the decline recorded in 1999.
In this context, the average employment rate rose to 49.7%, up by almost one percentage point compared with the average for 2000.
Nevertheless, with high levels of emigration to destinations abroad, unemployment declined much Inflation was highly favourable.
In November, the consumer price index showed a cumulative rise of 24.6%, compared with 96.8% a year earlier; this result reflects the reduction in the price of food and beverages.
From June to October, the producer price index reflected negative changes, which heralds lower rates of inflation for the first few months of 2002.
In January, the monthly minimum wage increased from US$ 98 to US$ 121, a rate that was maintained up to November; in view of the downward trend in inflation, minimum wages, measured in real terms, should have increased by around 12%.
The effects of the global slowdown have spilled over into the Ecuadorian economy through the business channels, especially via prices.
In October, merchandise exports fell by 9% in value terms; oil products, by 17% and banana and shrimp, by about 2%.
Current transfers, mainly remittances from Ecuadorians abroad, remained in the US 1.5 billion range, helping to offset the chronic deficit in services and factor income.
Contributing to the change in this last item was the interest relief granted when the external debt was restructured in August 2000.
Long­ term capital inflows, especially foreign investment, mainly in the petroleum sector, reached a record figure ofUS$ 1.37 billion; but, as there was also an appreciable outflow o f short-term private capital, the net balance was US$ 520 million.
The global balance of payments showed a deficit of US$ 300 million, two thirds of which was financed by IMF loans and the remainder out o f international reserves.
The gross external debt o f Ecuador, o f the order o f US$ 13.6 billion, did not reflect any significant variation.
Nevertheless, indicators o f the external debt burden continued to be cause for concern.
Thus, despite the restructuring negotiated with private creditors in August 2000, the external debt/GDP ratio stood at 80%.
Paraguay After four years of poor performance and six years of decline in the per capita GDP, in 2001 the Paraguayan economy grew by 1.5%, as the recovery in the agricultural sector offset the fall in the other productive sectors.
The fragile external situation resulted in a real depreciation of the guarani, which in view of the low level of reserves, made it necessary to adopt a contractionary policy.
Against this background, at the end o f November, the accumulated rate o f inflation over the twelve-month period was at around 6%.
After two consecutive years o f expansionary fiscal policies, the government decided in 2001 to implement more austere policies, in view of the accumulated public debt, the lesser degree of access to external financing and the urgent need to achieve the goals established in the staff-monitored programme with the International Monetary Fund.
The deficit o f the central government was reduced to the equivalent of one percentage point of GDP (3.6% in the previous year), basically by increasing income.
This was achieved by increasing the collection o f duties on goods and services, particularly selective taxes on fuels, and o f non-tax receipts from binational dams.
At the same time, expenditure was reduced, mainly by means of cuts in capital investment.
At the end of the third quarter barely a quarter o f such projects had been implemented.
Current expenditure had also been maintained at the same level as the previous year by cutting expenditure on goods and services.
It was estimated that the rest of the public sector would also reduce its deficit, thanks to an improvement in the accounts o f public enterprises.
During the third quarter, the depreciation o f the guarani and an inflationary surge led the Central Bank of Paraguay (BCP) to sell around 100 million dollars.
Open-market operations with the placement of monetary regulation instruments were not very significant.
In the second quarter, in contrast, when the national currency suffered severe shocks because of the fragile subregional situation, BCP chose to make more placements of such instruments in view of the country’s low level of international reserves.
In the third quarter, both the rates and placements o f monetary regulation instruments increased significantly, in order to raise interest rates and prevent a fall in the guarani.
As a result o f this policy, the real lending and deposit rates rose by 19% and 7% respectively.
The interannual growth rate in monetary aggregates at the end of September was less than the level observed in the same month in 2000.
In fact, the M1 grew by only Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 43 4.0%.
The level of reserves at the end of the third quarter had decreased to US$ 690 million, a figure equivalent to a little more than two months of imports.
With regard to the reforms, the government went ahead with the privatization process, intervening in the administration of the Sanitary Works Corporation (CORPOSANA) and the National Telecommunications Administration (ANTELCO) in order to prepare for their sale to the private sector.
The only sector with positive growth in 2001 was agriculture, which after shrinking by 8.5% in the previous year, grew by around 10%, thanks to an increase in the production of its main export crops, cotton and soya, in both cases by 20%.
There were good crops of the main products for national consumption, tapioca, maize and sugar.
The other productive sectors remained stagnant or declined, as suggested by the preliminary indicators for the construction sector (including public works) and the manufacturing industry.
In November cumulative inflation for the year reached 6.8%, three percentage points lower than the comparator, and 6.4% over a twelve-month period.
The variation in the prices of national goods followed the general trend, although the prices of non-tradable goods, especially housing, transport and education, rose by more than the average (around 10%).
In turn, the increase in the prices of imported goods fluctuated at around 8%, owing to the depreciation of the guarani.
The producer price index (PPI) increased similarly to the CPI (6.4% in twelve months), which was mainly due to the rise in imported products, as the wholesale prices of national inputs did not change.
The minimum salary was readjusted by 15% in May which represented an average real increase of 3% in the first half of the year.
The average salary improved a little over 2% in real terms during the first half of 2001 compared to that period in the previous year.
The sectors of basic services, transport, communications and services suffered real losses and workers in commerce, construction and industry recorded slight improvements.
The current account deficit contracted to US$ 100 million owing to a reduction in the trade deficit.
This is explained in turn by a decrease in imports, which were affected by the lower income from products destined for re-export.
Total exports stagnated owing to the weakening in the flow of products to the informal markets of Brazil and Argentina, countries which imposed greater access barriers.
This reduction was barely offset by exports, which in September increased by 12.5% (from US$ 686 million to US$ 772 million), thanks to the increase of close to 20% in the value of soya sales, which increased by US$ 300 million.
In this area, the increase in the physical volume (25%) easily compensated for the drop in the international price (-5%).
Cotton exports increased by 15% (reaching 72 million) thanks to a 30% increase in volume, which also managed to offset the steep drop in international prices which occurred as of September 2000.
Sales recorded to MERCOSUR fell by around 20%, as a result of the weakening of the markets in neighbouring Brazil and Argentina, which could not be offset by the increased exports to Uruguay.
The balance of external public debt at the end of the third quarter was US$ 2,190 million, similar to the level recorded twelve months previously.
Peru In a year of political transition, the gross domestic product of Peru contracted by a half percentage point.
The first half of the year was marked by political uncertainty and a worsening of the recession that the country had fallen into at the end of 2000, but signs of recovery appeared in the second half of the year.
The weakness of internal demand eroded fiscal revenue, which contracted in real terms; however, cuts in expenditure, especially in investment, diminished the public sector deficit to 2.4% of GDP, a gap that was financed mainly by external resources.
In this recessionary situation, employment grew by scarcely 1%, so that the annual rate of inflation was practically zero.
As a result of the moderate increase in exports and a slight reduction in imports, the external deficit continued to diminish and was equivalent to 2% of GDP.
Although GDP grew by 3% in 2000, the economy entered a recession in the final quarter of that year in view of increasing political uncertainty.
This situation continued into the first half of 2001, when the interim government, while improving the transparency of public accounts, managed to ensure sound fiscal management, after the increase in expenditure in the first half of the previous year.
The first measures taken by the new government were designed to revitalize internal demand and reduce unemployment.
The freedom to set interest rates was maintained, as well as the floating exchange-rate system, with occasional intervention from the Central Bank.
Electricity prices for small consumers were also reduced and some personal and company income tax rates were reduced.
Private investment, which had begun to fall in the middle of the previous year, continued to decline during 2001.
Public expenditure also diminished, in the context of fiscal caution encouraged both by the in terim Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 45 government and by the new government that took over in July.
Exports also continued to rise, but were not sufficient to counteract the negative effects previously mentioned.
In addition to weak internal demand, there were unfavourable factors affecting supply in the primary sectors, so that GDP fell Agricultural production did not manage to achieve the high level of production of the previous year.
The performance of fishing was irregular, owing to changes in seawater temperature, while construction continued its marked de, in view of the lack of financing and the weakness of internal demand.
Only mining showed significant growth, due to the start-up of production at the Antamina polymetal mine, which as of 2002 will add a few percentage points to GDP growth.
During the third quarter, however, the primary sectors showed a significant recovery (almost 7% higher than the levels of the previous year), which seemed to indicate the end of the recession.
The non-primary sectors remained negative until the third quarter, but with a clear trend to recovery towards the end of the year.
The fall in GDP caused a deterioration in public revenue in real terms, despite which the fiscal imbalance was reduced.
In the first half of the year the strict fiscal management of the interim government reduced the deficit by almost one percentage point.
In the context of greater availability of external financing, the strategy of the new government gave priority to overcoming the recession, and managed to enhance the flexibility of the agreement reached with the IMF, which involved reducing the deficit in 2001 to the level of 1.9% of GDP.
In this new situation the annual deficit was equivalent to 2.4% of GDP.
Two-thirds of this gap was financed from external sources; incom e obtained from privatizations also contributed, although it was less than in the previous year.
The new political situation also had positive effects on the exchange market.
The reduced level of uncertainty attenuated the demand for foreign currency, at a time when the supply was increasing owing to the recovery in primary exports and the flow of external funds was increasing.
In this way, in contrast with the volatility observed in the months prior to the election, as of July the Peruvian currency appreciated in relation to the dollar and its nominal value at the end of the year was almost 3% less than at the end of 2000.
The greater confidence in the exchange market also had repercussions on interest rates, which rapidly declined after the election.
The inter-bank rate for national currency, which had climbed to an annual 16% in June was below an annual 4% in November.
In any case, credit to the private sector remained depressed: although placements in national currency increased by 5%, the bulk of the credits, denominated in foreign currency, contracted by alm ost 4%.
The banking system continued the rescheduling process, but in a situation where non­ performing debts were still at a level of about 10%.
The spread on sovereign bonds for Peruvian debt improved after the elections, reaching around 570 basic points at the end of November.
The stability of the exchange rate and the weakened internal demand kept prices depressed, to the extent that there was deflation in the second quarter.
The inflation rate for the twelve-month period ending in November was zero, the lowest value for over 40 years.
The higher export offer and the recession contributed to a further reduction in the trade gap, which this year was equivalent to 2% of GDP (3% in 2000).
The exports of goods increased by 1.5% owing to the significant increase (8%) in shipments, as international prices for the main traditional products shrank by 6%.
The rise in external sales was thus concentrated in non- traditional products, whose value increased by more than 10%.
Imports also contracted slightly, as the increase in the quantity imported did not manage to offset the fall in prices.
The decline in purchases of capital goods due to the low level of investment contrasted with the growth in purchases of consumer goods and intermediates.
The external current account deficit was financed without difficulty with capital income, mainly private, so that there was an accumulation of international reserves.
Uruguay The instability of neighbouring countries and the reappearance of foot-and-mouth disease adversely affected the performance of the Uruguayan economy in 2001.
The gross domestic product fell by 2.5%, with a cumulative reduction of 7% over the past three years, which is more than 10% in the case of national income.
Despite the care taken to manage expenditure, the public sector deficit was equivalent to 3.8% of GDP, owing to the close relation between the level of activity and fiscal revenue.
As the private sector showed a surplus, the gap in the current account of the balance of payments, financed by external borrowing, was maintained at around 3% of GDP.
In this situation of recession internal prices rose by only 4%, but unemployment shot up to 15%.
At the beginning of 2001 there was hope for some relief from the unfavourable international situation and for significant improvements in the economies of Argentina and Brazil, which would support an increase of 2% in the gross domestic product.
Economic policy aimed to reduce the consolidated public sector deficit from 4 to 2.6%; and the imbalance in the external current account from 3% to 2.4% of GDP.
If the pattern of monthly devaluation of 0.6% was maintained, annual inflation should be around 5% and the country should gradually recover its external competitiveness.
These expectations were upset by the worsening of the crisis in Argentina, as well as by the sudden slowdown in the economy and the continuing real depreciation of the Brazilian currency.
In the middle of the year, the growing uncertainty with regard to the neighbouring economies and the strengthening of the dollar against the euro changed the exchange rate trend, doubling the devaluation rate (from an annual 7.4% to 15.4%) and the width of the flotation band (from 3 to 6%).
The regional uncertainty was exacerbated by the events in September in the United States and the threat of a recession in the developed economies.
The external and internal demand remained depressed, as the reappearance of foot-and-mouth disease, after many years of absence, severely damaged the export offering.
The fiscal adjustment brought a reduction in public consum ption expenditure, while private consumption also contracted.
The sudden halt to beef shipments reduced the physical volume of exports in goods by almost 4%, while the quantity of imports declined by more than 3%.
The low level of internal demand and the imported deflation contributed to maintaining inflation at historically low values, with indications that the accumulated variation over the twelve month period would be less than 4% at the end of the year.
The agricultural, manufacturing, and construction sectors were severely affected, as well as commerce, restaurants and hotels.
Unemployment rose by almost two percentage points, coinciding with a weakening in the demand for labour, attributable to the prolonged recession, with a broadening of the labour supply.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 47 M easured in real term s, central government expenditure increased by 1.5% in 2001.
The significant increase in interest payments for public debt, which now represent almost 9% of current expenditure, was alleviated to a significant extent by the contraction in investment and the lower transfer payments.
Fiscal revenue, which is highly correlated with national income, diminished by 1% in real terms, so that the fiscal gap increased to 4% of GDP.
The positive result of the public companies was not sufficient to reach the goal for the public sector deficit, which showed strong resistance to contraction.
The deficit was financed, as planned, with a higher level of external debt, at rates which included additional charges of the order of 300 basis points over United States bonds.
By September, the financial uncertainty prevailing in Argentina had caused an increase of US$ 900 million (+18%) in deposits by non-residents in Uruguay, with an increase of 5% in dollar deposits by residents.
Credit to the private sector, however, not only did not expand, but even contracted slightly, as the banks chose to locate abroad the deposits received or to purchase public bonds, in view of the internal recession.
There was also a rapid increase (13% in real terms) in term deposits in the national currency, which amount to scarcely 15% of those made in foreign currency.
The dollar maintained its level, fluctuating around the centre of the flotation band.
On the whole, there was scarcely any growth in the money supply over this period.
The real exchange rate as measured with a basket of the currencies of the main trading partners continued to appreciate in relation to Brazil, whose currency was devaluating significantly, but depreciated in relation to the rest of the world.
Thus, exports from Uruguay diminished by 7% in 2001, after contracting by more than 17% in the previous biennium.
The decline was mainly due to the fall in beef exports when the outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease paralysed sales.
Also significant was the reduction in exports of transport equipment and textile manufactures.
In contrast, sales of leather and its products and of wool expanded.
Sales to Argentina contracted by almost one quarter (after falling by 20% in the two previous years) and those to Brazil diminished by 14%, after a drop of one-third from 1998 to 2000.
Imports also diminished (-5%) in response to the weakness of internal demand.
The contraction of purchases of capital goods (-17%) was significant, as well as the reduction in the oil bill (25%) in view of the collapse of the price of crude oil, while acquisitions of consumer goods and the rest of intermediates showed a slight reduction.
At the end of 2001 Uruguay recorded negative trade balances with almost all o f its significant trading partners, which was a very rare event.
The current account deficit o f the balance o f payments increased slightly and reached US$ 560 million.
As a higher level of external credit was obtained, international reserves were increased by about US$ 30 million.
At the end of November, in the context of the official strategy o f obtaining advance financing for the following year, and given the high level o f uncertainty in the subregional environment, the government placed an external bond for US$ 300 million.
Venezuela The Venezuelan economy was moving in 2001 towards an estimated growth of around 3%.
Unlike the previous year, this result came from the private sector, as the influential state oil sector reduced its production in accordance with the policy o f the Organization o f Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) to reduce supplies in order to curb the declining fuel price observed at the end o f 2000.
Despite this, the average price o f Venezuelan crude oil dropped by one fifth from the high level of the previous year.
This loss affected external accounts, which showed a large deficit, as well as confidence in maintaining a limited depreciation o f the bolivar, which was the corner stone of the anti-inflationary policy.
In a climate of political tension, this resulted in a substantial outflow o f short-term capital which the monetary and exchange rate authority tried to counteract by stabilizing the inflation rate below an annual 13%.
The year-on-year variation rate in the non-oil sector of the economy, which had been gradually improving until the final quarter of 2000, dropped in 2001 and was at around 4% in each of the first three quarters.
This growth was m ostly due to the construction and communication sectors, which experienced double-digit increases.
C onstruction had continued on its expansionary path since its recovery from the recession prior to 2000.
Communications were responding to the expansion in basic and mobile telephony services.
The sectors o f manufacturing, commerce and transport also grew, to a lesser degree, although in the former two sectors there was some deceleration in the second half o f the year.
These activities were boosted by investment expenditure, which was mainly public, or to a lesser degree by private consumption and non-oil external demand.
The transfer to the central governm ent of dividends from the Petro leos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA) in the first half of the year offset the fall in tax revenue from external sales.
As a result of OPEC’s policy of cuts, the export quota o f Venezuela was reduced by more than 400,000 barrels of oil per day to 2.67 million.
Despite this, the average price of Venezuelan crude oil fell by around 20% with regard to the previous year.
This decline affected fiscal policy in the second half of the year, when the public sector was obliged to adjust expenditure and reduce investment items in order to meet the payroll, and endangered the fiscal objective o f achieving an end- of-year deficit equivalent to 3% of GDP.
The BCV continued to try to control inflation by keeping the currency within a sliding band of 7.5% around a central parity.
The depreciation of the central parity was lowered early in the year to an annual rate o f 7%.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 49 The central bank (BCV) continued trying to control inflation by keeping the bolivar within a sliding band of 7.5% around a central parity.
The slippage of the central parity was lowered at the beginning of the year to an annual 7%.
High oil prices initially made this exchange­ rate policy possible, while monetary policy took a passive role, allowing the inflow of foreign currency to cause an expansion of the money supply and a slightly declining trend in interest rates which contributed to reactivating the economy.
The reduction in those prices however and the subsequent outflow of short-term capital forced the bolivar down.
The BCV used its foreign-currency reserves to support the exchange rate and, when the pressure increased as of May, proceeded to drain liquidity from the system through open-m arket operations, placing national public debt securities by means of repo operations and, in the second half of the year, issuing seven-day deposit certificates.
It also reduced its high discount rate to levels that made it more efficient and thus effective as an tool of monetary policy.
As a result of all this, the money supply contracted in the first ten months, although in November it expanded considerably, and interest rates rose.
By the beginning of December, the nominal lending rates had risen from 21% to 25% and deposit rates from 12.5% to approximately 16%.
This made it possible to control inflation, which at the end of November showed a year-to-year variation of 12.7%, somewhat higher, however, than the official target.
The increasing price of money also contributed to a deceleration in economic activity, which may have also been affected by the uncertainty with regard to the promulgation of numerous legislative reforms, many of them in the framework of the enabling law, that allowed the President of the Republic to legislate by decree.
Special mention should be made of a new reform of the Investment Fund for Macroeconomic Stabilization (FIEM) which moves it away from its initial aim of amortizing variations in oil income.
By virtue of the new law, contributions to the Fund for the last quarter of 2001 and fo r 2002 were suspended.
The subsequent contributions were established in terms of a fixed percentage of the oil price, independently of its level.
The construction boom contributed to a fall in unemployment to 12.8% in July, almost two percentage points below the figure recorded one year previously and three points less than the seasonally high level at the beginning of the year.
In this same month an increase of 10% in the minimum salary was announced.
Despite the growth in non-traditional exports, the reduction in the value of hydrocarbon sales resulted in a decrease in the current account surplus during the year, which amounted to US$ 5 billion at the end of the year.
This net income was less than the outflows recorded for the financial account balance and for errors and om issions, where short-term capital outflow s predominated.
Accordingly, although foreign direct investment showed a net balance of the order of US$ 2 billion for the first three quarters, the balance of payments showed a deficit, estimated for the year as a whole, at a level higher than the latter figure.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 51 Costa Rica The Costa Rican economy grew by only 0.3% in 2001, owing to a strong contraction of external demand, to which was added, after the events of 11 September, the reduction in tourist income.
Fixed investment declined in view of the unfavourable prospects, despite the lower international interest rates and the greater flow of foreign direct investment.
Despite the lower net factor payments abroad, national income fell by 1%, as a result of deterioration in the terms of trade.
There was also an increase in open unemployment (6.1%), especially for women and in rural areas, and inflation rose to 11%.
The high-technology electronic industry suffered a marked setback, equivalent to 1.7% of aggregate GDP, as external demand contracted and production at one plant was halted owing to a restructuring phase.
Meanwhile, the rest of productive activities grew by only The authorities managed to adjust the economy to the new conditions.
Measures were adopted to contain government expenditure and increase tax collection, but the central government deficit expanded.
Public debt continued to grow and the interest payments amounted to 25% of total expenditure.
During the second half of the year the exchange devaluation rate accelerated and interest rates rose.
Fiscal policy was restricted by high debt servicing payments and by expenditure for specific purposes.
The central government deficit was 3.2% of GDP, while the non-financial public sector increased its surplus.
Despite the slowdown in economic activity, the income of the central government grew by more than 5% in real terms thanks to the payment of tax arrears, the elimination of Tax Credit Certificates, the application of the Tax Rules and Procedures Code and the approval of the Law on Tax Simplification and Efficiency.
Expenditure rose by 5.7% owing to increases in salaries and transfers for real investment in the National Road Council.
In view of the large servicing payments for public debt, an effort was made to reduce interest payments by exchanging internal debt for external debt; the government placed US$ 250 million in bonds on the international markets at a fixed rate of 9% for a 10-year period.
The size of the total public debt reached 57% of GDP in September, while internal debt was 37%.
The goal of monetary policy was to maintain inflation within a range of 10%.
Very few monetary stabilization bonds were issued, whereas the required reserve was reduced by two percentage points in May and reached 7% in September.
This, together with the lowering of international interest rates, lead to some reduction in domestic lending rates, especially for housing and construction.
Credit for consumption and construction continued to increase and total private credit had expanded by 20% as of October.
Credit in dollars expanded rapidly, as interest rates were lower than rates for colones.
Deposit rates in colones were reduced on average to 15% and lending rates were at 27%.
Total liquidity was reduced (growing nominally by 11%) and fixed-term deposits declined.
Public cash holdings increased by 10% owing to the lower production growth rate and the availability of more profitable options in government securities.
There was a boom in dollar deposits (22%) given the lower premium for investing in the national currency.
Exchange-rate policy aimed to maintain export competitiveness by means of a crawling peg regime.
During the first half of the year the exchange rate devalued by 8 centesimos per day; as of July the devaluation rate increased to 12.
The annual accumulated nominal devaluation rate was 7%, which in real terms was a slight appreciation.
In the area of commercial policy, the free trade agreements with the Dominican Republic and Canada were ratified.
Implementation of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures of the World Trade Organization was postponed for five years; thus, the companies operating in export processing zones would continue to enjoy the benefits offered by this regime.
The gross domestic product stagnated in the face of the contraction in manufacturing and agriculture.
The latter was adversely affected by the low prices for coffee, bananas and other agricultural goods.
Internal demand remained almost stagnant, which reflects the poor perform ance of public investm ent and private consumption, as well as the lower level of equipment purchases.
Meanwhile, construction, especially housing, was encouraged by the reductions in interest rates and in prices of inputs, which also stimulated mining activities.
The adverse international economic situation affected in particular external demand in the high­ technology electronic industry and textile manufacturing.
In the case of agricultural goods, there was a negative impact on producer prices, despite the increase in the volume of external sales.
Inflation was at 11%, similar to the level in the previous year.
During the first six months, the increase in electricity and water tariffs, together with the rise in transport, caused an increase in the consumer price index.
During the second half of the year prices for fuel derivatives and electricity tariffs diminished, but the higher exchange-rate devaluation rate had the opposite effect.
In order to avoid a deterioration in real salaries, at the beginning of January minimum salaries were readjusted by 5.1% and in June another increase of 7.7% was agreed.
Workers in the public sector received an increase of 6.6% (4% in July and the rest in October).
Unemployment increased in manufacturing and in agricultural export activity; in the last quarter, it also increased in tourism.
A reform to the Labour Code was approved, prohibiting discrimination by gender, age, ethnicity or religion.
The trade gap increased considerably; the current account deficit rose to 5% of GDP.
Exports of goods contracted generally (-13%); in contrast, tourist services increased by 7.5% until August, but fell in the last quarter.
Exports to Central America grew by 6.4% and represented 11% of the total.
Imports of goods contracted, mainly those of capital goods, which declined by 11%.
The lower profits of companies in the export processing zones meant that external Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 53 payments in this connection were 35% less than in the previous year.
Capital flows, much higher than those in 2000, were insufficient to cover the current account deficit, so that the reserves of the issuing bank fell by US$ 75 million.
Foreign direct investment increased and there was a new bond issue by the central government, which thus obtained a level of resources which was higher than the payments for amortizing public debt and the purchase of foreign bonds by private investors.
El Salvador GDP growth in El Salvador slowed to barely 1.5%, owing to the economic recession in the United States and the drought-induced contraction in export volumes.
The earthquakes in January and February, which killed almost 1,200 people and caused material damage estimated at US$ 1.6 billion (approximately 12% of GDP), gave rise to an increase in public spending, which pushed the central government deficit up to almost 4% of GDP.
The fall in merchandise exports and the expansion in imports led to a sharp increase in the external deficit.
With the entry into force of the Monetary Integration Act in January, a fixed exchange rate was set and the dollar was established as a unit of account of the Salvadoran economy; in this context, annualized inflation declined to 3%.
The weakness of domestic demand and the virtually flat performance of exports following the recession in the U nited States economy eroded overall demand.
Moreover, the after-effects of the two earthquakes, the record low in the price of coffee, and the drought that crippled the production of staple grains had an adverse effect on supply.
The economy started to pick up in April after the devastating earthquakes with the strongest impetus coming from tradables, associated with non-traditional exports, and from export processing.
The highest-growth sectors were mining (12%), construction (9%), transport, storage and telecommunications (almost 7%), power, water and gas, and manufacturing (both over 4%).
The effects of the drought were felt in agriculture, which experienced a 2% decline.
Despite the lower supply of agricultural products, food prices trended downwards; the same was true of house rentals.
The weight of these two major items of household expenditure in general price levels brought annualized inflation down to 3%, one percentage point below the level recorded in the previous year.
Even though current expenditure declined, public spending had to be increased substantially in the afterm ath o f the earthquakes (12% in real terms) in order to cover reconstruction work (indeed, one quarter of public investment was allocated for this purpose).
Current revenues showed no improvement in real terms, at a time when weak domestic demand compounded the familiar problems of tax avoidance and evasion.
The fall in income-tax receipts during the year was offset by higher proceeds from value added tax and the tax on imports.
The fiscal deficit was financed to the extent of over 80% with external funds from the issue of treasury notes (LETES).
Fiscal management in the coming years should take into account above all the expenditures associated with the new pension system, which will exceed the US$ 1 billion mark in the next five-year period.
During the year, privatization of State-owned companies, especially the telecommunications and electricity corporations, was completed and the operation of the five pension fund administrators was consolidated.
Dollarization of the economy was initiated in the early part of the year and has recently been approved by the Supreme Court, which dismissed various claims of unconstitutionality.
The United States dollar was thus adopted as legal tender and the rate of exchange of the colón has been set at 8.75 colones to the dollar, following a fixed exchange-rate system that had been in force since 1993.
This measure has been implemented in the context of the high volume of trade between El Salvador and the United States, the market for two thirds of Salvadoran merchandise exports and the country o f origin o f the substantial family remittances received in El Salvador, which account for 14% o f GDP.
In October, 46% o f money in circulation and of deposits had been converted into dollars.
The slow economic activity has had the effect o f stabilizing the demand for credit and lowering lending and deposit rates.
Now that the exchange risk has been eliminated, it is much easier for industrial, electricity, transport and business firms to secure foreign loans directly.
The performance o f the external sector was less favourable than in 2000.
The trade deficit grew to the equivalent o f 16% o f GDP, as a result o f the contraction in exports and the expansion (7%) in imports.
Exports to Central America expanded by 3%, but sales to the rest of the world stopped expanding.
Plummeting coffee prices on the international market caused a sharp contraction in coffee sales (-62%) and consequently a slump in traditional exports as a whole (-44%), while non-traditional exports expanded by almost 7%, with maquila exports performing well (15%).
The increase in imports is attributable to higher purchases o f intermediate goods (15%) and consumer goods (8%), since purchases o f capital goods remained stable.
The large trade deficit declined substantially at the current account level, thanks to the increasing inflows of remittances from nationals abroad, which have already exceeded the US$ 2 billion mark, or the equivalent of 90% of the trade deficit.
The balance-of-payments current-account deficit stood at US$ 500 million and was financed through foreign direct investment, which bordered on US$ 200 million, and new loans.
In August, the country’s external debt represented approximately 25% o f GDP.
The trade policy was focused on international trade negotiations and further advances were made with the free trade agreements being forged with Panama and Canada.
Negotiations with the Andean Group are at a standstill, while El Salvador is continuing to participate in the rounds relating to the Free Trade Area of the Americas.
It should be noted that the extension of the free zone regime to 2010 is an extremely important decision for the country’s maquila sector.
Nevertheless, thanks to renewed efforts to bring fiscal policy in line with monetary policy, the exchange-rate remained stable, a significant deterioration in the budget was avoided and fiscal reform -a milestone in the country’s recent economic history- was achieved.
Further measures were taken with a view to the adoption of legislation for improving financial supervision and strengthening the central bank’s autonomy.
Progress was also made in the negotiation of an agreement with the IMF on special drawing rights, which would provide access to funds for modernizing the financial system and implementing a strategy for poverty reduction.
Notwithstanding the fiscal reform, the government deficit increased to 2.5% of GDP in 2001 (compared with 1.9% in the previous year), owing, mainly, to the transfer of obligations postponed from 2000, to emergency support for the coffee industry and to the low level of tax revenues.
These were disappointing compared with the expected outcome of efforts to control tax evasion and the yield anticipated from increases (from 10% to 12%) in the rate of value added tax and the taxes on corporate assets, fuel oil, transport, the import of vehicles and other goods (cigarettes and liquor).
For purposes of public debt restructuring, a US$ 325 million sovereign bond issue was launched in November.
The central bank used open-m arket operations, lowered the nominal rediscount rate to 6.1% per year and successfully reduced the rate of expansion of money and quasi-money, although the latter remained in double digits.
The real lending rate fell by five percentage points to average approximately 11% per year, but loans to the private sector declined in real terms.
For the first time in years, banking authorities intervened in banking and financial institutions.
The Free Negotiation of Currencies Act was implemented and attracted higher inflows of funds into offshore banking services.
Pressures on the rate of exchange between 12 September and the end of November, resulted in a nominal depreciation of the quetzal of 2%.
GDP growth slackened to 2% in 2001, the third year of steady slowdown; this is attributable to the worsening terms of trade and shrinking external demand.
In addition, the extended conflict between certain corporate groups and the government eroded the business climate and was reflected in a fall of close to 4 percentage points in private investment.
The only strong components of demand were public investment and public consumption.
For the first time in the decade, export earnings contracted in real terms (-1%).
Agriculture showed modest growth (1%) and manufacturing weakened for the fourth consecutive year.
Only those services branches w ith a significant share of public expenditure, electricity, water, transport and community services grew by more than The slowdown is estimated to have caused a number of job losses in the formal sector and to have made the job market even more precarious.
The situation was especially difficult in areas affected by the fall in the coffee operations, where job losses, combined with the effects of the drought, prompted applications for assistance from the World Food Programme and the In ter-A m erican Agency for C ooperation and Development, since some 500,000 full- or part-time workers depend on this activity.
The annualized variation in the consumer price index was almost 10% in December, almost double the rate observed in 2000 and double the target set in the government programme.
This resurgence in inflation may be attributed to the effect of the nominal exchange­ rate depreciation, the rise in the price of some foods due to the drought and the one-off increase in general price levels associated with the increase in various taxes (in particular, value added tax).
The persistent and sharp expansion in monetary liquidity, which outstripped the supply of goods and services, may also have had an impact.
External capital flows swelled international reserves, offsetting a current-account deficit equivalent to 4.8% of GDP (compared with 4.6% in the previous year).
Foreign direct investment, representing the final payment for privatization of the telephone company, and the US$ 325 million sovereign debt issue on the eurobond market were major components of these flows.
The current-account deficit increased slightly reflecting a modest expansion in merchandise imports at a time when exports were down.
The slump in international prices for coffee to a record low, combined with lower sales volumes, led to a sharp contraction in export earnings from this product (-33%); thus, notwithstanding the rise in exports of sugar (24%), banana (5.5%) and cardamom (4.3%) sales of traditional exports were down by13%.
Expansion in in-bond processing was down, at only 8% (compared with 21% in the preceding year).
Exports to Central America increased by 4.5%, marking an improvement compared with the previous year’s performance.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 57 Honduras The Honduran economy recorded modest growth in 2001 (2.5%), owing largely to negative spillover from abroad.
The slump in coffee prices was compounded by the effects of the recession in the United States.
The main impetus for growth came from the buoyancy of domestic consumption in a context of relative stability with respect to the economic and financial aggregates and an intensive campaign culminating in the general elections in November.
Inflation remained within the same range as in 2000; the real rate of exchange showed a slight appreciation, notwithstanding an acceleration in the nominal slide and public finances reflected a deficit similar to that of the previous year’s.
Towards the middle of the year, the country suffered a drought and later the onslaught of Hurricane Michelle, confirming its high vulnerability to natural disasters.
The central government fiscal deficit rose to 5.5% of GDP, in keeping with the objective of boosting public investment in infrastructure reconstruction and poverty alleviation.
However, the outlays under these headings were lower than projected as the transparency requirements laid down by international cooperation sources and the State Procurement Act resulted in delays in the use of resources.
The central government deficit was financed wholly from foreign funding, as has been the case since 1998.
Direct tax revenue expanded by 8% and its main component, income tax, by almost 12%.
Central government revenue, including non-tax items, was almost equivalent to 18% of GDP (approximately one percentage point lower than in 2000).
Current outlays accounted for almost two thirds of the total, investment for 28% and debt payments for 7%.
Honduras benefited under the Highly Indebted Poor Countries Debt Initiative from external debt relief amounting to US$ 100 million (or 40% of the interest paid out in 2000).
The total external debt balance stood at US$ 4.6 billion at the end of the year, similar to the previous year’s level.
The money supply showed a year-on-year increase of close to 1%, much lower than in 2000, and the annual growth rate for foreign currency deposits was almost three times that of local currency deposits.
This is attributable to the uncertainty typical of an election year and to expectations of a devaluation which were rife up to September.
Bank loans to the private sector, mainly for real estate purchases and consumption, rallied slightly (1.5% in real terms).
Further progress was made in banking supervision and capitalization ratios improved throughout the system.
For the fourth consecutive year, the lempira appreciated, this time by 2%.
To avert political pressures in favour of a sudden devaluation, the Central Bank decided in September to speed up the crawling peg devaluation; thus, by November the monthly average rose to double the rate recorded between January and August.
Further preparations were made fo r the implementation of a Customs Union in Central America and the trade agreement signed with Mexico a year earlier entered into force.
The Social Insurance Reform Act was challenged by private business and the Supreme Court of Justice is expected to make a pronouncement on this action.
GDP growth (2.5%) was lower than expected (4.5%) and was buoyed up by domestic consumer spending, since gross fixed capital formation contracted for the second consecutive year.
The agricultural sector experienced a sudden slowdown (growing by 1%, compared with 9.8% in 2000), falling below the levels recorded before Hurricane Mitch, which devastated the country in 1998.
A drought mid-year slashed staple grain production, while the fall in international coffee prices meant a sharp decline in income for producers.
The manufacturing sector experienced a cooling off (with growth down to 4%), although crucial activities (cement, sheets and plates, and textiles) maintained their level of activity.
Some in-bond industries shut down their operations and sought locations that would enable them to reduce costs, but the sector as a whole expanded.
At the close of the year, inflation stood at 9% (lower than in 2000), owing to the exchange-rate appreciation and the fall in fuel prices on international markets.
The minimum wage increased by an average of almost 16% in nominal terms (6% in real terms).
The loss of momentum in the production sector caused a sharp increase in unemployment.
The resumption of the national survey on the labour market revealed an open unemployment rate of 4.2% (compared with 3.3% in 1999) and visible and invisible underemployment of years earlier).
The current account deficit increased by just over US$ 100 million, to stand at US$ 359 million.
This was largely due to the continuing decline in international coffee prices, reflected in a loss of income of US$ 160 million (45% of the current account balance).
This deficit was financed through family remittances, other transfers and foreign investments.
Imports rose by 6.6%, with agricultural products significantly higher (31.6%), food products (16.5%) paper and paper products (34.4%) and electrical machinery (12.3%).
On the other hand, fuel imports declined (-5.6%) together with transport equipment Direct foreign investment flows (US$ 186 million) diminished.
Notwithstanding the increase in financial flows, the overall balance was negative for the second year in a row.
The Central Bank’s gross international reserves were of the order of US$ 1.05 billion, or the equivalent of four m onths’ imports of goods and services.
Preliminary overview of the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 59 Mexico In 2001 the Mexican economy stagnated, which was in sharp contrast to the targeted growth rate of 4.5% and well below the previous year’s rate of 7%.
The economic slowdown in the United States caused a considerable downturn in output in the second semester, although the rest of the country’s macroeconomic targets were met.
The public-sector deficit was 0.7% of GDP and the balance-of-payments current-account deficit was 3.1%.
Voluminous flows of foreign direct investment contributed to a real appreciation of the peso, which in turn helped to reduce inflation (5.4%).
The sluggishness of the economy hurt employment and the overall performance of the production sectors.
From the first half of the year export activities and investment suffered the effects of slackening external demand.
An upturn in real wages boosted consumption, but in the following months domestic demand trended downwards as the wage bill contracted and uncertainty mounted with regard to the timing of an economic recovery in the United States, especially in the wake of the attacks of 11 September.
Priority was afforded to reducing inflation and to maintaining the fiscal accounts in balance in the framework of a floating exchange rate.
Monetary and fiscal stances were adjusted as the international situation grew bleaker, and in response to the economic downshift in the United States.
Early in the year, monetary policy remained tight in order to keep inflation on target, but later eased as trends and expectations w ith respect to in flation becam e increasingly favourable.
This led the authorities to lower the nominal interest rate, which was also a reflection of the interest cuts in the United States, and the average prime rate on deposits recorded a single-digit figure for the first time since 1994, though lending rates continued to be high.
The government kept the public-sector deficit on target in GDP terms by means of budget adjustments, mainly to investment.
Public-sector borrowing requirements, which include a number of items in addition to the traditional definition of public deficit, are estimated at 3% of GDP at the end of 2001.
The Bank Savings Protection Institute (IPAB) and privately co-financed public investment projects absorbed most of the resources (0.87% and 0.69%, respectively).
In April the Executive submitted to Congress a financial and fiscal reform proposal that generated some controversy.
Reforms to financial affairs were approved; and alternative fiscal reform proposals made by the country’s three main political parties were discussed, but in early December no agreement had been reached.
The government’s proposal seeks to expand the country’s small tax burden (11% of GDP) by setting a standard rate of 15% for value-added tax (VAT) on basic consumption sectors that are exempt or have zero rates, mainly food and medicines.
It also proposes a lower rate of income tax for individuals and firms.
The peso remained stable, mainly due to foreign direct investment flows and to public and private international debt issues, which benefited from the low international interest rates and the investment grade rating obtained by Mexico in 2000.
In real terms, the currency appreciated by 5% against the dollar, which was a continuation of the trend recorded since 1998.
International reserves stood at over US$ 40 billion, posting a gain of US$ 6.5 billion on the year’s end figure of 2000.
External investment in the money market decreased considerably to account for less than 2% of the total, while the stock market displayed a slight fall.
In the first half of 2001 the effects of the economic slowdown in the United States were felt severely in Mexico.
As a result, output declined gradually and in mid-2001 the economy slipped into recession.
After growing by 1% in the first semester, in the third quarter of 2001 GDP thus began to slip (-1.6%) for the first time since 1995, which resulted in a slight contraction for the year overall.
External sales were the first sector to suffer the effects o f the downswing.
By contrast, private consumption expanded in the first semester, chiefly thanks to an increase in real wages (owing to lower- than-expected inflation), which offset the effects of a decrease in employment.
In the second half of the year, however, the decline in output became widespread.
Investment decreased (down by 5% in January-August) and continued to slide gradually as the year went on.
In the first nine months of the year, services expanded by 1.7% and the agricultural sector by 1.3%, while industry slipped back by 3.2%.
In the third quarter the output of the manufacturing, construction and mining sectors clearly showed the effects of the downturn with declines of 5.5%, 4.1% and 1.1%, respectively.
The output of the automobile sector decreased by 3.5% in the period from January to October -w ith production for the local market down by 2.3% and for the export sector by 3.8%- although domestic sales grew by 9% in the same period, due mainly to financing programmes offered by automobile distributors.
Similar schemes were operated for purchases of other durable goods and sustained the growth of private consumption, although this indicator trended downwards in the second half of the year.
By contrast, commercial bank credit to the private sector shrank in real terms for the seventh year running (-7.5% to October).
The real appreciation of the exchange rate helped to being the rate of inflation down to 5.4%, which was the lowest figure recorded The number of urban workers registered with the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) decreased by 2.9% between October 2000 and October 2001, which represented a loss of almost 323,000 jobs.
For the first time in 15 years, employment declined in the maquila export industry, with a drop of 14% between September 2000 and September 2001, which brought the number of jobs in the sector to 1.149 million, while the man hours worked decreased by 18%.
Employment in manufacturing was down by 3.7% in the period January- September.
In the first 10 months, the average rate of open unemployment was 2.5%, which was slightly higher than the figure for the same period of 2000, partly due to the absorption of workers by the informal sector.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 61 The increase in real wages, in combination with economic stagnation and a decline in labour productivity, considerably increased the unit costs of labour, especially in manufacturing.
External trade decreased essentially because of the recession in the United States, which accounts for 90% of Mexico’s exports and supplies over 80% of its imports.
Together, the downturn in exports (-3.1% to October) and in imports (-1.9%) made for a deficit of close to US$ 9 billion, which was larger than the deficit posted in 2000.
To October, im ports of intermediate goods decreased by 4.4%, and of capital goods by 4.6%, while purchases of consumer goods increased by 23%.
The decline in exports was also partly attributable to a sharp reduction in petroleum exports, which plunged by 19% to October, and to a backslide of 1.1% in manufacturing sales abroad (down by 1.7% in maquila and by 4.3% in non- maquila exports).
Transfers -m ainly remittances by Mexicans abroad, which are equivalent to 70% of petroleum exports- posted a significant increase.
This pared the current-account deficit down to US$ 19 billion, or 3.1% of GDP, which was similar to the 2000 figure.
Not including income from the sale of Banamex to Citigroup (US$ 12.447 billion), in the first three quarters FDI was almost US$ 10 billion and it is estimated that total flows for the year overall have reached US$ 12 to 13 billion, which is much the same as the sum recorded in 2000.
In the third quarter net public external debt was just over US$ 77 billion and represented 24.7% of GDP, or 1.3 percentage points more than the previous year.
Private external debt stood at around US$ 55 billion mid­ year, which was similar to the figure recorded at the end Nicaragua In 2001 the Nicaraguan economy slowed down, as the country’s external and financial vulnerability became more acute, as well as the global degree of underemployment of the work force.
Despite the fact that the internal and external imbalances were higher than expected, inflation was less than 6%.
The gross domestic product (GDP) grew by 2%, which represents a slowdown of more than two percentage points compared to the previous year.
The lower increase is associated with the unfavourable external environment, the high fiscal deficit and the continuing difficulties in the banking sector.
It was also due to the natural uncertainties of an election year, which caused a decline in private investment and in international financial cooperation flows.
The adverse economic environment affected the fiscal results, so that in the first nine months of the year the total income of the central government grew in nominal terms by only 1.2%.
The government was obliged to limit expenditure, choosing mainly to cut capital outflows (-21%), which eroded the effectiveness of public spending as a catalyst for the economy.
On the other hand, current disbursements grew by a nominal 12%, so that total expenditure increased slightly by 3.4%, stretching the deficit to more than 8% of GDP.
In view of the failure to achieve the goals agreed with the International Monetary Fund in the second year of the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility, the government managed to agree on only one interim program m e for the second h a lf of 2001.
I f the reduction in public expenditure stipulated in the programme is achieved, the global deficit in the non- financial public sector will fall to 7.8% of GDP (8.3% Owing to the high fiscal deficit and the costs associated with the banking crisis which erupted in the previous year, monetary policy remained tight.
The central bank provided a full guarantee for the deposits and liquidity support for those banks where intervention had been necessary, while it sterilized a substantial portion of the liquidity through the placement of indexed debt securities.
Also, in July it provided for a gradual increase of three percentage points in the legal reserve requirement rate, which reached 19.25% in September.
In this context, the net credit of the central bank to the non-financial public sector expanded considerably, while in ternational reserves were substantially decreased.
A fter the h igh levels recorded during the reconstruction programme carried out after the passing o f H urricane M itch in 1998, public investm ent declined, as well as private investment in the residential sector.
Both factors resulted in a major downturn in construction, one of the main causes of the loss of growth in the economy as a whole.
In contrast, the industrial, energy and financial sectors stim ulated econom ic activity .
The m ediocre performance of agriculture was due to a drought that caused substantial crop losses in different parts of the country.
The unfavourable external environm ent was characterized by an additional deterioration in the terms of trade and a significant slowdown in the global economy and trade, which resulted in a loss of sales for Nicaragua’s main export products, particularly coffee.
The worsening of the United States economy was felt in exports of manufactures situated in the export-processing zones and the tourist industry, and this will probably also affect the level of family remittances.
Also, the cost of exports rose, owing to the additional security measures adopted.
As the accumulated inflation over the first eleven months was 4.5%, a figure of less than 6% is estimated for the year as a whole (9.9% in the previous year).
This drop is mainly due to the slowdown in the economy, the lower prices for petroleum products and the greater stability of tariffs for basic services.
The increase of 12% in minimum salaries, which had not changed since 1999, the salary adjustments in the public sector and the increase in remuneration in certain sectors meant that real average remuneration showed a substantial improvement.
It is estimated that the current account deficit will increase slightly to reach US$ 980 million (39% of GDP).
This is attributable to the increase in the trade deficit and the larger payments for interest, profits and dividends.
Current transfers, however, especially family remittances, remained at the high level of the previous few years.
The deficit in the trade in goods (37% of GDP) remained very high, especially taking into account the context of lower growth of the economy.
Exports, including those from companies operating in the export-processing zones, declined more than imports (-4.7% and -1.6%, respectively).
The drop in exports was principally due to the reduction in traditional product sales (-18.5%) caused mainly by the collapse o f coffee exports (-40.3% ) tha t was in tu rn a consequence of the fall in international prices.
The value of imports was undermined by the lower levels o f external purchases of intermediary goods and capital, a phenomenon which could be attributed in Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 63 turn to the slowdown in economic activity.
In contrast, the imports o f consumer goods rose significantly The capital and financial account showed less income in the first nine months o f the year, owing to the reduction in official transfers and loans.
This could not be offset by the relief o f external debt in the framework o f the HIPC initiative, although the amount allocated for this purpose in 2001 was higher than in the preceding year.
Panama The Panamanian economy, which had been losing momentum in recent years, experienced a sharper slowdown in 2001.
GDP growth was down to 0.5%, signifying a per capita decline in output for the first time in over a decade.
External demand weakened considerably, putting a damper on economic activity, although with a downward adjustment in imports, it was possible to reduce the current-account deficit.
Capital formation contracted sharply for the second consecutive year, partly as a result o f a weakening in foreign investment flows.
Consumer spending also grew more slowly, despite a continuing expansion in personal credit.
In the early part of the year, the Government adopted counter-cyclical measures as part of a revitalization plan to counter this slackening of business activity; however, the sharper slowdown and the decline in public revenues defeated the incipient public investment programme.
Discussion of the fiscal reform proposed by the executive authorities was therefore postponed.
Under the IMF standby agreement, the primary objective o f which was to balance the government budget, economic policy sought first and foremost to adopt a moderate countercyclical approach through concerted action with the private sector for government expenditure on labour-intensive activities.
However, with the economy weakening, revenue falling and fiscal reform becoming increasingly difficult, the authorities decided to cut back on budgetary expenditures in an attempt to rein in the deficit.
The public-sector deficit rose to 2% of GDP, as a result o f the reduction in revenue and the decline in contributions from State-owned corporations.
In the first nine months o f the year, current revenue declined by 1% owing to the 10% fall in tax receipts and the lower direct and indirect tax collections.
Production, sales and excise taxes fell (-2.8%) as, indeed, did imports (-16.5%), which continued to decline in the last quarter, owing in part to a reduction in tariffs.
Non-tax revenues, which had been very high in preceding years, contracted sharply (-14.1%).
These results were partly offset by advance interest payments from the Development Trust Fund, which had been credited with US$ 1,213,000 from privatizations.
In addition, 750 million United States dollars’ worth o f global bonds were issued on the international market in the first half-year to support the budget and finance loan repayments.
Under central government expenditure, staff remuneration increased, owing to an expansion in employment in the education and health sectors.
Total interest payments on public debt also increased, accounting for more than one quarter o f current expenditure.
Loan operations within the domestic banking system increased in the period January-September both on the domestic market (6.3%) and abroad (3.8%), mainly as a result of loans to the business sector, the mortgage sector and for consumer spending.
Merchandise production as a whole fell back considerably, while services expanded, albeit only moderately.
Although the transit of vessels through the Panama Canal diminished (-2.7%), toll receipts were higher.
The number of tourists increased by 3.7% until September and tourist spending was up 6.3%.
Electricity generation expanded by 4.2%, with a sharp increase in production from therm al power stations, which compensated for the reduction in hydroelectricity generation due to the drought.
Agricultural production expanded by scarcely 0.6% (1.6% in the previous year) owing to the persistent decline in banana production (-20%), attributable to adverse conditions on the international market and labour problems.
Fish %especially shrimp% catches expanded (16%) but were insufficient to compensate for the setback in livestock production.
Manufacturing also contracted (-5%) while the sector sought to adjust to the new conditions imposed by trade liberalization.
Following the completion of sundry road projects, hotels and commercial centres, the construction industry suffered a slump (-15%), which also dragged down ore, concrete and cement production.
As a result, the unemployment rate rose to 13.7% in August (compared with 13.3% in the same month of the previous year).
The low level of inflation (0.6%) reflects the fall in food and beverage prices and in transport and communications rates.
Other headings, however, showed increases: clothing and footwear (4.3%), furniture and accessories (2.6%) and medical and health care (2.6%).
Wholesale prices declined (-1.1%) owing to the decline in the cost of imports and industrial goods.
The current-account deficit narrowed to US$ 400 million compared with US$ 933 million in the preceding year, equivalent to 4% and 9% respectively.
The merchandise trade balance (-US$ 825 million) was partly offset by the surplus on the services balance.
However, as the capital account was also in deficit, authorities resorted to bond issues on the international market, which boosted international reserves to over US$ 1 billion.
Merchandise exports grew by just 1.4%, in contrast with 10% in the previous year.
Reexports from the Colón Free Zone (over 80% of total) were flat owing to weak demand from the Latin American countries.
For their part, national exports increased by 10% between January and September, thanks to larger catches of shrimp (23.8%), shrimp larvae (4.4%) and fish meal and oil (67.9%).
Production figures were also stronger for melons (178%), watermelons (130%) and petroleum products (85%).
Conversely, banana exports were down (-17%), as were those of coffee (-12.1%) and clothing A 4% contraction in imports reflects zero growth in imports into the Colón Free Zone and the fall in national purchases (-10%).
With the exception of crude oil, all import categories showed a dramatic decrease: capital goods (-27.7%), food products (-6.1% and intermediate goods (-9.3%).
Lastly, foreign investment flows amounted to US$ 250 million , in contrast with the figure of over US$ 600 million in 1999 and 2000, respectively.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 65 Barbados1 The Barbadian economy, having experienced declines in the second and third quarters of 2001, slipped below its long-term growth trend.
Real GDP contracted by 1.5% over the first nine months of 2001 in response to downturns in tradables and slow growth in non-tradables.
This contraction contrasts with an average annual growth rate of 3% over the previous eight years.
The reduction in economic activity reflected the slowdown in the world economy.
The manufacturing sector suffered the effects of trade liberalization as all of the major sub-sectors contracted.
Uncertainty in the economy sparked by the effects of globalization and the events of 11 September drove liquidity up above the preceding year’s level.
The fiscal deficit was almost twice as high as it had been in the same period in 2000 and was financed locally for the most part.
The slowdown reflected the effects of adjustments in some sectors as they confronted the challenges of trade liberalization.
Real value-added in the tourism sector contracted by 3.2% in the first three quarters of 2001, as compared with a 7.5% increase in the corresponding period of the previous year.
The decline in real tourism output reflected a reduction in long-stay arrivals, which fell by 4.9% for January-September 2001 after an expansion of 6.6% in the corresponding period of 2000.
The relatively poor perform ance of tourism resulted from continued competition from other destinations and an economic decline in the source markets for the country’s tourism.
Despite lower output, B arbados ju s t m anaged to m eet its contractual ob ligations to the European Union.
N on-sugar agriculture decreased by 5.1% during the first nine months of 2001, as reductions in the output of fish and chicken more than offset an increase in the production of milk.
The manufacturing sector suffered the effects of trade liberalization, with decreases in all of the major subsectors.
Output for the sector as a whole fell by 7.6%. 1 This report is based on information provided by the Central Bank o f Barbados.
Gross domestic product 3.1 3.0 -1.5 Consumer prices 2.6 3.8 0.3 Real effective exchange rateb -0.5 0.0 -0.8 Percentages Unemployment rate 10.4 9.3 10.0 a Prelim inary estimates to end o f third quarter. b A negative rate indicates an appreciation of the currency in Value-added in the food-processing subsector fell by 5.8%, while wearing apparel dropped by 26.2%.
Construction activity increased by an estimated 2.3% in the first three quarters of 2001, following a marginal decrease in the corresponding nine months of the previous year.
The performance of this sector was strongly influenced by activity in commerce and tourism-related projects and by a number of large government infrastructure projects.
Other non-tradables sectors that registered growth were transportation, storage and communications, and business and other services.
Output in the wholesale and retail subsectors is estimated to have contracted by 1.4% owing to reduced activity in tourism and the other tradables.
Output from mining and quarrying was also down, mainly because of the temporary suspension of drilling of new wells.
By October 2001, the annual rate of inflation as measured by the retail price index was 0.3%.
Data for the first nine months of 2001 indicate that the number of new licenses issued to international business service companies was lower than in the corresponding period of 2000.
Em ployment was down in m anufacturing, construction, distribution and tourism, and gains in employment in finance, insurance and other services failed to offset the losses in other sectors.
This compares with the 9.3% figure recorded at the end of 2000.
The female unemployment rate increased from 11.3% to 11.8%, while the male unemployment rate rose from 7.4% to 8.3%.
For the period January-Septem ber 2001, the Government recorded a deficit of BDS$ 140 million, which was about twice the size of the deficit for the corresponding period of 2000.
This was attributable to a decrease in receipts and the upswing that was seen in current and capital expenditure as the effect of slacker economic activity worked itself through the country’s accounting system.
Spending on goods and services rose by some 17.2%, while interest payments climbed by 8% owing to the country’s larger stock of external debt.
Expenditure on the government capital works programme expanded by 14.8% as work continued on a number of projects.
Commercial banks provided BDS$ 54.9 million, while the National Insurance Scheme and private non­ banking institutions expanded the level of credit they extended to governm ent bodies, w ith holdings amounting to BDS$ 43 million in government securities.
For the first nine months of 2001, the economy’s liquidity remained relatively high.
Excess liquidity was approximately 11.5% at the end of September, as compared with a rate of 7.7% at the end of December 2000.
As a result, the treasury bill interest rate had fallen to 2.7% by the end of September, down from 3.9% at the end of December 2000.
On the other hand, credit to the private sector rose by BDS$ 24 million as growth in loans to the construction, tourism, manufacturing and personal services sectors outstripped the reductions in loans to agriculture and distribution.
The lower rate of credit to the agricultural sector was matched by lower output.
The central bank lowered the minimum deposit rate from 4% to 3.5%, the discount rate from 9.5% to 8.5%, and the reserve requirement from 6% to 5% of deposit liabilities.
It also set indicative lending rates which required the weighted average lending rate to be no higher than 10% by 1 August 2001 and no higher than A small current account surplus of some BDS$ 0.3 million was recorded, in contrast to the deficit of BDS$ 3.6 million posted for the corresponding period of the previous year.
This outcome was the result of a 10% drop in retained imports.
Imports of capital and consumer goods declined while tourism earnings remained almost constant.
Domestic exports fell by 12.4% as higher earnings from food and beverages and from electronic components were offset by lower inflows from chemicals and sugar.
The surplus on the capital and financial account of the balance of payments was estimated at BDS$ 133 million, which was less than one-third of the figure for the corresponding period of the previous year.
Net international reserves of the central bank stood at BDS$ 1.1 billion at the end of September, which represented an increase of BDS$ 137.6 million over the December 2000 figure.
Liquid foreign assets represented 27 weeks ’ worth of imports at the end of September 2001.
Imports were also down, but by a smaller amount, and the trade deficit consequently widened.
Sugar-cane production declined by 9.1% in the first six months of 2001 as compared to production in the corresponding period o f2000.
This is attributable to poor farming practices and damage to sugar-cane fields caused by Hurricane Keith.
Deliveries of oranges and grapefruit for the period from October 2000 to June 2001 topped the previous year’s figure by 2.3% as young groves reached harvest maturity.
Sugar production decreased by 13.2%, owing to the decline in processing volumes and relatively significant reductions in factory time efficiency.
Citrus products in the form of concentrate and pulp turned in a mixed performance.
The production of orange concentrate increased in the period from October 2000 to June 2001, thus improving upon its performance of one year earlier, and grapefruit concentrate posted an 8.5% increase over a similar period.
The production of orange and grapefruit pulp for the period October 2000- June 2001 was also higher than the year before.
For the first six months of 2001, stay-over arrivals increased by 0.2% over the figure for the same period of 2000.
A slight increase in seaport arrivals offset a reduction in visitors entering through land border crossings.
The main source markets for stay-over tourists continue to be the United States and Europe, which accounted for approximately 66% and 11% of the total, respectively.
Arrivals began to slow, however, as a result of the economic downturn in those markets and the financial difficulties being experienced by one of the cruise lines that calls at Belize.
Nevertheless, the outlook was for a resumption of cruise ship arrivals in the latter part of the year.
Between February and May 2001, the consumer price index rose by 0.6%, with significant increases in transport and com m unications and in personal care.
The implementation of a common external tariff (CET) reduced import duties and contributed to the price declines observed in clothing and footwear, household goods and maintenance, and recreation, education and culture.
The annualized rate of inflation from May 2000 to May 2001 (1.7%), is largely a reflection of the increase in fuel costs.
Over the first half of the year, monetary growth was largely driven by an 8.7% (BZ$ 71.2 million) expansion in net domestic credit.
M1 rose by 24%, an increase far in excess of the average growth rate of 9.8% recorded over the same period of the previous two years.
Contrasting with the rapid growth of M1, quasi-money contracted by 2.7% to BZ$ 17.5 million as excess liquidity and low interest rates prompted a reduction in time deposits of some BZ$ 39.1 million.
Time deposit holdings by individuals, cooperatives, credit unions and private financial institutions declined by BZ$ 44.8 million.
Savings deposits rose by BZ$ 21.6 million, with individuals accounting for 79.2% of the increase.
Over the first half of 2001, the net foreign assets of the banking system rose slightly (by BZ$ 0.6 million), with a BZ$ 6.8 million improvement in the net external position of commercial banks slightly outweighing a BZ$ 6.2 million decline in the central bank’s net foreign assets.
During the period from January to June 2001, the central government’s domestic debt rose by BZ$ 17.8 m illion to BZ$ 189.7 million.
As there were no disbursements or new issues of securities, the expansion of the debt was attributable to an increase of BZ$ 18.5 m illion in its overdraft w ith the central bank; amortization payments on that credit exceeded BZ$ 0.7 million.
For the first half of 2001, the total volume of international trade was down from the previous year’s level.
Gross imports fell by 7.4% to BZ$ 468.8 million, while poor market prices and bad weather resulted in a 14.3% drop in the value of total exports, which slipped to BZ$ 209.9 million.
The trade deficit widened by BZ$ 6.8 million to BZ$ 217.1 million.
Domestic exports fell from BZ$ 245.1 million for the period from January to June 2000 to BZ$ 209.9 m illion, as export performance weakened under pressure from exogenous shocks.
Sugar exports declined in value as production losses caused by Hurricane Keith in late 2000 were reflected in smaller export shipments, especially to the European Union.
Banana exports also fell in value after adverse weather conditions reduced yields and hence export volumes.
The decline in the value o f citrus shipments from BZ$ 100.2 million to BZ$ 78.7 million is attributable to the mix o f juices shipped.
Marine products increased in term s o f export value as investments in the shrimp-farming industry boosted output and export volumes.
Cuba Economic growth in Cuba slowed to 3% in 2001 owing to a weak performance by the sugar industry and a decline in foreign currency inflows, which restricted the country’s import capacity.
Although exports exceeded imports in terms of volumes and despite an improvement in the terms of trade, the balance-of-payments current-account deficit widened (to 2.5% of GDP, compared with 2.1% in 2000), following a decrease in remittances by family members abroad and an increase in net factor service payments.
Although the official rate of exchange remained fixed, the national currency lost value against the dollar on the open market, the events of 11 September having led to a decline in foreign currency inflows.
The monetary overhang expanded to 36% of GDP and the fiscal deficit grew slightly (2.5% of GDP compared with 2.2% in 2000), since income declined faster than expenditure.
Nevertheless, inflation was barely 0.5%, thanks to the stability o f regulated prices and to a general fall in prices attributable to increased supply on the open market.
The authorities concentrated on the constraints caused by the shortage o f foreign exchange, which started to become more acute in September.
In fact, investments were frozen, tourist facilities temporarily closed, imports restricted and budget adjustments made, especially in dollars.
The situation was further com plicated in early November, when Hurricane Michelle struck the centre of the island causing direct and indirect damage estimated at over US$ 1.5 billion (5% o f output).
In terms o f the fiscal position, current revenues fell (-3.7%) while capital revenue increased (7.9%).
The latter included an increase in direct revenue (7.4%) whereas indirect revenue diminished (-7%), as a result of the reduction in circulation and sales On the expenditure side, current expenditure contracted (-3%), reflecting a reduction in subsidies to State-owned corporations.
Nevertheless, there were increases in expenditure for culture and the arts, defence and internal order, administration, education and social welfare.
The external public debt, not including debt contracted with member countries of the now defunct Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA), was alm ost the same as in the p rev ious y ea r (US$ 10,960,000), or 35.6% of output calculated at the official rate o f exchange.
The majority o f these loans Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 69 were government-insured export credits (33% of total), inter-government loans (17%) and medium- and long­ term bilateral and syndicated loans (16%).
Reform of the financial sector, which now includes more than 20 new institutions, was consolidated and a new system of charges and payments was established to improve financial discipline and expedite the settlement of outstanding debts between national corporations.
Further progress was made with economic reforms designed to enhance the corporate structure of public entities and open up the economy to foreign investment.
Thus, 300 State-owned companies were covered by the corporate reforms, while the process of opening-up has been extended to 405 joint-venture companies and contracts (395 at the end of the previous year).
In total, committed capital investments amount to about US$ 5 billion, of which half has already been disbursed.
Total supply grew (3%) reflecting an increase in output (3%) and an upturn in imports (2.8%).
On the demand side, external and domestic demand grew at similar rates (2.9% and 3% respectively).
The increase in investment (4.4%) exceeded growth in consumption (2.8%); of the latter, growth in government investment (3.5%) was stronger than private investment (2.4%).
The priority was given to capital formation in the energy sector, as well as in nickel, the sugar-based agro-industry, shrimp farming, tourism and telecommunications.
There was a slight improvement in the quality of the food distributed through regulated consumption (ration books).
With respect to individual sectors, strong growth was observed in construction (6.7%) and mining 3.4%.
Growth in construction is attributable to the work carried out in sectors that are part of the foreign currency circuit and to the start of reconstruction work following the hurricane.
Growth in manufacturing (2.4%) is in keeping with the level of activity in 14 of the 21 branches of the sector, notably in the fuel industry, non-ferrous metals, electronics, paper, food and beverages, and tobacco.
Nickel production was at a record high (75,000 tons), showing a 5% increase over the previous year’s figure; meanwhile, growth in the energy sector made it possible to expand coverage of basic services: 78,000 persons were connected to the gas supply and 40,000 households to the electricity grid.
This decline, together with the slump in fish catches, caused a slowdown in the agricultural sector, which showed barely 1.4% growth (compared with 11.5% in 2000).
Thus, they took advantage of the temporary closure of 20 hotels (of a total of 225) and one third of the island’s 36,000 rooms to commission repairs or remodeling of hotel facilities and to retrain the labour force, while launching a more intensive international campaign to promote Cuba as a tourist destination.
Perseverance with the price control policy and increased supply on the open agricultural markets kept inflation down to 0.5%.
The unemployment rate declined for the sixth consecutive year (this time, to stand at 4.5%), at a time when labour productivity was growing and real wages were stronger.
Export earnings from the sale of goods and services increased by 2.7%, reflecting higher volumes of nickel -which actually fell in price- and of non-traditional exports, including tourism services and telecommuni­ cations.
The value of imports rose by 0.9%, owing mainly to the greater volume of foodstuffs purchased abroad, since oil purchases showed practically no variation.
Overall, the level of net current transfers received (US$ 750 million) were in balance with net factor service payments, so that the balance of payments current-account deficit (US$ 758 million) was equivalent to the trade deficit in goods and services.
This deficit was more than offset by the surplus on the current account (US$ 770 million), leaving US$ 12 million to add to international reserves.
Haiti The poor performance of the Haitian economy has been cause for disquiet for the third consecutive year.
GDP has declined by almost 1 percentage point, inflation slowed considerably (9.5%) and the fiscal deficit remained high at 2.8% of GDP, slightly more than the balance- of-payments current-account deficit.
The evident weakening in all productive sectors was aggravated by the uncertain political outlook and by the economic slowdown in the United States, and, together with the highly unstable political situation, augurs ill for the year 2002.
Restrictions in external financing persisted despite the efforts of the international community, headed by the Organization of American States (OAS), to achieve a negotiated settlement to the post-electoral conflict of the previous year.
In addition, the advisory mission from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) was unsuccessful in concluding a new Staff Monitored Program (SMP) with the Haitian authorities, following the suspension of the prior agreement for non-fulfilm ent of the established quantitative criteria.
The external bottleneck and the internal recession restricted the authorities’ margin for manoeuvre with respect to their economic policy.
Meanwhile, fiscal revenues fell by 12% in real terms and expenditure contracted by 9%.
In spite of the increases applied in the previous year to local prices for petroleum products, the replenishment of related tax resources did not materialize and losses under this heading remained significant (over 900 million gourdes).
The central bank continued to bear almost the full burden (94%) of the fiscal deficit, equivalent to 2.8% of GDP, while its contribution declined by 9%.
Unlike the situation of the preceding years, this financing reflected a shift in capital expenditure towards current outlays in order to avoid an even greater deterioration in government accounts.
Government external debt payments contracted sharply, which extended the vicious circle of non-payments and undisbursed commitments and pushed up cumulative arrears to US$ 18.7 million.
In June, they raised the legal reserve ratio to 31% and altered the form of provisioning for such reserves.
In the case of dollar liabilities, 70% of this fund must be set up in foreign exchange and the remaining 30% in national currency, which is the opposite of the previous situation.
At the end of the fiscal year, total liquidity in the economy (M3) contracted by 6% in real terms, largely as a result of the withdrawal of nominal amounts of dollar liabilities (67%), of term deposits in national currency (16%) and of narrow money (M1) (17%).
The actual money supply in September 2001 reflected a 4% increase in real terms, owing to the strong expansion of loans from the banking system to the Government (15%), while credit to the private sector declined by 18%.
The annual average exchange rate of the gourde reflected a 21.7% devaluation against the dollar.
Although the decline was sharper in the last few months, the Banque de la République d’Haïti had to refrain from intervening on the foreign exchange market as its reserves were extremely low.
In fact, gross external assets declined and owing to external constraints, no new debts could be contracted.
Investments fell (-2.5%), since the contraction of public-sector investments could not be 2 The period under consideration refers to fiscal year 2000-2001, starting in October 2000 and ending in September 2001.
Consumption declined by 1% owing to the weak demand for labour and the decline in real income (the minimum wage fell by 14%) in an economy where a high percentage of the people are poor.
Gross electricity generation diminished by 28%, with clear proof of damage to productive activities and households.
During the fiscal year, average inflation was high (18%), but diminished towards the end of the year (9.5%), largely as a result of the attenuation in the rate of devaluation and the increases in domestic prices for petroleum products.
The balance-of-payments current account showed a negative balance of the order of US$ 90 million.
In spite of this decline, remittances (US$ 588 million) performed a key role to avoid a major deterioration faced with the reduction in external grants.
Part of this deficit was financed using the limited foreign assistance funding available: net disbursements amounted to barely 11.3 million dollars; extraordinary funding came from the accumulation of arrears (US$ 19 million) in interest payments on the external debt.
The trade balance remained virtually unchanged: exports contracted by 8%, while imports diminished by 3%, owing largely to a sharp decline in hydrocarbons both in value and volume terms (-12% and -17%, respectively).
Once again, the terms of trade showed a deterioration of close to 9%, despite a slight variation (0.9%) in crude oil prices on the international market, since national prices for imports of refined products increased by 5%.
Exports from the textile maquila industry declined both in value terms (-6.4%) and in terms of volume (-5%), while the slump (-30%) in coffee prices on the international market worsened conditions in this sector.
Exports of non-traditional products (mangoes) were Owing to the restrictions maintained by virtually the whole international financial community and by donors, there was only a minimal variation (2%) in the net external debt balance (US$ 1,188,000).
Disbursements barely amounted to US$ 34.8 million, while debt servicing and repayment (US$ 23.5 million) declined considerably.
Jamaica3 It is estimated that GDP increased by over 3.5% during the first nine months of 2001 compared to the same period of 2000, as output in the mining industry rebounded to normal levels after the Gramercy accident.
All of the other major sectors except electricity and water and miscellaneous services recorded increases.
Consumer prices rose by 8.3% between January and October 2001, while central government operations showed a fiscal deficit of J$ 2.6 billion.
Increases in output were posted for agriculture, forestry and fisheries, manufacturing, and transport, storage and communications in the first semester o f2001.
Growth rates slowed in these industries in the third quarter, however, when compared with their performance in the first half of 2001.
A lower level of real output in the electricity and water sectors is attributable to problems at generating plants that drove down the level of electricity generation.
Slower growth rates for miscellaneous services reflect a drop in output for hotels, restaurants and clubs as tourist arrivals declined.
Agricultural production had shown a 10.3% increase in January-September 2001 over the corresponding period of 2000 due to an almost fivefold increase in the volume and value of the sugar cane produced.
The floods of October 2001 are thought to have eroded that increase, however, and the forecast is therefore that production will remain at its 2000 level.
The increase in the production of sugar cane was primarily responsible for the improved performance reflected in the export-crop subindex.
The upswing in output was a consequence of the deferral of milling operations, which influenced production figures.
One of the factors underlying these statistics was the yield in terms of tons of cane to tons of sugar. 3 The present description o f main aspects o f the Jamaican economy was prepared from the th ird quarter analysis as presented by the Planning Institute o f Jamaica.
The mining sector continued to recover as bauxite and alumina production increased.
Activity in non-residential construction was spurred by major infrastructure projects undertaken by the Ministry of Transport and Works.
In the services sector, tourism slackened its pace of growth owing to a continued reduction in cruise ship arrivals and a slowdown in the rate of growth of stopover visitors as the slowdown in the United States economy continued and as negative reports on safety conditions in the country were carried on major news networks.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 73 Financial services continued to expand at a significant rate.
Growth in the sector is attributable to an ongoing recovery in the banking and insurance industries.
In basic services, although sales and generation in the electricity, light and power subsector continued to climb, they did so more slowly than before as a consequence of the generation problem s being experienced by the Jamaica Public Service Company.
Water production fell by 3.4% com pared to the corresponding period in 2000.
The reactivation of the financial services sector was fuelled by improved supply conditions in the credit market, stronger demand for insurance-related products (as evidenced by an increase in the number of policies being sold) and the continued recovery of the stock market.
Government consumption expenditure is estimated to have increased by less than 1% in real terms, in part because of higher wages.
Mary areas have put additional pressure on the production and service sectors to meet their growth target of 4.5% in 2001.
The drop in tourist arrivals in the wake of the September 11th attacks on the United States has resulted, as an immediate response, in hotel occupancy rates of some 11% %less than one-third of the normal occupancy rate.
The available information indicates that occupancy rates are on the rise, however, and some increase in arrivals is expected in the last month of the year.
The floods and the reaction to the September 11th attacks have put pressure on government expenditure.
The floods had a particularly strong impact given the need to provide emergency financial support to victims in Portland and St.
Between January and September 2001, the overall performance of the manufacturing sector improved by 2.5% as compared to the corresponding nine months of 2000.
A significant factor behind this performance was the return to normal operations at the Petrojam refinery, which led to a 27.3% increase in petroleum production.
Consumer prices increased by 8.3% between January and October 2001, the largest jump in the last three years.
This relatively high rate of inflation reflected cost-push effects as well as seasonal increases in domestic food-crop prices.
Growth in time deposits continued to outstrip the expansion of savings deposits, as investors moved into higher-yield interest-bearing accounts.
Domestic credit continued to expand, with credit to the public sector increasing by 17.8% and credit to the private sector by 8.7%.
The central governm ent’s fiscal operations generated a deficit of J$ 2.6 billion during the third quarter of 2001.
This contrasted sharply with a surplus of J$ 333 million in the corresponding quarter of 2000.
The fiscal outturn was, however, somewhat better than the programmed deficit of J$ 3.4 billion as steps were taken to curtail government expenditure on capital projects and program m es by 49.5% and 23.3%, respectively.
There was also a reallocation of funds in an effort to meet the established fiscal targets while dealing with some degree of social unrest in July 2001.
Total expenditure stood at J$ 28 billion and was 4.3% less than the sum budgeted for the period.
When compared with the outturn for the corresponding period of 2000, total expenditure for the quarter was 14.1% greater.
This increase was accounted for by an upswing in recurrent expenditure amounting to some 16.8% as the government wage bill rose by J$ 11.2 billion.
The country’s balance-of-paym ents position improved in January-July 2001, with a build-up in net international reserves of US$ 556 million.
The positive balance-of-payments outturn was due to large inflows on the financial account and reflected increases in both official and private investment.
Official investment clim bed to US$ 423.9 m illion, thanks to the government’s receipt of US$ 400 m illion from a Eurobond issue.
Private investment increased by 4.3% as the government received the final payment from the sale of the Jamaica Public Service Company.
The capital account moved from a surplus of US$ 2.8 million to a deficit of US$ 8.4 million.
The current account registered a deficit of US$ 224.7 million for January-July 2001.
The trade deficit increased by 18.5% as the net effect of an upturn in the value of imports and a decline in that of exports.
The income account was less favourable than it had been in the corresponding periods of 1999 and 2000 as m ultinational corporations increased their profit remittances.
The improved position of the services account was due to the travel component of that account and reflected increased earnings from the tourism sector up to the end of July 2001.
Dominican Republic The GDP growth rate slowed to 3% in 2001 (7.8% in the previous year), owing to an adjustment policy applied at the beginning of the year and the entry into force of fiscal and tariff reforms.
The tax reform put pressure on prices, but their monthly fluctuations diminished, so that the variation was about 5%, which is less than in 2001.
The performance of the external sector was characterized by dampening of trade in goods and services and continuity of the foreign direct investment flows.
The slowdown of the United States economy had a negative impact on employment and external sales.
The economy showed signs of a strong recovery however, as of the third quarter, boosted by a successful placing of sovereign bonds, although the events of 11 September were prejudicial to tourism.
The tax reform made it possible to increase fiscal pressure, maintain stability in the fiscal accounts and make a timely contribution to external debt repayments.
This provided a basis, in the second half of the year, for implementing a monetary policy aiming to reduce nominal interest rates with a view to boosting the economy.
The fiscal result was surplus (1% of GDP), as a result of the tax reform.
This increased receipts, despite the reduction (-10%) in income from external trade, deriving from the tariff reform.
The growth rate of tax income rose to 25% (1% in the previous year) and the tax burden increased from 13.7 to 16.1% of GDP.
The tax reform included the increase from 8% to 12% in the tax rate on transfers of goods and services, an advance income tax payment of 1.5% of the gross monthly income of commercial establishments, and the increase in selective taxes.
New legislation on oil and gas was also implemented, with a selective fixed tax per gallon of fuel consumed.
The tariff reform simplified the structure of import duties and reduced the tariff ceiling from 35% to 20%.
As the fiscal balance was maintained, a flexible monetary policy was possible for most of the year, based on reducing the nominal interest rates; the debt of the Central Bank was also reduced through absorption of participation certificates.
The weighted average of nominal loan rates decreased from 29.3% in January to 23.5% in October, and the average for deposit rates fell The revitalization policy was complemented, towards the end of the year, by the issuing and placement of sovereign bonds for a total of US$ 500 million, payable in five years at an annual interest rate of 9.5%.
Of this total, 79% of the bonds were placed with United States companies, 20% with European investors and the remaining 1% in Latin America.
The marked slowdown in growth was the result of the adjustment measures implemented between August 2000 and January 2001, which had a negative impact on investment and consumption.
In the last four months of the year, however, there were signs of a recovery, owing to the lowering of interest rates and the favourable prospects for income from the sovereign bonds issue.
Manufacturing (-2.3%) was affected by the fall in internal demand and the increase in production costs due to the rise in fuel prices.
Activity in the export-processing zones lost momentum owing to the reduction in sales o f textile manufactures to the United States market.
Employment in the export-processing zones declined owing to the deteriorating international situation and the use o f more capital-intensive production processes.
Affected by the global slowdown, and then by the events of 11 September, tourism stagnated, following the 16% growth rate in 2000.
Inflation remained at around 8% until September, this result being mainly due to the one-time impact o f the fiscal measures adopted at the beginning of the year, which in January alone resulted in an increase o f 2.5% in consumer prices.
On the other hand, in the fourth quarter, the CPI fell significantly to around an annual 5%.
Sound economic management and the depressed internal situation prevented an increase in inflationary pressures.
The temporary suspension of the liquid-gas subsidy also affected the rise in prices.
The slowdown of the economy pushed unemployment to over 15% (13.9% in 2000), resulting in an increase in social expenditure.
Recent measures to stimulate economic and social development in economically depressed areas, the establishment of a minimum salary in those areas, and, above all, the multiplier effect expected from the use of resources from sovereign bonds may manage to revert the trend of rising unemployment.
The global balance of payments was positive, as the economic slowdown caused a drop in imports, which reduced the gap in the current account by the equivalent of 3% of GDP (5.2% in 2000).
Foreign direct investment flows (US$ 900 million) also contributed to this result.
Exports of goods were affected by the fall in international prices of traditional products and the lack of growth in external demand.
With the aim of boosting export growth, the dismantling began in October of the exchange commission on purchases of foreign currency.
The first steps were also taken towards the unification of the exchange market, so that traditional exporters would no longer have to offer their foreign currency to the Central Bank at the official exchange rate.
Lastly, a compensation fund for coffee production was created using resources obtained from the sovereign bonds.
The decrease in the surplus of the non-factor services balance reflected the performance of tourism.
D espite the unfavourable in ternational context, remittances remained an important source of financing for the current account deficit (6% of GDP).
The result of the financial and capital account (US$ 1,850 million) was sustained by foreign direct investment flows similar to those of the previous year.
The resources resulting from the sovereign bonds issue reinforced the effect of foreign direct investment flows on the global result of the balance of payments; at the same time, they represented an increase in the country’s external debt.
Trinidad and Tobago GDP growth for the first two quarters of 2001 was 1%.
During the first nine months of the year, consumer prices rose by 2.2%.
Fiscal accounts continued to reflect a better-than-expected performance in the second quarter, since expenditure remained below projections while revenues continued to benefit from higher-than-budgeted oil prices.
Monetary conditions in the second quarter were generally very liquid as short-term technical considerations restricted the central bank’s ability to conduct open market operations; credit growth was fairly slack.
The marginal improvement in economic growth was associated with the recovery in the petroleum sector, which expanded by 3.3%.
Other sectors such as manufacturing, government services, other services and construction experienced either a slowdown or an outright contraction, but agriculture, distribution, finance and electricity and water strengthened.
Overall, growth in the non-petroleum sector slowed but, when measured on a year-on-year basis, the economy nonetheless expanded by 4% in the first half of the year.
The petroleum sector was the major driver of growth in the second quarter as the rate of expansion of the non­ petroleum sector slowed.
Some weakening in the non­ petroleum sector of the economy became apparent in the second quarter when declines were registered in manufacturing (1.4%), government services (5.5%) and other services (4.3%).
Distribution and finance remained major areas of strength, with rates of 5.8% and 5.4%, respectively.
Despite an uneven performance by industrial sectors, production was up by 4% in the first half of the year.
Growth was fairly well balanced between the petroleum (3.4%) and non-petroleum (4.1%) sectors, with agriculture being the only sector to register a contraction (-19.1%) for the first half of 2001 despite an upturn in the second quarter.
The sugar industry experienced a number of problems during the second quarter o f2001, which made it necessary to shut down one plant for two weeks.
As a result, sugar output amounted to just 26,600 tons in the second quarter, or about half the level produced in the corresponding quarter of 2000.
The food component of the index exhibited an increase of 17.3% and thus continued to be the major source of upward pressure.
The non-food components of the index reflected no more than a marginal increase.
The central government registered a surplus of TT$ 1.156 billion during the first six months of 2001.
This hefty surplus was expected to decline by the end of the fiscal year, however, owing to a projected increase in expenditure.
This outcome stood in sharp contrast to a projected budget deficit of TT$ 701 million.
Preliminary overview o f the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, 2001 77 revenue growth came from both the oil and non-oil sectors, with the Government’s oil revenues in the first semester of 2001 amounting to TT$ 2.685 billion.
Outside the oil sector, better collection measures helped to raise corporate tax receipts by 21.8%.
Personal income tax receipts jumped by 70% thanks, in large part, to payments of arrears to some categories of public- sector employees, as well as to improved collection procedures.
In addition to running up a sizeable surplus for the quarter, the Government borrowed TT$ 676 million on the domestic market.
Consequently, during this period the Government’s balance with the central bank rose by over TT$ 1.5 billion; TT$ 376 million of its total borrowings were sterilized by the central bank, however.
The public sector external debt fell by US$ 1 million to US$ 1.656 billion in the second quarter of 2001.
The external debt profile therefore showed little change, with United States dollar-denominated debt accounting for about 94% of the total debt stock.
Conditions in the financial system fluctuated but remained generally liquid in the three-month period ending in July 2001.
In attempting to smooth out these fluctuations and to soak up liquidity, the central bank relied mainly on repo operations, since its ability to conduct open market operations continued to be constrained by a lack of available securities.
The existing level of liquidity exerted downward pressure on interest rates, and this trend was reinforced when, in mid-May, the central bank lowered the reserve ratio for commercial banks from 21% to 19%.
In contrast to the situation a year earlier, when similar monetary conditions had fuelled a strong demand for foreign exchange, there were no signs of pressure in the local foreign-exchange market.
Indeed, against the background of sharply falling United States interest rates, this market was remarkably stable during the first seven months of 2001, with inflows surpassing the levels seen in the corresponding period of 2000 by more than 40%.
As a result of strong demand for the TT dollar, the selling rate of the United States dollar slipped from TT$ 6.30 at the end of 2000 to TT$ 6.17 by the end of July 2001.
Preliminary data indicate that the domestic money supply exhibited strong growth despite a much more moderate expansion in credit.
In particular, the narrow money supply (M1A) expanded by 31.4%, which was a sharp upswing from the rate of 14.1% seen at the end of 2000.
The year-on-year increase in the broad money supply (M2) was also significantly larger than the rate of 6.9% recorded in 2000, but this was not matched by changes in the level of outstanding bank credit.
Credit to the private sector reflected a year-on-year increase of 6.3% in July, while total commercial bank credit rose by 5.3%.
The slow growth of credit relative to the increase in bank deposits was m irrored in the accumulation of liquidity in the financial system and the weakening of domestic interest rates.
In the first semester of 2001, Trinidad and Tobago’s merchandise trade balance yielded a surplus of TT$ 4 billion, whereas the surplus for the same period of the preceding year had been TT$ 2.756 billion.
The current account posted a surplus of 4.7% of GDP in the first quarter of 2001, compared with a surplus of 1.9% in the previous quarter.
As of the end of August 2001, net foreign reserves stood at US$1.715 billion and the country’s gross foreign assets am ounted to US$ 430 m illion.
I Official estimates. j August. k Up to 1993, figures correspond to the metropolitan area of Asuncion.
NNFPS = national non-financial public sector (does not include provinces or municipalities). a Calculated on the basis o f figures in local currency at current prices. b Preliminary estimates. c Simple average d To 1994, refers to the operational financial balance; thereafter, refers to the nominal financial balance.
The weightings reflect the average for b Average January-September. c Simple average.
Includes reinvested earnings. b In accordance with the fifth edition o f the IMF Balance o f Paym ents Manual, all transactions between non-financial direct investment enterprises and their parent companies and affiliates are included in direct investment. c Prelim inary figures. d In 1999, includes the value o f the investment by REPSOL in Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales.
Part o f this amount corresponds to the purchase of shares in the company held by non-residents.
In the balance of payments, the value o f those shares is reflected in a debt under the portfolio investment item. e For the period January-October 2001, includes two movements o f significant value.
An inflow of US$ 4.032 billion and an investment abroad worth US$ 3.092 billion. f The Central Reserve Bank o f El Salvador has kept systematic records of foreign direct investment since 1998. g In 2001, includes the value o f the investment by City Group in BANAMEX (US$ 12.447 billion).
The views expressed in signed articles, including those by Secretariat staff members, are those of the authors and therefore do not necessarily reflect the point of view of the Organization.
CEPAL Review is published in Spanish and English versions three times a year.
Annual subscription costs for 2001 are US$ 30 for the Spanish version and US$ 35 for the English version.
América Latina y el 10 Avances en la interpretación ambiental del desarrollo agrícola de América Latina, 1985, 236 p. 11 El decenio de la mujer en el escenario latinoamericano.
Gestión para el desarrollo de cuencas de alta montaña en la Políticas macroeconómicas y brecha externa: América Latina en los años ochenta, 1988,201 p.
Planificación y gestión del desarrollo en áreas de expansión de la frontera agropecuaria en América Latina, 1989,113 p.
A collection of documents on economic relations between the United States and Central America, Inventarios y cuentas del patrimonio natural en América Latina y el Caribe, 1991,335 p.
Evaluaciones del impacto ambiental en América Latina y el Caribe, 1991, 232 p. (out of stock) El desarrollo sustentable: transformación productiva, equidad y medio ambiente, 1991,146 p.
Sustainable development: changing production patterns, social equity and the environment, 1991,146 p.
Equidad y transformación productiva: un enfoque integrado, Social equity and changing production patterns: social equity and the environment, 1991,254 p.
Educación y conocimiento: eje de la transformación productiva con equidad, 1992, 269 p.
Education and knowledge: basic pillars of changing production patterns with social equity, 1992, 257 p.
Ensayos sobre coordinación de políticas macroeconómicas, Población, equidad y transformación productiva, 1993, 2a ed.
Population, social equity and changing production patterns, Cambios en el perfil de las familias: la experiencia regional, 1993, Familia y futuro: un programa regional en América Latina y el Fam ily and future: a regional programme in Latin America and the Caribbean, 1994,124 p.
Imágenes sociales de la modernización y la transformación El regionalismo abierto en América Latina y el Caribe.
La integración económica en servicio de la transformación Open regionalism in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Econom ic integration as a contribution to changing productions patterns with social equity, 1994, 103 p.
América Latina y el Caribe: políticas para mejorar la inserción en la economía mundial, 1995, 314 p. (out of stock) Latin America and the Caribbean: policies to improve linkages with the global economy, 1995,308 p.
Las relaciones económicas entre América Latina y la Unión Europea: el papel de los servicios exteriores, 1996,395 p.
América Latina y el The economic experience o f the last fifteen years.
Teorías y metáforas sobre el desarrollo territorial, Sergio Boisier, Privatización portuaria: bases, alternativas y consecuencias, Nuevas políticas comerciales en América Latina y Asia.
Un examen de la migración internacional en la Comunidad Transformaciones recientes en el sector agropecuario brasileño, M.
Notas de un seminario conmemorativo, 2000,149 p. 55 Financial globalization and the em erging economies, José Antonio Ocampo, Stefano Zamagni, Ricardo Ffrench-Davis y Carlo Pietrobelli, 2000,328 p. 56 Protagonismo juvenil en proyectos locales: lecciones del cono 57 Las mujeres chilenas en los noventa.
Hablan las cifras, 2000, 58 La dimensión ambiental en el desarrollo de América Latina, Apertura y (des)encadenamientos - Reflexiones en torno a los 59 Juventud, población y desarrollo en América Latina y el Caribe.
Hacia la consolidación de los asentamientos humanos en América Latina, 2001, 176 p. 61 Apertura económica y (des)encadenamientos productivos - Reflexiones sobre el complejo lácteo en América Latina (forthcoming) 62 Equity, development and citizenship.
Abridged edition. 63 Investment and economic reforms in Latin America, 2001, 64 Structural reforms, productivity and technological change in Latin America, 2001,143 p. 65 The income distribution problem in Latin America and the 66 E conom ic refo rm s, grow th an d em ploym ent.
Mullen,1978, 25 Ecuador: desafíos y logros de la política económica en la fase de expansión petrolera, 1979, 2a ed. 1984,153 p. 26 Las transformaciones rurales en América Latina: ¿desarrollo social o marginación?, 1979,2a ed. 1984,160 p. 27 La dimensión de la pobreza en América Latina, Oscar Altimir, 28 Organización institucional para el control y manejo de la deuda externa.
El caso chileno, Rodolfo Hoffman, 1979,35 p. 29 La política monetaria y el ajuste de la balanza de pagos: tres estudios, Carlos Massad, V.
García y A.Saiheh, 1979, 2a ed. 29 M o n etary p o lic y an d ba lan ce o f p aym ents a d ju s tm e n t: th re e s tu d ie s , Carlos Massad, V.
Saieh, 30 América Latina: las evaluaciones regionales de la estrategia internacional del desarrollo en los años setenta, 1979, 2a ed. 31 Educación, imágenes y estilos de desarrollo, Germán W.
Geneletti, 1981, 2a ed. 1985,162 p. 40 Programa de acción regional para América Latina en los años 40 Regional programme of action for Latin America in the 41 El desarrollo de América Latina y sus repercusiones en la educación.
In view of this situation, the countries have taken steps to bring about an adjustment in expenditure, in addition to introducing other more intensive measures.
More specifically, many governments have embarked upon social security reforms (especially in the public sector), new decentralization schemes, fiscal rules based on macroeconomic considerations and tax reforms.
As ECLAC has indicated on num erous occasions, macroeconomic management calls for efficient tools for moderating the cycle.
The countries will not recover the ability to make use of fiscal instruments overnight, however, as a number of structural issues that strongly influence solvency must first be resolved.
Hence the importance of the public-sector reform agenda being pursued by the countries.
As for the direction of monetary policy, the countries’ central banks have focused on controlling inflationary pressures.
Various countries have set inflation targets and are using interest rates as a tool for meeting those target levels.
In others, the authorities have chosen to use monetary aggregates to provide them with benchmarks for this purpose.
Whatever instruments are chosen, the prevailing goal has been to reduce inflation rates, which had climbed to double-digit levels in 2002.
This is particularly evident in countries such as Mexico, Brazil and Colombia, whose inflation indexes for the early months of the year were endangering their chances of meeting their policy goals.
In order to deal with this situation, the authorities initially raised rates and restricted liquidity.
Once inflation subsided, they paved the way for a reduction in interest rates and adopted a more active stance in an effort to reverse the business cycle.
This greater degree of freedom in monetary management has been possible, among other reasons, because of the improved fiscal outturn.
Argentina, Brazil and Mexico are finishing the year with real lending rates that are much lower than the rates charged on loans at the beginning of 2003.
Most of the countries have consolidated their use of more flexible exchange-rate regimes and have been phasing out restrictions on foreign-exchange operations.
In fact, in 2003 very few changes have been made in the countries’ exchange-rate regimes.
The only exception is Venezuela, which adopted a fixed exchange rate in March together with strict controls on foreign-exchange operations.
Despite this preference for a flexible exchange rate, currency values are closely monitored by the authorities in view of the influence they have on real and financial flows.
In addition, various countries in the region have m aintained a high degree of dollarization in their economies or have simply adopted the dollar as legal tender.
The real effective exchange rate is a key variable for commercial competitiveness.
At the end of the first 10 months of the year, the region’s average exchange­ rate index showed a slight depreciation (2.6%) in relation to the end of 2002.
The currencies of various South American countries (Brazil, A rgentina and Chile) have not only undergone significant appreciations in relation to the dollar but have also risen slightly in value (1.6%) against the currencies of their trading partners.
By contrast, the Central A m erican and M exican currencies have depreciated by almost 6% in relation to the dollar and by 8.4% against the other currencies.
From an overall and longer-term perspective, the main point to be noted is that the exchange rates that are relevant to trade in the region are now 18% higher than their 1997-2001 average.
Maintaining suitable exchange rates is an essential ingredient in expanding the export base while b ring ing in h igher value-added and more technologically complex production activities.
The design and implementation of various fiscal and monetary instruments has helped, inter alia, to reduce inflation.
In 2003, prices have increased by 8.5%, four percentage points less than the previous year.
The region has thus returned to single-digit levels of inflation, as was the case between 1998 and 2001.
This return to low inflation rates takes on added importance in the light o f the difficulties experienced in 2001 and 2002, including, in particular, substantial rises in nominal exchange rates.
Accordingly, relative prices have been altered without fuelling inflation, in clear contrast to the problems encountered by the region in this respect in the past.
The management of economic policy and the absence of cost pressures have also contributed to these results.
In view of the external environment and economic trends on the domestic front, in 2004 the region should continue the expansion that began in 2003.
An increase in economic activity is expected to bring the average rate for the region up to 3.5%, which is far higher than the average for the past five years.
Growth estimates for the fourth quarter of 2003 point to an acceleration of economic activity to a level 2.5% above the rate for the same period in 2002.
Consequently, in 2004 growth will be fuelled by the region’s improved performance in the second half of 2003.
An analysis of various Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 13 external and internal factors suggests that these favourable economic trends will continue during 2004.
First of all, the positive factors that brought about the recovery in 2003, particularly in the export sector, will continue to apply.
The reactivation of the world economy ought to continue, bringing with it an upturn in prices and in international demand for commodities.
In the light of the most recent data, the recovery in the United States is also expected to continue in 2004, thanks to unprecedented fiscal and monetary incentives.
The serious external and fiscal disequilibria affecting the United States economy could make the dollar fall further and, in that event, interest rates would rise.
Most analysts agree that these adjustments are necessary and ought to occur in late 2004 or in 2005.
At this point, however, it is still too early to project the conditions under which this shift in the world’s largest economy might take place.
There are also internal factors that contribute to this favourable outlook for 2004.
Although each country has its own particular features and the factors discussed here have varying effects in each case, some considerations that are valid for the region as a whole can be advanced.
First, domestic interest rates should continue to fall during the first half of 2004, provided that domestic prices also continue to drop.
Furthermore, international interest rates are expected to remain rather low during most of 2004, thereby minimizing external pressures for an increase in domestic interest rates.
Second, the Latin American and Caribbean countries’ exchange rates will remain high, despite the cases of currency appreciation observed in the last few months of 2003.
Third, if economic activity continues to pick up, fiscal policy may cease to be contractionary and could even become expansionary in some countries.
Finally, it should be pointed out that the region’s performance will be influenced by the elections due to be held in various countries of the region during 2004.
As far as the region’s largest economies are concerned, it is estimated that Argentina, which has made such a rapid recovery since the end of 2002, will grow at a rate lower than in 2003 but still higher than the average rate for Latin America and the Caribbean.
The increase in investment seen in 2003 should continue, but at lower rates.
This will help to sustain growth in the short and medium terms.
The upswing in private consumption is also expected to continue in 2004, but there are some doubts as to the pace at which credit will recover.
The restructuring of the financial system is under way and the renegotiation of the foreign debt is still pending.
In Brazil, more rapid growth is projected for 2004 based on the revitalization of domestic demand (both private consumption and investment).
Domestic interest rates should continue to fall, provided that no pressure is put on the exchange rate and no factors emerge that would drive prices up.
The expansion of industrial activity in the last few months of 2003 should also continue into 2004.
The performance of the Mexican economy will be closely linked to that of the United States, although problems in relation to the competitiveness of its economy could continue to limit Mexico’s capacity to take advantage of an increase in demand in that market.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 15 2.
External sector In 2003, the external sector in Latin America and the Caribbean has benefited from the recovery of the world economy.
Increased economic activity has been reflected in an expansion of export markets and higher export prices.
The terms of trade have also improved this year, thereby halting the deterioration observed since 1997.
Imports have rebounded from last year’s drastic adjustment, although they failed to reach the levels recorded in 2000.
For the first time in half a century, the region is running a surplus (0.4% of regional GDP) on the balance-of-payments current account.
This has been achieved despite a further increase in the already high level of net payments of interest, profits and dividends, and is attributable to the large trade surplus and the record level of remittances received by the region.
The high level of compensatory credits and exceptional financing is on a par with the figure recorded the year before.
All these movements have contributed to a significant increase in international reserves, which stand at US$ 32 billion.
Meanwhile, the region has registered US$ 29 billion in outward transfers, which is equivalent to 6.9% of its exports of goods and services.
Although a larger amount was transferred in 2002 (US$ 40.2 billion), this year’s level is still extremely high.
The world economy recovers but uncertainties remain 2004 is not very bright owing to the appreciation of the euro, the high level of unemployment and the limitations imposed by the Stability and Growth Pact on the implementation of expansionary fiscal policies at this juncture.
Germany and France have recently, however, been authorized to run a higher fiscal deficit than is allowed for in the Pact.
This upturn has been concentrated in a limited number of manufacturing sectors, however, so it is still too early to say if this marks the end of the Japanese economy’s protracted bout of lethargy.
Generally speaking, the Asian nations, and especially China, have been the most dynamic ones in the world economy this year.
As of the third quarter, China had a cumulative growth rate of 8.5% relative to the same period of 2002, and a similar rate of expansion is expected in 2004.
In the second half of 2003 world economic activity has taken a positive turn which, despite some risks, should continue in 2004.
The impetus for this trend change has been the onset of a more stable recovery in the United States, where the extraordinary package of expansionary fiscal and monetary policies put in place by the government began to exert a strong effect between the second and third quarters of this year.
The United States economy is expected to have grown by 2.9% in 2003 and should reach between 3% and 4% in 2004, as long as investment continues to react favourably to the fiscal stimulus measures, the interest rate does not suddenly rise and the expansion begins to be accompanied by an increase in employment.
In the euro zone, however, the growth rate stands at a mere 0.5% and the outlook for At this point in time, the main risk for the world economy is the high level of public and private debt in the United States and the possible secondary effects of the expansionary policies implemented in that country.
These measures have driven up the fiscal and balance- of-payments current account deficits to their highest levels of the past 25 years.
To cover the deficit that the United States is running on its current account, it is essential that the rest of the world (in particular some European and Asian countries) remain willing to use a portion of its savings to help finance it.
And in order for this to occur, the outlook for the United States economy must remain relatively favourable and the dollar must not undergo any sharp depreciation.
In 2003, the dollar has experienced a significant devaluation against the euro and the yen in a context of exchange-rate volatility, and the possibility exists that the present imbalances could lead to a further depreciation of the dollar.
If this were to occur, capital inflows to the United States would wane, which would in turn force up interest rates.
This could put a brake on the current recovery process, with the consequent negative implications for the world economy.
The reactivation of the world economy has taken place under circumstances that have been favourable, in two different ways, for Latin America and the Caribbean.
From a financial vantage point, the decline in international interest rates has made it possible to lower interest rates in a number of countries1 and has reduced the cost of external borrowing.
In the area of trade, several countries have benefited directly from Asia’s burgeoning growth, since that region has a shortage of natural resources.
C hina’s expansion has been particularly significant, and this country has been integrating itself into the world market very rapidly.
In the first 10 months of 2003, China’s external trade flows rose by 36.4% relative to the corresponding period in 2002.2 Over the same period, Chinese imports jumped by 40.4%, and many of the major product lines making up those imports are ones in which various Latin American countries have an exportable supply (e.g., soybeans and copper).
Chinese purchases of these commodities have helped to boost their prices and the volumes exported by some countries in the region.3 Growth in Japan has also contributed, although to a lesser degree, to the strength of some commodity markets in the second half of the year, especially in the case of copper.
Although the United States’ recovery has spurred the growth of its non-oil imports, in September 2003 they were still 2.1% below the pre-recession peak value reached three years earlier (see figure 1).
The reactivation has been very positive for Latin America and the Caribbean, although it has had uneven effects on different countries.
Mexico, which is the main trading partner of the United States in the region (around 65% of United States imports from Latin America and the Caribbean come from Mexico), has seen its placements in this market decline since mid2002.
In contrast, other subregional groups have increased their shares in the United States market,4 with their sales rising at rates above the world average ever since the onset of the recovery early this year.
For example, MERCOSUR sales, particularly those o f B razil, have clim bed considerably and have stabilized at these levels during 2003.
A similar pattern has been seen in the Central American and Caribbean countries’ sales, while the exports of the Andean Community and Chile have held to an upward trend throughout the year.
Improving commodity prices and terms of trade Between January and October 2003, the price index for Latin American and Caribbean commodity exports rose by 15.9% compared to the same period in 2002; excluding oil, the increase was 5.9% (see figure 2).
The prices of non-oil commodities have rebounded strongly this year, although they are still 17% below their 1997 average.
The price rise has boosted exports from various South American countries, especially in the latter part of the year.
In 2003 there have been two-digit increases in the prices of soybeans and soy products, some raw materials such as cotton and wool, minerals such as copper and tin, and other commodities such as rolled steel.
Gold prices have also soared as gold’s role as a store of value has increased in importance, and this has spurred exports from Peru and Colombia.
For Brazil, exports to China represent 6.5% o f the total exported in January-October 2003, whereas in 2002, the figure was 4.2%.
Brazil accounts fo r about 1.5% o f Chinese imports. 4 The changing composition o f United States imports also affects other countries.
For example, while imports from China have risen very rapidly, those from Japan show a declining trend.
For analytical purposes, 1997 is used as the reference year for this figure. b Preliminary figures to October.
Over the same period, the price of crude oil has jumped by 23% (11% in 2002), and the prospects for 2004 are that it will remain at levels similar to those reached in 2003.
Although the short duration of the war in Iraq attenuated the sharp increase witnessed early in the year, the market has kept prices high in the face of continuing uncertainty about the situation in the Middle East.
O ther factors include the production cuts announced by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) in November and the low level of inventories in the United States.
The rising trend in major commodity export prices is due to various factors.
First, as already mentioned, the upswing in economic activity worldwide, and especially in the Asian countries, has stimulated imports of products such as soybeans and copper, thereby pushing up their prices.
The bright outlook on some of these markets also seems to have encouraged financial investments that have strengthened prices.
In addition, the devaluation of the dollar has provided an indirect stimulus for these markets.
This is because, since trade in these products is conducted in dollars, the devaluation has made these commodities relatively cheaper for buyers holding currencies that have appreciated over the course of the year, such as the euro and the yen.
Higher commodity prices notwithstanding, the increase in the prices of the region’s total exports has been just 2.8%.
This is due to the fact that the prices of other products, such as manufactures, have risen much less or decreased in 2003.
In any case, the price increase for exports has been higher than that of imports (1.5%), thus halting the deterioration of the region’s terms of trade.
Between 1998 and 2002, there was a cumulative loss of 3.3% in the region’s total terms of trade and one of 14.9% for the non-oil countries (see figure 3).
In 2003, the terms of trade for the region have improved by 1.3% overall, with the gain for the oil-exporting countries being 2.6%, compared to 0.5% for the non-oil countries.
As a result of this improvement, the increase in national income in the region has outstripped GDP growth.
Thanks to the high prices of some agricultural goods, Argentina and Bolivia have seen improvements in their terms of trade amounting to 8.6% and 4.9%, respectively.
In the cases of Chile and Peru, the improvement amounts to 2.4% and 2.2% and is attributable to higher copper and gold prices.
These two countries sustained the greatest cumulative deterioration Meanwhile, the Central American countries, which also suffered large losses over that period, have continued to face unfavourable terms of trade in 2003, as the increases from record lows in coffee and sugar prices have been offset by higher oil prices.
Capital inflows recover Thanks to the upturn in the international financial market, capital flows to L atin Am erica have rebounded somewhat, although they are still no higher than the low levels seen in the early 1990s.
Since late 2002, investors have become much less risk-averse, in part because the uncertainty that had surrounded the presidential elections in Brazil has ceased to be a factor.
This has been reflected in lower risk premiums (spreads) on external public debt bonds.
In fact, after having climbed to 2,400 basis points in September 2002, risk premiums began to decline late in the year and have continued to drop steadily thereafter, reaching 500 basis points -the lowest level to be recorded since May 1998- at the start of December 2003.
The region’s net capital inflows amount to US$ 25.8 billion for the year, in comparison to the US$ 10.6 billion received in 2002 (see table A-6 of the statistical annex).
Net inflows have remained positive in the Central American countries, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru and are quite close to their 2002 levels.
Brazil’s and Mexico’s abundant capital inflows for 2003 amount to over US$ 12 billion.
In Brazil’s case, these funds are credits from the International Monetary Fund (IMF), while in M exico’s, they have taken the form of autonomous capital flows.
Uruguay is posting a positive net balance this year, in contrast to the net outflow it registered in 2002.
Argentina and Venezuela are recording net outflows of capital for the second year in a row.
Net autonomous inflows for 2003 amount to some US$ 3.5 billion, in contrast to the US$ 14 billion net outflow of 2002.5 Inbound foreign direct investment (FDI) far outweighed net outflows of financial capital.
After registering a net outflow of equity capital in 2002, the region witnessed a turnaround in the direction of these flows during the first half of 2003, thanks to the low level of stock prices in dollars.
Midway through the year, investm ent by non-residents to talled approximately US$ 4 billion.
Compensatory capital includes IM F credits and exceptional financing (including interest arrears).
In 2003 the region once again recorded a positive net inflow of compensatory capital (US$ 22.3 billion); almost US$ 12 billion of this sum is made up of IMF credits, w ith the rem ainder being com posed of exceptional financing (mainly interest arrears in Argentina).
Capital flows to the region are expected to continue to rise in 2004 as the industrialized econom ies’ performance improves.
Against a backdrop of continued contract stability, FDI flows are likely to be directed towards the developm ent o f new areas and the privatization of services, while financial capital will continue to be used chiefly to refinance external obligations.
As of September, net IMF financing totalled US$ 11.3 billion (compared to US$ 12.2 billion in 2002).
At year’s end, 11 Latin American and Caribbean countries have arrangements with the Fund, but three of them (Colombia, Guatemala and Peru) have not made use of these credits.
Of the countries that have drawn on these funds, Brazil and Uruguay have received the largest net sums (see table A-6 of the statistical annex).
In Argentina, IMF-approved credits have been just enough to cover the country’s commitments with that institution.
In Paraguay, a political agreement concerning an economic reform package was signed in October by the government and by the political parties represented in the congress, and since then the government has made headway in its negotiations with IMF regarding a special drawing rights agreement which is to be signed in mid-December.
The net amount of financing that the region has received from other multilateral agencies in 2003 is negligible.
FDI flows have continued to shrink in 2003 and net outflows continue to be registered for other categories of financial capital (especially bank lending), even though the region’s gross sales on the international bond market have been higher than in 2002.
As a result, the contribution made by autonomous capital inflows to the region’s development during the past five years has fallen to an average of 1.7% of GDP, or half of what it was in 1994-1998.
This outcome reflects the impact of the series of crises and disruptions that began with the 1997 Asian crisis and the moratorium declared by the Russian Federation in August 1998 and were then compounded by turbulence and/or outbreaks in a number of Latin American and Caribbean countries.
In 2003, the list of such difficulties has continued with serious economic and/or political crises in Bolivia, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela.
The region has witnessed a large negative transfer of resources owing to its factor payments The region’s profit remittances and interest paid or due (factor payments) have risen from US$ 50.8 billion in 2002 to US$ 54.8 billion in 2003.
Remittances have been higher (in contrast to the situation in 2001 and 2002) and interest payments are up as well, largely because of interest due but not yet paid.
When total capital inflows (US$ 25.8 billion) are subtracted from the figure for factor payments, the result shows that the region is recording a negative net transfer of resources for the fifth year running.
This means that, over the last five years, Latin America has witnessed a cumulative outflow of resources equivalent to 5% of GDP.
Although this negative transfer is somewhat smaller in 2003 than in 2002, the worrisome downward trend in direct investment inflows to the region has persisted (see figure 5).
Foreign direct investment (FDI) is down once again Since 2000, inflows of FDI to the region have been losing the momentum seen in earlier years and have been gradually but clearly declining.
The reasons for this slide in FDI include the downturn in the acquisition by foreign residents of privately held assets in the countries of the region and the virtual completion of the privatization process in 2002 in many countries.
In addition, some transnational groups have continued to scale back the implementation of their expansion strategies, which, during the international boom in mergers and acquisitions, had led them to buy up public and private firms in Latin America.
The situation in the MERCOSUR countries in 2001­ 2002 and the econom ic or po litica l instability experienced by some countries in 2003 have also been factors in the reduction of FDI.
The total net capital inflow corresponds to the capital and financial balances, plus errors and omissions, IMF loans and credit and exceptional financing.
Negative figures indicate outward resource transfers. b Is equivalent to net foreign direct investment inflow (FDI) minus net profit remittances. c Is equivalent to net inflow from other non-FDI capital, minus net interest payments. d Preliminary estimate. of FDI in 2002, but this year that flow has reversed direction.
In the rest of the countries (with the exception of Panama), small positive variations are being posted.
In countries where FDI has been buoyant, approximately 30% of inflows have been accounted for by the reinvestment of profits.
In Chile, the level of net FDI inflows is similar to what it was in 2002, but this year outbound FDI has more than doubled.
In Mexico, net inflows have hovered around the average for the past five years.
A considerable percentage of this has been made up of investments associated with the country’s new heavy crude pipeline and other investments in the petroleum sector designed to boost private producers’ output of crude oil so that they can take advantage of the pipeline’s recent start-up.
Since December 2002, after a seven-month hiatus in bond placements by the countries of the region, activity on the bond market has been brisker (see figure 6).
Between January and September 2003, gross placements amounted to US$ 21 billion, which is more than the volume for all of 2002.
Two thirds of these sales have been made by the Governments of Brazil and Mexico and firms in those countries (PEMEX and PETROBRAS), which have been the main borrowers.
In most of the countries, these funds have been used to refinance debts that were nearing maturity, but in some cases they have been used to exchange domestic debt for external debt (see table A-17 of the statistical annex).
The cost of external borrowing has declined As global financial markets have strengthened, the average cost of external financing for the region has declined from an annual rate of 12% to 9.6% in 2003.
The cost of borrowing has moved lower as the year progresses, reaching 8.3% in early December.6 The 6 This figure represents a weighted average based on the level o f 10-year maturities.
Early in December, the annual cost for the region’s largest borrowers, Brazil and Mexico, amounted to 9.3% and 6.3%, respectively.
By way o f comparison, the cost was 8.8% for the Philippines, 6.8% for the Russian Federation and 5.3% for the Republic o f Korea.
This crisis had only a slight effect on the cost of external finance in the fourth quarter of 1997 (see figure 7), but average maturities have taken a turn for the worse, shrinking from 15 years prior to the Asian crisis to 10 years in 2002 and 9 years in 2003.
This reduction in the cost of external borrowings has also been reflected in the countries’ debts with multilateral agencies and official lenders.
In recent years, most of the governments in the region have used the resources they obtain to roll over external debts, and a number of these governments have reached the limit of their debt-carrying capacity.
It is therefore important for such governments to adopt a prudent external borrowing policy during this relative boom on the bond market.
In point of fact, as of year’s end, the risk premiums of Chile and Mexico, whose governments have persevered with just such a policy for several years, are the lowest in the region and in those countries’ histories (90 and 190 basis points, respectively) (see figure 8).
Exports pick up and imports recover In 2003 the region is posting a positive merchandise trade balance of close to US$ 41.1 billion, which is comparable only to the level achieved in 1984 and is almost twice as high as the already significant surplus of2002 (see figure 9).
This balance reflects a 7.4% expansion of exports (7%, excluding oil) and a 2.5% increase in imports.
The adjustment in imports in 2002 was thus followed by the expansion of exports noted in The increase in exports has been fairly widespread.
MERCOSUR exports have climbed by 18%, those of Central America and the Caribbean by 5% and those of the Andean Community and Chile by 5.3% (excluding Venezuela, the growth rate for the exports of this subgroup is 11.5%).
Morgan and Merrill Lynch. a Sum of the average spread for bond issues and the yield on ten-year United States Treasury bonds.
Spreads correspond to estimates in the Latin Eurobond Index (LEI). bLEI recalculated using fixed weightings corresponding to November 2001. c Yield of ten-year treasury bonds. d October and November. have risen by just 2.7%, and exports other than oil have not grown at all.
The factors that have influenced export behaviour have had differing effects in each group of countries.
These factors include the growth in world demand, higher commodity prices, the real devaluation in some countries during 2002 and the countries’ ability to increase supply by taking advantage, in some cases, of prior investments in mining and agriculture and, in others, of installed capacity that is being underutilized because of a contraction of the domestic market.
Although it is clear that the moderate improvement in the world economic situation has been a determining factor in the rise in commodity prices, the existence of idle installed capacity has allowed some countries, especially exporters of mining products, to expand their production in order to capitalize upon the upturn in these prices.
The real devaluations that occurred in some countries in 2002, especially those of MERCOSUR and Chile, have also increased the profitability of some non- traditional export sectors.
All in all, increases in the volume of shipments have made a more important contribution to export growth than the rise in prices, although the latter has by no means been a marginal factor for many countries (see figure 10).
Argentina, Bolivia, Chile, Peru and others have benefited from price increases of over 5%.
Some Central American and Caribbean countries have gained from price rises for such products as coffee and sugar, as well as from the expansion of maquila activities.
Mexico, which is strongly influenced -as are these other countries- by the United States business cycle, has suffered a loss of competitiveness owing to the appearance of competitors with lower costs, such as China, and to the relative decline in prices and costs in some Central American and Caribbean countries.
Another factor is that the Mexican peso has appreciated in past years, even though it has undergone a real depreciation in 2003.
The loss of competitiveness in manufactures, which constitute the bulk of Mexico’s exports, has prevented it from benefiting from the recovery of the United States economy.
Oil -whose export volumes also rose- is the only product that has performed well.
Almost all of the Andean countries and Chile have increased their production of hydrocarbons (Bolivia, Ecuador), and Chile and Peru have expanded their mining industries’ output, thus benefiting from the higher prices being brought by many of these products.
MERCOSUR exports owe their dynamism to the combined effect of increased production of the main product lines and higher prices for some agricultural products, especially soybeans and soy products.
The increases in export volumes are mainly a result of the improved profitability of export activity brought about by the 2002 devaluations and the introduction of technological innovations.
In the case of Brazil, exports of industrial manufactures are also up.
Morgan. a On the basis of the Emerging Markets Bond Index (EMBI) except in the cases of Chile, the Dominican Republic and Uruguay, in which data from a representative bond were used. iron and steel), exports of other manufactures have also risen.
Much of the latter increase has been seen in branches of industry that have redirected products to the external market because they have not succeeded in placing them on the domestic market.
The increase in imports, which has been especially significant in the second half of the year, has not been large enough for them to match the level reached in 2000.
Growth has been led by the South American economies, whose domestic markets have been picking up (especially in the case of Argentina).
In some of these countries -particularly Chile and, to some extent, Brazil- the real appreciation of their currencies in 2003 has stimulated imports.10 The upturn in Brazilian imports 10 Real exchange rates have been somewhat higher in 2003 than before the crisis, however.
The balance oftrade in services is somewhat lower than it was in 2002, with a deficit of around US$ 13.5 billion.
Although transport costs have risen because of higher fuel prices and insurance costs, tourism revenues have also climbed as this activity recovers from its 2002 downturn.
This industry is especially important in the Central American and Caribbean countries, whose surplus on the services trade account has risen by 23% in 2003.
The boom has been driven by a larger flow of tourists from European countries, thanks to the increase in the euro’s purchasing power.
There has also been a modest increase in tourists from the United States, who had reduced their visits to the Caribbean and Central American countries by 2% and to South America by 11% in 2002.
This upswing has been the strongest in the Dominican Republic, where activity in this sector has increased considerably in 2003 owing to the greater numbers of both European and United States tourists visiting the island.
Intraregional trade11 is showing signs of a recovery as well, as it has expanded by a rate similar to the growth rate for total exports (see figure 11).
In Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole, intraregional exports account for 15% of total exports this year; this is very similar to the average for 2002 and is still below the 1997 level, when they exceeded 21% of the total.
The greatest increase has been in trade within MERCOSUR (21%), owing to the upswing in the exports of all members of this group to Argentina.
Trade within the Andean Community, in contrast, has declined for the second consecutive year (-19%), mainly because of the strong contraction of demand in Venezuela.
Exports among countries of the Central American Common Market (CACM) are up by 8% and among those of the Caribbean Community countries by 12%.
A surplus is posted on the balance-of-payments current account for the first time in half a century The current account of the balance of payments for 2003 is showing a positive result for the first time in the last 50 years12 (see figure 12).
The surplus amounts to about US$ 6 billion (around 0.4% of regional GDP) and is accounted for by the MERCOSUR countries, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela (the latter country traditionally has a positive current account balance).
In total, these countries have run a surplus of US$ 22.5 billion.
A positive balance on the current account is a sign of capital outflows and/or the formation of reserves.
The regional current account balance has two highly positive components: the merchandise balance, at US$ 41.1 billion, and transfers (especially remittances from workers residing abroad), at US$ 33.1 billion (for a total of US$ 74.2 billion).
In view of the region’s low growth rate, its large trade balance is indicative of a relative weakness in domestic expenditure (consumption and investment), which is reflected in the fact that exports have been the main source of growth in a number of countries.
Within the current account, the services trade balance and the income balance (which includes factor service payments, in particular interest on debt, dividends and profits) show a deficit of US$ 68.3 billion, of which US$ 54.8 billion corresponds to factor payments.
The size of this latter deficit has become a structural feature of the regional balance of payments and reflects not only the high level of indebtedness but also the scale of payments of dividends and profits generated by foreign companies located in the region.
In the absence of autonomous external financing, this constraint implies that other components of the current account need to be adjusted by increasing transfers, reducing imports and/or increasing exports, as has been the case in 2002 and 2003.
Gross external debt has expanded The gross external debt of Latin America and the Caribbean as of December 2003 totals some US$ 744 billion, which represents a 2.4% increase.
The level of the debt is thus similar to what it was in 2000 (see table A-18 of the statistical annex).
The euro’s appreciation against the United States dollar has affected all of the economies to some extent, since euro-denominated debts have risen by over 10% during the year.
The impact of this change on the individual countries’ borrowings depends on how much of their debt has been contracted in that currency.
In addition, some countries’ debts have climbed because either the 11 Exports o f goods destined for other countries in the region, measured as a percentage o f total exports. 12 See ECLAC, Economic Survey o f Latin America, 1953 (E/CN.12/358), Santiago, Chile.
Although the increase in the external debt has been manageable in the short run, thanks to low international interest rates, the size of the debt is a worrisome structural factor, and the debt’s management will become a more difficult proposition if international interest rates and risk premiums rise in the future.
The change in the level of external liabilities amounts to under 2.5% for the year in 13 Latin American and Caribbean countries; in Colombia, Mexico and Venezuela, it actually declined in nominal terms.
In more than half of the countries of the region (the countries whose economies are more open than average), the two traditional debt burden indicators have remained within a moderate range.
Thanks to the 7% expansion in the region’s external sales, the debt burden/exports ratio points to a widespread improvement (see figure 13).
In three of the nine most heavily indebted countries (Bolivia, Brazil and Peru), the external debt/GDP ratio stands at around 50%, while the debt/exports ratio, which has been steadily improving over the past five years, is nearly 280%.
In contrast, both of these indicators have deteriorated in El Salvador, although its debt coefficients has stayed within moderate ranges.
Given the deferment of the IMF proposal for the establishm ent of a sovereign debt restructuring m echanism (SDRM) designed to function like a bankruptcy law, the introduction of collective action clauses (CACs) has proved to be a positive development.
CACs provide greater certainty both for investors and for governments issuing debt instruments and expedite external debt restructurings, if necessary, by facilitating the dispute settlement process.
The use of these clauses in bond contracts allows issuing governments and a qualified majority of bondholders to take decisions that are binding upon all the creditors participating in the issue.13 Such a majority may impose the conditions of a restructuring agreement upon the rest, either before or after default.
In addition, these provisions make it possible for a qualified majority of bondholders to prevent individual creditors from taking prejudicial legal action after a default has occurred but before a restructuring agreement has been finalized.
The Governments of Belize, Brazil and Mexico have included such clauses in the bond contracts they have issued in 2003.
In May 2003, the Governm ent of Uruguay conducted a sovereign debt swap with its creditors.
The authorities proposed a “friendly” swap to these creditors, with IMF consent, providing for a five-year deferral of the sovereign bond maturities while retaining the original contract currency and with no reduction in capital or interest.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 29 (US$ 3.5 billion in external securities and the balance in domestic securities).
The great majority of creditors accepted the proposal in May, thereby easing the debt servicing burden for the coming years.
The loans held with multilateral financial institutions are not covered by this agreement, and their original terms and conditions have been maintained.
In 2003, Argentina’s external debt has grown by 4.6%, mainly because of the build-up of interest arrears.
Since early 2002 the government has maintained its unilateral moratorium on the servicing of its external debts with private creditors, but it has continued to meet its obligations to multilateral lenders.
The amortization and payment of interest arrears on the external public debt need to be restructured so that its servicing will be sustainable over the medium and long terms.
In September, the government proposed an external debt swap involving the rollover of US$ 87.05 billion in bonds, with a 75% reduction in face value.
The agreement would, in principle, also have to include the refinancing of interest arrears at a rate below 5%.
First, in the m ultila tera l arena, the F ifth M in is teria l M eeting o f the W orld Trade O rgan iza tion (W TO) w as held in C ancún in m id-S eptem ber.
The Doha round o f W TO negotia tions is expected to continue, a lthough it may be extended beyond the agreed deadlines.
The Centra l A m erican coun tries a lso held va rious rounds o f trade ta lks w ith the United S ta tes w hich are expected to lead to the conclus ion o f a free trade ag reem ent in the near fu ture .
The m ain benefit fo r these coun tries w ill be the conso lida tion o f a grow th stra tegy geared tow ards boosting exports and a ttracting investm ent.
In fact, a lbe it w ith d iffe ring results, m ost o f the C entra l A m erican coun tries have fo llow ed such a course since 1984, w hen the U nited S ta tes granted them ta riff p re fe rences under the C aribbean Basin In itiative.
These negotia tions have sparked reactions in pa rticu la rly sensitive secto rs in Centra l Am erica, such as the dairy, grains, m eat and suga r industries, w h ile in Costa R ica, com plex negotia tions have been held regard ing the te lecom m un ica tions sector.
A t the end o f 2002, the United S ta tes extended the Andean Trade P re fe rence A c t (ATPA) by converting it into the A ndean Trade P rom otion and Drug E rad ication A c t (ATPDEA).
The Trade R epresenta tive o f the U nited S ta tes also announced his coun try 's in te rest in negotia ting a free trade ag reem ent w ith the Andean countries.
A lthough th is so lu tion w ill pe rm it the negotia tions to be fo rm a lly concluded by the agreed deadline, the fragm en ta tion o f the negotia ting agenda cou ld be de trim enta l fo r coun tries w ith re lative ly less barga in ing power.
An ag reem ent is expected to be s igned in May 2004 in M exico at the European U nion-La tin A m erican and C aribbean S um m it o f H eads o f S tate and G overnm ent.
The C AR IC O M coun tries have succeeded in m ainta in ing a cons is ten t position in the various a renas by coord ina ting the ir nego tia tions th rough the C aribbean N egotia ting M achinery.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 31 3.
Macroeconomic policy In a context of low economic growth rates, the region’s fiscal policy has been aimed at increasing the governments’ primary surpluses, rather than at stimulating demand.
The primary balance of the region has improved by nearly one percentage point, moving from a deficit of 0.3% of GDP to a surplus of 0.6%.
In the sphere of monetary policy, the countries’ central banks have focused on controlling inflationary pressures.
Once inflation had eased, they paved the way for a decline in interest rates and adopted a more active policy stance in an effort to reverse the business cycle.
Consequently, both fiscal and monetary policies had only limited degrees of freedom for the attainment of countercyclical effects.
At the end of the first 10 months of 2003, the average effective exchange-rate index showed a slight depreciation (2.6%) in relation to the end of 2002.
Fiscal policies Fiscal policies in 2003 have focused on deficit reduction, and the outlook for 2004 is much the same In 2003 the countries of the region have continued to implement policies aimed at improving their fiscal balances.
The central governments of Latin America and the Caribbean are posting primary surpluses averaging 0.6% of GDP this year, as compared to a deficit of 0.3% in 2002.
Given the measures currently in place, this trend is likely to continue in 2004, with primary surpluses equalling or bettering their 2003 levels.
This bears out the projection made in the Economic Survey o f Latin America and the Caribbean 2002-2003that, despite the recessionary climate, fiscal policy was not going to be used to spur economic activity.
Most of the countries have focused attention on their high levels of public debt and the need to secure short-term financing.
Accordingly, they have tightened fiscal policy and taken steps to prevent public finances from fuelling an expansion of the primary money supply -even though growth has remained weak in 2003 and expectations uncertain.
Many countries have taken effective steps to control primary expenditure and concomitantly boost public- sector revenues.
As w ill be discussed below, Governments have also promoted reforms aimed at enhancing their fiscal solvency over the longer term.
It thus comes as no surprise that use of the public budget as a countercyclical tool has been relegated to a secondary role, given the need to tackle structural problems stemming from high levels of public debt and financing constraints.
The difficulties involved in using fiscal policy to smooth the business cycle have been pointed out in the past by ECLAC and are a characteristic trait of the Latin American economies, except for Chile.
In the other countries, the main thrust of fiscal policy has been dictated by their limited access to financing, particularly from external sources.
Against this general backdrop however, conditions have varied somewhat from one subregion to the next.
Having weathered the most difficult situation in all of Latin America the year before, the MERCOSUR economies have made gradual improvements that are reflected in their fiscal performance for 2003.
The rapid growth it has achieved this year has helped rebuild tax revenues; and the Government’s decision to maintain the tax on agricultural exports introduced in 2002, and refrain from adjusting income-tax assessments in line with inflation, has also helped to boost receipts.
This has been complemented by a policy of keeping State spending at national level on a tight rein, as clearly exemplified by the federal government’s rigid wage policy.
In tandem with the suspension of its public debt service payments, the Government has taken over the provinces’ debts and renegotiated their maturities, which has helped restore the public finances of those federal units during the current year.
The three-year arrangement signed between Argentina and IMF in September includes basic short­ term fiscal-policy definitions and lays down guidelines for structural reforms in public finances, especially in social-security and revenue-sharing with the provinces.
By the end of the year, Argentina will have achieved the fiscal target established in the economic programme for 2003; and a primary surplus of 3% of GDP has been forecast for 2004, during w hich negotiations to restructure the overdue debt are likely to intensify.
In early 2003, amidst prevailing uncertainty concerning its capacity to meet debt-service payments, the new Government decided to tighten its fiscal stance still further.
This was specifically aimed at improving public-sector financing at lower interest rates, and restoring the value of the real.
Both of these objectives have been achieved; nine months into the year, the public sector was displaying a primary surplus of 5.1% of GDP thereby fu lfilling the targets envisaged in the arrangement made with IMF in late 2002.
This greater room for fiscal manoeuvre, in conjunction w ith exchange-rate appreciation, has helped reduce the net public-debt burden, which is now expected to stabilize around 57% of GDP.
The improved fiscal outturn, supported by other components of the programme, has also made it possible to finance repayments falling due during the year with a significant reduction in the sovereign-risk premium.
At the same time, the Government has proposed drastic changes to the pension regime covering public- sector workers, which was perceived as an unfair and costly system; and it has made reforms to the taxation of consumption.
Once approved by Congress, these two measures are expected to further improve the fiscal balance.
The Government has announced a one-year extension of its current programme with IMF, which opens up the possibility of obtaining additional funding.
The goal of fiscal policy is to achieve a primary result similar to the 2003 figure, since the federal government balance continues to be a key variable in the financing strategy.
Having been one of the economies of the subregion to suffer most as a result its close commercial ties with the larger MERCOSUR partners, and in particular, its exposure to financial flows from Argentina, Uruguay embarked upon a recovery in 2003.
W hit in the framework of an agreement reached with international agencies, the country completed a successful public-debt swap -w ith a participation rate of 93%- involving a rescheduling of maturities that will reduce debt service during 2003-2007 by over 80%.
The operation also generated an estimated 20% reduction in the net present value of public-sector liabilities.
Despite the importance of this swap deal, consolidation of public finances requires a primary surplus of around 3% of GDP to be sustained -a target that is just over one percentage point above the figure likely to be achieved in the current year.
The tax reform designed by the Government and approved by Parliament in 2003 is intended to raise additional funding by simplifying and rationalizing the system.
Although Uruguay is expected to continue accessing capital markets, m ultilateral agencies (especially IMF) are likely to provide the major source of government financing.
Fiscal policy in 2004 will be dominated by this target, as explicitly established in the current programme with the Fund, which is due to expire in March 2005.
Measures to control current expenditure will probably have to be maintained in 2004, and the Government will aim at setting utility rates to ensure the generation of a cash flow surplus of public enterprises compatible with the fiscal programme.
This scenario will provide a backdrop for the presidential elections to be held in October next year.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 33 Paraguay has improved fiscal results in 2003: the central government deficit is expected to approach 1% of GDP, which means a reduction of over two percentage points compared to the 2002 figure.
After the new Government had taken office, in October it reached agreement with parties represented in parliament on six legal bills aimed at enhancing economic management.
On the fiscal front, as the year draws to a close, an extensive and far-reaching tax reform is currently making its way through the legislative process.
This involves an expansion of income tax and VAT, the application of specific taxes and simplification of the system, among other items.
The measures also include pension reform aimed at saving resources and correcting distortions that mainly affect the regime covering public-sector workers.
Approval of these bills, supported by strict expenditure management, should help strengthen fiscal results.
Alongside other macroeconomic decisions, in 2004 Paraguay will implement a standby arrangement with IMF, which is currently in an advanced state of negotiation.
Targets for the primary surplus are expected to be established that will make it possible to reduce the public debt, the level of which has doubled over the past four years.
The arrangement with IMF will also free up funds from IDB and the World Bank, which are needed to rectify the country’s overdue position with both institutions, and to address financing needs for 2004.
In contrast, there are several countries in the Andean subregion that display a more complex fiscal situation.
In Bolivia, the non-financial public-sector deficit is expected to come in at 9% of GDP this year.
The political crisis killed off several of the measures with which the Government had been striving since the start of the year to meet a fiscal-deficit target of 6.5% of GDP.
The scenario in 2004 will be dominated by the need to reduce the deficit and find funding sources for the public sector.
Nonetheless, as grants and concessional multilateral funding are insufficient at their current levels, the public-sector deficit is putting pressure on domestic sources.
To achieve the target, increased revenue from hydrocarbons, elimination of tax breaks, and cutbacks in current expenditure will be needed.
Recovery in Brazil will help in this regard by boosting sales of Bolivian natural gas to that country.
Nonetheless, a comprehensive programme will also be needed to address structural factors that have put public accounts out ofbalance, such as the cost of the 1997 pension reform, loss of hydrocarbons revenues and the lack of alternative income sources contributed by the tax system.
Meanwhile, during the coming months the Government will face the challenge of building internal consensuses to make it possible to implement a programme that is both viable and deemed eligible for financing by the donor community and multilateral institutions.
Another country where fiscal policy has been at the centre of economic and political debate during 2003 is Colombia.
Since the middle of last year, the authorities have adopted a variety of measures aimed at bringing the deficit under control and thereby reduce the level of public debt, which has surged from 30% to 55% of GDP since 1996.
Starting in January this year when a two- year arrangement was signed with IMF, the Government established a fiscal programme for 2003 that aims to limit the global consolidated public-sector deficit to 2.5% of GDP.
This target means improving the primary result by 2.3 percentage points of GDP compared to the 2002 figure, with nearly all the improvement coming from the expenditure side.
The Government has proposed various policies aimed at attaining this goal, including a wage freeze and budget cuts; it has also recognized the need to correct structural imbalances in public finances originating primarily in public pension systems -in particular, the special regimes covering teachers and military personnel.
These issues, along with a number o f po litica l reform s, were put to the vote in a constitutional referendum in October, but failed to gain the necessary support.
This setback makes it even more urgent to approve compensatory measures to make it possible to meet the fiscal targets for 2004, which envisage a primary balance similar to the current year’s figure.
Several o f the actions proposed require parliamentary approval, which will entail negotiations.
The Government also plans to implement similar expenditure restraint policies, supported by higher levels of taxation (income tax, wealth tax and VAT).
A very different situation obtains in the subregion’s two main oil countries, Ecuador and Venezuela.
The first of these has been using fiscal policy as a tool to reduce its public debt.
Fiscal efforts in 2003 have focused on generating a public-sector primary surplus equivalent to 5.2% of GDP -nearly one percentage point higher than that achieved in 2002- in the framework of an IMF programme signed in March.
Preliminary projections suggest that actual performance will fall slightly short o f the 2003 target, however.
During the year the Government has implemented a variety of measures to achieve the established goal, including hikes in fuel prices and other charges, making use of surplus funds from social security, reducing transfers to the regions, and im posing wage restraint.
Oil revenues have undershot their forecast levels, because the gains obtained through higher prices have failed to compensate for the drop in production.
The Government has also adopted a number of structural measures: it promoted reforms to the public employment regime, which gained legislative approval; and it designed a tax reform that took a long time to pass through Congress and in the end is likely to be revenue-neutral.
The fiscal programme for 2004 aims to achieve a further one-point increase in the primary surplus; but the chances of achieving this will depend on increasing oil production, which in turn requires additional investments to be made in the sector.
The fiscal situation in Venezuela during 2003 has been disrupted by the political conflict that paralyzed production by Petróleos de Venezuela S.A. (PDVSA), causing a corresponding drop in revenue.
The Government has tried to make up for this situation through taxes on bank debits and alterations to VAT; and public-sector wages have been raised only moderately, without fully compensating for the loss of purchasing power caused by higher inflation.
The final outturn for the year as a whole is likely to be broadly the same as in 2002.
The global public-sector deficit, of around 3.5% of GDP, has been funded through domestic debt issues, drawing on resources from the M acroeconom ic Stabilization Investment Fund, and inflation tax (in particular, exchange-rate differences have generated profits for the Central Bank which have been transferred to the Treasury).
In this respect, the Venezuelan case differs from general patterns in the region.
Although the fiscal panorama for 2004 would become easier if oil output were to recover, the political and economic situation could conspire against this by putting pressure on expenditure, reducing domestic funding sources and limiting seigniorage possibilities.
The fiscal programme in Peru during 2003 has continued to pursue the goal set in the previous year, namely to reduce the level of public indebtedness (47% late this year) through sustained and gradual generation of a primary surplus.
In fact, the projection for the year envisaged at a primary-balance target of 0.2% of GDP for the consolidated public-sector, which implies a slight improvement over the zero balance reported in 2002.
The key instruments underpinning the programme are structural, such as tax reform, budgetary policy rules, and a decentralization strategy that is intended to be fiscally neutral, but also accom panied by strict management of current spending.
Despite expenditure overruns, Peru should be able to achieve its fiscal- programme targets this year by adopting corrective measures.
In 2004, policies announced and those already in place involve consolidating the course already described, in the framework of the standby arrangement with IMF, which is about to complete two years of life and will conclude next February.
Lastly, the case of Chile diverges sharply from the rest of the regional scenario.
In a framework of solvent public finances, fiscal policy in 2003 has adhered strictly to the principles established by the structural surplus rule (1% of GDP).
In keeping with this, expenditure cuts have been implemented, along with a temporary one- percentage-point increase in the VAT rate as from October.
For 2004, predictions of stronger economic growth and better copper prices foreshadow a reduction in the deficit.
No obstacles are foreseen regarding application of the long-term fiscal guidelines; and, at the structural level, Chile will continue to make progress in adapting its tax system to the burgeoning trade- integration process.
At the opposite geographic extreme of Latin America, the fiscal situation in Mexico is trending positively.
The country has been achieving primary surpluses of between 2.5% and 2.0% of GDP, thereby facilitating management of maturities and costs on its public debt, the level of which is currently below the regional average.
In this context, the 2003 fiscal programme has been implemented without major obstacles; the global deficit target of 0.5% set at the start of the year has been achieved, and it has been financed almost entirely in the domestic market for the fourth year in a row.
Although non-oil tax revenues have been undershooting expectations, this has been offset by the fact that crude oil prices have turned out higher than projected in the budget, thereby helping to restore fiscal balance.
On the reform front, the Government is promoting a generalization of VAT at 11%, with a lower rate for food and medicines, and reduction of the top rate of income tax, which will jointly produce a net yield equivalent to 1% of GDP.
As this proposal has not yet been approved, the Government has designed an expenditure budget for next year which is consistent with currently authorized funding levels.
The fiscal situation in 2004 is thought unlikely to change, and the corresponding adjustments will be made to the federal budget, as and when the reform is approved.
The Central American economies display a variety of situations, on which a number of specific comments can be made.
Costa Rica is ending the year with a consolidated deficit of 4.1% of GDP -one percentage point higher than the target set at the start of the year, despite the fact that economic activity has grown rapidly.
This fiscal-account situation will probably have to be reviewed in the coming year when the growth scenario is unlikely to be as dynamic as in 2003.
Guatemala has kept its public finances under control, thereby enabling it to achieve the objectives set in the economic programme agreed with IMF; and the pattern is expected to continue in 2004.
In contrast, the two countries of the subregion eligible for inclusion in the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative - Honduras and Nicaragua- are currently running large fiscal deficits (5.8% and 6.9% of GDP respectively).
In El Salvador, the public-sector deficit is projected at 3.5% of GDP, representing a one-percentage-point improvement in relation to the 2002 figure.
In a dollarized economy, where per-capita growth has been virtually non-existent, fiscal policy is focused on reducing the public-debt burden.
Public finances in Panama do not display any major problems, although the presidential elections scheduled for May next year will probably put additional pressure on the budget.
To conclude this overview of the region’s fiscal policies and their most salient features during the year, special mention should be made of the situation in the Dominican Republic.
The severe crisis affecting this country has significant fiscal dimensions with effects in the short and medium terms.
Interventions in the financial system have been costly, and the public debt has soared to 45% of GDP, compared to 26% in 2002, in the wake of quasi-fiscal losses.
At the end of August, when the standby arrangement was signed with IMF, the authorities were predicting a central-government primary balance of 1.9% of GDP, which meant reversing the result achieved in 2002 by 3.3 percentage points in a year of declining economic activity.
To achieve this, the Government a promised a number of emergency measures, including expenditure cuts, temporary increases in import tariffs, taxation ofbank debits and higher tax rates on consumption.
In practice, several exceptional measures have been implemented to boost revenue, but expenditure cuts have only been partially applied.
In addition, soon after the program began, the Government decided to re-nationalize the electric-power sector.
Although there are plans to re­ privatize these assets, the Government’s action was not envisaged in the terms of the agreement signed in August.
In this complex setting, during the closing months of the year the authorities and IMF have been reviewing implementation of the original programme and alterations that will need to be made to it.
It is therefore not surprising that fiscal policy for 2004 is focused on the need to attain primary surplus targets similar to those established for this year.
The Dominican Republic has US$ 800 million in public debt falling due in 2004 (both multilateral loans and bonds), and servicing this w ill require an understanding to be reached with the creditor institutions.
In synthesis, and focusing now on predominant trends in the region as a whole, fiscal policy in 2003 and the outlook for 2004 have both been marked by the need to reduce debt levels, paying special attention to public- sector financing needs, among other macroeconomic constraints.
The over-riding objective is to achieve the primary surplus target; so countries are applying conventional measures to restrain expenditure and increase revenues, in conjunction with a wide range of structural decisions which, one way or another, are aimed at improving the long-term solvency of public finances.
This task is easier in countries whose economies are in a more expansionary phase of the cycle.
Regional panorama By the end of the first 10 months o f2003, the currencies of Latin America and the Caribbean had appreciated in real terms against the United States dollar.14 On average, the currencies of the region revalued by 3.3% in a context of lower exchange-rate volatility.
A different result -o f opposite sign- is obtained from a review of the variation in the real effective exchange rate15 in recent months, which reveals a 2.6% depreciation as compared to the levels registered at the end of last year.
This depreciation in the countries’ effective exchange rates is closely linked to the fact that the euro and the Asian currencies have risen in value against the dollar and, to a lesser extent, against the currencies of the countries of the region as a group.
Moving beyond this short-term development to a longer-term perspective, it can be seen that current levels are 18% higher than the average recorded between 1997 and the end of 2001 (see figure 14).
However, as indicated below, the pattern of these two indicators has not been homogeneous for all the countries in the region, and a more in-depth analysis is therefore required.
Caribbean fall into two different groups: on the one hand, South America (see figure 15) and, on the other, the countries of Central America, the Caribbean and Mexico (see figure 16), although the situation is not entirely homogeneous within each group.
An examination of South America over the relevant period indicates that the real exchange rate against the United States dollar and the effective exchange rate have behaved differently.
In recent years, the currencies of this part of the region have recorded significant depreciations and appreciations against the dollar.
These differentiated patterns are linked to the fact that the countries in this group have been influenced by similar movements and, in a sense, have been exposed to similar shocks.
Furthermore, given the magnitude of intraregional trade, effective exchange rates fluctuate much less.
In addition, a review of exchange-rate trends in 2003 indicates that all the countries except Bolivia and Venezuela have recorded real appreciations of their currencies against the dollar, with the average for the group being 7.5%.
Special reference should be made to the case of the MERCOSUR countries, which have witnessed a change in trend since 2002, when they had recorded sharp real depreciations.
The appreciation of the effective exchange rate, as shown in figure 15, is was 1.6%.
Four countries in this group (Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Paraguay) have 14 The nominal exchange rate vis a vis a foreign currency is understood as the amount o f units o f the local currency that must be handed over at a given point in time in exchange for one unit o f the foreign currency.
A local currency depreciates/appreciates in nominal terms when, at a given point in time, more/fewer units o f that currency must be given in exchange for one unit o f foreign currency as compared to a specific reference period.
The real bilateral exchange rate index w ith respect to a foreign currency (for example, the dollar) is calculated by deflating the nominal exchange rate by the ratio o f the inflation rate in one country to that o f the other (in the case o f the dollar, the United States).
A currency depreciates/appreciates in real terms when the real bilateral exchange rate rises/falls. 15 The real effective exchange-rate index is calculated by weighting the indices o f the real bilateral exchange rate with each trading partner by the share o f trade with this partner as a percentage o f the country’s total trade (of exports or imports, as appropriate).
In this case, the average real effective exchange rate for exports and imports is used.
The opposite has occurred with the other South American currencies, which have undergone effective depreciations.
This performance reflects the fact that the real appreciations against the dollar have been limited and that the currencies of these countries’ trading partners have strengthened considerably against the dollar.
The second group, which encompasses the rest of the region (Central America, Mexico and the Caribbean) and is more dependent on trade with the United States, has recorded on average a real depreciation of 5.8% against the dollar and an even larger real effective depreciation (8.4%).
If this group is broken down into geographical subgroups, it may be seen that real exchange-rate trends in relation to the dollar have differed in each one of them.
In Central America, real exchange-rate movements against this currency have generally been limited.
In the C aribbean, exchange-rate patterns have been heterogeneous, since the situation in countries such as the Dominican Republic and Jamaica has led to sharp depreciations of their currencies, Haiti has seen a strong real appreciation against the dollar, and the currency of Trinidad and Tobago has also strengthened.
The Mexican peso has lost value in real terms against the dollar.
In terms of the real effective exchange rate, Haiti is the only country in this group to register a marked appreciation, reflecting a considerable real increase in its currency’s value against the dollar and the fact that the United States is its most important trading partner.
It also indicates that the movements in their real exchange rates against the dollar and their effective exchange rates are almost parallel, owing to the fact that the United States figures so prominently in these countries’ total trade flows.
On the other hand, volatility has increased in the Dominican Republic and Jamaica as a direct result of the problems faced by these two economies.
The fact that foreign-exchange regimes have remained unaltered in 2003, with the exception of Venezuela (see table 4), has also contributed to the greater exchange-rate stability in the region.
Venezuela pegged its exchange rate to the dollar in February 2003, following a two-month strike which paralysed the country, and has thus had three different exchange-rate regimes in as many years.
The trend towards flexible exchange rates strengthens Generally speaking, in the larger economies in the region the trend towards flexible exchange-rate regimes seems to be gaining strength, as well as the use of inflation targeting (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru).
A number of the smaller countries, however, are maintaining more or less fixed exchange-rate regimes vis-à-vis the dollar or else have adopted this currency as legal tender.
In Argentina, the 16 Volatility was measured by taking the standard deviation o f the absolute value in monthly variations in the real effective exchange rate.
The January-October variations for 2002 and 2003 were taken for each country, except in the case o f Panama, fo r which January- September figures were used.
The average value for the region takes the simple average o f the individual vo latility measurements for the 19 countries for which data are available.
Other volatility measurements yield qualitatively similar results. 17 For the period December 2002-October 2003, the volatility measurement used here registers an increase for Venezuela owing to the sharp variations in the real effective exchange rate that occurred in January 2003.
However, other volatility measures that are less influenced by the volatility observed in January 2003 point to a decline in volatility even for the period December 2002-October 2003. authorities have also recently expressed interest in moving towards a monetary policy guided by inflation targets.
Despite the preference for flexible schemes and for phasing out restrictions on foreign- exchange transactions, monetary authorities continue to closely monitor the evolution of exchange rate markets.
A number of factors, including short-term fluctuations, the link between fiscal revenues and export prices, and the dollarization of financial transactions, have led to prudential intervention in the market.
External and dom estic factors influencing exchange-rate movements and trends in the different groups of countries Two of the external factors that have affected real exchange rates in the region in 2003 warrant special mention.
First, there is the reversal in the direction of capital flows, which have gone from a large net outflow in 2002 (US$ 14 billion) to a moderate inflow in 2003.
Second, the growing external demand for commodities, in particular in Asia, has significantly boosted the prices of some commodities exported by the region, including oil, soybeans, wood pulp, copper and gold19.
El Salvador is listed in the category “ dollarization” in 2002 because the process o f dollarization matured during 2002.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 41 Argentina and Brazil, is especially relevant for the most open economies in the region and those whose trade flows are particularly dependent on some of these products.
Real exchange-rate movements have, however, been determined in large part by domestic variables, such as the fiscal situation and monetary policy.
In particular, the greater autonomy of some countries in the area of monetary policy management has meant that, once inflationary pressures have been brought under control, their central banks have been able to lower interest rates substantially, thereby helping to avoid major currency appreciations.
Based on the combined effects of these two types of factors, and without prejudice to the foregoing analysis, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean can be divided into three subgroups.
First, there are the countries whose currencies have appreciated sharply in real terms against the dollar.
This group includes the MERCOSUR countries (where the appreciation of their currencies during the year reflected, in large measure, the events of 2002), Chile and Haiti.
A second group is made up of those countries whose currencies have either depreciated sharply against the dollar or which have resorted to strict exchange controls to prevent them from doing so.
This group includes Jamaica, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela9, where exchange-rate movements have reflected serious macroeconomic problems stemming mainly from dom estic factors.
The M exican peso has also depreciated, albeit for different reasons from those of the other countries in this group.
The third and last group consists of the Central American countries and the Andean Community (except Venezuela), which have not experienced major real exchange-rate movements.
The following section presents a more detailed analysis of developments in the countries of each group 2.
These movements reflect the influence of a combination of internal and external factors.
During 2003, Brazil’s country risk has decreased significantly, partly because of investors’ positive perception of the government’s economic policy on both fiscal and monetary matters.
The reader will recall that the uncertainty surrounding the presidential elections in the second half of 2002 was associated with an increase in country risk and a depreciation of the real in relation to the dollar.
Improved expectations during 2003 have been reinforced by the strong performance of the external sector, which, assisted by high export prices, has produced a record trade surplus.
This led to a nominal appreciation of 21.1% of the real between December 2002 and October 2003; nonetheless, the real effective exchange rate is 15% above (depreciation) the average values for 1999 (the year that Brazil decided to float its currency).
The external sector’s surplus is also a major factor in accounting for the behaviour of the exchange rate in Argentina.
Indeed, despite a considerable increase in imports, higher export prices and record agricultural output generated a hefty trade surplus.
This has been more than enough to offset capital outflows, which have been substantially lower than during 2002.22 The central bank’s forthright intervention in the exchange market prevented the peso from appreciating in real terms against the dollar even more than it actually did (17.8%) during the first 10 months of 2003.
Its effective appreciation (8.6%) was less than its appreciation vis a vis the dollar, mainly because of the above-mentioned rise in value of the euro and the Brazilian real against that currency.
During 2003, the government also introduced a minimum stay (reserve requirement) of 180 days for capital inflows as a means of curbing the appreciation of the peso without intervening in the currency market.
Generally speaking, the government’s policy in ten tion -p a rtly for fiscal reasons and considerations of competitiveness in the tradable goods sector- seems to indicate a continuation in 2004 of the implicit policy of ongoing intervention in order to maintain a high nominal exchange rate.
The level of Argentina’s real effective exchange rate as of October 2003 was almost double the average from 1992-2001, thereby sending out favourable price signals for the tradable goods sector.
The 14.8% appreciation of the Paraguayan guarani against the dollar in 2003 is chiefly attributable to the 21 Trinidad and Tobago could also be included, as its currency appreciated by a nominal rate o f 2.3% between December 2002 and October 2003.
Changes in the nominal exchange rate were specifically linked to foreign direct investment in the energy sector. 22 See the section on foreign trade. good showing turned in by the external sector, particularly in the case of soybean exports.
However, given the sharp appreciation of the real and the Argentine peso in relation to the dollar, the real effective appreciation of the guarani has amounted to only 3.5% during the year.
The fourth country of the group, Uruguay, has witnessed a limited real appreciation against the dollar (3.3%).
However, movements in the exchange rates of its trading partners have translated into an 8.7% depreciation of U ruguay’s real effective exchange rate.
As the end of 2003 approaches, the effective exchange rates of both countries, and of Uruguay in particular, are higher than before the crisis: In O ctober 2003, U ruguay’s was 47% higher (depreciation) than its average between January 1997 and December 2001, whereas Paraguay’s was 18% higher.
In Chile, changes in the exchange rate have mainly been driven by external factors.
The nom inal appreciation of the Chilean peso has been linked, in particular, to the sizeable upswing in copper prices on the international market (and, to a lesser extent, in wood pulp prices), the stabilization of oil prices and a considerable inflow of capital.
Against the backdrop of a very low inflation rate, there was a real appreciation of the peso in relation to the dollar of 8.1% (1.1% in the real effective rate) during the first 10 months of 2003.
In Haiti, on the other hand, changes in the exchange rate were mainly due to domestic factors.
Between D ecem ber 2002 and O ctober 2003, the gourde appreciated by 20% against the dollar in real terms.
This was mainly a reflection of the currency’s nominal stabilization, since it posted a 5.7% depreciation during that period as a result of fiscal stabilization measures adopted as part of an agreem ent signed by the government with the International Monetary Fund.
These changes have occurred within a context of high (but falling) inflation following the increase in fuel prices resulting from changes in price-setting mechanisms for fuel products.
The second group is made up of the countries whose currencies have decreased significantly in value against the dollar in 2003.
This group consists of Jamaica, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela, where exchange rates have mainly been affected by crisis-related domestic factors.
In early 2003, the Dominican Republic lapsed into a deep crisis from which it has yet to emerge.
In 2002, lax fiscal accounts signalled the approach of a situation of this type.
In 2003, the crisis has been reflected in events such as the collapse of the Banco Internacional and two other banks, and the tragic strike in November that resulted in the loss of human life.
In particular, fiscal problems (in an election year), a quasi-fiscal deficit (the negative profit balance of the central bank) and the deterioration of expectations following the return of the electricity distribution companies to State ownership (and the subsequent suspension of IMF payments), have all driven up the currency’s nominal depreciation rate (59.5% during the first 10 months) and inflation (29.7%).
The result has been a 25.3% depreciation of the Dominican peso in real terms against the United States dollar in the first 10 months of 2003.
Jamaica’s fragile fiscal situation and its current account deficit were reflected in a sharp depreciation of the Jamaican dollar in 2002 and during the first quarter o f2003.
At that point the authorities managed to stabilize the currency through the direct intervention of the central bank in the foreign-exchange market and a steep increase in interest rates.
These measures have taken a heavy toll on public finances (due to the high level of indebtedness) and economic activity, however.
In October 2003, the real exchange rate in relation to the dollar was 7.5% higher than in December 2002 as a result of the 12.8% nominal depreciation of Jamaica’s currency against the dollar during that period.
Venezuela fixed its exchange rate in relation to the dollar in February 2003, following a general strike that paralysed the country for two months.
At the same time, the government introduced exchange controls and limited the sale of dollars through a new institution, the Currency Management Commission (CADIVI).
The official dollar exchange rate for the bolivar depreciated by 0.7% in real terms between December 2002 and October 2003, which may appear surprising given the fixed exchange rate and the 22.5% accumulated rate of inflation for that period.
The Mexican peso has continued to depreciate (8.7% in real terms in relation to the dollar between 23 In fact, the exchange rate fo r the bolívar increased by 26.9% (depreciation) between December 2002 and January 2003 amidst significant capital outflows.
The bolívar exchange rate was fixed below the peak parity reached in January 2003.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 43 December 2002 and October 2003), notwithstanding the short-lived appreciation observed during the second half of the year.
In a context of sluggish economic growth, low inflation and falling interest rates, the peso experienced a 9.5% nominal depreciation against the dollar in 2003.
The appreciation of the peso reached its peak in March 2002,24 after which it began to trend downward.
At present, the real exchange rate against the dollar is 7.3% higher (depreciation) than in November 1994, just before the so-called “tequila crisis”.
Given the growing volume of Chinese exports to the United States market, where they may be crowding out imports from other emerging economies (such as Mexico), there is some question as to whether the current level of the Mexican peso will be enough to reverse the poor performance of its exports to that market.
However, in view of the fact that China’s expansion is based on such factors as improved labour productivity, high investment and the country’s entry into the World Trade Organization, it may not be easy for Mexico to maintain its market share simply by maintaining a depreciated exchange rate.
It will also be necessary to take account of the importance of real factors influencing the productivity of the economy’s tradable goods sector.
It should, however, be pointed out that Bolivia’s real exchange rate against the dollar and its effective exchange rate (depreciation) are high by historical standards (see figure 14).25 In Central America, Guatemala’s real effective exchange rate is low (appreciation) by historical standards at the close of 2003, despite a slight depreciation in relation to the dollar.
A ll the dollarized econom ies of the region (Ecuador, El Salvador and Panama) are in this group.
Ecuador’s real effective exchange rate has remained stable during 2003 (depreciating by 0.5%), thereby halting the ongoing appreciation that had been observed since the adoption of the dollar as legal tender in January 2000.
The contributing factors to this stabilization have been not only the deceleration o f in fla tio n (a cum ulative ra te o f 5.8% as of October), which meant that the real appreciation in relation to the dollar amounted to 3.6%, but also, and especially, the downtrend (appreciation) in the currencies of its other trading partners.
The real effective exchange rate has stabilized at historically low levels (close to the rate seen at the beginning of 1998 and below the longest-standing historical averages (see figure 14).
This underscores how important it is for Ecuador to enhance the real productivity of its economy.
Monetary policy Although generally lower inflation and greater fiscal discipline have made it possible to reduce policy interest rates, credit has contracted sharply in real terms in countries where crises have undermined the solvency of bank borrowers.
Reduced inflationary pressure in most of the region’s countries, combined with a tight fiscal policy and lower international interest rates, have enabled several countries to reduce their policy interest rates or keep them at a low level, and still meet their inflation targets.
In countries with relatively low and stable inflation, the intentions of the monetary authorities are signalled by the behaviour of nominal monetary-policy interest rates.
In high-inflation countries, on the other hand, the authorities take measures acting on real interest rates and thus reduce the pace of inflation.
Another significant development has been a sharp real credit contraction in crisis-hit countries, both in 2002 and in 2003.
Thus interest-rate cuts have not had uniform effects throughout the region; and in these countries particularly, lower rates have failed to boost lending because of the straightened situation of bank borrowers, the bank’s perception of the risk attaching to increased lending, and lack of confidence in economic prospects.
In 2004, fiscal discipline and low inflation are expected to continue in most countries; so no major changes are anticipated in the direction of nominal monetary policy rates, even though international interest rates might increase.
Bank portfolios will need to improve substantially before credit recovers in a number of countries that have suffered financial crises.
A country’s exchange-rate regime is the prime determinant of its ability to implement monetary policy.
For instance, the decisions taken by Ecuador, El Salvador, Panama and the member countries of the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank (ECCB) to adopt a foreign or non-national currency (dollarization in the first three cases) implies forgoing monetary policy, since the national authorities no longer control the amount of money in circulation, and domestic interest rates tend to be determined internationally.
Nonetheless, most Latin American countries have adopted flexible exchange-rate regimes that allow them to implement monetary policy; and the same is true of countries with intermediate exchange-rate regim es such as Costa R ica and Nicaragua.
There are also countries outside the first group, such as Bolivia, Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Uruguay, where highly dollarized financial systems have developed (de facto dollarization); monetary policy is very difficult to apply in such economies, and the feasibility, cost and benefits of de-dollarization is currently a topic of debate.
Effective control of the interest rate used as a policy tool by monetary authorities results in an immediate change in the interbank rate and has a significant and rapid effect on deposit rates (see box 2).
In figure 18, for example, changes in the interbank interest rate in Brazil and Chile have been reflected almost immediately in identical movements in deposit rates, such that the paths of these two variables are virtually inseparable; thus the policy interest rate exercises very close control over deposit rates in these countries.
Interest rates on loans should also tend to move in the same direction, as has happened in Brazil throughout the period, and in Chile until mid-2003 when lending rates began to rise for reasons discussed below. 1.
Across-the-board reduction in monetary- policy interest rates The general pattern in 2003 has been for interbank rates and other nominal interest rates to retreat from their 2002 levels, although figure 19 clearly identifies the Dominican Republic, and to a lesser extent Colombia, as exceptions.
The conditions allowing for such reductions have been provided by generally lower inflation compared to last year, again with the exception of the Dominican Republic.27 To expand on this point, this section identifies three groups of countries according to their revealed policy intention in 2002 and 2003.
The first group consists of Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, all of which had already lowered their interest rates to some extent in 2002.
Those countries, which operate with flexible exchange-rate systems and inflation targets, held crisis at bay in 2002 and kept inflation in single digits.
Chile and Peru have been able to maintain their monetary policies in 2003, but the authorities in Colombia and Mexico have had to change course.
In 2003, Peru has resumed the process of lowering the interbank interest rate that it had begun in previous years, and the rate eased from 3.8% in January to an annual rate of 2.7% in October 2003.
Chile cut its monetary-policy rate six times in 2002 and again in January 2003 to an annual rate of 2.75%; at which level it remained until December, when it was further reduced to an historical low of 2.25%.
For this purpose several countries have im plem ented foreign-exchange polic ies based on fixed or sem i­ fixed exchange-ra te regimes.
W hen flexible exchange-ra te m echanism s were adopted, m onetary po licy becam e the instrum ent o f in flation targeting.
Once an inflation ta rge t has been set, achieving it is crucia l for cen tra l-bank credib ility; and announcem ent o f the ta rge t is also a m eans o f guid ing the expectations o f econom ic agents.
Som e have adopted the princip le o f aligning the ir inflation rate w ith tha t of the ir main trad ing partners, w h ile others have attem pted to match rates prevailing in developed countries.
The current m eans of contro lling inflation involves m anipulating a po licy in terest rate.
G iven the com m itm ent to achieve the inflation target, the behaviour o f the m onetary-policy in terest rate is a function o f the gap between expected inflation and the target.
Adopting a targe t in terest rate as a po licy tool typ ica lly results in gradual ad justm ents being made to the rate, w ith very few changes of direction.
In an open economy, the dom estic in te rest rate is the sam e as the in ternationa l rate, augm ented by a risk prem ium and the expected rate of devaluation.
In a flexible exchange­ rate system, th is m eans that external shocks w ill be transm itted through exchange-ra te fluctuations.
In h igh ly do llarized o r dual­ currency econom ies, the m onetary-policy in terest rate w ill be equal to the in ternationa l rate ad justed for country risk.
As ne ither the risk prem ium nor devaluation are set by the m onetary authority, they represent constra in ts on m onetary policy as actually im plem ented.
The in terbank in terest rate is a reflection o f the (nom inal and short-te rm ) m onetary-po licy rate set by the centra l bank or other relevant m onetary authority.
This is because the in terbank m arket is w here the au thorities in tervene to guide the in terest rate towards its target, and w here liquid ity is channelled from institu tions w ith surp lus funds to those with shortfa lls, the reby allow ing more effic ient financia l in term ediation.
A pa rt from exceptional circum stances, capita l flows w ith in the financia l system are in term ediated at the rate decided upon by the centra l bank.
It is the re fore possible to infer the authorities ' in tention by observing the behaviour o f po licy- or in terbank in terest rate.
Rates will tend to rise if the inflation targe t seem s likely to be m issed, w hereas they w ill tend to ease if the ta rge t looks set to be achieved comfortably. ' The interest rate tha t acts on aggregate demand is a m ediumterm real rate determ ined by the market.
There are two basic m onetary-policy transm ission mechanisms: the interest-rate channel (which affects two o f the com ponents o f aggregate demand, namely consum ption and investment); and the credit channel.
The relative effectiveness of m onetary policy depends on the extent to which the authorities' intention is transm itted through those channels (i.e. if they operate in the direction signalled by the central bank).
As financial system s in the region are essentia lly banking systems, the structure o f the banking sector (in term s o f interest-rate behaviour or the supply o f credit) has a m ajor effect on m onetary-policy transm ission mechanisms.
The behaviour of real long-term interest rates in the financial system does not depend solely on decisions made by the m onetary authorities, and market conditions may overrule the authorities' intentions in certain situations.
Exam ples include failure by banks to transm it a reduction in policy rates to the interest rates they charge on loans; excessive dollarization o f the financial system; and falling inflation which causes real interest rates to rise.
In addition to this, one of the greatest problems in im plem enting m onetary policy stems from the tim e lag with which m easures adopted affect dom estic prices.
Another issue, which cuts across this discussion, is whether monetary policy can affect the real business cycle once inflation has been controlled and the established target met.
In Mexico, the authorities’ concern over the rise in inflation, which breached the 4.5% target by 1.2 percentage points in 2002, has given rise to monetary tightening28 and interest-rate hikes.
From April onwards, this was replaced by a “ corto” o f 25 m illion pesos per day (i.e., 700 m illion pesos per 28 days). 29 The annual range is 2% to 4%.
In Colombia, however, where inflation also overshot the 6% target in 2002 (by 1.1 percentage points), the intervention interest rate was raised to 5.25% per year in January (below inflation), and then to 7.25% in April where it has remained for the rest of the year.
Of these four countries, only Colombia has a higher monetary- policy interest rate in 2003, although its current nominal level (7.25% per year) is historically low and only slightly above annual inflation as of November (6.1%).
The second group consists of the MERCOSUR countries affected by severe crises and their aftermath in 2002.
Having experienced steep currency devaluations and inflationary surges in 2002, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay have reversed the in terest-ra te hikes implemented in that year, by making significant cuts in 2003.
The freedom to do this has been provided by tight fiscal policy and a substantial fall in inflation, helped greatly by a partial reversal of the previous steep currency depreciation.
In Argentina, the interbank rate peaked a few months ahead of the deposit and lending rates, which had reached 80% per year in mid-2002.
Similar processes have occurred in Paraguay and Uruguay, where interbank rates have dropped substantially.
Argentina and Uruguay have both adopted the monetary base as a policy tool for achieving inflation targets and have significantly lowered bank reserve ratios.
The constraints faced by Brazil in the second half of 2002 caused the benchmark interest rate (SELIC) to rise from 18% to 25% per year, and it eventually peaked at 26.5% in February 2003.
In addition, the Central Bank has drastically reduced the monetary base and used other instruments to reduce liquidity.
In 2003, these measures have reduced inflation to an annual rate of under 10%, hence the authorities’ decision to begin a gradual and moderate lowering of the SELIC rate, which had fallen to 17.5% by November 2003.
In more concentrated economies that are relatively less open to foreign trade, profit margins can expand rapidly in response to higher inflation expectations fuelled by a break in the downward trend in prices.
These considerations led the Brazilian authorities to act more prudently in terms of monetary management.
In Bolivia, 90% of deposits are held in dollars, which leaves little room for monetary-policy manoeuvre.
Nominal lending and deposit rates in dollars have begun to trend downwards again in 2003, but the tense political situation prevailing in the country caused bank deposits, the loan portfolio and international reserves all to shrink, while interbank rates shot up albeit temporarily.
All of this has served to further weaken the banking system, which in September was displaying a non-performing loan rate of 18%.
The Central Bank made use of the liquid-asset requirements that commercial banks maintain abroad, and expanded the monetary base.
The critical situation unfolding in Venezuela has led to abrupt changes in its exchange-rate regime, together with currency controls, price controls and other drastic measures, in a major inflationary process involving repressed inflation and great uncertainty.
Despite the high rate of inflation, the interbank interest rate has dipped sharply during 2003, following the rate hikes that ensued from changes made to the exchange-rate system and economic policy in early 2002 and 2003.
The Dominican Republic is the most striking exception to the general trend.
Interbank rates -which had soared in 2002 amidst rising inflation, currency devaluation and intense capital flight- have risen further during 2003.
With inflation gathering pace, the interbank rate had climbed to 30% per year by October 2003, although this level was still below inflation.
Costa Rica, Guatemala and Honduras form a relatively homogenous group in which nominal interest rates have trended downwards. 2.
The effects of policy were uneven When monetary authorities have greater control over the policy interest rate, movements in that rate rapidly produce effects in the same direction over the entire spectrum of nominal deposit and lending rates (see box 2).
The available information shows that deposit and lending rates have tended to follow the changes of direction in interbank-rate movements in most countries (see figure 18), apart from the exceptions already mentioned.
Another significant result is that, in the third quarter of 2003, bank credit in real terms has contracted substantially in several crisis-hit countries.
These included Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay (as a result of the crises of 2002), and Bolivia, Dominican Republic and Venezuela (as a result of the crises discussed above).
Elsewhere, bank lending has either remained flat or has retreated slightly in real terms.
In countries where large firms have access to foreign credit or to the stock market, this situation has mostly affected small and medium­ sized enterprises.
Argentina and Mexico are examples of countries where monetary policy aimed at cutting interest rates has caused other nominal rates to fall rapidly, and has also low ered real in terest rates (see figure 2).
Nonetheless, bank credit in Argentina has shrunk considerably as a result of weak intermediation and the high level of non-performing loans (18.8% of the total credit portfolio).
Argentina and Mexico have both been regaining control over their deposit rates in 2003, as revealed by the smaller spreads with respect to the interbank rate.
In the case of Chile, all interest rates have swiftly matched movements in the monetary-policy rate since 2001, but in the second half of 2003 rates on loans began to rise relative to the policy rate.
This is explained by stronger growth in consumer lending (12%) on which interest rates are higher, while commercial credit remained stalled.
There was similar stagnation in Peru, where total credit shrank by 6.4% in real terms in the third quarter of 2003 year-on-year.
Colombia provides an example of a policy interest­ rate hike being followed by increases in other rates, including deposit and lending rates (see again figure 19), although these remain at historically low levels.
In Brazil, real lending rates have been rising since the second half of 2002, mainly because of the monetary Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 49 tightening, mentioned above, which led to currency appreciation and a substantial fall in inflation.
Once inflationary expectations had been broken, the authorities started to lower their policy interest rates gradually.
In Paraguay, real interest rates had been rising since 2002 and have continued to do so in 2003, since inflation has fallen faster than nominal rates (the country even experienced deflation between May and August 2003).
Interbank interest rates have only begun to fall during the current year.
There are other factors that make the situation more critical, however: bank credit has shrunk by 28.8% in real terms over 12 months (as of the third quarter of 2003), and non-performing loans account for 22.6% of the total credit portfolio.
In Bolivia, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela, the spread between interbank and deposit rates is growing, which shows that the monetary authorities have lost some of their control over the latter.
The climate of uncertainty prevailing in Venezuela as a result of the deep economic recession and severe political crisis is the main explanation for the significant contraction of bank credit (25.4% in real terms on a 12- monthly basis as of the third quarter of 2003).
Although price indices are trending downwards, repressed inflation is a major factor here (indices that include non-controlled prices are reporting higher inflation), so it is by no means clear that real rates have actually increased.
A similar climate of doubt engendered by political crises also prevails in Bolivia, where interest rates on loans have remained high despite attempts to boost expansion.
Bank lending in this country has also plummeted, and the high arrears rate is another factor in play.
In the Dominican Republic, the authorities have reacted to higher inflation by continuously raising interest rates during 2002 and 2003, with the aim of tightening the monetary stance.
Although the greater- than-expected increase in inflation has reduced lending rates in real terms, the crisis in the country has resulted in a 19% reduction in bank lending in real terms in the third quarter of 2003 compared to same period in 2002.
The equivalent figure 12 months earlier showed bank credit growing by 12.8% in real terms.
In Uruguay, interest rates on peso-denominated loans to business fell from 155% in December 2002 to 51% in October 2003, while the lending rate for families has dropped from 144% to 71%.
These rates are particularly relevant since the banks are no longer granting loans in dollars (70% of banking-system deposits are held in dollars).
In Costa Rica, Guatemala and Honduras, interest rates have eased slightly against a backdrop of fairly low inflation; between 2002 and 2003 inflation rates have slowed from 9.7% to 9.5% in Costa Rica, from 6.3% to 5.4% in Guatemala and from 8.8% to 8.1% in Honduras.
Real interest rates on loans remain relatively high, however, particularly in Costa Rica.
This heightened risk has made it hard to pass on lower interest rates to borrowers in some cases, and has caused total bank credit to shrink in many countries.
Eight of the 12 countries that have information available for the third quarter of 2003 are reporting negative growth in total lending compared to the same period in 2002, with total bank credit falling by 19% or more in five cases.
In these countries, the intention signalled by lower monetary-policy interest rates could not be transmitted through the credit channel. 3.
The process of lowering policy interest rates is expected to continue in 2004, but credit is unlikely to recover until risk perceptions among banks are reduced Although international interest rates may rise in 2003, further cuts in monetary-policy rates are expected, since no resurgence in inflation, major currency depreciation or changes in fiscal discipline are anticipated.
The policy would become more effective and widespread, however, if the risk attaching to bank loan portfolios were to fall more steeply.
This would represent an intensification of a process that is already underway: in the third quarter of 2003, ten of the 15 countries with recent information available had succeeded in lowering their non-performing loan rates compared to levels reported for the same period in 2002 -although admittedly some of the reductions were minimal.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 51 4.
Domestic economic performance The Latin American and Caribbean economy has grown by 1.5% in 2003, thus marking a favourable contrast with the region’s 0.4% contraction in 2002.
The recovery has not, however, been strong enough to compensate for the stagnation of previous years, and per capita GDP is still 1.5% less than in 1997.
The reactivation of the world economy, which has brought an increase in regional exports, has contributed to this year’s moderate improvement.
Domestic demand has not yet bounced back from the slump of 2002, however.
The increase in consumption has been slight, and gross fixed capital formation has been flat and thus remains at a historically low level.
After having accelerated in 2002, inflation has been lower in 2003, thanks to prudent monetary and fiscal policies and greater exchange-rate stability.
The moderate upturn in economic activity has not been sufficient to reverse the prior deterioration of labour and social conditions, as the unemployment rate remains comparatively high, while in many countries real wages are down.
Growth and investment Following a 0.4% reduction in GDP in 2002, the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean have expanded by 1.5% in 2003.
Although its economy has picked up in the fourth quarter, Brazil’s growth rate in 2003 is just barely in the positive range, while economic activity in Mexico has expanded by 1.2%.30 Venezuela has witnessed a sharp contraction (9.5%) after having already sustained a similar decline in 2002.
Argentina has succeeded in making a significant recovery in 2003 (7.3%) from its 10.8% slump of the previous year.
While Chile, Costa Rica, Colombia and Peru are posting growth rates above 3%, the other economies of the region have performed sluggishly, recording rates of around 2% (see figure 20).
Although the data for 2003 point to a recovery from the preceding year’s levels, this rebound has not been strong enough to reverse the economic stagnation experienced in the region in recent years.
The region’s economic performance has been uneven in 2003, in contrast to its clear downward trend in 2001 and its strong upswing in 2002 (see figure 22).
GDP growth was weak in the first three quarters, and economic activity did not begin to pick up its pace until the end of the year.
This is in keeping with the more buoyant performance of the world economy, which has gained momentum in the second half of the year.
It is also, in large part, a reflection of the pattern of GDP growth in Brazil, which was flat in the first three quarters 30 Setting Brazil and Mexico aside (the two largest economies in Latin America and the Caribbean), the region’s economies grew by 3.1%.
In 2003, the economic performance of most of the countries was marked by an increase in the volume of exports (4.4% in regional terms), whereas domestic demand remained stagnant.
Consumption, which contracted considerably in 2002, strengthened somewhat, but still grew at a lower rate than GDP.
One highly significant feature of the years from 2000 on is that a relative increase in national saving has been generating a shift in the composition of total saving (see figure 24).32 This stems from the decline in private consumption and a significant increase in remittances from abroad.
The adjustment in consumption reflects the fact that many heavily indebted countries need to channel funds into servicing their extensive external commitments.
As mentioned in the section on the performance of the international economy, several factors, whose effects have varied in intensity from country to country, have contributed to a modest, export-driven (rather than domestic demand-driven) reactivation in 2003.
This corresponds to a surplus on the current account and is reflected in capital and financial account balances, errors and omissions, exceptional financing and the variation in reserves on the balance o f payments.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 55 these are extraregional factors linked to the relative upturn in the world economic situation that began in the second half of the year.
The expansion of some Asian economies has been reflected in stronger demand and higher prices for the region’s exports, including minerals, metals and certain agricultural products.
High oil prices have also benefited the petroleum-exporting countries in the region, whose fiscal accounts are heavily dependent upon the proceeds from oil sales.
In addition, the upswing in United States imports has had a positive influence on exports from the countries that are most closely linked to its business cycle, with the notable exception of Mexico.
There are also two types of internal factors that have contributed to the increase in export volumes in 2003.
First, the sharp real devaluations in some countries’ currencies in 2002 have not only boosted their competitiveness but have also increased exporters’ local- currency earnings and facilitated, in some cases, import substitution.
Although this trend has been partially reversed during the second half of 2003 in some countries, since their currencies have revalued in real terms against the United States dollar, the region as a whole has maintained its exchange-rate competitiveness.
Thus, trends in exchange rates have boosted some sectors’ exports in 2003.
Second, past investments have created the installed capacity needed to expand production in given sectors, especially the mining and hydrocarbons industries.
GDP growth in the MERCOSUR countries has been based on the strong performance of the agricultural sector and, within it, especially those branches of economic activity most closely related to exports.
The real devaluations of local currencies in 2002 and during 2003, the growth in world demand and higher commodity prices have also stimulated external sales.
In 2002, domestic demand, both for investment and for private consumption, contracted in these countries.
The adjustment in all of their trade balances (mainly attributable to the sharp contraction in imports in 2002) paved the way for imports to make a comeback this year, together w ith investm ent and private consumption.
Even this robust expansion represents no more than a partial recovery, however, from the sharp drop in GDP of previous years, which was especially steep from mid-2001 to mid-2002.
The strongest sectors are those related to investment, in both construction and in machinery and equipment, and to the export sector, whose solid performance is chiefly attributable to the increase in agricultural production.
Nevertheless, given the steady decline in investment in the country during 1999-2002, the investment rate, measured in 1995 dollars, continues to be one of the lowest since the start of the 1990s.
The reactivation that began in mid-2002 and continued in 2003 is based mainly on the greater profitability of export sectors, the boost given to industrial activity by, among other factors, import substitution and the measures adopted by the authorities to assist households in a context of high unemployment.
Towards the end o f2003, the rate of recovery has slowed, but sectors related to household consumption (such as food and beverages and personal care items) have rallied.
In Brazil, the growth of export sectors and associated activities has contrasted with the weakness of domestic demand.
Growth in economic activity has been influenced by policies geared to strengthen the authorities’ credibility.
One such measure was to raise the target figure for the primary surplus from the 3.75% level agreed upon with IMF to 4.25%; another was to keep interest rates high during the first half of the year in order to control domestic price movements.
This policy has succeeded in reining in inflation and laying the foundations for economic growth in 2004, but in the short term it has triggered a sharp contraction in domestic demand.
Thus, the most buoyant sectors have been export-related activities (agriculture and agribusiness) and industries involved in mechanical engineering and production and in metallurgy.
In addition, some sectors have directed their output to the export market because demand has been so slack on the domestic market.
In the second half of the year, economic activity has taken a more positive turn.
The authorities’ success in curbing inflation and the reversal of negative expectations on financial markets have been reflected in a narrowing of external debt spreads.
In addition, a slight upturn in industrial production appears to have begun, together with an increase in imports of capital goods and consumer durables.
Nevertheless, investment has shrunk by 7.5% during the year, which comes on top of the 4% decrease seen in 2002.
Economic activity in Uruguay and Paraguay has been underpinned by the strength of the agricultural sector, most of whose output is geared to the export market.
In Uruguay, GDP has expanded by just 1%, but this rate nevertheless reflects a considerable reactivation of the economy over the year.
Paraguay’s 2.5% growth rate has been based almost entirely on the noteworthy increase in agricultural output and a slight upswing in the construction sector.
In the Andean countries, economic growth has also been buoyed by the export sector, especially mining and hydrocarbons exports.
These countries, too, have benefited from stronger international demand and higher prices for some products, particularly metals, minerals and petroleum.
In Chile, increased export shipments have been coupled with a slight improvement in the terms of trade.
This is no minor factor, since these terms had been steadily deteriorating, with a cumulative decline of 17.5% being registered for 1997-2002.
In addition, a monetary policy that has kept interest rates low has encouraged consumption and investment, especially in construction.
All of this has translated into a 3.2% growth rate for the year.
In addition, Chile has benefited from the devaluation of its currency in 2002, which has turned various non-traditional exports -whose production is very elastic in relation to a real currency depreciation in the short term- into profitable ventures.
In Bolivia, economic activity has been disrupted by the political upheavals that occurred at various times of the year, especially in February and October.
Some sectors of the country have been paralysed, and the operation of transport and other services has been affected.
The sharp decrease in imports reflects the weakness of domestic demand in an economy in which gross fixed capital formation has contracted by almost 15% in 2003.
The economy’s 2.5% growth rate for the year is essentially a result of the higher export volumes made possible by a good soybean harvest and increased sales of natural gas to Brazil in the fourth quarter of 2003.
In Peru, GDP has risen by 4% in 2003, bolstered by the mining, manufacturing and services sectors.
The increase in dom estic demand reflects private consumption and gross fixed private investment, much of which is related to a large-scale natural gas project.
Ecuador is posting GDP growth of 2% for 2003, thanks to the steep increase in oil production in the closing months of the year once the new heavy crude pipeline came on stream.
In September-October 2003, crude production shot up by around 20% compared with the same period of 2002.
The rest of the economy has been sluggish, except for banana production, which has expanded significantly during the year.
Colombia is recording a 3.4% growth rate based on the expansion of exports and investment, chiefly in the construction industry.
Coal and nickel exports have expanded, but exports of manufactures have dipped as a result of the drastic cutback in Venezuelan imports.
The recovery in the construction sector has fuelled growth in related areas, including some branches of industry and the financial sector.
In Venezuela, the economic and political situation has been troubled throughout 2003.
The strike called by the opposition and business associations, which lasted from December 2002 to early February 2003, caused oil production and exports to plunge, as well as triggering a strong contraction in the rest of the economy.
As a result, economic activity plummeted in the first quarter, with activity in the petroleum sector down by nearly 50% from the same period of the preceding year.
In the second quarter, a partial recovery in this sector opened the way for some improvement, but the non-oil sectors did not follow suit.
Economic activity as a whole will fall by 9.5% for the year, with steep downturns being exhibited by investm ent (-45%) and household consumption.
Mexico’s 1.2% growth rate is associated with its extractive industries, particularly oil production, which has climbed by approximately 6% in 2003.
Construction has also been boosted by low-cost housing programmes, and this has had a positive impact on related sectors, such as real estate and financial services.
Oil revenues account for about one third of fiscal revenues and, since oil prices have stayed high throughout the year (and far above the projected levels used in drawing up the budget), the government has been able to offset the loss of income in other areas and maintain its public works projects without falling short of its fiscal target.
On the other hand, maquila production has stagnated and has not benefited from the upswing in United States imports.
Domestic demand reflects the fact that the authorities kept interest rates high during the first few months of the year in order to ease the upward pressure on domestic prices and meet inflation targets.
Private consumption has been a major engine of growth for the country in recent years, and it has continued to expand faster than the overall economy, but it has lost some momentum owing to the increasingly slower growth of real wages and higher unemployment.
In the Central American countries, economic activity is growing at similar rates to those observed in 2002 (around 2% for most of these countries).
Economic performance in El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras has been buoyed by the increase in the maquila industries’ output, most of which is sold on the United States market.
Private consumption has continued to be fuelled primarily by transfers by non-residents, chiefly family remittances.
In Nicaragua, economic growth has mainly been attributable to household consumption, higher wages, the availability of loans and the remittances sent by family members residing abroad.
The expansion of Costa R ica’s and Panama’s economies has been stronger than in the other countries of the subregion.
Costa Rica is posting a growth rate of 5.6%, thanks to its fruit and high-technology industries, Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 57 both of which cater to the export market.
Investments made in 2002 in the communications sector have enabled it to boost its level of activity.
Panama’s 3% growth rate for 2003 reflects upturns in construction and tourism, and especially in cruise ship activity and its Canal and port operations.
On the other hand, activity in the Colon Free Zone and the financial district has been sluggish.
Economic activity in the Dominican Republic, which has contracted by 1.3%, has been hurt by the spike in inflation and the devaluation of the Dominican peso.
The surge in inflation is attributable to the depreciation of the currency, higher international oil prices and the elimination of electrical power subsidies.
The increase in the rate of exchange, which began in late 2002, is the result of the pressure exerted on the foreign exchange market by a decline in foreign capital inflows and an outflow of private capital, both of which have contributed to a loss of international reserves.
This critical situation was heightened when a major bank failed and the central bank had to step in and provide massive financial assistance.
The authorities have adopted a package of fiscal measures to respond to this state of affairs which include the establishment of emergency taxes to offset the fiscal costs of the banking crisis, cutbacks in public investment and a freeze on civil service wages.
There has been a sharp slowdown in economic activity during the year, but the economic sectors most closely related to export activity have prospered.
The depreciation of the currency has helped the free trade zones boost their exports of manufactures and even to attract investment.
Mining has picked up thanks to the reopening of a nickel mine which was closed early in 2002.
Although tourism activity has increased in most of the subregion, the performance of the English-speaking countries has not come up to expectations, owing in part to the diversion of tourist flows to Cuba and the Dominican Republic.
The merchandise trade deficit has widened, as imports have reflected the increase in oil prices and merchandise exports have not expanded significantly.
The balance on the services account will not be large enough to offset the increase in the merchandise trade deficit, and pressure is therefore being exerted on the balance of payments.
This situation is com pounded by the coun tries ' h igh level of indebtedness, which includes a large percentage of domestic debt, and serious fiscal imbalances, above all in the smaller economies.
The exception is Trinidad and Tobago, which is turning in a 5.5% growth rate thanks to a strong increase in oil production.
Jamaica and Guyana, which have large fiscal deficits and are subject to exchange-rate pressures, are recording 1% growth; Barbados is marking up a 2.5% rate, while Suriname is posting a rate of 3.5%.
Belize, with a 4% growth rate, has benefited from a surge in tourism activity.
Growth rates in the Eastern Caribbean countries range from 0.4% in Dominica to 3.2% in Antigua and Barbuda, where increased investment in road infrastructure has had a very positive impact.
Tourism activity has increased, but the sugar cane harvest has been the worst in the island’s history.
In Haiti, where the economy grew slightly in 2003, the authorities have reached an agreement with IMF on targets for the fiscal deficit, inflation and public- sector efficiency.
This arrangem ent w ill enable international organizations to resume their grants and d o n atio n s fo r re fo rm and poverty red u c tio n programmes.
Inflation Regional inflation again exhibits a downward trend The annual inflation rate for Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole34 stands at just over 8.5% for 2003.
This is four percentage points less than in 2002 and would seem to herald a return to the single-digit levels recorded in 1998-2001.
Price increases have been low or moderate in 18 of the 22 economies for which information is available.
Two-digit surges have been seen in only four countries, with the sharpest increases being in Haiti and the Dominican Republic, which are posting rates of over 40%.
In several countries inflation rates for 2003 are very low and are approaching the levels 34 The calculation is based on variations in the consumer prices indices (CPI) in December o f each year in relation to the same month o f the preceding year, weighted by the population o f each country.
Determinants of the lower inflation rates of 2003 The downturn and generally low level of inflation in 2003 is accounted for by a series of demand- and supply-side factors.
In terms of demand, the appropriate management of macroeconomic -and particularly monetary- policies and the adoption of a prudent policy stance in almost all the countries has clearly had an impact.
Although in several countries these policies have been expansionary, they have been managed cautiously in order to avoid generating inflationary pressures.
Some countries are also basing their monetary policies on inflation targets, which means that policy instruments will be applied rapidly if there is any deviation from those figures.
In addition, the authorities’ management of fiscal accounts has at least partially reversed the deterioration of previous years, and this improvement has reduced the danger that inflation might spiral out of control.
On the supply side, variations in costs associated with increases in the exchange rate have abated, in contrast with what happened in 2002, when some countries experienced significant devaluations.
During 2003, the depreciation seen in some of the region’s currencies has generally been moderate (except in the case of the Dominican Republic and, to a lesser extent, Jamaica and Mexico), and this has helped to keep inflation under control.
In the six economies where the exchange rate had climbed sharply in 2002, the situation in the currency market in 2003 has eased considerably.
These trends have contributed to declines in inflation in almost all of these countries, although of differing magnitudes.
Even in the economies whose currencies have devalued in 2003, problems in connection with the exchange rate have diminished over the course of the year, and this has been reflected in a more moderate rise in inflation.
The euro’s appreciation against the dollar has partially counteracted the effect of greater exchange-rate stability in those countries that trade a great deal with Europe, however.
The effect of higher oil prices on the international market has been just the reverse, especially in the non-oil-producing countries.
The prices of other imported products have not influenced domestic prices, since they have remained relatively stable.
Wage adjustments have been moderate, even in countries which have recently witnessed inflationary surges.
Adjustments in utility rates have also been small in almost all cases, and especially in Argentina, where agreements are being negotiated with utility companies.
Supply shocks, especially those resulting from natural disasters, have not had much impact in 2003.
The countries have not resorted to indexation, as such, despite the inflationary spikes recorded in various countries in 2002 and to a lesser extent in 2003, as the authorities have blocked the reintroduction of corrective mechanisms as a means of offsetting price increases.
In view of the small scale of the region’s reactivation in 2003, the upturn has not contributed to inflation, especially since most of the countries currently have idle production capacity.
In fla tio n patterns in the various country subgroups For 2003, the countries may be grouped into five categories according to their inflation patterns or their perform ance in this respect.
First, there are the dollarized economies, such as Panama, where this system has been in place for a very long time.
As is customary, Panama is once again posting a low rate of inflation.
El Salvador, which also belongs to this group, has recorded a very low inflation rate, as it has been doing since before the introduction of the new exchange regime.
This category also includes Ecuador, where inflation has declined again, although its rates are still above developed-country levels.
In January, when public rates and charges were adjusted, the increase in prices accounted for almost half of the total for 2003; throughout the remainder of the year, the inflation rate has been very low.
Lastly, Barbados, which has had a fixed exchange-rate regime for many years, has once again experienced low inflation.
A second group consists of those countries in which a monetary policy based on inflation targets is used as a nominal anchor, and these countries have likewise recorded quite small price increases.
Chile has a rate of around 1.5% for 2003, the lowest in the past 60 years, mainly as a result of the strong revaluation of its currency.
In Mexico, inflation has fallen to below its 2002 level, despite a significant devaluation which has not appeared to affect domestic prices, probably because of the modest growth of the economy.
The third group includes countries with moderate inflation rates which generally have exchange-rate regimes based on sliding parities or crawling-peg currency bands.
Costa Rica is posting an inflation rate of something less than 10% for 2003.
This is similar to the rate recorded in 2002 and thus marks a break in the downward trend of previous years.
In Guatemala, the only country in this group that has a free-floating exchange rate, inflation has fallen again, to an estimated 5.5%, or one point less than in 2002.
This has been possible by the tight monetary policy applied by the Banco de Guatemala and the relative stability of the exchange rate.
Inflation in Nicaragua began to increase in May, but the variation for 2003 as a whole will still be under 6%.
Honduras is posting an annual rate of around 7% and has thus maintained the downward trend in this variable, thanks to the small scale of the adjustment made in its exchange rate.
In Trinidad and Tobago inflation is also down, and the annual rate for 2003 is estimated at less than 4%.
The decline in the exchange rate over the past few years has contributed to this result.
In Bolivia, inflation has risen slightly, although it will only be just over 3% for the whole of 2003.
The shortages caused by the serious political and social situation that arose in October did have an effect on prices, but after business activity returned to normal, inflation subsided to the low levels of the past few years.
The MERCOSUR countries, which have managed to bring the inflationary spike of 2002 under control in 2003, make up the fourth group.
Almost all of them have moved from a fixed exchange regime to a system of floating exchange rates; Brazil has also begun to use inflation targets.
The value of Argentina’s currency decreased sharply in 2002, and this had a considerable impact on prices, but the stability of the exchange rate in the second half of 2002 and the subsequent revaluation in 2003 set the stage for the reduction in the rate.
The same thing occurred in Uruguay in the second half of 2002, owing to the sharp devaluation of the currency.
The slowing of the rise in its exchange rate beginning in the fourth quarter of 2002 and its revaluation in the second quarter of 2003, however, have made it possible to curb the rise in inflation, despite the large-scale adjustment made in public rates and in the prices charged by public enterprises.
In Paraguay, inflation surged in the first quarter of 2003, but the rate of increase began to diminish in the second quarter, thanks to the fact that the guaraní had been appreciating since the start of the year.
In Brazil, inflation accelerated in late 2002 as a result of the devaluation recorded between May and October, and it remained high in the first few months of 2003.
It has been decreasing quite notably since then, however, primarily thanks to the real’s revaluation over the course of the year.
The fifth and final group consists of the countries that have experienced high inflation in 2003.
The sharpest price rises, between 41% and 46%, have been recorded by Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
The rate of inflation is reported to have risen to 16% in Jamaica and to have eased in Venezuela, although it is still high (27%).
In the Dominican Republic, inflation began to surge in August 2002, mainly as a result of the depreciation of the local currency, the rise in international oil prices and the elimination of electrical power subsidies.
Matters were further aggravated by the serious banking crisis that erupted in 2003 owing to problems having to do with the solvency and liquidity of the system, as the substantial financial assistance that the central bank had to provide to commercial banks became one of the main components of quasi-fiscal expenditure.
Haiti has witnessed sharp price rises in 2003, following the devaluation of its currency in the last quarter of 2002, which forced authorities to adjust fuel prices, thereby triggering a flare-up in prices.
Inflation has been abating, however, ever since the exchange rate stabilized in February.
The arrangem ent reached w ith the International Monetary Fund in May has helped to consolidate this improvement.
Meanwhile, in Jamaica, inflation has been driven upward in 2003 by a 17% rise in the exchange rate.
The bulk of this devaluation occurred in the first half of the year, and its effect on the rate of inflation has consequently tapered off during the Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 61 second half.
In Venezuela, inflation had begun to rise sharply in 2002, owing mainly to the elimination of the currency band, which sparked a sharp devaluation in the first half of 2002.
The serious political and social disputes that have marked 2003 and the further devaluation of the bolivar then caused inflation to surge once again.
The authorities responded by making further adjustments in economic policy, restoring the fixed exchange rate and imposing controls on sales of foreign exchange and on many prices.
There are no fears o f significant Employment and w Unemployment stays at record levels The modest upturn in economic growth was not enough to improve the labour market situation.
As a result of moderate increases in the employment and labour force participation rates, the unemployment rate for the year as a whole will probably remain virtually unchanged, edging upward by one tenth of a percentage point to 10.7%.
Given the expansion of the labour supply, this small uptick in the unemployment rate means that about 700,000 more people have joined the ranks of the urban unemployed, bringing the total to 16.7 million.
Real wages, reflecting the slack demand for labour, declined or stayed the same in most of the region.
In Brazil, inflation may continue to follow the downward trend that emerged in the second quarter of 2003, thanks to the stabilization of the exchange rate.
Most of the remaining countries will continue to have low rates of inflation.
In the case of the economies that have had high inflation rates in 2003, there are indications that not only will prices cease to rise but that they will probably begin to descend in at least some of these countries. year, while total employment expanded by 1.8% and ow n-account labour, by 2.2%.
As em ploym ent opportunities dwindled, the increase in the labour force participation rate - driven by women’s growing tendency to join the workforce - came to a halt and, between 1997 and 2002, dipped slightly from 58.2% to 58.0%.37 In several countries large-scale emigration also contributed to this outcome.
Real wages in 2002 stood at the same level as in 1997, according to the weighted average for the countries of the region.
The progress made in reducing poverty in the early 1990s came to a standstill owing to the erosion of labour market conditions.
In much of the region, however, the cautious stance that still prevails among firms is holding back labour demand.
The proportion of 35 The unemployment, labour force participation and employment rates cited in this section have been adjusted to reflect the methodological changes introduced recently in Brazil (see box 3).
For this reason, they do not coincide w ith the rates given in previous ECLAC publications. 36 The employment rate is the number o f employed workers as a percentage o f the working-age population.
This indicates that precarious employment conditions, in terms of contractual status and social security coverage, probably becam e even more widespread in 2003.
The composition of the new jobs created, as described earlier, may help to explain why employment has risen faster than expected in view of recent trends, since in the 1990s economic growth of 1.5% would have resulted in a smaller increase in employment (see figure 27).
Apparently, signs of economic recovery have improved the perception of employment opportunities, since the overall participation rate for the region as a whole, after having held steady for several years, has risen from 58.0% to 58.6%, with most of the increase concentrated in the region’s large economies and a few of its medium-sized ones (Brazil, Mexico, Argentina, Chile and Venezuela).
As labour demand has been slack in Latin America, a sizeable proportion of the increased labour supply must be engaged in non-wage-earning types of economic activity.
This is probably why the employment rate has risen higher than the level that could be accounted for by the jobs generated as a result of labour demand on the part of firms.
Because the expansion of the labour supply overtook the growth of employment, region-wide unemployment went from 10.6% to 10.7%, as noted above.
It is estimated that the simple average of the countries’ unemployment rates has remained at 11.0%.
Sluggish labour demand hurts wages The behaviour of real average wages in the region reflected both the sharp year-on-year declines that took place in countries experiencing or just recovering from severe economic crises and the impact of weak labour demand on nominal wages in most of the other countries.
In the latter case, the combination of meagre nominal wage growth and low inflation translated into quite small changes in real wages (see table A-24 of the statistical appendix).
As a result, in the group of 11 countries for which information is available the weighted average real wage fell by an estimated 4.7% and the median real wage, by 0.5%.
Thus, labour market trends did little to revive domestic demand, since the modest upturn in employment was concentrated in non-wage-earning activities (which usually generate low income), while developments with respect to real wages in the formal sector did nothing to increase the purchasing power of households.
As noted in last year’s edition of the Preliminary Overview, changes in inflationary patterns in 2002 largely accounted for the differences observed between countries with respect to the behaviour of real wages, especially in countries where in flation sped up significantly without being offset by comparable hikes in nominal wages.
This correlation has not been observed in 2003, since in some countries real wages have failed to recover even though inflation has subsided.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 63 This phenom enon stems m ainly from the sluggishness of many of the region’s economies in recent years, w hich have pushed up many coun tries’ unemployment rates to levels higher than the medium­ term average.
As shown in figure 28, some countries experienced situations in which unemployment reached record levels and led to the erosion of real wages, even in contexts o f declin ing inflation.
Since institutionalized indexation mechanisms have fallen into disuse, nominal wage adjustments in these cases have been moderate (see figure 29).
This has prevented wage inflation from resurfacing and has helped to curb the inflationary upsurges seen in 2002.
In countries whose unemployment rates are within the usual medium-term range, on the other hand, changes in nominal wages usually offset the effects of inflation and reflect trends in labour productivity.
According to the small amount of information available, and as shown in figure 30, the correlation between labour productivity and income has been generally positive in 2003.
Among the main exceptions are Brazil and Uruguay; in these cases the year-on-year comparison showed that in 2003 real wages were still suffering the effects of higher inflation in 2002, but the decline in real wages over the course of the year was much smaller.
It may be concluded that, in countries where unemployment has stayed within the prevailing medium­ term range, sluggish wage growth is mainly attributable to slow economic recovery and weak labour demand.
At the same time, wages did not have inflationary effects and changes in wage levels had little influence on changes in unemployment levels.
This outcome was achieved in part through the im plem entation of conservative minimum-wage policies, with the result that real minimum wages changed little in most of the countries.
Selected national experiences Region-wide trends are a synthesis of the different experiences of the various economies (see figures 31 and 32).
Argentina’s experience stood out in 2003, as employment continued to climb after having begun to pick up in late 2002, mainly as a result of the recovery of the tradable goods market, which benefited from the peso’s real depreciation in 2002 and from the plunge in real wages caused by the spike in inflation that year.
This recovery also stimulated formal employment, whose year-on-year growth reached positive rates beginning in March and amounted to 4.9% in September.
Even so, the formal employment rate is still clearly below its p re-crisis levels.
Em ploym ent grow th was concentrated in activities that had benefited from exchange-rate movements since the abolition of the convertibility scheme.
Accordingly, formal employment in agriculture, manufacturing and hotels and restaurants (because of the tourism boom) expanded by 5.8%, 7.7% and 8.8%, respectively, between September 2002 and September 2003.
In construction, which had lost almost two thirds of its formal-sector jobs, employment soared by 42.7%.
This means that changes in the incidence o f evasion may distort the analysis o f changes in formal employment.
As em ploym ent rose, unemployment dropped sharply -despite the increase in the participation rate- and underemployment subsided somewhat.
Since June -in an environment of rapidly falling inflation- the year-on-year variation has been positive.
Because of a statistical effect due to the steady decline observed in 2002, however, the average real wage level for 2003 will probably still show a loss, albeit a moderate one, with respect to the 2002 average.
None of the o ther countries experienced comparable increases in employment levels.
The ones with moderate rates of economic growth, including Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Panama and Peru, typically show slight im provem ents in some of the main employment variables.
However, the limited nature of these improvements, together with adverse trends in other variables, indicate that these countries’ labour markets have not yet visibly recovered from the economic doldrums of earlier years.
Be that as it may, these countries’ labour market situation nonetheless shows some incipient improvements.
In the region’s two biggest economies -Brazil and Mexico-, on the other hand, employment indicators are still weak as the year draws to a close.
While the analysis of Brazil’s performance in this regard is hampered by methodological complications (see box 3), the country’s unemployment rate has climbed steadily all year, with a January-to-September average of 12.5%.
This is the result of a sharp rise in the participation rate, which has overtaken the increase in the employment rate.
At the same time, the proportion of wage earners in the occupational structure has fallen from 72.3% to 71.5%.
Real wages rose slightly in a context of falling inflation, and the year-on-year growth of formal employment was negative beginning in April.
In particular, manufacturing employment contracted, partly because the incipient recovery of maquila activity early in the year failed to pan out.
Following the sharp drop in employment in response to the economic slowdown in the United States in 2001, maquila employment crept upward starting in the second quarter o f2002, but stopped rising in mid-2003 and again showed negative year-on-year growth rates.
Lastly, in the two countries whose economies contracted -the Dominican Republic and Venezuela- the labour m arket situation w orsened considerably.
Employment went down and unemployment went up in both countries, while real wages suffered severe losses.
The employment situation is expected to improve som ewhat in 2004, as the econom ic recovery experienced in most of the countries gains momentum.
In view of the region’s projected economic growth, unemployment should decline by about half a percentage point, to just over 10%.
It is likely that the main factor behind this improvement will be a further increase in the employment rate, brought about by stronger labour demand on the part of firms.
At the same time, real wages should stop falling in the countries that saw the sharpest downturns in 2003, while in other countries lower inflation and higher labour demand should result in a modest rise in the real wages paid in the formal sector.
Changes in the m ethodo logy used can make this task m ore difficult.
S ince O ctober 2001 the Brazilian Institute for G eography and S tatistics (IBGE) has used a new m ethodo logy in its Pesquisa M ensal de Em prego (PME), or m onth ly em ploym ent survey, w h ich is carried out period ica lly in the six m ajor m etropolitan areas.
Up until Decem ber 2002 it continued to use the old m easurem ents in parallel w ith the new ones so tha t it could analyse the im pact o f the change o f m ethodology.
In addition, the design o f the questionnaire w as altered and its geographica l coverage was updated to include m unicipa lities tha t had not previously belonged to the m etropolitan areas studied.
The main effect o f the first change is a drop in the partic ipation and em ploym ent rates, tha t o f the second is a slight increase in the em ploym ent rate and tha t o f the th ird is an increase in the unem ploym ent rate.
A specia l study conducted by IBGE showed tha t the changes in the questionnaire helped to increase all three o f these rates (by increasing the num ber o f people regarded as econom ica lly active in both the em ployed and unem ployed categories) and to reduce the rate o f inactivity.
Lastly, the inclusion o f additional m unicipalities had little effect on the principal rates.
The m ost s ig n ifica n t o f all these effects w ere the ones tha t resu lted in a lower pa rtic ipa tion rate, a low er em p loym ent rate and a h igher unem ploym ent rate.
Beyond the change in the levels o f these rates, however, the analysis o f the data ob ta ined using the new m ethodo logy revealed a very strong upsurge in em p loym ent th roughou t 2002.
M oreover, the B razilian econom y's perfo rm ance in 2002 does not appear to substan tia te such a m arked upturn in em ploym ent.
The s teady rise in the em p loym ent rate th roughou t 2002 also has the effect o f sha rp ly increasing the em p loym ent rate in the yea r-on - year com parison fo r 2002-2003.
Specifica lly, w ith respect to labour m arket dynam ics in Brazil in 2002, the find ings ob ta ined using the old PME m ethodo logy w ere used.
As a resu lt o f the inclusion o f a num ber o f new neighbourhoods, the survey identified a very high partic ipation rate and a m odera te ly h igher em ploym ent rate, w h ich led to a “s ta tis tica l” increase in the unem ploym ent rate.
Thus, the available in form ation also m akes it hard to conduct a year-on-year com parison in the case of Ecuador.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 69 The Argentine economy rallied strongly in 2003.
Investment was the most dynamic component of domestic demand and the unemployment rate declined, even though the social situation remained a cause for concern.
The balance-of-payments current account position was once again very positive, with exports being buoyed by stronger international prices and imports picking up considerably from the low levels observed the preceding year.
Private capital outflows were lower than the year before, and the central bank was able to build up its reserves.
The annual variation in the consumer price index (CPI) was below 4%.
Tax revenues were sharply higher, helping to expand the public sector’s primary surplus in line with projected levels.
The government succeeded in signing agreements with IMF and normalizing its relations with multilateral agencies.
The public debt issued since 2002 has been serviced and the remainder of the government’s securitized debt now has to be restructured.
The authorities have announced their intention to consolidate MERCOSUR as a partnership and as an instrument for interregional negotiation (trade negotiations within the framework of the F ree Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA), with the European Union and with the member countries of the Andean Pact).
In general terms and barring any unexpected disruptions, no significant changes are anticipated in the country’s economic performance in the near future.
Argentina’s relationship with IMF has had its ups and loans, and the country then defaulted on those credits. downs.
In the early days of the year, the absence of any In January, Argentina signed a provisional agreement agreement with the Fund generated a tense situation; in covering the period up to the end of August which fact, multilateral agencies did not refinance maturing provided for loan rollovers.
Once this period elapsed, it negotiated a three-year programme with the Fund, which was signed in September.
The size of the primary surpluses to be attained in the years to come and policies on public services were some of the controversial issues to be addressed.
The government has not authorized rate increases, which are henceforth subject to the review and renegotiation of contracts w ith the supplier companies.
The government’s proposal for restructuring its outstanding debt (US$ 60 billion) was based on a hypothetical future primary surplus equivalent to 3% of GDP and on the assumption that its liabilities with multilateral agencies would remain constant in terms of principal and interest rates.
Debt issued since the end of 2001 was to be excluded from the restructuring under the proposal.
Reductions in face value or interest were offered as options, and consideration was given to the possibility of issuing bonds whose payments would be indexed to GDP growth.
In 2003, the consolidated public-sector primary surplus amounted to the scheduled level of 2.5% of GDP Government tax receipts increased by 45% in the first 10 months of the year compared with the same period of 2002, with taxes on foreign trade accounting for 16% of the total.
The rise in value added tax (VAT) receipts, which at 36% outstripped nominal GDP growth, suggests a higher degree of compliance.
Central government primary expenditure increased by almost 30% in the first nine months (17.5% of GDP, in comparison to 16.8% in 2002).
Staff and social security expenditure went up following a judicial decision rescinding the reductions in wages at the higher end of the pay scale that had been introduced in 2001.
The increase in transfers (41%) was consistent with a better distribution of taxes within the framework of a tax- sharing regime between the federal government and the provinces and with social welfare plan payments.
Total public debt, including arrears, is estimated to have stood at US$ 185 billion, a figure equivalent to 140% of annual GDP.
Of this total, US$ 31 billion corresponded to multilateral agency loans, US$ 28 billion represented loans from local financial entities arising from bond swaps conducted in 2001 and US$ 10 billion was in the form of provincial debts guaranteed by the national government.
The debt issued since early 2002 in order to compensate depositors and banks for the effect of the conversion of their deposits and loans to pesos stands at around US$ 20 billion.
In October, the year-on-year growth rate of broad money, which includes quasi-monies, exceeded 40%.
Primary money creation was mainly a reflection of purchases made by the central bank on the foreign exchange market (close to US$ 5.4 billion in the 12-month period ending in October) and was sterilized in part by issues of central bank bills (LEBAC).
The yields offered on 90-day securities declined from a nominal annual rate of 11% at the end of 2002 to 3% in October 2003, which reflected lower expectations of inflation and devaluation.
Money in the hands of private individuals (including quasi-monies) expanded by almost 35% between October 2002 and October 2003.
The greater demand for money implied a willingness by individuals to hold liquid assets in pesos.
The increase in currency outside banks as a percentage of M1 was probably a consequence of the tax on bank credits and debits and the scale of the informal economy.
Certificates of deposit issued as a result of the rescheduling of time deposits that took place the preceding year decreased from 23 billion pesos at the end of 2002 to 6 billion in October 2003.
The difference reflects the decision taken by a group of depositors to forgo the option of accepting funds in pesos and to pursue judicial proceedings demanding a refund in dollars.
In the same period, voluntarily constituted time deposits increased from 13.7 billion to 31.4 billion pesos.
The Supreme Court has ruled that the deposits that were converted into pesos in 2002 (“pesification”) should be returned in dollars.
The government has offered the bearers of these certificates a bond to cover the difference between the value of the asset and the dollar amount of the original deposit.
Banking operations took place within the framework of a high level of liquidity.
The deposit rate decreased from an annual rate of 23% in December 2002 to 4.5% in October 2003.1 Lending rates also fell, but the volume of loans to the private sector contracted by 16.4% in nominal terms in the period from October 2002 to October 2003.
In fact, private consumption expanded, while the domestic saving rate was higher than its pre-crisis level and fixed investment was close to 13.5% of GDP (11.3% in 2002 and 15.8% in 2001).
Investment in machinery and equipment rallied considerably, driven by demand in the agriculture sector and some branches of industry.
Construction rebounded despite the absence of mortgage credit, and this was reflected in higher sales and rising real estate prices.
Activity in the goods production sectors picked up more strongly than total GDP For the first few months of 2003, the industrial production index was 28% higher than in the same period of the preceding year.
The 2002­ 2003 grain harvest yielded a record 70 million tons, while a strong expansion in the cultivation of soybeans was a particularly conspicuous trend during this period.
Textiles and engineering products other than motor vehicles were also buoyant; the upturn in these industries is all the more noticeable because its starting point is provided by the very low levels recorded when the devaluation had pushed up the cost of imports.
Construction materials, chemicals and basic metal products experienced an upswing that had them operating at close to the limit of their capacity.
The increase in the CPI in the 12-month period ending in November 2003 was 3.6%, and relative domestic prices showed a moderate increase.
The appreciation of the currency implied a decrease in the real exchange rate, which, in any event, remained at historically high levels.
This decline was due to a considerable rise in employment, which exceeded the increase in the labour force participation rate, owing in part to the assistance programme that has been set up for male and female heads of household, which benefits approximately 2 million people.
Employment rose significantly in the manufacturing sector (by slightly more than 6% between the third quarters of 2003 and 2002) and in commerce, while it declined in financial services.
Real wages in the private sector recovered slightly thanks to the lump-sum increases decreed by the authorities.
The current account registered a surplus of close to 7.6% of GDP.
The trade balance (f.o.b.) exceeded US$ 16 billion, since the increase in imports was largely offset by the higher value of exports.
Owing, for the most part, to the higher profits and dividends of foreign companies, the financial services deficit (which includes total interest due) widened.
The current account surplus was partly counterbalanced by capital outflows, and there was a build-up in international reserves. 1 On 30-day time deposits.
The private sector again recorded a net capital outflow, which, although significant, was much lower than that of 2002, while the public sector’s arrears in external markets accumulated.
International financial in stitu tions refinanced most of the m aturities corresponding to principal, but not interest.
Exports grew by 14%, largely as a result of price rises (8.6%).
The expansion was based on soybeans and its by-products, which accounted for more than half of the total year-on-year increase recorded in the first nine months of 2003.
Other commodity exports were also higher in value terms, including cereals, meats, fruits and fishery products.
In fact, exports to M ERCOSUR again dim inished as a percentage of total external sales to 18.5% in the first nine months.
By contrast, sales to China expanded considerably and accounted for more than 9% of total exports.
Imports expanded by almost 50%, starting from an extremely low base value, and were led by capital goods (which increased by over 70% from one nine-month period to the next) and intermediate and consumer goods (around 45% in both cases).
The outgoing government failed to rally public consensus on a project to export gas to the United States, fiscal adjustment measures or the coca eradication programme.
October saw the start of a transition period in which the new authorities continue to grapple with the challenges they have inherited and in which institutional changes may occur in strategic areas, including the hydrocarbon sector.
The crisis arose against a backdrop of slow economic growth and the dichotomy that has emerged between an export boom and a languishing domestic market.
Growth is expected to be around 2.5% in 2003, meaning that per capita GDP will continue to trail its 1998 level (by 2.2%).
Since that year Bolivia has suffered from a drop in the prices of several of its exports, the coca eradication programme and slack demand from neighbouring countries.
Although there are a few buoyant areas -gas extraction and soybean cultivation- these are non-labour-intensive activities, and thus have done little to attenuate the high rates of informal employment and poverty.
Social security reform (1997) was implemented at a high fiscal cost (5% of GDP) and the highly dollarized financial system makes monetary policy ineffective.
Moreover, the government that emerged from the 2002 elections is made up of a fragile alliance of parties.
The macroeconomic problems stem mainly from the huge non-financial public-sector deficit, which amounted to 8.9% of GDP in 2002.
The agreement Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 73 signed in April 2003 with IMF provided for this deficit to be reduced to 6.5% (1.6% excluding pensions).
The target contemplated increasing revenue by eliminating exemptions, increasing tax receipts from hydrocarbons and giving greater powers to the tax authority.
In order to reduce current expenditure, the authorities planned to abolish certain ministries, cut central government spending and eliminate the problem of fraudulent pensions.
However, between January and September the fiscal situation deteriorated so badly that the deficit increased by 10% in nominal terms (6.6% in real terms), while total revenue and expenditure grew by 10.8% and 10.6%, respectively.
The major factor in this development was a 14.4% increase in current expenditure, while public investment contracted by 2.3%.
New ministries were established as a result of negotiations within the coalition that governed up to October, and the authorities increased outlays on wages and on the procurement of goods and services; net interest payments on the public debt also rose.
The increase in fiscal income, though appreciable, could not contain the expansion of the deficit.
Approximately 60% of that rise came from taxes on hydrocarbons, 30% from external grants and the remaining 10% from revenues linked to domestic activity (VAT and customs revenues, among others).
Some 65% of the deficit was financed with external loans and the remaining 35% through domestic borrowing.
The political crisis was one of the reasons why fiscal accounts veered out of control and domestic activity contracted, although the decision by PETROBRAS to increase gas purchases immediately after the change of government boosted revenues in the last few months of the year.
Nevertheless, the deficit is expected to stay close to its 2002 level, although the figure could be lower if the international community responds positively to the new authorities’ appeal for additional aid.
Meanwhile, it is estimated that the deficit will stand at US$ 100 million in the last two months of the year.
Political instability and the slower pace of domestic activity have been weakening the financial system since 2002.
In 2003 the system faced two critical junctures, the first of which resulted from the disturbances in February, which caused deposits to slip by 4.1% from their level of late December 2002, when they had already fallen by 13% since 2001.
Deposits later recovered but, because of the September-October crisis, their level was 6.7% lower than it had been in December 2002.
In October approximately US$ 200 million in deposits were withdrawn and consolidated net international reserves (of the central bank and commercial banks) slumped by US$ 140 million.
The central bank injected liquidity into the economy, modifying the composition of consolidated reserves by recalling liquid assets held in commercial banks outside the country, which made it possible to expand the monetary base and deal with the decline in deposits.
These critical situations had repercussions on interbank interest rates in dollars (normally between 1% and 2%), bringing them to maximum levels of 4% and 5% in February and October, after which they started to subside.
The nominal lending and deposit rates for bank deposits in dollars, which account for 90% of the total, followed a downward trend throughout the year.
In November the average nominal rate in dollars charged by the banks was 9.7%, which compares with 11.3% in December 2002.
This decline reflects the fall in international rates, the weakness of domestic activity and lending activity and the abundant banking liquidity caused by the prevailing uncertainty.
All these problems are reflected in the percentage of overdue loans: 18% in October, as against 9% at the beginning of 2000.
The crawling peg system applied since 1998 started to experience problems in 2002 owing to the massive devaluations that occurred in the currencies of the MERCOSUR countries.
Despite the boliviano’s nominal devaluation against the dollar (9.5%) in 2002, the currency effectively appreciated -bearing in mind all of Bolivia’s trading partners- by 4.6%.
In real effective terms, in October the boliviano had depreciated by 12.3%, with the rate of exchange returning to the July 1995 level.
Up to October the boliviano reflected a 4% nominal devaluation against the dollar.
Investment declined by 14.2% owing in large part to the completion of the Yacuiba-Rio Grande gas pipeline, and private consumption expanded by a mere 1.3%.
In constant prices, imports shrank by 4%, while exports grew by 8%.
It is estimated that in 2003 gross fixed capital formation, measured in constant 1995 dollars, In the last quarter of 2003 gas production increased to levels that will probably be maintained or surpassed in 2004, which will also see the construction of a gas pipeline to northern Argentina and a significant expansion in soybean production.
In November accumulated 12-month inflation was 3.3%, which was higher than the target agreed upon with IMF for the year (2.8%).
Inflation picked up speed in July and August and spiked in October as a result of the shortages engendered by the crisis.
In November, however, price levels were lower than they had been in October, so that the year could end with a figure not far from the target.
There are no available data on employment and wages for 2003, but the pattern of domestic expenditure suggests that these variables deteriorated; in 2002 urban employment stood at 8.7%.
Exports grew by 17% in 2003, to US$ 1.5 billion, as a consequence of increased sales of gas, soybeans, tin and silver.
The last three items benefited from notable price rises which brought about a 4.9% improvement in the terms of trade.
A significant proportion of the soybean crop was marketed in primary form, since Venezuela and Colombia cut back on purchases of soybean products.
During the year imports reflected the sluggish state of the domestic market and are estimated to have slumped by 11%, resulting in a small surplus on the country’s merchandise trade balance.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 75 Brazil experienced limited growth of 0.1% in 2003.
Inflation stood at an estimated 9.2% in 2003, while country risk went down to 600 basis points, much lower than the 2,396 points recorded at the end of the third quarter of the previous year.
Economic policy was geared to curbing inflation, strengthening public finances and regaining access to international financial markets at lower cost.
In order to achieve these objectives, the new authorities used three main instruments: a nominal anchor in the form of inflation control targets, a floating exchange­ rate regime and public-sector reforms, specifically of social security and the tax system.
Economic growth was driven by the growth of the external sector; indeed, the increase in exports (20% in terms of value and 14.8% in terms of volume) far exceeded the expansion in imports, which represented only 2.5%.
Consequently, the merchandise trade surplus is estimated to be US$ 24 billion and the current account surplus, US$ 2.7 billion or 0.6% of GDP, compared to -2% of GDP the previous year.
With respect to domestic demand, both consumption and investment contracted, the latter by 7.5%, and the investment-to-GDP ratio was below 18%, one of the lowest percentages in the last decades.
Unemployment in the main metropolitan areas, calculated using a new methodology, increased to 12.4% in 2003 from 11.7% in 2002 (January-October average).
The growth rate is projected to exceed 3% in 2004, boosted, among other factors, by domestic activity, which started to show signs of recovery in the last quarter of 2003.
On the external front, the country will have to settle payments totalling US$ 40 billion.
At the same time, to maintain the primary surplus target of 4.25% of GDP on the public accounts, which is higher than the level agreed with IMF (3.75%), the authorities will have to keep a tight rein on expenditure policy so that they will not have to make any further adjustments.
The inflation target is 5.5% with an allowable deviation of 2.5% in either direction, which is lower than the 2003 target of 8.5% with a similar deviation allowance.
In term s o f m edium - and long-term strategy, the government presented proposals for a comprehensive tax reform, as well as reform of the retirement and pension system for civil servants, which represents the main component of the social security deficit; the relevant measures were adopted at the beginning of December.
The growth strategy to be pursued under the m ulti-year p lan is based on the expansion of consumption and is consistent with the objectives of improving the social situation and introducing changes in income distribution.
In terms of foreign policy, the authorities have given priority to South America, especially the MERCOSUR countries, in order to secure market access through international negotiations and the joint development of new markets in Asia, Eastern Europe and Africa with the members of this group.
Lastly, the government announced that it would draw for a further year on the assistance provided by the IMF programme, which offers access, if need be, to additional funds of almost US$ 10 billion.
This set of measures will have a strong impact on export trends in the coming years.
The main objective of fiscal policy was to raise the primary surplus to 4.3% of GDP and to control the expansion of public debt, which was exacerbated by the higher cost of exchange-rate-indexed securities and higher domestic interest rates.
In the first 10 months of the year the public sector recorded a primary surplus equivalent to 5.1% of GDP; specifically, the federal government balance rose from 0.5% to 4.9% of GDP The deficit of the social security system (1.4%) was offset by the surplus of the state governments and State- owned corporations (1.6% of GDP).
By contrast to previous years, the central government achieved a higher primary surplus thanks to better control of spending, which declined by 1.3% in real terms; the central government wage bill declined by 0.5% and other non- financial current expenditure and investments were down by 0.8%.
The slower pace of economic activity had an adverse effect on tax receipts and social security contributions.
The pension system deficit increased by over 50%, rising to 1.4% of GDP, as a result of the increases granted to retirees and pensioners.
Early in the year the authorities raised the inflation target from 4% to 8.5% with an allowable deviation of 2.5% in either direction.
They also decided to raise the benchmark nominal interest rate on government securities from 25% to 26.5% and the legal reserve requirement from 45% to 60% for demand deposits.
In order to reduce exposure to the impact of a possible exchange rate increase, the government sought to reduce the amounts involved in swap or derivative operations, which offered investors in public securities the choice of applying either the domestic interest rate or the rate of currency devaluation.
By this means, the government also managed to reduce its liabilities in exchange-rate- indexed securities.
The monetary base and the money supply contracted by 4.8% and 3.7%, respectively, in nominal terms in the 12 months ending in October 2003.
In February the central bank ceased intervening in the foreign exchange market in order to stop building up international reserves.
Therefore, in the last few months the exchange rate stabilized at around 2.9 reais to the dollar, w hich reflects a 27% appreciation since September 2002.
In the 12 months up to October 2003 the currency appreciated in real terms against the dollar, the yen and the other Latin American currencies (by 8.9%, 8% and 6.5%, respectively) and depreciated by 5.2% against the euro.
The more promising economic outlook was reflected in the financial market, where stock exchange operations again expanded and the Sao Paulo Stock Exchange (BOVESPA) index reached a record level.
Loans to private individuals expanded by 12.3% between October 2002 and 2003, while Brazilian companies resumed issues of securities abroad.
Pre-set lending rates in local currency declined to an annual nominal rate of 47.1% in September 2003 after reaching 53.8% in March, while deposit rates on interbank certificates of deposit recorded an average of 20.88% in the same period, after arriving at a maximum of 26.25% in March.
Merchandise exports were the strongest component of demand, since export volumes were up by 14.8%.
The higher exports were due to the sound performance of the agricultural sector and some branches of industry.
Export prices rose by 4.5% thanks to the increase in the international prices of some commodities, such as soybeans, coffee and iron ore.
Merchandise imports grew by only 2.5%, partly owing to the upturn in economic activity starting in August.
The merchandise balance recorded a surplus of US$ 24 billion, compared to US$ 13 billion in 2002, while the services balance remained at levels similar to those of the previous year, with a US$ 5.3 billion deficit.
The positive merchandise trade balance is attributable to the 20% increase in the value of exports, especially commodities (25%), while m anufactures exports increased by 19%, boosted by a 90% expansion in sales to China and Argentina.
The balance on the income account showed an improvement with respect to 2002, with a deficit of US$ 18.7 billion, while the capital and financial account recorded a balance of US$ 991 million.
In net terms, foreign direct investment contracted from US$ 14 billion in 2002 to US$ 7.1 billion.
Changes in the regulatory frameworks of the infrastructure and communications sectors, which generally attract this type of investment, have not yet been implemented.
Net portfolio investment moved from a negative value of US$ 5.1 billion to a positive value of US$ 6.9 billion thanks to gross capital inflows into the stock market and a large surplus on the issue of fixed income instruments.
Therefore, international reserves increased considerably to stand at US$ 54 billion in October, which represented an increase of US$ 16.3 billion in relation to the level reached at the end of 2002 and corresponded to 14 months’ worth of imports.
In accordance with IMF parameters, available reserves at the end of October stood at US$ 15.5 billion, which was 23% higher than the December 2002 value.
As in the previous two years, the different sectors of the economy performed unevenly.
Beginning in August 2003 there were signs of recovery in the level of activity.
The manufacturing industry has recorded continuous growth since then, with upturns in the production of capital goods and consumer durables in September.
The industrial sector presented a contraction of close to 1%, but the service sector was flat.
Construction was down by approximately 8% in the first three quarters of 2003 in comparison to the same period of 2002.
In terms of demand, all the major aggregates except external trade in goods and services contracted in the first nine months of the year.
From January to September government consumption grew by 0.6% compared to the same period of 2002, while household consumption declined by 4.2%, which explains the marked downturn in domestic commerce.
Spurred by exports, Chile’s economy expanded by 3.2% in 2003, for a rise of 2% in per capita GDP.
Although still performing below potential, the economy therefore improved upon its 2002 growth rate of 2.1%.
The rate of unemployment dropped to 8.5%, but remained high in comparison to the average for the first half of the 1990s (5.5%).
Inflation trended downward throughout the year, partly thanks to the considerable appreciation of the Chilean peso against the dollar, which has enabled monetary policy makers to continue lowering the benchmark rate of interest.
Consumer prices rose by 1% in the 12 months up to November, which was one percentage point below the floor of the monetary authority’s target range (2%- 4%).
With respect to fiscal affairs, the central government deficit is set to come in at 0.8% of GDP.
Chile’s fiscal rule requiring a structural surplus of 1% of GDP permits fiscal spending to be isolated from temporary fluctuations in copper prices and in GDP, thus conferring greater stability in spending over the economic cycle.
The outlook for 2004 is bright, with growth projected at a rate of 4.5%.
Although export growth is contingent upon an upturn in the global economy, the free trade agreements signed with the European Union (effective as of 2003), the United States (effective as of the beginning of 2004) and the Republic of Korea provide grounds for expectations of a larger volume of more freely flowing trade with those economies.
This is significant, bearing in mind that exports account for one third of Chile’s GDP.
In January 2003, Chile took advantage of improved conditions on the international financial markets and its own low country-risk rating to issue a US$ 1 billion sovereign bond on the external market.
In the second semester, the government sought and obtained approval for a temporary rise of 1% in the VAT rate, which therefore moved up to 19% as of 1 October; this increase is intended to offset the downturn in tax receipts expected as a result of the new trade agreements signed in 2003.
In July, the government announced a spending cut of US$ 300 m illion, w hich brought the central government’s actual deficit to 0.8% of GDP, in keeping with the fiscal rule that requires a structural surplus of 1% of GDP.
The budget for 2004 is based on a projected increase in tax revenues and high copper prices, which are expected to enable the central government to narrow its actual fiscal deficit to 0.6% of GDP.
Lastly, the tax authority, through the Treasury General of the Republic, is to begin issues of domestic debt in the form of 20- year bullet bonds.
In 2003, the rise in international copper prices, in combination with higher export earnings and inflows of financial capital attracted by the buoyancy of the local stock market, translated into a large inflow of dollars and a steady appreciation of the peso within the framework of the flexible exchange rate regime established in late 1999.
By early December the currency had appreciated to a rate almost 20% above the low recorded in 2002.
Despite exporters’ complaints about the rise of the peso (the real effective exchange rate index dropped from 124.4 in February 2003 to 113.8 in Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 79 October), the central bank reaffirmed its decision not to intervene at this stage in the currency’s climb.
This suggests that it is reserving the right to intervene when the exchange rate suddenly soars to very high levels, as it did before the Argentine crisis in 2001 and when uncertainty about the Brazilian real peaked in 2002.
The appreciation of the peso contributed to the downward trend of inflation in 2003, which dropped from an annualized high of 4.5% in March 2003 to just 1% in November.
This put the authorities in a position to lower the monetary policy interest rate, which gradually declined from a nominal annual rate of 6.5% in December 2001 to 2.25% in December 2003.
The increase in the demand for money was not accompanied by a higher demand for currency outside banks, however, which rose by only 3.9% in real terms.
The annual rate of interest on deposits was a mere 3.5% in nominal terms, which may account for the real decline of almost half a percentage point recorded in M2 in the 12 months to October.
Lending rates, meanwhile, climbed from their low point for the year (a nominal rate of 12% in May) to 15.5% in October, thereby broadening the interest rate spread.
The rise in lending rates reflected a much faster expansion in consumer loans (12%) than in commercial loans, which remained at a standstill.
Manufacturing expanded more slowly than GDP, rising by 2.3% in the first nine months of the year with respect to the same period of 2002.
The industrial production index displayed a year-on-year increase of 1.7% in the first 10 months of 2003, while mining expanded at a rate of 6.7%, followed by agriculture (5.1%) and electricity (4.9%).
The output of the commerce and transport sectors rose at a lower rate, albeit still above 3% in both cases.
Up to October, the supermarket sales index displayed a real variation of 10.5% with respect to the same month of 2002 and one of 9.2% for December.
Chile posted a current account deficit of US$ 487 million, or 0.7% of GDP, while the trade balance yielded a surplus of over US$ 2.6 billion.
Imports grew more quickly than exports, expanding at a rate of 13% thanks to increases in both the volume of imports (9.7%) and prices (3%).
The upturn in imports encompassed interm ediate goods (12% over nine months) and consumer and capital goods (7% and 5.5%, respectively).
Exports climbed by 12% over the year in response to increases in both prices (5.5%) and volume (6.2%).
The trade surplus was offset by a deficit of US$ 2.687 billion on the factor income account.
Job creation was strong in community, social and personal services (4.3%); transport, storage and com m unications (3.3%); manufacturing (3.2%); and financial services (3.1%).
As an average over the year, the real hourly wage rose by 0.8% with respect to 2002.
GDP rose by 3.4%, which was a significant improvement over the 2002 figure of 1.7%.
Unemployment remained high, although the nationwide rate dropped from 15.7% to 14.4%.
The monetary policy intervention rate, which was lower than the rate of inflation, rose from 5.25% to 7.25%, exceeding inflation in the final months of the year.
The current account posted a deficit of about 2.2% of GDP, reflecting higher payments on external debt and a sharp downturn in exports to Venezuela.
The Colombian economy displayed an upswing in 2003 after growing slowly in the preceding two years.
As noted above, GDP expanded by close to 3.4%; this represented a climb of 1.6% in per capita output, which surpassed the results of the previous five years.
The change of government and the economic programme raised expectations and boosted indicators of consumer and business confidence, fuelling a small upturn in demand and investment.
The renewal and extension of the tariff preferences granted by the United States had a positive impact on the sectors concerned, including textiles, and the government announced that in April 2004 it would enter into negotiations on a free trade agreement with the United States.
Meanwhile, a free trade agreement between the Andean Community and MERCOSUR was scheduled to be signed at the end of (Ô .iP CD CO sCLOo Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 81 Fiscal affairs moved to the centre of political debate after the October referendum.
The government had been taking measures to rein in the deficit since mid-2002, in view of concerns over the rapid expansion of public debt, which swelled from 30.8% of GDP in 1997 to 56.2% in June 2003.
The fiscal programme for 2003 was designed to limit the overall consolidated public sector deficit to 2.5% of GDP.
The executive branch proposed a number of initiatives by which this might be achieved, including a wage freeze and the imposition of administrative budget controls, as well as reform of the public pension system, particularly the special regimes for teachers and military personnel.
These plans were put to a constitutional referendum in October, which returned a negative response.
In addition, the proposed imposition, as from 2005, of an across-the-board 2% VAT rate on the basic goods and services in the household basket was declared unconstitutional, and the Constitutional Court issued a judgement prohibiting freezes on civil service wages.
In view of this situation, the government put together a package of measures to place fiscal affairs on a sounder footing and meet the revised target of 2.8% of GDP for the consolidated public sector deficit.
These measures made up what was known as “Plan B”, which was geared towards dealing with the immediate problem (at the close of 2003) and planning for the coming years, from 2004 onward.
The new adjustment plan included changes in the VAT regim e, the elim ination of income tax exemptions and the imposition of a new variable tax on pensions in excess of six times the minimum wage, as well as spending cuts.
In early November the government put this proposal to Congress, which made a number of alterations to it.
The increase in the VAT rate on beer was reinstated, along with the levy of a tax on gambling and the deduction of local taxes.
The rise in VAT and in the tax on pensions was not ultimately approved.
In June the net debt of the non-financial public sector was 56% of GDP, which was lower than the figure of 60% recorded at the end of 2002.
The government conducted a number of transactions during the year to improve the maturity profile of the country’s domestic and external debt.
The central bank (Banco de la República) will allow the government to use up to US$ 500 million in international reserves to pay off part of the external debt.
In January 2003 the monetary policy intervention rate was 5.25% a year -below the rate of inflation, which was over 7%.
The intervention rate was raised twice, however, in January and April, to 7.25%, where it stayed for the rest of the year.
The real deposit rate averaged 1.2% in the 12 months ending in October, while the real lending rate was 8.2% over the same period.
Money (M1) expanded by 13.2% in the 12 months ending in November, which represented a slowdown with respect to the rate of 18.8% posted in 2002.
The increase in inflation and the rise in the exchange rate in late 2002 and early 2003 prompted the central bank to intervene in the foreign exchange market by auctioning dollar call options.
As a result, the nominal exchange rate remained very stable in the seven months up to November (between 2,826 and 2,845 pesos to the dollar), which had a somewhat moderating effect on inflation.
In fact, the imported goods component of the producer price index shifted downward.
The 12-month rate of increase in consumer prices, which had quickened between April 2002 (5.7%) and April 2003 (7.9%), began to slow gradually in May owing partly to the wider availability of foodstuffs, and stood at 6.1% in November.
This was close to the ceiling of the monetary authorities’ target range of between 5% In 2003 the Colombian economy experienced a modest upswing.
GDP growth was 3.4% between January and September, which was higher than the rate for the same period of 2002 (1.5%).3 The sectors where the upturn was strongest were mining (12.5%), mainly because of increased coal production; construction (9.8%), owing largely to building projects; finance capital formation moved up from 15.8% of GDP in 2002 to 16.3% in 2003.
The labour market showed some signs of bouncing back, though unemployment continued to be high.
The employment rate (53.4%) rose by nine tenths of a percentage point and the labour force participation rate (64.4%), by four tenths of a point, while underemployment (32%) dipped by just six tenths of a point.
Thanks to a good economic perform ance in rural areas and small cities, the nationw ide rates o f unem ploym ent and underemployment dropped further, from 15.7% to 14.4% and from 34.8% to 31.7%, respectively, while the employment rate rose by more than one point (53.1%) and the participation rate, by six tenths of a point (62%).
The financial sector performed well in 2003, with progress in indicators of portfolio growth and quality, especially in the commercial and consumer portfolios.
All the entities in the sector enjoyed an increase in profits, while the process of real credit contraction seen in recent years came to a halt.
After the initial negative impact of the plunge in exports to Venezuela, these exports began to climb again in the second half of the year, and grew by 7.7% over the first nine months with respect to the same period of 2002.
The rebound was driven by traditional exports, which expanded by 15.9% over that period, while non- traditional exports remained at a standstill.
The large rise in traditional exports was due primarily to exports of coal, coffee, gold and ferronickel.
Non-traditional exports received a boost from the renewal and extension of United States tariff preferences, which helped to offset the slump in sales to Venezuela (-51.3%).
The United States continued to be the main destination for Colombian exports, accounting for 44% of the total, followed by the European Union countries (14.5%), while the Andean Community’s share dropped (13.8%) because of the steep slide in exports to Venezuela and a dip (6.1%) in exports to Ecuador.
Total imports expanded by 9.9% in the first nine months of the year and consisted mainly of capital and intermediate goods and fuels.
An increase in transfers, especially family remittances, formed the main counterweight to a deterioration in the merchandise trade balance and an increase in external debt payments.
The capital and financial account of the balance of payments closed the year with an estimated surplus of some US$ 1.388 billion, including errors and omissions, which contrasts with the current account deficit of US$ 1.677 billion.
There was a sharp downturn in foreign investment, of about US$ 2.5 billion, including both portfolio and direct investment.
This drop was largely offset by a decline in capital outflows from the government and the private sector alike (just over US$ 2.6 billion).
In November net international reserves stood at US$ 10.668 billion. 3 The figure for 2003 includes a contraction o f 0.3 GDP percentage points to reflect the eradication o f illegal crops.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 83 The economic slowdown that began at the end of 2002 has continued in 2003, and ECLAC projections indicate that Ecuador’s economy will grow by 2%.
Since inflation slowed in 2003, the real dollar exchange rate registered only a slight appreciation, while the real effective exchange rate remained stable.
Inflation is also expected to continue its downward trend The balance-of-payments current account deficit shrank considerably, mainly due to an upswing in exports (especially oil) and near-zero growth in imports.
This, combined with the decline in purchases of foreign assets and the reversal of the trend in private external debt, resulted in increased reserves.
In fact, in 2003, a sharp increase was seen in the unemployment rate, chiefly as a reflection of the higher number of redundancies.
During the first half of 2003, the overall fiscal surplus of the non-financial public sector was US$ 412.8 million.
This was mainly attributable to the high level of oil revenues, which increased by 50% during the first quarter thanks to higher crude oil prices.
Non-oil revenue also improved during 2003, but its growth slackened in the second quarter.
VAT collection in particular climbed by 4% during the first quarter o f2003 but remained constant during the second, partly due to the economic slowdown.
Social security contributions were up by 30% and income tax receipts expanded by 26%.
Revenues from the VAT were higher than those from social security and income tax combined.
At the end of the year and in accordance with the requirements of the standby arrangement signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in the first quarter, the government approved a law aimed at limiting spending on civil service wages and compensation.
The application of the law is currently restricted to a small number of civil servants, but the government has announced its intention to extend its scope.
The government has not yet been able to implement the necessary m easures to comply w ith o ther IMF requirements, such as the placement of the State’s two telephone companies under private-sector management.
Since the adoption of the United States dollar as Ecuador’s official currency in January 2000, the country has had no monetary policy as such.
In a dollarized economy, the spread that investors demand above the yield of United States treasury bonds has a crucial influence on domestic interest rates.
This is considerably lower than the 1,794 points of expressed a willingness to open up some of the main oilfields of the State oil company (PETROECUADOR) to private investment.
At the end of October, the reference lending rate stood at 11.5% and the reference borrowing rate was 5.4%.
As for credit, the level of arrears in the financial system remained practically unchanged between December 2002 and October 2003.
The private financial sector’s loan portfolio, however, increased by 8.7% in nominal terms.
In open private banks, foreign security holdings other than shares (such as bonds) rose by 137.1% between February and October 2003.
These holdings increased much more than the sector’s assets overall (11.7%) and came to represent 9.4% of the total.5 It would appear that foreign assets were being substituted for public domestic assets, given that the holdings of central government securities dropped by 42%, i.e. from 7% to 3.6% of the sector’s total assets.
Loans to non- financial private institutions grew at a lower rate than assets, whereas other loans to residents (including household loans) increased by a mere 6.4%.
In fact, 10.9% of the sector’s total assets were transferable deposits being held abroad.
During the first half of 2003, GDP was up by only 1.1% as compared to the first half of 2002 owing to the fact that during the second quarter output fell by 0.5% in the wake of reduced hydrocarbons production.
ECLAC projections point to a growth rate of around 2% for the Ecuadorian economy in 2003, thanks to the increase in oil production that is expected during the final quarter of 2003 following the opening of the heavy crude oil pipeline.
In October 2003, private oil production was more than 83,000 barrels per day higher than in July.
Production by PETROECUADOR, however, continued the trend of recent years and dropped slightly.
In 2004, economic growth will depend mainly on the degree of investment in hydrocarbon extraction.
Investment levels are expected to be significant, given the interest shown by companies that have transportation rights in the new pipeline to take full advantage of that transport capacity.
In addition, the government is interested in opening the main PETROECUADOR oilfields to private investment with a view to increasing production and tax revenues.
As for sales of bananas, the country’s other main export product, the low prices registered in the second half of 2003 could affect investment in that sector and therefore reduce production during 2004.
Following January’s steep price hike, which was mainly due to adjustments in utility rates, inflation declined to 6.5% in November 2003 compared with the same month in 2002.
It is estimated that the rate of inflation will continue to fall during 2004, although it may rem ain higher than the U nited States rate, particularly if domestic gas subsidies are eliminated and utility prices are adjusted further.
In addition to domestic inflation’s stabilization at lower levels, the real appreciation of the exchange rate that began in January 2000 following dollarization slowed its pace in 2003.
Between December 2002 and October 2003, real appreciation in relation to the United States dollar was 3.6%.
In contrast, the first 10 months of 2003 saw a limited real appreciation in relation to the currencies of Ecuador’s main Latin American trading partners and a 10.4% real depreciation in relation to the euro.
In 2003 Ecuador also witnessed a stabilization of the real effective exchange rate, which depreciated by 0.5% in the first 10 months of the year.
This increase reflected a sharp upswing 5 In February 2003, the methodology used to calculate indicators was changed. 6 In October 2003, the effective exchange rate was 11.3% lower than the average for January 1992-December 1998, i.e. the period prior to the crisis that resulted in the dollarization o f the economy in January 2000.
Unlike the situation in 2002, in 2003 the largest increases in unemployment were among men, as the male unemployment rate jumped from 6% to 9.7%, whereas female unemployment only rose from 14% to 14.7%.
In the first nine months of 2003, the balance-of- payments current account deficit shrank by 63% to US$ 378 million, mainly thanks to the satisfactory result on the merchandise trade balance.
The deficit was covered with a US$ 400 million surplus in the financial account and US$ 272 million in the errors and omissions account.
The improvement in the trade balance for goods was attributable to a 17.5% expansion in exports, which was in turn chiefly accounted for by hydrocarbons (up by 55.7%) and bananas (16.1%).
The volume of crude oil exports increased by 4.8% and, since prices rose by an average of 21.1%, the value of oil exports climbed by 25.4%.
Imports dipped slightly (-0.4%) owing to the completion of the heavy crude oil pipeline and probably also to a slowdown in aggregate domestic demand.
Imports of consumer goods thus rose by a mere 1.3% while imports of raw materials contracted by 6.2%, primarily because of a decline in imports of construction materials.
Imports of capital goods were down by 12.6% owing to a sharp decrease in imports of transport equipment and of capital goods for the industrial sector.
Remittances from migrants showed a 12.2% year- on-year increase in the first nine months of 2003, rising to a total of US$ 1.149 billion.
During this period, this category of remittances remained slightly higher than the level of profit remittances being sent abroad The financial account performed very differently than it had in 2002.
During the first nine months o f2003, foreign direct investment amounted to approximately US$ 1.332 billion, which was 46% more than in the corresponding period in 2002.
A large part of this investment was in the petroleum sector and was linked either to the opening of the pipeline at the end of 2003 or to initiatives for increasing private production of crude oil.
Lastly, external liabilities trended downward by US$ 473 million after having previously risen by US$ 907 million.
This was mainly the result of changes in the level of private external debt, which, rather than rising as it had in 2002, decreased during the first three quarters of 2003.
All of the above combined to produce an increase of US$ 310 million in freely disposable reserves. 7 The data in this paragraph come from the annual survey conducted by the National Institute o f Statistics and Censuses.
The unemployment rates mentioned in this section therefore do not coincide with the rates shown in the table and figure accompanying this note, which come from the monthly surveys conducted starting in that year by the Latin American Faculty o f Social Sciences (FLACSO).
This result was due exclusively to the significant expansion (around 12%) of value added in the agricultural sector, facilitated by favourable weather conditions, since non-agricultural activities as a whole registered slightly negative growth.
Thus, despite the recovery of GDP in 2003, the Paraguayan economy showed very low growth for the sixth consecutive year.
The central government deficit declined from 3.1% in 2002 to 0.8% in 2003, following a significant rise in tax income attributable to administrative measures for reducing tax evasion and cutbacks in expenditure.
In a stable subregional context, the guarani appreciated moderately in the first few months of the year.
Thanks to its subsequent stability, 12-month inflation diminished from a peak of 21% in April to 9.9% in November.
Until the middle of the year the outgoing government had no choice but to cope with the serious fiscal crisis and the steady deterioration of the fiscal accounts, which had started in 1999.
One of the factors that contributed to this situation was the fact that since mid-2002, when the country failed to conclude an agreement with IMF, the shortage of external resources had become more acute, making the fiscal gap increasingly difficult to bridge, so that it became necessary to defer the payment of commitments at home and abroad.
In April the new government-elect, which was to take office in August, expressed its intention of moving forward with the formalization of the economy and the effort to combat corruption and tax evasion.
In addition, the authorities established the priority objectives of reducing the fiscal deficit and regularizing outstanding external and domestic debt obligations.
In mid-December IMF approved a US$ 73-million standby arrangement for the next 15 months; the economic authorities indicated that they intended to use these funds to swell international reserves and to draw on them only in the event of an economic crisis.
The agreement will give the government access to loans from the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, which will be employed to regularize external debt servicing.
Apart from the above-mentioned reforms, the agreement contemplates eliminating the current fiscal deficit of close to 1% of GDP in 2004 and accumulating a surplus, as well as raising GDP growth to around 2.5% and reducing inflation to 6.5%.
Towards the end of the year a proposed administrative restructuring and fiscal adjustment law providing, among other things, for a series of legal Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 87 changes was making its way through the legislative pipeline.
The measures proposed include broadening the income tax base by generalizing the tax and eliminating exemptions for medium and large enterprises, for which the rate is to be reduced from 30% to 10%; rates of 3% and 10% are proposed for small enterprises and personal income tax, respectively.
The proposal would also expand the value added tax base to include persons who provide independent services, and would tax agricultural products in their natural state and other products and services at 5%.
In addition, the measure calls for the adoption of an excise tax of 20% on cigarettes and beverages and 50% on petroleum-based fuels and for the expansion of the regulatory powers of the Office of the U nder-Secretary for Inland Revenue.
The government also submitted a social security reform proposal designed to reduce the growing deficit of the Fiscal Fund, the State pension system into which civil servants pay contributions, which currently accounts for a sizeable portion of the government deficit.
The effects of these measures will start to be visible in mid-2004, once the new laws have been enacted and the relevant regulations have been drawn up.
However, already in 2003 (especially in the second half of the year), the central government deficit narrowed thanks to tighter evasion control policies and, albeit to a lesser extent, to spending cuts.
Up to October tax revenues increased nominally by 23% and tax receipts from foreign trade and value added tax expanded.
This means that the tax ratio probably went up from 9.5% of GDP in 2002 to 10% of GDP in 2003, although this is still very low.
On the other hand, non-tax revenue, which includes income from the Itaipu and Yacyreta binational enterprises, increased by scarcely 8.5%.
In addition, expenditure was cut back drastically, by 5%; most of this adjustment was in the area of current transfers (0.1%) and capital expenditure (3.5%).
At the end of the year the central government deficit amounted to 0.8% of GDP. compared to 3.1% in 2002.
Since the beginning of the year the remarkable expansion in income from soybean exports, boosted by the sharp devaluation that occurred in 2002, made it possible to build up international reserves systematically in the following months.
The larger supply of foreign exchange brought the price of the dollar down from a record high of 7,100 guaranies in January to 6,200 in June, and this value remained almost unchanged until November.
This development was reflected by an increase in the monetary aggregates, with M1 up by 24% in October 2003.
This expansion did not lead to faster inflation, since the confidence inspired by the new authorities Gross domestic product 2.4 -2.5 2.5 Consumer prices 8.4 14.6 9.9b Real effective exchange ratec 16.5 8.1 ■oIT)CO Urban unemployment rate 10.8 14.7 ...
Consequently, inflation declined from a maximum of 21% in April to a 12-month variation of 9.9% in November.
Up to mid-year the contraction in non- agricultural economic activities also contributed to this decline.
In this context, the yields on monetary regulation instruments also started to diminish steadily, to reach 11.5% in October.
Nevertheless, owing to negative variations in the CPI between May and August, interest rates were very high in real terms until the third quarter, although they tended to decrease in the fourth.
This situation, together with the past-due loans in the commercial banking system, which amounted to US$ 138 million and whose restructuring is the subject of legislation currently on the table, significantly reduced bank credit to the private sector, which decreased by 20% between December 2002 and September 2003, in both local and foreign currency.
One of the chronic problems facing the Paraguayan economy is the existence of a wide spread between investment and lending rates, which is partly due to the concentration of banking activity.
GDP recorded a 2.5% rise, attributable almost ex c lu siv e ly to the no tab le ex p an sio n in the agricultural sector (12%), since the other sectors as a whole showed a slightly negative variation.
An estimate of the performance of industry, commerce and other services suggests that the production of these goods and services suffered a sharp contraction (9%) at the beginning of the year, but started to show slightly positive values mid-year.
The agricultural sector recorded an annual expansion of 5.6%, led by the strong growth in crop-farming, where the steepest rises were observed in the production of cotton (38%) and soybeans (28%), in the latter case because o f h igher y ields, w hich resu lted in an unprecedented output of 4,200,000 tons.
By contrast, the livestock sector suffered a 7% decline due to outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease.
In the goods- p roducing sec to rs, co nstruc tion show ed a 2% recovery, following an 11% decline in 2002, while the m anufacturing industry slipped by 1%.
The service sector grew by 1% overall, with a notable climb in electricity consumption (6%).
Thanks to the Paraguayan econom y’s more competitive position, attributable to a 7% increase in the average annual real effective exchange rate, together with an upturn in export prices, exports posted a 12% expansion, while imports rose by 9% after having fallen off sharply in 2001 and 2002.
Therefore, the merchandise trade deficit narrowed again, this time to about US$ 250 million, and the service sector yielded a surplus, as in previous years.
Although net factor income was positive, current transfers showed zero growth, as a result of which the current account surplus shrank to some US$ 60 million, after having stood at close to US$ 100 million in 2002.
However, in contrast to what had happened that year, there were capital inflows of some US$ 80 million in 2003.
This raised the overall balance to US$ 145 million, which corresponded almost entirely to an increase in international reserves.
In October Paraguay and the U nited States signed their first bilateral agreement, which will boost non-traditional exports.
The agreement provides, among other things, for the establishment of a commission to promote investments by United States firms in Paraguay.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 89 The Peruvian economy grew by 4%, while inflation was kept within the range established by the monetary authority, reaching 2% at the end of the year.
In view of these circumstances, monetary policy was moderately expansionary and interest rates declined.
The fiscal deficit was reduced to 2% of GDP, in accordance with the authorities’ aim of ensuring the sustainability of public debt.
The trade surplus was the highest since 1990, mainly owing to mining exports, while the balance-of-payments current account deficit stayed at around 2% of GDP.
In view of the favourable macroeconomic situation and the more stable regional context, the spread for external debt securities diminished in the course of the year.
Economic growth was constrained, however, by the fact that levels of private investment remained relatively low and public investment contracted.
Moreover, the impact of growth on the labour market was still limited, and both wages and unemployment showed only minor changes.
To ensure the sustainability of public debt, the authorities applied a medium-term strategy that involved whittling down the fiscal deficit and building up the primary surplus over the next few years.
For these purposes, they persisted with measures to expand the tax base in 2003 and temporarily raised the general sales tax to 19% as of 1 August.
Between January and October central government revenue increased by more than 8% in real terms compared to the same period of the previous year, in particular because of higher receipts from income tax (31%) and the general sales tax (9.5%).
M eanw hile, bo th wage outlays and central government transfers for pensions grew by more than 6% in real terms in response to strong pressure to increase current expenditure.
In order to contain the potential risk to public finances inherent in the decentralization process, the Fiscal Responsibility and Transparency Act was adopted.
In order to counteract the rise in current spending, the authorities again cut back on public investment, so that total central government expenditure increased by only 4% in real terms.
The non-financial public-sector deficit is estimated at 2% of GDP, which represents a slight reduction, in line with the authorities’ plans at the beginning of the year.
The deficit was financed in part through new sovereign bond issues on the external markets, as well as a new system of bond issues for the creation of a local capital m arket.
In contrast, incom e from privatizations and concessions was less than the amount budgeted.
The stability of the main prices (especially consumer prices) was beneficial for monetary policy, which facilitated the recovery effort.
The authorities again set a target range of1.5% to 3.5% for inflation, and explicitly established that the interbank rate should follow the trend defined by the lending and deposit rates of the central bank’s monetary operations with the commercial banking system.
Over the year the interbank rate declined from 3.8% in January to 2.5% at the beginning of December, thus contributing to the decline in the rates offered by banks to their customers.
This moderately expansionary policy did not, however, succeed in stimulating credit demand, which dropped by 2.2% between October 2002 and the same month of 2003.
Mortgage and consumer loans and loans to microenterprises were relatively dynamic, while commercial credit contracted.8 The nuevo sol appreciated by 1% against the dollar in real terms in the first 10 months of the year, compared to the average for 2002.
Owing to the appreciation of the euro, the Argentine peso and the Brazilian real, however, the real effective exchange rate rose by 3%.
The stability of the dollar exchange rate helped to sustain the gradual decline in the dollarization of credit that had begun in 2002, from the high levels recorded previously.
Exports and private investment were the main engines of economic progress, with growth rates higher than 5% over the first three quarters, while private consumption expanded less than in the previous year as a result of a weak labour market.
Public consumption recovered, while public investment fell again, albeit less sharply than in 2002.
Mining was one of the main areas of expansion, although non-primary manufacturing also grew by more than 4% over the first three quarters.
Agriculture and construction expanded more slowly than they had the previous year, by between 3% and 4%.
Over the first nine months of the year the number of jobs in formal urban enterprises grew by 1.7% in relation to the same period of the previous year, with particularly strong expansion of employment in commerce.
Employment shrank, however, in small businesses and microenterprises, which contributed to a drop in the employment rate.
As the participation rate was also lower, the unemployment rate stayed virtually the same.
Over the 12-month period from November 2002 to October 2003 per capita income rose by 1.7% in real terms compared to the level of the preceding 12 months.
In September the minimum wage was increased by 12%, the first rise since 2000. 8 As interest rates are lower for commercial loans than for the other types o f loans referred to, the overall result was that the average rate for all bank lending operations was higher in October than in January.
Gold sales, which increased in terms of both volume and price, surged by 43% and accounted for 23% of the value of total exports.
Imports increased by 11.5%, with the biggest increments in inputs and intermediate goods, especially fuel, and in capital goods.
The improvement in the goods balance was counteracted by an increase in payments for factor services, so that the current account deficit remained unchanged at about 2% of GDP.
To enhance its integration into external trade flows, Peru became an associate member of MERCOSUR, and also aspires to sign free trade agreements with the European Union and, in particular, with the United States.
With regard to the financial account, there were sovereign bond issues for US$ 1.25 billion, while private sector flows diminished, partly because of the lower level of foreign direct investment.
The overall balance made it possible to increase net international reserves, which rose to about US$ 10.4 billion at the beginning of December.
External debt was down slightly, from 49.3% of GDP in December 2002 to 47.9% in September 2003, as a result of the reduction in private sector debt.
Thanks to the better regional situation and the stability of Peru’s macroeconomic variables, the spread on external debt went down from around 600 basis points in late 2002 to a little over 300 points in November 2003.
In 2003 Uruguay managed to halt the economic recession which had persisted since the middle of 1998.
Although overall GDP growth was as little as one percentage point for the year, after having plummeted by more than 10% in 2002, the level of activity began to pick up in the first quarter and maintained an upward trend until the end of the year.
The financial system stabilized at the low levels recorded after the acute crisis the previous year and, in the middle of the first semester, the government succeeded in implementing its proposal for the voluntary swap of foreign currency-denominated public securities.
In June a new letter of intent was signed with the International Monetary Fund (IMF), which opened up access to financing from international institutions.
These factors helped to dispel the pervading uncertainty that had weighed on the Uruguayan economy since the beginning of 2002.
The main challenge in the near future continues to be that of achieving sustained growth that will enable the authorities to cope with the enormous burden of servicing the debt denominated in foreign currency.
The upturn in production was mainly export-driven, since domestic consumption remained slack.
Annual inflation declined, approaching the 10% mark, and the unemployment rate, although very high, also tended to decrease.
The higher level of activity boosted tax revenue, which, together with spending restrictions, helped to reduce the fiscal deficit to less than 4% of GDP, a level not seen for several years.
The rapid expansion of exports and the limited level of imports for most of the year yielded a positive external current account balance.
In these circumstances, at the beginning of 2003 the authorities put forward a proposal for the voluntary swap of foreign currency-denominated debt amounting to US$ 5.2 billion.
The proposal did not include the remission of capital or interest, but extended redemption schedules by at least five years.
The proposal was well received, since it was accepted by more than 90% of private creditors.
Following the restructuring of its public securities debt, the government signed a new agreement with IMF, which offered the prospect of fresh financing from multilateral institutions.
The agreement specified a consolidated public sector primary surplus on the order of 3% of GDP in 2003, rising to 4% in 2005.
Bearing in mind the heavy burden of interest, the surplus will bring the consolidated deficit to around 3.5% of GDP, a level that is considered consistent with the public sector’s current borrowing capacity and inflation targets.
The agreement estimates that GDP will contract again (-1%) in 2003, but that growth will return to levels of about 3% a year starting in 2004.
The change in the debt profile and the new agreement with IMF bolstered confidence significantly at the beginning of the second half of the year, but the reduction of the fiscal deficit continued to be an elusive goal.
Tax revenue increased in line with the acceleration in the rate of activity and improved tax collection, but total central government revenues rose only slightly.
Total expenditure did not show any variation from the previous year, but did change substantially in structure: while primary expenditure fell significantly, interest payments went up considerably in nominal terms to stand at almost 6% of GDP, through the combined effect of the rise in the exchange rate and the expansion of foreign- currency debt.
Therefore, in 2003 interest payments accounted for more than one fifth of total expenditure, while wages represented 17% and investments, only 5%.
Transfers to the social security system to balance its accounts were the item with the strongest impact: 37% of total expenditure.
The higher revenues and stable expenditure made it possible to raise the primary surplus to a level close to the target of 3% of GDP agreed upon with IMF; this placed the consolidated deficit within the planned range.
To finance the deficit, the authorities turned to currency issues, loans from international institutions and short­ term debt issues denominated in local and foreign currency on the domestic market.
In October Uruguay rejoined the international credit market with the issue of a three-year bond payable in dollars but denominated in inflation-indexed units, at an annual interest rate of Under the current free exchange-rate system, monetary policy assumed a more important position.
In the first half of the year excess liquidity was absorbed through monetary regulation bills.
Once it became evident that the demand for money was growing and that expectations were clearly improving, expansionary monetary policy measures were adopted in the second half of the year.
Credit, however, remained tight, given savers’ preference for demand -o r very short-term- deposits and the weakness of much of the banking system.
Investment shrank again, this time by more than 10%, while consumption remained at low levels in a context of reduced public spending and scarce domestic credit.
In annual terms, agricultural production was the only sector to show vigorous expansion.
In a context of listless private consumption, manufacturing was sluggish and construction continued to show signs of recession, with a level of activity equivalent to only 60% of the maximum recorded in 1999; services also declined.
This bleak picture looks very different, however, when viewed in terms of the behaviour of GDP during the year.
The sharp contraction in activity in the second half of 2002 had resulted in a negative carry-over of seven percentage points for the m easurem ent of GDP in 2003.
Nevertheless growth in the fourth quarter of the year was projected to be substantial enough (more than 10%) to offset the considerable negative overhang from the previous year.
The upturn, which was based on the use of idle installed capacity, was led by agricultural and agro-industrial production, nascent import substitution and tourism-related activities.
Joblessness decreased as the level of activity picked up, but at the end of 2003 it was still high, affecting 16% of the EAP.
This decline in unemployment was due to an increase in labour demand and a simultaneous decrease in the labour supply attributable to the persistent outflow of migrants, which had been observed since the beginning o f 2002, and the im pact o f the “discouragement effect” on job-seeking.
Increases in public- and private-sector wages were much lower than inflation, which meant a further setback in real wages, this time of more than 10%.
In a context of shifting relative prices and rising international prices for Uruguay’s main exports, wholesale prices rose faster, by 20% for the year.
Merchandise exports forged ahead starting in the middle of the year and are estimated to have expanded by around 13% in 2003.
Tourism earnings also increased, boosted by the higher real exchange rate and growing demand from neighbouring countries.
After showing negative growth in the first six months, imports showed signs of recovery which, together with the increase in the oil bill due to the rise in international prices, resulted in an 8% expansion for the year as a whole.
Consequently, both the balance-of-payments current account and the capital account recorded a surplus and international reserves expanded, making up for part of the considerable loss registered the previous year.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 95 In 2003 Venezuela continued ensnared in a complex economic and political situation.
Overall, economic activity dropped by about 9.5% during the year, with steep slumps in both household consumption and investment, of about 45% in the latter case.
The strike called by opposition political parties and business groups, which lasted from December 2002 until early February 2003, led to sharp drops in the production and export of petroleum and a strong contraction in the other sectors of the economy.
As a result, economic activity dropped heavily in the first quarter (-27.6%), while petroleum activity fell nearly 50% below its level of the same period of 2002.
In the second quarter, by contrast, a partial recovery in petroleum activity enabled the economy to grow in relative terms, but the other sectors did not bounce back at the same rate.
All this has translated into high levels of unemployment -around 18%- and informality, as well as a steep decline in real wages.
The current account surplus was larger than in 2002, mainly as a result of a plunge in imports.
The fiscal deficit stayed close to its prior-year level of about 3% of GDP.
The outlook for 2004 points to a significant upturn in growth, mainly because the first quarter of 2003 represents a very low standard of comparison.
The prospects for a settlement of the complex political situation are not particularly clear, and it is possible that a referendum may be held in early 2004.
Against this backdrop, the main feature of fiscal policy was an expansion in current spending, mostly in the form of transfers to public-sector agencies.
This was sustained by increased domestic borrowing and a rise in the foreign exchange profits generated by international reserves.
In early 2003 the authorities adjusted the national budget by extending the bank debit tax and changing the VAT rate, which at the beginning of the year was set at 8% for certain food items, air transport and medical and dental services.
Given the contraction in economic activity, however, revenues from those sources have dipped.
This reflected an upswing in production after the stoppage that took place early in the year, although output is still trailing its levels of the third quarter of 2002, and a rise in the price of the Venezuelan crude basket.
The performance of oil revenues is significant because they represent a little under half of all fiscal income.
The Macroeconomic Stabilization Investment Fund (FIEM) was used less and less as a source of financing in 2003 as its resources declined and were not replenished w ith fresh contributions.
The Fund’s resources slid from US$ 2.8 billion in early 2003 to US$ 700 million at the end of the year, following withdrawals allowed under legislative amendments adopted at the beginning of the year.
This is indicative of lower demand for credit on the part of economic agents, although the financial system displayed a steady increase in monetary liquidity (M2) throughout the year. 9 In this regard, the measures the authorities took were ineffective as mechanisms to kick-start the economy.
Given the impossibility of investing in the foreign exchange market and the slack demand for credit, banking institutions purchased a large volume of government securities.
These instruments represent a little over half the asset portfolio held by commercial banks.
As a result of the large capital outflow recorded in 2002 and the stoppage in petroleum activity late that year and early the next, foreign exchange became scarce and the bolívar therefore devalued heavily.
In February 2003 the government responded by implementing strict exchange controls, setting the exchange rate at 1,600 bolívares to the dollar and prohibiting the purchase of dollars within the country.
The resumption of petroleum production and exports, in combination with the foreign exchange controls, made for a considerable expansion of international reserves, which rose from US$ 14 billion at the beginning of 2003 to close to US$ 21 billion in December.
The Foreign Exchange Board (CADIVI), a public agency responsible for the foreign exchange supply, maintained tight exchange controls throughout the year but gradually increased the amount of foreign exchange available to agents to meet their external obligations, especially import payments.
Economic activity continued to decline in 2003 in petroleum and non-petroleum sectors alike, accumulating a drop of 9.5%.
The stoppage called at the end of 2002 lasted until February 2003, causing sharp contractions in both oil production and exports and 9 M2 refers to bills and coins in circulation plus sight, savings and time deposits.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 97 across the other segments of economic activity.
As a result, GDP plunged by 18.5% in the first half of the year.
Petroleum production trended back upward throughout 2003, but did not return to pre-stoppage levels.
Non-petroleum activities, which represent around 75% of the total, were affected by price and exchange­ rate controls, with the private sector hit by foreign exchange shortages.
The worst affected non-petroleum sectors were construction, commerce and manufacturing, which contracted by 56.1%, 27.2% and 23.8%, respectively, in the first three quarters of 2003 compared to the same period of 2002.
This was attributable to slack domestic demand, a drop of around 8% in private consumption and a slump of almost 47% in investment in the first three quarters o f2003 in comparison to the year-earlier period.
As a complement to the controls implemented in the foreign exchange market, the government imposed price controls on basic consum er goods and services, encompassing more than half the items included in the CPI.
A number of business sectors argued that the official prices were too low to allow them to continue producing and supplying the market and that production costs would exceed sale prices.
The government therefore had to begin directly importing and distributing some basic products in order to prevent shortages.
In these circumstances, the cumulative CPI in the period January-November 2003 displayed a rise of 26.1%.
An alternative index prepared by the central bank, which measures the prices of goods and services not subject to price controls, showed a price rise of 35.4% in the same period, however.
Although wages increased in nominal terms in relation to 2002 -the general index, which includes both the public and private sectors, was 7.6% higher in the period January-September 2003 than in the same period of 2002- they declined sharply in real terms.
Moreover, the downturn in productive activity impinged on unemployment and informal-sector employment.
Informal-sector workers, it should be noted, represent over 50% of the total.
With regard to the external sector, petroleum exports made a partial recovery in the second quarter of the year after dropping steeply in the first.
Although growth in the volume of petroleum exports picked up speed as the year went on, it was not enough to prevent a decline in average annual output.
The average price of the Venezuelan crude basket moved up, largely offsetting the decline in the volume of crude exports, but petroleum exports nevertheless dropped slightly, as did non- traditional exports.
The foreign exchange shortage, foreign exchange controls and the sharp decline in domestic demand were reflected in a strong contraction in imports, which in July 2003 were down by 46% with respect to the same period of 2002.
They revived somewhat during the rest of 2003, however, ending the year with a value decrease of 27%.
This sharp decline in imports, together with a 5% drop in the value of merchandise exports, translated into an expansion of the trade surplus and the current account surplus, to about US$ 9.85 billion (12.9% of GDP) in the latter case.
Prelim inary overview o f the econom ies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 99 According to official estimates, in 2003 gross domestic product increased by 5.6% in real terms (4.4% excluding the high-technology industry).
This increase was more than double the growth rate predicted at the beginning of the year.
The rise was mainly due to the major increase in exports, the recovery of the agricultural sector, the expansion of construction, transport, telecommunications and energy activities and the upturn in international tourism.
The buoyancy of exports was based largely on sales from the free trade zones (especially microprocessors) and exports of agricultural products, whereas production sectors geared to meeting domestic demand recorded lower rates of expansion.
Under the monetary programme for 2003, economic policy focused on controlling inflation and reducing the fiscal deficit and the balance-of-payments current account deficit.
Fiscal policy continued to revolve around ways of addressing the chronic fiscal deficit and guaranteeing the financial sustainability of the public sector.
The Legislative Assembly discussed a fiscal reform proposal without reaching a decision on the matter.
It is estimated that the reduced overall public sector deficit (4.1% of GDP) will exceed the initial target (3.1%).
Although the central government deficit (2.8%) will be lower than initially predicted (3.1%) as a result of the positive effects of the fiscal contingency plan and the containment of public spending, the rest of the non-financial public sector will post a surplus (0.2%) smaller than estimated (1.2%).
This is mainly because the Costa Rican Electricity Institute will run a deficit and the Costa Rican Social Security Fund will probably run a smaller surplus, since both institutions made higher investment outlays in 2003.
At the same time, the central bank’s deficit will increase slightly (1.5%) owing to its greater money absorption needs in the wake of the unexpected increase in international reserves.
In January 2003 the country issued US$ 450 million in bonds and placed them on the international market.
Of this amount, US$ 200 million was used to pay off a previous bond issue and the remainder was used to finance most fiscal requirements.
The imbalance in public finances is one of the factors behind the relatively high interest rates that encourage inflows of flight capital and raise the cost of open-m arket operations, thereby reducing the effectiveness of monetary policy.
The central bank continued to im plem ent a cau tious m onetary policy aim ed prim arily at maintaining the previous years’ results in terms of macroeconomic stability.
During the fist quarter the issuing authority gradually increased the legal minimum reserve requirement from 5% to 10%, which cut down on the amount of resources that banks could use for loans and made it possible to reduce the losses entailed by interest payments on monetary stabilization bonds.
The central bank also decided to reduce the benchmark interest rates it offers on its bonds.
Thus, the basic deposit rate (which is the market reference rate) dropped from 17.5% to 14%.
As a result of the implementation of prudent fiscal and monetary policies, credit and liquidity grew moderately, interest rates tended to decline, inflation rose in line w ith predictions and the local currency experienced a real depreciation against the dollar which, though slight, was greater than the depreciation of the currencies of Costa Rica’s trading partners.
The buoyancy of GDP was based on a striking increase in exports, which offset the slump in the domestic market.
The increase in GDP reflected the expansion of manufacturing activities (due to the perform ance of free-zone firms, including high­ technology firm s), construction , transport and telecommunications (particularly mobile telephones and Internet service), as well as the recovery of the agricultural sector and an upturn in international tourism.
Particular mention should be made of the recovery of agriculture, which bounced back from its 2% downturn in 2002 mainly because of increased exports of non- traditional products, particularly pineapples, melons and flowers and foliage.
Other contributing factors included increases in milk, fruit and vegetable production and in banana and coffee exports.
In November the consumer price index was up by 9.3% in comparison to the same month of the previous year.
This was close to the 10% target set by the monetary programme.
Contributing factors included m onetary policy, the partia l external financing of the fiscal deficit and the low price of certain imports, particularly capital goods.
To a certain extent, these factors offset the inflationary pressure generated by increases in the price of hydrocarbons (particularly at the beginning of the year), utility rates, the devaluation rate and the fiscal deficit.
Employment increased significantly (3.4%), but the high participation rate pushed up the nationwide rate of open unem ploym ent from 6.4% to 6.7%, while urban unemployment stayed practically constant.
Adjustments in the nominal minimum wage barely compensated for the increase in prices.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit is expected to be equivalent to 5.6% of GDP, which is one percentage point higher than the level estimated in the monetary programme and equal to the level posted in 2002.
The contraction of the trade deficit was due to the significant increase in exports (15%), which exceeded the rise in imports.
This improvement was offset by the widening of the deficit on the income account due to increased repatriation of profits and dividends from foreign direct investment.
However, the greater inflow of external resources was used to finance the current account deficit, pay off US$ 86 million of the central bank’s foreign-currency liabilities and accumulate foreign assets worth US$ 35 million.
Export performance was driven mainly by exports of non-traditional products such as microprocessors produced by the Intel plant, medical equipment and pharmaceuticals, in addition to exports of the aforementioned agricultural products.
The growth of imports was concentrated in capital goods and raw materials.
In 2003 the Salvadoran economy was once again in a cyclical downturn.
Gross domestic product increased by 2%, which meant that per capita GDP remained virtually stagnant for the fourth consecutive year.
On the one hand, the economy benefited from increased external demand for maquila exports.
Family remittances also continued to rise and represented 14% of GDP, thereby boosting private consumption.
On the other hand, there was a fall in public investment resulting from the virtual termination of the extraordinary investment programme for repairing the damage caused by the earthquakes that occurred in 2001.
Despite abundant liquidity and low interest rates, private investment showed only a slight upturn, partly because of uncertainty in the run-up to elections.
The increase in tax revenue and the decrease in capital expenditure brought down the central government deficit to 2.1% of GDP, although public borrowing rose to worrying levels.
The consolidation of the dollarization process continued to encourage reductions in nominal deposit and lending rates and in year-on-year inflation, which was about 2.5% in December.
The current account deficit shot up to 4.1% of GDP because of a 15% increase in the trade gap.
Official estimates for 2004 predict a 2.5% rise in GDP and a fiscal deficit of 1% of GDP Public finances were characterized by a smaller fiscal deficit and a considerable increase in public borrowing.
Excluding social security liabilities, which are recorded below the line in the public accounts, the deficit of the non-financial public sector was 2.4% of GDP, or one percentage point lower than the previous year’s level.
This improvement was the result o f bo th higher incom e and low er expenditure.
The central government reduced its deficit to 2.1% of GDP, which was one percentage point below the 2002 figure.
Tax revenue climbed by almost 11% as a result of increased VAT and income tax receipts and auditing programmes.
Although current expenditure increased owing to a rise in consumption expenditure, this was offset by a downturn in capital outlays, mainly reconstruction spending and capital transfers.
Total public debt represented 47% of GDP as a result o f the refinancing of short-term debt, which was converted to long-term liabilities.
This exceeded the prudential level of 40% set by the Ministry of Finance.
The external public debt, at US$ 4.6 billion, represented approximately 30.3% of GDP.
By late 2003, the consolidation of the dollarization process had brought the balance of colones in circulation to 42 million (12% of the notes and coins in the public’s possession) and had accentuated recent trends towards an unprecedented reduction in inflation and the convergence of interest rates with those in the United States.
Nominal deposit rates dropped to 3.4% and lending rates, to 6.6%, which resulted in a 7.7% expansion of credit to the private sector.
The Central Reserve Bank’s net international reserves cover the issuance of currency and liquidity reserves and provide foreign-exchange backing for obligations to the public and to banks.
Despite these achievements, the performance of real investment and capital flows was not encouraging.
Indeed, the slow economic growth of recent years is explained in part by the slow development of investment (less than 18% of GDP) and by the fall in foreign direct investment at a time of negative growth in total factor productivity and worsening terms of trade.
The first priority of the government’s trade policy continued to be the negotiations for a free trade agreement between Central America and the United States.
Given the progress made, the agreement is expected to be signed at the end of the year or at the beginning of 2004.
El Salvador also continued to participate in the talks on the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA).
Economic activity was driven mainly by private consumption and, to a lesser extent, by exports of goods and services and gross domestic investment.
In terms of supply, imports of goods and services expanded by 5.4%.
The sectors that grew and had a positive effect on GDP were manufacturing (2.8%), commerce (1.1%), finance (2.8%) and transport (3.1%).
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 103 international market.
The country’s stalled economic growth in recent years is attributable in part to a systematic deterioration of the terms of trade.
Inflation as measured by the consumer price index showed a year-on-year rate of 2.6% in November 2003, and is expected to show a 12-month variation of 2.5% up to December.
In the second quarter minimum wages in commerce and services, industry and maquila activities posted increases - the first since 1998 - ranging The balance-of-payments current account deficit rose to 4.1% of GDP, which was a significant increase over the 2002 figure of 2.7%.
That figure was slightly lower than the negative balance of goods and services, and represented more than three times the current account deficit.
The most noteworthy aspects of the performance of exports (6.3%) were the increase in sales of non-traditional products and the strengthening of maquila sales.
Exports to Central America (23%) were up by 3%, whereas exports to the rest of the world climbed by 7.4%.
Traditional exports slid by 10% overall, especially because of reduced sales of sugar (-21%) and coffee (-7.2%).
Imports surged by 9.6%, with most of the increase accounted for by imports of intermediate goods for manufacturing (10%) and of consumer goods (13%).
The trade deficit therefore widened by more than 15% and came to represent 15% of GDP Foreign direct investment, which was down from the previous year, amounted to some US$ 140 million and was directed mainly at the maquila, fishing, finance and electricity sectors.
Guatemala’s gross domestic product grew by 2.4% in 2003, so that per capita GDP contracted for the second consecutive year.
These figures were in line with the targets agreed upon with IMF under the extension of the standby arrangement approved in June 2003, which was mainly intended to support economic stabilization.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit was US$ 1.1 billion, similar to the figure for 2002, and equivalent to 4.5% of GDP.1 The deficit on trade in goods and services stayed close to its level of the previous year, at about US$ 2.8 billion.
The increase in transfers from abroad, mostly remittances, offset the increase in the deficit on the income account.
Higher levels of external borrowing were reflected in a US$ 380 million increase in international reserves. 1 In 2002 the balance-of-payments current account deficit represented about 5% o f GDP.
The agreement with IMF was the key reason why economic policy did not neglect monetary and price stabilization, despite the pressures resulting from the holding of presidential elections.
The low level of investment and sluggish job creation, however, are a cause of concern, and were mainly due to the downturn in construction, the virtual stagnation of manufacturing and difficulties in agricultural restructuring.
In 2004, if the United States economy remains buoyant, the country expects to achieve GDP growth of 2.6%, annual inflation of 4% to 6% and a fiscal deficit of between 2% and 3% of GDP.
M acroeconomic policy reflected the standby arrangement signed with IMF at the end of March 2002.
This agreement expired on 31 March 2003 and was extended for another nine months as from 18 June in order to support a m acroeconom ic stabilization programme.
The targets for 2003 were to reduce cumulative annual inflation to between 4% and 6%, increase international reserves by US$ 250 million, limit the combined public sector deficit to 1.7% of GDP and raise social spending to more than 5% of GDP (the 2002 target), with economic growth of 2.4%.
Resistance to tax increases on the part of some business groups hindered the management of public finances.
Other adverse factors were the delay in the placement of Peace Bonds on the international market to finance commitments undertaken in the Peace A greem ents, special outlays related to army dem obilization, com pensation payments to some 250,000 former combatants and the strengthening of the Savings Protection Fund and the National Mortgage Bank.
Nevertheless, it is expected that the authorities will be able to limit the central government deficit to 1.6% of GDP and the consolidated public sector deficit to 1.7% of GDP, based on a tax ratio of 10.7% of GDP The fiscal deficit reflects the fact that the 13.9% increase in central government expenditure outpaced the increase in revenues (8.7%).
Although interest rates continued to fall, ample spreads kept lending rates at around 10% in real terms; deposit rates, meanwhile, were barely positive.
Accordingly, credit to the private sector expanded by only 5.7% in nominal terms, which represents a decline in real terms.
Under the floating exchange-rate regime -w ith occasional intervention by the Central Bank- the quetzal showed a nominal depreciation against the dollar.
By October 2003 the local currency had depreciated by 5.7% in nominal terms and 2.8% in real terms in relation to the dollar.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 105 GDP growth in 2003 (2.2% in 2002) was driven by consumption (3.5%), both public (4.5%) and private (3.5%), the latter stimulated by a sharp rise in wages; this combined with lower import growth of 2.4%, compared to the 2002 figure of 8.4%.
Gross fixed capital investment fell by 0.6% and inventories, by 15.9%, which counteracted their increase in 2002.
The ratio of gross fixed investment to GDP in 2003 was thus less Significant features of productive activity were the decline in construction activity (4.3%), the slowdown in the agricultural sector (1.1%, compared to 1.8% in 2002) and stagnation in manufacturing (0.7%).
While mining was more dynamic, it too lost momentum (3.4%, compared to 9.8% in 2002).
In basic services, transport and communications continued to increase (5.5%), in the latter case because of the growth in cellular telephone services.
Other services grew by 2.9% thanks to higher expenditure on government services (5%) and a moderate upturn in financial services (2.7%).
In view of this sluggish expansion, open unemployment stood at 3.4% and underem ploym ent, at 16% of the economically active population.
The agricultural minimum wage went up by 14% in nominal terms and 8% in real terms, while other minimum wages rose by 16% (10% in real terms).
In view of high import levels in 2002, however, the deficit on trade in goods and services was similar to the previous year’s figure, at around US$ 2.94 billion.
The rise in net payments of profits and dividends (21.6%) was offset by the net inflow of current transfers, mainly family remittances, which increased by 9% in 2003.
The current account deficit thus remained at about the same level as in 2002, and declined from 5.1% of GDP in Merchandise exports were up by 6%, driven by non-traditional products (12.4%), in particular clothing (54.7%), fruit and fruit preparations (42.4%) and food products (34.2%).
The value of trad itional exports grew by 5.1% owing to the significant rise in the price of oil, sales of which were up by 18%, and in coffee exports (21%), which rose in both value and volume as a result of improvements in highland crops.
In contrast, declines were observed in exports of cardamom (1.7%), bananas (6.4%) and sugar Imports lost momentum, growing by only 2.4%, compared to 8.5% in 2002.
Imports from Central America were down by 0.6%, while purchases from the rest of the world slowed down (2.8%, compared to 12.3% in 2002).
Imports of capital goods fell by 5% and those of consumer goods remained stagnant (0.8%), while imports of intermediate goods rebounded by 7.4%, in view of higher fuel and lubricant prices (34.7%).
The increase in external borrowing, due in part to a government bond issue in the amount of some US$ 300 million, and inflows of short-term capital boosted international reserves by US$ 380 million, bringing the balance to US$ 2.75 billion.
After two years of stagnation and decline in per capita output, the Honduran economy showed signs of recovery in 2003.
GDP grew by 3%, raising per capita output by 0.4%.2 This upturn, which was due to the recovery of both domestic and external demand, was not, however, sufficient to change the unfavourable trends observed in the labour market.
The agreement would not only send positive signals to investors regarding the credibility of the country’s macroeconomic policies, but would also provide additional resources from m ultilateral institutions.
Moreover, it would enable Honduras to reach the completion point under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative, a key objective in the authorities’ efforts to fight poverty, since it would mean external debt relief of more than US$ 900 million over the next 15 years (US$ 550 million in net present value).
Those resources would be used to combat poverty under the poverty reduction strategy that began to be implemented in 2002.
If external demand continues to improve, driven by growth in the United States (the country’s main trading partner), Honduras could achieve growth of close to 4% in 2004, in a more stable macroeconomic environment.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit would continue to increase, reaching about 6.6% of GDP. because of higher import levels resulting from the upturn in investment.
The biggest question mark is the political viability of the fiscal adjustment, as government initiatives in this area prompted considerable criticism in the previous biennium.
The central bank’s monetary programme for 2003 foresaw growth of between 3% and 3.5%, together with annual inflation of 7.5% to 8% and a central government fiscal deficit of 3.5% of GDP.
The Fiscal Responsibility Act now under discussion is the current administration’s third reform in two years, as the previous two reforms yielded much less income than expected.
Strong opposition from business groups prevented the implementation of some of the provisions of the Tax Equity Act adopted in April.
The government suspended the provision for the withholding of 2.5% of income tax, one of the pillars of the reform.
In the last quarter the authorities passed a general tax amnesty in order to regularize the situation of many taxpayers.
Total central government income increased from expenditure rose by one point to 25.3% of GDP.
An unexpected increase in outlays was posted, mainly because of an agricultural debt forgiveness law passed by the Congress at a cost equivalent to 1.2% of GDP.
As a result, the fiscal deficit exceeded projections, reaching In the first three quarters monetary policy focused on pumping liquidity into the economy to produce a recovery through a reduction in interest rates, in the context of a gradually declining inflation rate and a stable exchange rate.
Thus, the expansion of the three monetary aggregates until September, at rates higher than 10%, was attenuated by means of open-market operations in local currency and dollar-denominated certificates.
The reduction in interest rates, together with brighter prospects for the recovery of external demand, led to a 10% increase in credit demand up to September.
Meanwhile, a series of mergers and acquisitions took place in the banking sector, as part of a turbulent consolidation process that has included various liquidations in recent years.
Exchange-rate policy has been geared to keeping the rate competitive and constant in real terms relative to the currencies of the country’s main trading partners.
The lempira depreciated by 5% over the 12 months ending in October under the system of daily public auctions of foreign exchange, meaning that the real exchange rate stayed practically the same.
Trade policy revolved around the negotiations on a free trade agreement between Honduras, together with the other Central American countries, and the United States; the process was completed within one year as foreseen.
Early in the year Nicaragua temporarily suspended its 35% tariff surcharge on Honduran exports, which it had applied since December 1999 in retaliation for Honduras’s conclusion of a maritime border treaty with Colombia.
The 3% expansion of economic activity was driven by both domestic and external demand.
Investment rallied (15%) after three years of decline, while consumption recorded an increase of 2%.
The fastest-growing sector was construction, which expanded by about 20%, almost offsetting the sector’s contraction over the previous biennium.
Also favourable was the performance of mining (10%), mainly in the quarrying segm ent.
M anufacturing im proved significantly (3.7%), thanks to the recovery of maquila activities.
The performance of agriculture was uneven: there were downswings in some sectors, such as coffee, bananas and eggs, and upswings in others, such as basic grains, palm and meat.
Electricity, gas and water production increased by 6.2%, almost doubling the growth posted by transport, storage and communications.
Commerce, restaurants and hotels were up by 3.5%, while public administration retreated slightly owing to the reduction in central government expenditure.
Consumer prices continued to fall, so that inflation at the end of 2003 (7.2%) was lower than it had been at the end of 2002, as expected.
Wholesale prices increased by 5%, exceeding the previous year’s rate but still trailing the growth of consumer prices.
Minimum wages went up by an average of 5.6% in real terms.
Owing to the time lag between the onset of economic recovery and improvements in the labour market, open urban unemployment rose from 6.1% in 2002 to 7.7% in 2003.
The maquila industry, however, added about 15,000 new jobs during the year, which augurs well for the future.
The current account deficit ballooned from an average of US$ 250 million over the last four years to US$ 450 million in 2003, as the trade gap widened by nearly US$ 300 million.
Exports of traditional goods continued to decrease, in contrast with non-traditional exports, whose value is now double that of traditional exports.
There was an across-the-board recovery in merchandise imports, particularly purchases of machinery for thermoelectric plants and oil and fuel purchases.
Remittances increased by approximately 15%, and to a large extent moderated the current deficit.
The financial account balance of US$ 450 million was sufficient to finance the current account deficit.
Foreign direct investment surged by 50%; this rebound was related to the expansion of maquila activities, partly in anticipation of the free trade agreement with the United States and partly in response to that country’s economic recovery.
Net international reserves declined slightly to a level equivalent to four months’ worth of imports.
In 2003 the Mexican economy was again characterized by low inflation and the disciplined management of public finances, but failed to break out of the low-growth cycle that had begun in 2001.
Both the annual variation in the consumer price index (4% up to November) and the fiscal deficit (0.6% of GDP) were in line with the official targets, but the country’s real GDP expanded by a mere 1.2%.
Gross investment and non-oil exports showed downturns, while public and private consumption were slightly up.
As a result, for the third year in a row, per capita GDP declined and open unemployment and part-time employment increased.
On the one hand, oil prices were high -exceeding official projections- and interest rates came down.
On the other, the economic recovery in the United States gave very little impetus to Mexican exports, which stalled as low productivity in the manufacturing sector eroded the international competitiveness of the country’s products, especially against Asian competitors.
Another disturbing development was a drop in capital formation, also for the third year running.
This was attributable to disagreem ent over the design and im plem entation of economic reforms and to the reduced availability of bank credit for productive activities.
As a result, the business climate was clouded by uncertainty and a shortage of financing.
Although fiscal, energy and labour reform s came up for discussion, no consensus was reached on their definition or implementation.
While there is general agreement on the need to strengthen public finances, guarantee the long-term supply of electric power and modernize labour laws, neither the Congress nor the general public has been able to agree on the best strategies for attaining those ends.
The proposed tax reform has been particularly controversial. 5 5 The government submitted a proposal to reduce the rate o f the value added tax (VAT) from 15% to 10% and to extend it to all goods and services, including food and medicine, which are currently exempted from this tax.
I t also proposed the imposition o f an additional 2% tax on sales and services to the public, which would be absorbed by the state governments.
The extraordinary inflow of revenue from high oil prices and the decline in interest rates made it possible to meet the fiscal deficit target (0.6% of GDP).6 The consequent availability of additional resources gave the authorities a degree of leeway in public expenditure.
Current expenditure and investment were up by 9.6% and 6.3%, respectively, in the first nine months of 2003 in comparison to the same period of 2002. 7 Monetary policy continued to be geared to keeping inflation low in the framework of an exchange-rate regime in which the peso’s value against the dollar was allowed to float.
In the first quarter of 2003 efforts were made to stave off the inflationary pressures that had emerged in 2002.
The success achieved in containing inflation, together with concerns about sluggish economic activity, paved the way for a loosening of monetary policy.
Starting in April interest rates tumbled and the expansion of liquidity proceeded at rates similar to those of 2002.
M onetary m anagem ent had to contend with speculative movements that set off considerable exchange-rate fluctuations at different times during the year.
In late November the exchange rate exceeded 11.20 pesos to the dollar, and the currency’s average nominal depreciation over the year was estimated at 13% (or 10% in real terms).
The m ain m onetary policy instrum ent for influencing nominal interest rates continued to be the so-called corto, or target level for commercial banks’ cumulative monthly balances in their current accounts at the Banco de México.
In the first quarter the corto was raised from 475 million to 700 million pesos per month, and in April this measure was replaced with a daily target balance of 25 million pesos (equivalent to 700 million pesos over 28 days).
Another factor that influenced monetary policy was the rapid build-up of international reserves in the initial months of the year.
In May the oil price hike boosted these reserves to a record level of US$ 55 billion; at the close of the year they amounted to US$ 50 billion.
To limit quasi-fiscal losses due to the carrying cost inherent in the build-up of reserves,8 the Banco de México introduced an ad hoc mechanism to try to slow down the rate of accumulation.
In view of low international interest rates, external liabilities were paid off ahead of time and new debt was incurred on better terms.
At the close of 2003 total public debt was equivalent to 26.5% of GDP, a few points higher than its level of 12 months earlier.
Part of the increase was due to the peso’s nominal depreciation against the dollar.
After picking up by 2.3% in the first quarter, economic activity lost momentum for the rest of the year.
Construction was the fastest- growing activity (3.4%, compared to 1.7% in 2002).
Basic services rebounded somewhat (2.5%), driven by public expenditure and private consumption.
In the country’s ailing manufacturing industry, the performance hotly debated in the Congress, w ith no sign o f convergence among the three major political parties, the tax on food and medicine being the main sticking point. 6 Public budget revenues rose by 4.7% to an amount equivalent to 23.3% o f GDP (22.6% in 2002).
Rises of 2% in both private and government consumption prevented per capita GDP from sagging even further.
Inflows of family remittances and credit schemes for the purchase of consumer goods helped to bring about this result.
Housing construction increased as well, thanks to an upturn in mortgage financing.
Between January and August gross fixed capital formation retreated by nearly 1%, as the construction sector’s renewed vigour (3.3%), primarily in the area of public works, did not offset the drop-off in machinery and equipment purchases (-5.3%).
A rate this high would reverse the downturn in per capita GDP that began in 2001.
To speed up growth, the country must take steps to revitalize investment and boost manufacturing productivity and international competitiveness.
Also important is the achievement of consensus on a tax reform that will raise tax revenues as a proportion of GDP, reduce their dependence on oil earnings and move towards the design of public budgets with medium- and long-term time-frames.
The country’s slack economic growth drove up the average rate of open unemployment (from 2.7% in 2002 to 3.2% in 2003), slowed down formal-sector employment and produced an increase in underemployment.
The number of people working in the informal sector was estimated at over 20 million, which is half the economically active population.
Employment in maquila activities continued to shrink, as the number ofjobs in this sector has dwindled by nearly 30% in the past three years.
By the end of the third quarter real wages had dipped by 1% in the maquila export industry and had risen by 1.5% and 4% in m anufacturing and commerce, respectively.
Productivity growth in the maquila industry, manufacturing and commerce failed to shake off its lethargy of the past five years, amounting to just 1%, 1.2% and 1.5%, respectively, as of July.
Modest increases in the value of exports (2.7%) and im ports (1%) had the effect o f narrow ing the merchandise trade deficit.
Up to October oil exports had swelled by 30%, but manufactures, which represent 86% of the total, had retreated (-1.6%), including both maquila (-2%) and non-maquila (-1.2%) exports.
These inflows, which were equivalent to about 3% of private consumption, exceeded inflows of foreign direct investment, estimated at US$ 11 billion (US$ 14.4 billion in 2002).
In terms o f traditional export products such as textiles, clothing and footwear, as well as more sophisticated manufactures such as electronics and automobile parts, some Chinese products are partially displacing Mexican ones.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 111 Foreign direct investment (FDI) is still one of the most important components of the capital account, but it brought in a smaller net inflow of foreign exchange in 2003 than in 2002.
In 2003 most FDI was funnelled into the production of internationally tradable goods: manufacturing received 54% of the total, followed by financial services (21%), com m erce (13%) and transport and communications (5.5%).
The United States was once again the primary source of such investment.
Despite increased consumer demand and a rise in public investment, GDP increased by only 2.3% in 2003 owing to the fall in private investment and the virtual stagnation of exports.
Given the rate of population growth, per capita GDP slipped by 0.4%, bringing the cumulative downturn for the biennium 2002-2003 to 2.3%.
Thus, as in 2002, the growth forecasts set out in the Strengthened Growth and Poverty Reduction Strategy did not materialize.
Economic policy was formulated within the framework of the financial support programme signed with IMF in December 2002.
The fiscal deficit was reduced from 4.1% to 2.3%, which made it easier to achieve monetary policy targets concerning price and exchange-rate stability.
The fall in the balance-of-payments current account deficit, combined with capital inflows, helped to strengthen the international reserve position.
The country’s fulfilment of its commitments with IMF will increase its chances of reaching the “completion point” under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative by the end of the year.
This would afford it debt relief amounting to 80% of the external public debt, estimated at US$ 6.4 billion.
In 2003 the country pursued its macroeconomic adjustment process in an effort to reduce the extreme financial and external vulnerability caused by a growing fiscal deficit, mounting liabilities, an increase in the central bank’s quasi-fiscal deficit, a strong upswing in domestic public debt and declining net international reserves.
In order to permit fiscal targets to be reached and to reinforce the poverty reduction strategy, in February 2003 the National Assembly adopted an amendment to the law providing for the expansion of the tax base.
In addition, at the end of April it passed reforms of the tax system and general budget for 2003.
This tax reform, whose object is to improve the tax system, includes tax incentives to promote exports.
Higher budgetary allocations for various social sectors and an upturn in investment in infrastructure were also approved.
As a result of the curbing of public expenditure and increased fiscal revenues, the central governm ent’s deficit narrowed from 4.1% of GDP in 2002 to 2.3% in 2003.
The tighter fiscal policy was designed in conjunction with a looser monetary policy.
The main aims were to ensure that international reserves remained at a level conducive to the maintenance of exchange-rate stability as an anchor against inflation, and to reduce domestic debt with a view to increasing liquidity in the banking sector and thus narrowing interest-rate spreads.
In the first half of the year the reserve requirement was maintained at 19.3%, of which three percentage points bore interest.
The central bank decided to gradually reduce the interest-bearing portion starting in July, so that in December the reserve requirement stood at 16.3%.
In the middle of the year the central bank’s debt with private banks was renegotiated for the first time.
Under the agreement, interest and principal payments on the negotiable investment certificates acquired by the main creditor bank were rescheduled for 10 years at an interest rate of 8.4%.
As a result of this operation, the central bank will defer payments amounting to US$ 250 m illion in 2004, thereby improving its reserve position and making the tax programme more flexible, in the interests of production and social programmes.
After three straight years in which growth slowed considerably, GDP increased by about 2.3%.
As exports virtually stood still, the modest upturn in domestic demand (1%) was due to increased public investment (9.2%) and consumption (3%).
Consumption was boosted mainly by increases in family remittances, real wages and consumer and housing loans, given that private investment spending was down by 17.6%.
On the supply side, the increase in GDP largely reflected the higher value added of construction, manufacturing (particularly in free trade zones) and transport, as well as a moderate recovery in the agricultural sector.
The poor performance of agricultural production for export was once more offset by the increased output o f basic grains, thanks to technical assistance programmes.
Services expanded at a rate similar to the one posted the previous year.
Although inflation was over two percentage points higher than its 2002 level, the annual inflation rate (6.5%) is almost in line with the established target.
The rise in prices was due to short-term factors such as higher fuel and transport costs, adjustments in the rates charged for basic services and the effects of the tax reform on production costs, rather than to a deterioration of monetary conditions or an increase in domestic expenditure.
The growth of the country’s economy had a positive effect on employment and average real wages.
The recovery of economic activity was accompanied by a reduction of the external imbalance.
The current account deficit (US$ 800 million) decreased by 9% as a result of the smaller trade deficit and an increase in current transfers (15.5%), especially family remittances, which remained on the upward trend seen in preceding years.
Net capital inflows, including foreign direct investment, made it possible to finance the balance-of- paym ents current account deficit, increase net international reserves and provide stronger foreign- exchange backing for the monetary base.
The value of merchandise exports was up by 1.4%, whereas imports dipped slightly (0.8%).
The increase in exports was due to the upturn in sales of traditional products and the buoyancy of net exports from free trade zones, particularly maquila exports of textiles, since sales of non-traditional products shrank by 4%.
The fall in imports reflected a decline in imports of capital goods, related in part to the completion of the investment cycle for the m odernization and privatization of State enterprises.
Imports of raw materials and intermediate goods, on the other hand, trended upward owing to the increase in purchases of oil, fuels and lubricants and imports of raw materials for industry and construction.
At the same time, purchases of consumer goods rose considerably as credit became more readily available.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 113 The main feature of the Panamanian economy in 2003 was a moderate recovery.
The growth rate of about 3%, after two years in which it fell short of 1%, was higher than expected thanks to domestic demand and international services, and a slight increase is expected for 2004.
Inflation remained low, the fiscal deficit widened slightly and the balance-of-payments current account deficit held steady at around 1% of GDP The government took advantage of the powers granted under the three fiscal laws promulgated in 2002 to define the economic policy framework, and implemented various infrastructure projects that facilitated the recovery of private activity.
Construction grew rapidly as a result of fiscal incentives that entered into force in 2003 and expire in December 2004.
Lastly, tourism posted good results, partly owing to the Republic’s centenary celebration.
Tax revenues were up by 8% thanks to the 2002 tax reform and the recovery of economic activity.
Other revenues contracted, however, so that total central government receipts increased by only 3%.
Expenditure grew by 4%, although debt interest payments expanded by 8% and amounted to almost one quarter of total central government expenditure.
As a result of these trends, the central government deficit was equivalent to slightly more than 2% of GDP. but other public entities had surpluses, so that the negative balance of the non-financial public sector was lower.10 In any case, the constant increase in the fiscal deficit in recent years raises questions, in view of the high level of debt.
Public external debt increased by US$ 140 million, while total public debt rose to US$ 8.64 billion, equivalent to 67% of GDP.
With regard to trade policy, efforts to open external markets to the country’s products continued in 2003 with the signature and entry into force of a free trade agreement with Taiwan Province of China.
Moreover, the authorities formally announced the opening of negotiations for a free trade agreement with the United States.
For the banking sector, 2003 was a year of consolidation after the crisis caused by turbulence in some South Am erican countries in 2002.
Assets contracted slightly owing to the reduction in external assets, but profits, before provisions, grew by around 10%.
Equity continued to grow in a situation of high liquidity, and the non-performing loan portfolio indicator continued to fall, going from 3.1% in 2002 to 2.7%.
The banking system was also restructured, with the exit of various entities based in OECD countries and the entry of Central American banks.
Nominal interest rates on both deposits and loans dipped slightly, following the international pattern, although the lower inflation rate means that they increased slightly in real terms.
Mortgage loans expanded by 8% thanks to the extension of preferential interest rates for 10 years, while business and consumer loans rose more slowly.
The increase in GDP of about 3% reversed the tendency of per capita output to decline over the past two years.
After a three-year slump, investment and the buoyancy of some export sectors once again boosted growth, w hile consum ption grew more moderately.
The performance of the different sectors was uneven, as the upward trend has not yet extended to all of them.
Panama has revised its national accounts estimates, but has not yet published all the results.
Once the new series are published, ECLAC w ill update its statistical database.
The fiscal account figures in nominal terms included in this report coincide w ith those provided by official sources.
Some agricultural activities (fruit and coffee growing) and fishing posted good results, while other segments, such as bananas and livestock, continued to perform poorly.
Mining and quarrying have performed well thanks to the extraordinary upswing (of about 25%) in construction.
This resulted from temporary fiscal incentives for the sector, the start-up of private projects that had been delayed in the previous three years and the launching of various public-sector infrastructure projects.
Manufacturing output diminished, and only cement production managed to avoid an even more serious decline.
The Panama Canal Authority achieved a positive result owing to an increase in tolls, as vessel traffic was down slightly.
Prices followed their traditional pattern of very small variations in comparison to those of other countries, rising by 1.3% between September 2002 and September 2003.
The increase was more pronounced in the first half of the year owing to high international oil prices.
Wages stayed virtually the same in real terms, and the urban unemployment rate was down from 16.5% in 2002 The balance-of-payments current account deficit stood at US$ 130 million, around 1% of GDP.
Inflows to the financial account (including errors and omissions) were not sufficient to cover this deficit, and the overall balance ran a small deficit of US$ 20 million.
Exports contracted as a result of the decline in re-exports from the Colón Free Zone.
This was due to the ra th e r tep id econom ic perfo rm ance of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador, Panama’s main trading partners.
Although prices are still low, the preliminary results for the third quarter show an im provem ent in volum es, w hich may augur a turnaround in free-zone operations.
Non- traditional exports kept up their strong showing of previous years, with sales of watermelon, fish meal and fish oil expanding by more than 50%.
Imports slipped for the fourth consecutive year, again reflecting a downturn in Colón Free Zone purchases, as total imports to the rest of the country scarcely changed.
Within the latter category, imports of petroleum products rose by more than 50%, but imports of other products diminished.
A significant element in the financial account was the inflow of foreign direct investment, estimated at almost US$ 600 million.
This was six times the previous year’s figure, but represents a return to normal, as the 2002 level was exceptionally low.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 115 Bahamas The moderate 2% growth of the Bahamian economy approximated the 2002 rate and reflected the gradual recovery of tourism after its expansion came to a standstill in 2001.
Inflation, at 2.5%, sped up slightly, while the fiscal deficit and the balance-of-payments current account deficit narrowed.
Initial data for fiscal year 2003/2004 show that fiscal performance is continuing to improve, thanks to the efforts made to control expenditure.
A central government deficit of 2.5% of GDP is expected, compared to 3.4% in the previous period.
In September the public debt, 80% of which consists of external debt, reached US$ 2.41 billion, which is 7% higher than the previous year’s level.
To counteract the effects of the increase in international reserves (29% from September 2002 to September 2003) on liquidity, the authorities applied a tight monetary policy, and the net domestic assets of the central bank contracted by 4.1% over the above­ mentioned period.
The limits on commercial bank loans introduced as a precautionary measure after the events of 11 September 2001 were maintained.
As a result, the monetary base contracted by 1.7% and the monetary aggregates M1 and M2 expanded at rates similar to those of the previous year (6% and 2%, respectively, from September 2002 to September 2003).
In accordance with monetary policy, in the same period interest rates rose from 11.4% to 12%.
This dampened the demand for credit, so that by September 2003 credit had grown by just 1.4%, compared to 3.5% twelve months earlier.
GDP grew by 2%, primarily reflecting a moderate recovery in tourism and a weak perform ance in construction.
The number of tourists increased by 2.7% owing to a rise in sea arrivals, since air arrivals stagnated.
The decline in 1 The fiscal year runs from July to June. mortgage loans reflected reduced activity in both commercial and residential construction.
This sector is expected to rally, however, as a result of increased foreign direct investment in tourism infrastructure.
The biggest increases were in recreation, en tertainm ent and health services.
Unemployment is expected to stay at the previous year’s level (9%) in view of the sedate pace of economic growth.
The overall balance of payments result was positive, partly because of the smaller current account deficit produced by the decline in imports, which, in turn, reflected the restrictive monetary policy.
Meanwhile, the surplus on the capital and financial account (including errors and omissions) increased despite short-term capital outflows through the banking system.
As in other Caribbean nations, this result is mainly due to the recovery of tourism after the attacks of 11 September 2001 in the United States.
Inflation rose slightly because of higher fuel costs, and the unemployment rate also rose.
The balance of payments was positive thanks to the capital and financial account surplus, which more than covered the current account deficit.
The outlook for 2004 is that moderate growth will continue and will have a favourable effect on the government accounts.
The fiscal deficit for fiscal year 2002/2003 amounted to 5.4% of GDP because of a marginal decline in income (-0.3%) and a moderate rise in spending (4.1%).2 The spending increase was due to higher expenditure on salaries and wages (5.7%) and to purchases of goods and services (5.9%).
Capital expenditure, in contrast, diminished (-6.7%), partly because of the completion of investment projects.
The deficit was financed primarily from domestic sources, particularly the government’s deposits with the central bank.
The projections for fiscal year 2004/2005 estimate increases in current income and expenditure of 2.2% and 3%, respectively.
In contrast, capital expenditure will contract by 18.5%, so that total expenditure will rise by only 1%.
A positive overall result is expected, in an amount close to BDS$ 16 million.
As a financial agent of the government, the central bank had to issue treasury bills for a nominal value of BDS$ 130 million to cover the fiscal deficit.
Between January and September the total value of the debt issued increased by 17%.
Most treasury bills were absorbed by the banking system, in view of excess liquidity.
The large-scale accumulation of excess reserves in the banking system, equivalent to 64% of total reserves in August, was the result of growth in liabilities and a slight expansion of assets.
In particular, savings deposits by individuals climbed by 12%, while the demand for credit increased by only 4.7%.
The meagre demand for loans reflected the modest and unequal growth of the different economic sectors. 2 Barbados’s fiscal year runs from A pril to March.
The demand for loans increased in extraction activities, distribution, tourism and entertainment and the food industry, but contracted in agriculture, fishing, other branches of manufacturing and transport.
The strong demand for treasury bills exerted downward pressure on interest rates; the three-month rate on treasury bills declined from 1.36 to 0.94 between January and August.
Interest rates in the banking system also tended to decline, albeit moderately, as the average deposit rate went from 2.59% to 2.55% between January and September and the lending rate, from 10.42% to Tourism was the standout in the B arbadian economy’s expansion in 2003, while most other sectors stalled or grew only moderately.
Sugar production was down by 12% because of weather-related factors and operational difficulties in some sugar plants.
Fishing improved in comparison to the previous year, rising from a decline of 7.4% to an increase of 7%, but this positive contribution was counteracted by declines in milk and chicken production.
Manufacturing stagnated because of sharp declines in electronics (owing to a plant closure) and chemicals.
Construction maintained its moderate growth of the previous year (3%), as residential activities stalled and public-sector infrastructure projects were gradually completed.
The tourism sector regained its traditional vigour in 2003 with a 6% increase, after a 3% fall in 2002, thanks to the recovery of cruise-ship arrivals.
This improvement was due in part to the sector’s gradual return to normal after the events of 11 September 2001, and also to the promotional activities launched by the authorities, including the “Best of Barbados” campaign.
Buoyed by the robust growth of tourism, the transport, storage, communications and commerce sectors expanded by about 3% in 2003, after their weak performance of the previous year.
In late 2002 the authorities adopted a law on the development of the hotel sector, with a view to raising the country’s profile as a tourist destination; this step should give the sector a significant boost.
The inflation rate, measured by the consumer price index, increased from 0.2% in 2002 to 1.5% in 2003 as a result of the expansion of economic activity, in a context of stable international prices.
The biggest increases were in fuels and electricity, medical and personal care and food, which were offset in part by declines in the cost of housing, clothing and footwear and of alcoholic beverages and tobacco.
The unemployment rate rose from 10.3% in 2002 to 11.7% in 2003 as job creation in activities related to tourism, commerce, transport and communications was more than offset by job losses in other economic sectors.
Accordingly, international reserves increased by US$ 141 million and kept import coverage at the previous year’s level (31 weeks, including both goods and services).
E xports, w hich include sugar, e lectrical components, chemicals, and food and beverages, were listless owing to internal problems such as poor weather conditions, technical difficulties and the closure of a chemical plant.
The growth in imports (10%) was attributable to the upturn in economic activity.
The categories with the largest increases were consumer goods (8%) and intermediate purchases (12%).
The services account (4.3%) reflected the recovery and brisk growth of the tourism sector.
Current transfers grew by 8% and the income account posted a negative result owing to debt interest payments and profit repatriation.
The latter two items brought in long-term public capital in the amount of US$ 79 million.
For 2004 it is expected that the current account deficit will remain above 6% of GDP, as a result of expanding economic activity and continued low export growth.
This deficit will be covered by foreign direct investment aimed at the development of the tourism sector and by the proceeds of the privatization programme currently being carried out by the government.
Belize In 2003 economic growth in Belize (4%), as in other Caribbean countries, was driven mainly by the recovery of tourism after the crisis caused by the events of 11 September 2001.
The restrictive stance of economic policy prevented faster growth, as the authorities sought to reduce the unwieldy fiscal deficit and prevent international reserves from declining further.
In fiscal year 2002/2003 the central government focused on reducing the budget deficit to 5% of GDP.
The deficit had reached 9% in the previous period owing to a policy aimed at expanding aggregate demand by increasing capital expenditure.
The fiscal year now ending saw a sharp contraction in investment outlays (43%) and a satisfactory increase in fiscal revenues (8%).
A further cutback in investment expenditure and a reduction of the fiscal deficit to 3% of GDP are planned for fiscal year 2003/2004.
Capital outlays financed from local sources will be cut by 48%, while those financed from foreign sources will drop by 24%.
Together with an estim ated 11% increase in fiscal revenues, in particular from international trade (19%), the restriction of capital expenditure is expected to compensate for the rise in current expenditure caused by increases in wages and social security.
This financing includes US$ 125 million obtained for debt restructuring, the placement of a US$ 200 million bond issue in June, US$ 34 million from multilateral creditors and US$ 8 million from bilateral creditors.
This improved access to international resources will maintain the upward trend in the level of external debt, which increased from US$ 556 million to US$ 674 million between January and September 2003.
Net international reserves diminished during the year, mainly because of the increase in debt servicing.
The central bank’s external assets decreased by 4% between January and September 2003, and the foreign- currency assets of commercial banks also declined.
The contraction in net external assets was accompanied by an 8% increase in total net domestic credit (credit to the private sector grew by 10% and credit to the public sector fell by 12%).
As a result, the level of liquidity decreased by 10% in the case of narrow money and 4% in the case of broad money, causing a slight upturn in deposit rates, from 4.4% in September 2002 to 4.9% in September 2003.
Lending rates remained at the same level as in 2002 (14%) owing to weak demand for credit in the private sector.
GDP growth (4%) reflected the performance of certain agricultural products, the fishing industry and continued growth in the tourism sector.
The sugar cane harvest was down by 6.7% because of adverse weather conditions, low productivity in the cane fields and the producers’ high levels of debt.
In contrast, banana output increased despite the fall in prices, owing to improvements in production methods, coordination between the harvest cycle and market demand and the penalty imposed for unused cargo space, which was intended as an incentive for making optimum use of available cargo capacity.
There was also growth in seafood production, which recovered from the effects of contamination by parasites and adverse external conditions.
Manufacturing (1.2%) benefited from increases in the production volume and prices of clothing.
The tourism sector expanded because of a 58% increase in total visitor arrivals between January- September 2002 and the same period of 2003, mostly due to cruise-ship calls (98% over the same period).
These results do not reflect the full potential of tourism in Belize, which offers one of the most diversified tourist destinations in the Caribbean and Central American subregion.
In addition to traditional seaside tourism, this country has the world’s second-largest barrier reef and the heritage of Mayan culture.
As it is the least deforested country in the Central American isthmus, Belize is also home to a wide variety of wildlife.
Inflation remained at the previous year’s level (2.3%), thanks to stable international prices, monetary control and the moderate expansion of economic activity.
In February the government announced wage increases for public-sector employees, to be implemented in three stages in 2003 and 2005.
The balance-of-payments deficit (including errors and omissions) increased from US$ 7 million in 2002 to US$ 36 million in 2003, while the current account deficit rose to US$ 129 million, which represents an increase of 16%.
This deficit was larger than the capital and financial account surplus (US$ 99 million), resulting in an erosion of international reserves.
The current account imbalance was due to the widening of the merchandise trade deficit (by 11% over its 2002 level) and the negative balance on the income account (by 12% over the 2002 level).
The trade deficit stemmed from the lacklustre performance of the main traditional export segments (except bananas and seafood) as a result of adverse weather conditions, low prices, poor management, low productivity and the large debts incurred by agricultural producers.
The deficit on the income account was mainly due to interest payments on external debt.
The non-factor services account surplus improved significantly (41%) because of the growth in tourism.
The positive balance of those services, together with the transfers account surplus (US$ 29 million), made it possible to finance 69% of the current account deficit.
The capital and financial account surplus was attributable to foreign direct investment inflows (of US$ 19 million in 2002 and US$ 14 million in 2003) and, in particular, to foreign exchange inflows from the bond issue on the international market.
Cuba After three years of slowing growth, the Cuban economy turned in a more robust performance in 2003, with a growth rate of 2.6% as opposed to 1.2% the previous year.
Although transfers from abroad continued to expand (US$ 915 million), the balance-of-payments current account deficit widened slightly to 1.1% of GDP.
This reflected an increase in the goods and services trade deficit and in factor service payments, in the latter case because of interest on external liabilities and the repatriation of profits generated by foreign direct investment on the island.
External demand, which was up by 10%, and the expansion of government consumption (6.2%) both acted as a powerful engine of GDP growth.
The market exchange rate held steady at 26 Cuban pesos to the dollar; the official rate remained unchanged at one peso to the dollar.
Tax revenues rose by 8.9%, w hile non-tax revenues slipped by 2.1%.
The higher tax receipts reflected an increase of 11.9% in indirect levies and a smaller rise of 4.7% in direct taxes.
The jump in indirect tax receipts was due to an increase in the rate of circulation and sales taxes (11.6%) and service taxes (14.2%).
Personal income taxes (8.7%) were the main component of the rise in direct levies, owing to larger receipts from small-scale farmers, since the intake from own-account workers contracted.
Revenues from the tax on the utilization of the labour force also Current expenditure rose by 8.9% owing to increases in budgetary allocations for social assistance (93.5%), science and technology (36.6%), culture and art (13.8%), sports (9.4%), education (9%), public health (6.6%), social security (3.3%) and municipal services (2.4%), in keeping with the strong social slant of fiscal policy.
The amount of budgetary resources channelled into capital formation was down by 2.5%, but priority was given to the construction of housing for the victims of hurricanes Isidore and L ili and to the tourism development programme.
Large slices of investment were also earmarked for the sugar industry, forestry development, the development of pastureland and shade tobacco, improvement of soil and waterworks and repair work on schools and public health facilities.
The decline in money in circulation reflected increased sales of convertible currency by the network of currency exchange offices (CADECA), higher retail sales and a rise in fixed-term savings deposits in response to attractive rates of interest.
Accordingly, M1 dropped by 11.4%, with declines of 12.1% in cash in circulation and 10.1% in regular savings accounts.
The drive to improve business practices also continued in 2003, extending to some 600 firms, which represent almost 20% of the total and contribute 38% of the output of goods and 40% of profits.
The idea is to make more efficient use of financial, m aterial and human resources and, in particular, of foreign exchange, and to give the firms more autonomy in the decentralized management and administration of part of their profits.
The sugar industry continued to be restructured, in order to cut production costs and foreign-exchange outlays in response to falling international prices.
The government hopes to encourage import substitution and the development of derivatives.
By the end of 2003 reciprocal investment promotion and protection agreements had been signed with 63 countries, and double taxation agreements, with a further 11.
Overall supply expanded by 3.2% thanks to an increase in imports of goods and services (7.2%), since output rose by 2.6%.
Higher overall demand was due more to external demand, which expanded by 10%, than to domestic demand, which was up by 3.2%.
Although gross investment dropped again, this time by 5%, consumption expanded by 3% as a result of higher government spending (6.2%), since private consumption grew only moderately (2%).
Given the lower level of investment, priority was given to energy projects with rapid returns, the com pletion o f approxim ately 2,000 rooms for in ternational tourists, the m odernization and rehabilitation of nickel plants, the electrification of agricultural irrigation systems (in order to save diesel fuel) and social programmes.
The standouts in this regard were international tourism (13%), commerce, restaurants and hotels (4.8%), government services (4.1%) and financial services (4%).
Smaller upturns were recorded in mining (3.4%), electricity, gas and water (3%), and agriculture (2.3%).
The downturn in investment brought construction to a standstill (0.7%), while manufacturing dropped by 2% owing to the sugar industry’s poor performance (sugar cane farming, sugar manufacturing and sugar cane products).
Inflation declined from 7% in 2002 to 5% in 2003 thanks to the more ample supply of goods and services, especially from the agricultural sector, and to the smaller amount of money in circulation.
The employment situation improved, since the unemployment rate dropped from 3.3% to 3%, but underemployment remained high.
Although services exports were up by 12.8%, mainly in the areas of tourism and telecommunications, the goods and services trade deficit widened by 11% because the rise in the volume of merchandise imports (7%) exceeded that of merchandise exports (6%) and because of a downturn in the terms of trade.
On the other hand, a smaller amount of sugar was exported at better prices and a larger quantity of nickel at high prices.
Exports of non-traditional goods were also up again, especially in high-value-added categories such as biotechnology, pharmaceuticals and medical and diagnostic equipment.
The capital account recorded an inflow of US$ 400 million, which was enough to finance the current account deficit and to generate a slight increase in international reserves (US$ 57 million).
Lastly, the balance of public external debt (US$ 11 billion) increased marginally because of the appreciation of the euro and the yen in relation to the United States dollar, since Cuba’s liabilities are mostly denominated in these currencies.
Guyana Guyana’s economy grew at a modest rate of 1% in 2003, reflecting sluggish performances by most economic sectors and the burden of the country’s external debt.
The economic outlook for 2004 is not particularly heartening, in view of Guyana’s macroeconomic imbalances and sectoral stagnation.
This reflected increased spending, which rose from 46% to 50% of GDP, while total revenues and the tax burden remained at 32% and 29% of GDP, respectively, despite the announcement of measures to broaden the tax base and augment receipts by imposing a tax on local telephone calls and raising the withholding tax on interest income from 15% to 20%.
Capital revenues, though they represent a small share of the total, expanded by a substantial 100% owing to an increase in subsidies secured under the World Bank and IMF Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative.
Some of this expansion was attributable to the implementation of investment plans by the State- owned sugar company Guysuco, which was able to secure the necessary financing.
This was more than enough to offset the low rate of implementation of investm ent plans in the public sector.
Current expenditure (not including interest payments) also increased, from 26% of GDP in 2002 to 29% in 2003, because of higher spending on wages and salaries and purchases of goods and services.
Meanwhile, the value of interest payments dropped as the burden of the government’s obligations eased and debt relief was secured under the HIPC Initiative.
The fragile fiscal situation worsened, however, as a result of a liquidity squeeze in the non-financial public sector produced by the State oil company Guyoil’s payments to creditors and increased spending on materials and supplies by other major State firms.
The central government deficit was covered using domestic resources raised mainly through the issuance of public debt and, to a lesser extent, through the sale of government assets.
In 2004 the government hopes to narrow the fiscal deficit, since the existing negative balance has prompted serious concerns over the sustainability of the public debt.
External debt is likely to increase from US$ 1.4 billion to US$ 1.5 billion.
In 2003 monetary policy was shaped in part by the fiscal situation.
As in 2002, there was abundant liquidity in the commercial banking system, due to the sluggish performance of the economy and very restrained demand for credit.
Excess reserves represented 62% of the reserves required at the beginning of the year.
The liquidity overhang enabled the banking system to hold on to most (60%) of the treasury bills issued by the central bank to finance domestic debt.
The stock of treasury bills held by the commercial banking system increased from 24 to 36 billion Guyana dollars.
Strong demand for government securities caused a decline in the corresponding rates of interest.
Over the same period the bank discount rate came down from 6.3% to 5% and the lending rate for prime borrowers, from 16.3% to 14.9%.
The drop in interest rates eased the burden of public debt servicing and helped to stimulate economic activity.
In a context of sluggish foreign-exchange activity, the exchange rate increased by 2% during the year.
The modest 1% rate of GDP growth was a reflection of a downturn in mining production and a moderate performance from the agricultural and manufacturing sectors.
Agriculture suffered from poor weather conditions, which affected the growth and sucrose content of sugar cane, causing a dip in production.
The expansion of agricultural output resulted from an increase in the area sown and good harvest conditions.
In the mining sector, gold production contracted, diamond output expanded and bauxite production rebounded.
The rise in diamond production was due to an increase in concessions, higher productivity and good international prices.
Bauxite production rose thanks to technical improvements and the reorganization of production.
Manufacturing saw a negligible upturn in the clothing industry and a slowdown in the non-durables subsector.
Construction, meanwhile, was hurt by the low rate of implementation of public investment plans.
The moderate rate of inflation (6%) reflected a combination of higher fuel prices, stable international prices, a steady nominal exchange rate and slight overall economic expansion.
Employment contracted in the public sector as a result of a hiring freeze in the government and cutbacks in employment in State enterprises.
The available data show an increase in employment in livestock-raising, transport and communications.
The overall balance of payments position was negative, since the capital account surplus of 12% of GDP was not enough to cover the current account deficit, which rose from 17% of GDP in 2002 to 21% in 2003.
It was therefore necessary to use net foreign assets belonging to the Bank of Guyana and part of the aid corresponding to debt reduction under the HIPC Initiative.
The merchandise trade deficit doubled to 17% of GDP owing to the low growth of exports (4%) and the strong expansion of imports (14%) caused by the higher cost of fuel supplies.
Sugar exports were hurt by low international prices, while rice exports decreased in both value and volume.
By contrast, both the international price and the volume of bauxite exports went up.
The services account turned in a deficit again, since Guyana is a net service importer, especially of shipping and merchandise insurance services.
Net factor payments increased owing to the rise in interest on the public sector debt.
Lastly, remittances, which represent the bulk of the transfers account, expanded by 12%.
The capital account balance reflected higher outlays, a stable level of non-financial public sector debt servicing (2% of GDP) and a twofold increase in long-term capital from the private sector (up from US$ 44 million in 2002 to US$ 83 million in 2003), in connection with the HIPC Initiative.
Haiti’s economy grew by a meagre 0.7% in 2003 against the backdrop of a political impasse which moved into its third year.
Although this represented a reversal of the contraction recorded in the preceding two years, per capita output slipped again and the country’s considerable social lags worsened.
A dearth of investment, lack of international financial resources and low levels of productivity helped to perpetuate the vicious circle of poverty.
The signature in May of an agreement to implement an IMF staff-monitored programme helped Haiti to re­ establish relations with the international financial community.
This agreement gave priority to controlling and stabilizing inflation, the exchange rate, net international reserves and the fiscal deficit, which had behaved in an alarming manner in the first two quarters of the year.
The year’s end brought encouraging results, although both the structural and the circumstantial determinants of the Haitian economy’s recessionary tendencies persisted.
In the political arena, no sign of a solution to the current problems has yet emerged, and recent events seem to have put the necessary mechanisms for consensus even further out of reach.
The conflict between the government authorities, on the one hand, and Democratic Convergence (a coalition of different opposition groups) and the Group of 184, on the other, has become even more bitter in recent months.
The antagonistic stances of the different sides are such that the country’s affairs still appear unlikely to return to normal.
The projections are cautious (GDP growth of between 1% and 3%) and depend to a large extent on the political situation, full resumption of external cooperation flow s and greater m acroeconom ic stabilization.
Despite the limited room for manoeuvre imposed by the unstable socio-political environment, the au thorities were forced to im plem ent a set of compensatory and stabilization measures to deal with the shortage of external financing and the severe fiscal, inflationary and exchange-rate imbalances the economy has suffered since the last quarter of 2002.
With regard to public finances, administrative and tax measures were geared to broadening the tax base.
In particular, the government stepped up its scrutiny of both taxpayer compliance, by intensifying verification and follow-up procedures, and customs inspection, hiring a Swiss company for pre-shipment inspection of imports.
In addition, new sectors were incorporated into the tax base, exemptions were reduced (especially for non­ governmental organizations) and certain duties and tariffs were restructured (especially on hydrocarbons).
Tax revenues were also boosted (by 3.6% in real terms) through a change in the tax regime for tobacco and alcoholic beverages (from specific to ad valorem rates), a rise in verification fees (from 4% to 5%), the unification at 2% of advances on imports (against income tax) and an increase in utility rates (electricity, water and telephone).
On the expenditure side, the government made a systematic effort to reduce current expenditure (by 1.7%) following the signature of the IMF staff-monitored programme.
Investment expenditure rose by 30% in real terms, however, largely because of infrastructure work associated with the 2004 celebration of the bicentenary of Haiti’s independence and the construction of low- income housing.
In real terms, total outlays expanded by 4% (compared to 11% in 2002), while the fiscal deficit increased again.
To that end, BRH instituted a vigorous campaign to soak up liquidity (M3) in the economy (-2.4%) by means of a series of hikes in the interest rates on BRH bonds (27.8% since March), which translated into a decline in both public and private credit (-15% and -7%, respectively).
Bank deposit and lending rates were negative, and the latter dampened the credit supply in the financial system.
This resulted in the increased dollarization of assets (dollar deposits represented 42% of M3), despite small yields (between 2.5% and 3.5% in nominal terms).
BRH maintained a flexible exchange-rate policy in a context of severe devaluation (49%) of the local currency and low levels of reserves.
This was offset later in 2003, but had a considerable impact on inflation and eroded the population’s purchasing power.
Agriculture posted a slight upturn of 2% after its steep fall in 2002, thanks to good weather conditions, while most of the other sectors tended to stand still.
The unstable political environment and the repercussions of inflation and devaluation were partly to blame.
The manufacturing sector failed to emulate the growth of the maquila industry (27%), while construction (2.3%) benefited from infrastructure and social projects undertaken by the public sector.
Despite an increase in both exports (12.4%) and imports (7.5%), domestic demand displayed no more than moderate growth.
The business sector’s continued lack of confidence and the shortage of external resources hurt investment, while the downturn in the living conditions of large sectors of the population -despite a 51% jump in the real minimum w age- sharpened, forcing the government to embark on the preparation of a PRSP.
A steep rise (130%) in the domestic prices of hydrocarbon derivatives during January and February made it possible to reduce public subsidies and improve fiscal revenues.
It also triggered a severe bout of inflation (42.5% from September to September), however, which was further fuelled by a rapid rise in the dollar exchange Except for the resumption of external financing from IDB in July 2003, the international financial institutions maintained their freeze on cooperation with Haiti.
In the specific case of the World Bank, payment arrears, which amount to US$ 31 million, are holding up new disbursements.
Given the H aitian econom y’s fragile macroeconomic situation in 2003, remittances (US$ 744 million) were of substantial help in softening the harmful impact of inflation on consumption, and offered a relatively stable source of foreign exchange at a time of scarce external funding and net outflows of capital (US$ 59 million).
Net international reserves are still minimal (representing just over a month’s worth of imports), leaving Haiti highly vulnerable in the event of fresh domestic or external crises.
Jamaica The Jamaican economy grew very moderately in 2003 (1%), driven by a 4% expansion in exports.
The central government recorded a deficit of 7.7% of GDP in fiscal year 2002/2003,3 which was considerably higher than its target figure of 4.4%.
The failure to meet this objective triggered a depreciation of the Jamaican dollar, which, in turn, pushed inflation up to more than 15%.
The merchandise trade deficit and the balance-of-payments current account deficit also widened, owing mainly to less favourable terms of trade.
In order to restore investor confidence, the authorities intervened in the foreign exchange market, announced a strict fiscal discipline policy and implemented a tight monetary policy.
The central government deficit in fiscal year 2002/2003 was the product of an increase in current expenditure (20%), specifically on public programmes, salaries and wages and interest payments.
This last item rose by 22% and came to account for 44% of current expenditure as a result of devaluation, which raised the local-currency value of domestic debt denominated in United States dollars, and restrictive monetary measures, which exerted upward pressure on the interest rate.
For fiscal year 2003/2004 the fiscal deficit is expected to stand at 5.5% of GDP, with a 25% increase in income and a 15% increase in expenditure.
The debt- to-GDP ratio (151% of GDP in March 2003) is reaching unsustainable levels, swallowing up a significant portion of available resources and hampering the authorities’ efforts to boost development.
The government plans to increase tax revenue through a series of measures such as expansion of the tax base, tax rate increases and new taxes.
In the first seven months of 2003/2004 the fiscal deficit exceeded the target level, since fiscal revenues were lower than expected.
This, in turn, was due to economic stagnation and delays in the implementation of the measures announced.
The currency started to depreciate after the authorities announced in December 2002 that the budget deficit would reach 8% of GDP, almost double the amount expected.
The exchange rate rose by 20% between January and May, with an increase of almost 7% in May alone.
The monetary authorities adopted a contractionary stance to deal with this volatility.
They used three mechanisms to control instability on the foreign exchange market: international reserves, open- market operations and temporary direct controls.
Specifically, they drew on resources from the issuance of a United States dollar-indexed bond for exchange­ rate intervention.
In addition, the authorities raised interest rates in the early months of the year.
Starting in June the rate of exchange settled at approximately J$ 59 per United States dollar.
This greater stability enabled the authorities to cautiously lower interest rates in the second half of the year, especially on longer-term instruments.
Intervention in the foreign exchange market in the course of the year eroded net international reserves and had a contractionary effect on the monetary base (8.8% between December 2002 and September 2003).
Narrow money followed a similar trend, diminishing by 0.8% between September 2002 and September 2003.
GDP growth was positive (1%) in 2003, thanks to the recovery of the agricultural sector.
The robust perform ance o f agriculture (4.2% ) was attributable to good weather conditions, which enabled the sector to bounce back from the losses caused by flooding in May and September 2002, although export agriculture was adversely affected by low levels of sugar­ cane replanting and by the delay in starting this activity.
As in previous years, manufacturing contracted (by 1.7%), owing to the slump in sugar output and to technical difficulties that cut production in one of the 3 Jamaica’s fiscal year runs from A pril to March.
Mining expanded by 4.9% as output increased and alumina refineries operated closer to capacity (over 95% on average for the year).
Construction edged up by only 0.8% owing to cutbacks in public investment and the completion of infrastructure projects.
Transport, storage and communications recorded 3.7% growth, reflecting heavier cargo traffic, an increase in tourist arrivals and in the number of vessels calling at Jamaican ports and the expansion of mobile telephone services, which were boosted by competition in the communications subsector.
Tourism was up by 6% as a result of the above-mentioned increase in arrivals (more than 5%), which attests to this sector’s gradual comeback after the events of 11 September 2001.
The contributing factors were devaluation, the increase in the tax base due to the elimination of exemptions for numerous products, fuel and transport price hikes in the third quarter and an 11% adjustment of the minimum wage in November.
Unemployment declined slightly to 14.7%, reflecting the modest increase in the level of economic activity.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit widened from 11.8% of GDP in 2002 to 13% in 2003, as the surpluses on non-factor services and current transfers were not enough to offset the merchandise trade and income account deficits.
The merchandise trade deficit, equivalent to 24% of GDP, reflected the moderate growth of exports (4%) and the significant increase in imports (10%).
External sales, in turn, owed their expansion to the agricultural sector’s emergence from the serious losses it had sustained as a result of flooding in 2002 and the continued encroachment of mining activities.
The services balance reflected the gradual revival of tourism and, in particular, the resurgence in passenger arrivals.
The negative result on the incom e account reflected an increase in profit repatriation and interest payments on the external debt.
The bigger surplus on the capital and financial account (21% over its 2002 level) was due to a combination of net official capital outflows and foreign direct investment inflows to the service and mining sectors.
The 1.3% contraction of economic activity in the Dominican Republic in 2003 brought about a 2.9% reduction in per capita GDP; a result this poor had not been posted in more than a decade.
The banking crisis that broke out in the second quarter of the year triggered a strong wave of uncertainty and lack of confidence, which resulted in increased dollarization and considerable capital flight.
Pressures on the foreign-exchange market caused a devaluation of the peso and triggered an across-the-board increase in prices, which reached 40.1% in November.
In order to limit the damage to the financial system, the authorities injected vast amounts of resources into banks that were suffering from such problems.
The costs to the government were huge, at a time when the fiscal and monetary restrictions in force since the end of 2002 were further tightened.
Although investment and consumer spending dropped by 12.1% and 9.8%, respectively, the increase in remittances and the sustained recovery of goods and services exports prevented the economic downturn from worsening.
Despite the reversal in the balance-of-payments current account, which posted a massive surplus, the year closed with a very low level of international reserves.
In 2004 the government w ill seek congressional approval of a fiscal reform, and fiscal and monetary restrictions will continue.
The standby arrangement signed with IMF provided for US$ 600 million in financial support over two years, of which US$ 120 million had already been paid out.
Further payments were postponed pending an assessment of the fiscal impact of the government’s repurchase of two electric power distributors.
The standby arrangement also includes a set of measures aimed at restoring confidence in the banking system, reinforcing supervision and prudential regulation, strengthening public finances and monetary discipline and establishing a flexible exchange-rate system.
For 2003 the arrangement assumed a 3% fall in GDP, 35% inflation, a current account surplus of 1% of GDP and a fiscal deficit of 3.5% of GDP.
In addition, the fiscal deficit is expected to drop to 2.5% of GDP in 2004 and 1% in 2005, owing to the sale of public assets.
The intervention, rehabilitation and subsequent sale of the three banks affected by the crisis involved shoring up the system to an extraordinary extent (13% of GDP).
The authorities therefore substantially increased the issuance of certificates to neutralize the monetary impact.
As a result, gross public debt rose to 47.9% of GDP 4 and the quasi-fiscal deficit shot up to 2.8% of GDP.
Credit limits were also established and the legal reserve requirement was raised from 17% to 20% for local- currency deposits, from 12% to 20% for foreign-currency deposits and from 10% to 15% for non-bank institutions.
By September cash in circulation had fallen by almost 10%, but broad money had climbed by 13.7%, both in real terms.
Also by September, deposit rates in universal banks had reached 21.61%, which was 2.18 percentage points higher than in December.
The interest-rate spread widened by 192 basis points and credit to the private sector expanded by around 7% in real terms.5 4 This figure was 20.9% o f GDP in 2002. 5 Because o f changes in the methodology used for calculating monetary and financial statistics and in their coverage, the figures for 2002 and 2003 are not strictly comparable.
The rates o f variation included in the text are therefore merely indicative.
Agricultural output dropped by 3.9% and was further impaired by serious flooding at the end of the year.
M anufacturing fe ll by 3.2%, despite a slight improvement in the sugar sector and free trade zones.
The sectors that recorded growth included telecommunications (10.7%), government services (3.7%) and other miscellaneous services (1.9%).
Mining expanded by 11.4% on the strength of increased exports, while tourism revitalized the hotels, bars and restaurants In November the inflation index was 40.1%, the highest level in 12 years.
Food and transport prices rose considerably, while the increases in prices for health care, entertainment and culture, hotels and restaurants and other miscellaneous services were close to the average.
Clothing and footwear prices rose much more slowly, as did housing and education prices.
A floating exchange-rate system, subject to intervention to prevent excessive fluctuations, was adopted.
The foreign exchange market was unified as official operations were transferred to the private market.
The public-sector deficit, of about 3.5% of GDP, was the result of the central bank’s large quasi-fiscal deficit and a smaller central government deficit (0.4%).
The sharp fall in domestic demand prompted a real reduction in government revenues (from 16.9% of GDP to 15.2%) from both direct and, especially, indirect taxes, despite the various temporary measures adopted to boost receipts.
These included a 2% surcharge on imports, a 5% tax on exports (which was abolished and replaced with an increase in the currency exchange commission from 4.75% to 10%), a cheque-cashing fee of 0.15% of the cheque’s value and a 100% increase in the airport departure tax.
Electricity rates were adjusted (while maintaining subsidies for small-scale consumers) to solve financial problems in the sector that resulted in service rationing.
There was a sharp cutback in public expenditure (from 18.8% to 16% of GDP), in terms of both current and capital expenditure.
Given its commitment to the sustainability of public finances, the government gave priority to reducing liabilities.
Currency depreciation and the resulting increase in consumer prices had significant effects on consumption and investment.
Only the increase in family remittances and the recovery of external demand mitigated the extreme recessionary pressures exerted by a tight economic policy.
Public employees received a pay rise in January, and private-sector wages in c reased by 25% in nom inal term s (15% in October 2003 and 10% in January 2004).
A pril’s labour survey showed a decline in the participation rate (from 55.1% to 53.9%) and a one-point drop in employment (45.1%).
The m ovem ent o f w orkers from the form al to the informal sector meant that unemployment was only The current account posted an unprecedented surplus equivalent to 5.8% of GDP owing to the reduction of the trade deficit, a larger surplus on the services balance and a steady increase in remittances.
However, the year closed with a minimum level of international reserves because of the persistent outflow of private capital.
Exports by domestic companies climbed by 18.8%, whereas the performance of free trade zones was modest (4.6%).
Tourism revenues shot up and increased the recurrent surplus on the services account.
The shrinking of domestic demand brought about an overall reduction in imports (10.3%).
By the third quarter, imports of consumer and capital goods had plunged by 59% and 28%, respectively.
Upswings were posted only in certain categories of intermediate goods, such as fuels (31%), Inflows of foreign direct investment slipped by 13.4%.
Even though the country received US$ 600 million from the sovereign bond issue, the overall balance was negative and was financed with reserve assets and the use of IMF credit.
Inflation remained high, though without reaching its 2002 rate, while external trade ran a large deficit and government accounts posted a narrower shortfall.
This last factor, together with a tight monetary policy, helped to stem the devaluation of the local currency.
Following a significant increase in the fiscal deficit in 2002 (11%) and the prospect of a further deterioration due to the implementation of the third and fourth phases of the Caribbean Community’s common external tariff (January 2003), the authorities adopted a series of measures -including changes to income and sales taxes- designed to close the fiscal gap.
Sales tax rates were raised from 5% to 8% for services and from 7% to 10% for goods with effect from December 2002.
These measures are expected to reduce the budget deficit by increasing fiscal revenue by 100 billion guilders.
Both direct and indirect tax receipts were noticeably higher in the first three months of 2003, expanding by 81% and 16%, respectively.
Thanks to these m easures and to prudent expenditure management (despite a wage increase in the electricity sector), the authorities turned the budget position around from a deficit in 2002 to a surplus (1% of GDP) in the first eight months of 2003.
For the year as a whole, a deficit equivalent to 3% to 4% of GDP is expected, which will be financed from external sources.
The amount of the external debt will continue to represent approximately 33% of GDP.
The government is also seeking to improve tax collection and tax administration in order to consolidate the increases in fiscal revenues.
Monetary policy took a contractionary stance to curb the depreciation of the local currency, which became a serious cause of concern in August 2002.
The central bank follow ed a strategy based on both quantitative controls and management of the monetary base.
At the same time the central bank imposed a 17.5% reserve requirement on foreign currency deposits in order to reduce the incentive for currency replacement and thus prevent the exchange rate from rising further.
These measures succeeded, since they stabilized the guilder, and the price of foreign currency on the parallel market declined and tended to converge with the official rate, which is the rate used for debt service payments and selected imports, notably fuel.
Towards the end of 2003 the official exchange rate stood at 2,650 guilders to the dollar, while the parallel market rate was 2,800 guilders.
In addition, in order to build confidence among consumers and investors, the government announced the introduction of a new currency in January 2004, the Surinamese dollar, whose unit value will be equal to 1,000 guilders.
Agricultural production suffered as a result of poor weather conditions, low international prices for some of the m ajor agricu ltural exports and stronger competition from other producers with lower costs.
Mining benefited from an increase in capacity and from the advent of new investment projects, including a bauxite mining and alumina production project to be conducted by a United States/Australian partnership and the development of a new gold mine by a Canadian company.
The latter project involves a US$ 100 million investment and will have a positive impact on the construction sector.
The overall balance of payments out-turn was positive, while the current account deficit (US$ 216 million) was more than offset by the capital and financial account surplus (US$ 225 million).
This import buoyancy is due to the above-mentioned investment projects in the mining sector.
The capital account posted a positive balance of US$ 22 million thanks to grants.
The financial account surplus (US$ 203 million) was due to foreign direct investment flows (US$ 116 million), non-financial public sector outlays (US$ 41 million), private sector loans (US$ 46 million) and short-term flows (US$ 36 million).
The current account deficit may shrink in 2004 if the performance of merchandise exports improves.
Meanwhile, the growth of imports will depend on the expansion of economic activity and the execution of new foreign direct investment projects.
Trinidad and Tobago The economy of Trinidad and Tobago expanded in 2003 and this trend is expected to continue in 2004, driven by a dynamic energy sector.
Increased fiscal revenues from hydrocarbons- related production sectors will sustain higher public spending in 2004.
The non-energy sector of the economy failed to rally, however, and the employment situation recorded no significant improvements, despite the high rate of economic growth.
The large volume of hydrocarbons exports helped to narrow the balance of payments deficit.
In fiscal year 2002/2003 the central government recorded a surplus of 0.8% of GDP, which was in excess of projections.
This was due largely to an increase in tax receipts in the wake of the rise in international oil prices, in contrast to the poor performance of receipts not related to the hydrocarbons sector (particularly VAT).
Capital expenditure was affected by a slowdown in the rate of implementation of public investment programmes.
The budget for fiscal year 2003/2004 is based on a growth rate of 5.5% of GDP, a 3% inflation rate and an average oil price of US$ 25 per barrel, and it allows for a deficit of 1% of GDP.
Tax receipts should reflect new fiscal measures, which include the elimination of the bank savings tax, an increase in pensions, larger benefits for the disabled, higher taxes on the gambling industry and a rise in taxes on oil companies whose production exceeds a certain level.
Spending will also expand, thanks to the government’s comprehensive development strategy to 2020, which targets spending on education, health and infrastructure -key areas that need to be improved in order to stimulate economic development.
In 2004 the government plans to reduce its debt, which stands at 53% of GDP and is more or less equally divided between domestic and external liabilities.
From January to August the central bank’s repo rate stayed at 5.25% and the prime lending rate, at 11.5%.
In September the monetary authorities decided to ease liquidity conditions in order to stimulate aggregate demand and boost the growth of the non-energy sectors of the economy.
As a result, the repo and discount rates were lowered by 25 basis points (from 5.25% to 5% and from 7.25% to 7%, respectively), and in October the commercial bank reserve requirement was also reduced, from 18% to 14%.
The shift in monetary policy reflected the central government’s need to strengthen weak demand for credit, as well as its implicit objective of whittling down the public debt.
To refinance its most costly domestic liabilities, the government placed two bond issues, for a total of TT$ 500 million, in the second quarter.
Together with the budget surplus, this enabled the central government to increase its deposits at the central bank by 19% between January and September.
Credit demand expanded by only 1% on average over the year, partly because of sluggish activity in some sectors (agriculture and manufacturing) and partly because businesses financed their activities by drawing on their own resources, particularly undistributed profits.
The rise in credit in the last two months of the year was a reflection of seasonal factors and rapid growth in the service sector.
The exchange rate came under sporadic pressure in the first half of the year owing to higher demand for foreign exchange as a result of seasonal factors, the need to cover financing gaps and capital transactions.
Given the healthy level of international reserves, the authorities were well positioned to intervene in the market and neutralize the gap between foreign exchange supply and demand.
The main driver of the economy in 2003 was the hydrocarbons sector (which grew by 9.5%), whose productive capacity was boosted by an increase in gas production as the international consortium Atlantic LNG brought two new liquefaction plants (Train 2 and Train 3) on stream.
Non-petroleum activity expanded by 5.9%, thanks mainly to the performance of the service sector and, in particular, construction, which was up by 13% thanks to the im plem entation of the public investm ent programme.
Inflation held steady at around 4% in 2003, thanks to the relative stability of the exchange rate.
Core inflation, which does not include food prices, rose by In keeping with the strong rate of GDP growth, the rate of unemployment dropped from 11% in 2002 to 10.2% in 2003, despite the job losses caused by the restructuring of the sugar industry.
A large number of jobs were created during the year in personal, social and community services, petroleum and gas activity, sugar growing and manufacturing.
There were losses, however, in finance, real estate and business services, transport, storage and communications, private construction and the rest of the agricultural sector.
The current account and the capital and financial account posted surpluses of US$ 399 million and US$ 63 million, or the equivalent of 4% and 0.6% of GDP, respectively.
This allowed international reserves to build up to US$ 2.385 billion (compared with US$ 1.924 billion in 2002), or 5.6 months’ worth of imports.
Goods exports, whose value was US$ 4.621 billion, reflected an increase in shipments of hydrocarbons (representing 62% of the total) and a smaller rise in petrochemical exports (15% of the total).
Imports, which totalled US$ 3.911 billion, consisted mainly of raw materials and intermediate goods (55% of the total).
The deficit on the service account in 2003, of US$ 348 million, was the result of a US$ 539-million deficit on the factor services account and a US$ 191- million surplus on the non-factor services account.
The capital and financial account posted a surplus of US$ 63 million.
This was smaller than the 2002 figure, since in 2003 capital flows to the energy sector in the form of foreign direct investment were offset by outflows of short-term capital remitted by commercial banks and the private sector, and by regional bond issues.
The countries members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) recorded a slight upturn of 1% in 2003, which was driven by the tourism sector, after two years of declining activity.
Inflation stayed very low, but the fiscal accounts took a turn for the worse, since the increase in current spending was not sustained by revenues, even though several OECS countries took steps to strengthen public finances.
The balance-of-payments current account deficit also widened, and was not fully covered by foreign capital inflows.
Reserves declined as a result, but did not fall below the statutory level of foreign exchange reserves held by the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, which is set at 60%.
Trade negotiations lie at the centre of the OECS countries’ current concerns.
In particular, the countries are concerned about the potential impact of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) on their economies and about the definition of a negotiating position that reflects the needs and specific features of development in small island States.
The OECS countries are also engaged in negotiations with the European Union.
The aggregate fiscal accounts of the OECS countries posted a deficit, reflecting an increase in current and capital expenditure and low growth in current income.
The expansion of current expenditure was attributable to wage and salary payments and debt servicing, which has reached considerable levels in some countries.
Capital expenditure rose in response to the OECS objectives of broadening the countries’ physical infrastructure and sectoral development.
Current income posted a poor performance despite the implementation of tax measures, which consisted of adjustments to customs duties and utility rates and taxes on sales, consumption and travel.
In 2004 the OECS members are expected to make a number of adjustments to alter their fiscal stance, which has been expansionary since 1997 and has not been matched by increases in government resources.
Their monetary unit, the Eastern Caribbean dollar, is linked to the United States dollar at a fixed rate of 2.7.
The union’s monetary authority, the Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, acts as a virtual currency board, since it is required by its statutes to keep reserves at 60% of its monetary liabilities.
The institution has consistently maintained a neutral stance in monetary policy and has not altered any of its key interest rates.
During the year the monetary union increased its foreign exchange assets, while its foreign exchange liabilities remained stable.
The positive net external position increased by 39% between January and September 2003, which has helped to strengthen the currency board in a context of heavy borrowing on the part of most of the member countries.
The balances returned by commercial banks showed an increase in foreign assets, which are the main determinant of growth in the money supply.
Both narrow and broad money expanded by between 6% and 8%, but domestic credit has risen at a much more sedate pace.
This has been reflected in the containm ent of growth in domestic credit to the government and in the stagnation of credit to the private sector.
Prelim inary overview o f the economies o f Latin America and the Caribbean, 2003 135 Gross domestic product -2.1 Consumer prices 2.2 NFPS fiscal balance/GDP -6.5 Real deposit rate 2.0 Real lending rate 9.0 Current account -407 Capital and financial account 427 Overall balance 20 b Variation between September 2002 and September 2003. in the OECS economies.
The performance of the tourism sector (3%) was boosted by an increase in visitors in all categories (stay- over and cruise ship passengers) and in all the main markets.
This upturn was attributable to an active advertising campaign by a number of OECS members, an increase in airline services and a gradual return to normality after the events of 11 September 2001.
As part of the effort to boost tourism, Dominica lowered its port charges by 34% and Saint Kitts and Nevis and Antigua and Barbuda increased flight frequencies.
Antigua and Barbuda is also expanding its hotel capacity and Saint Kitts and Nevis has renovated some of its port and hotel infrastructure.
The impact of the tourism sector on other economic activities is particularly visible in commerce By contrast, agriculture contracted in most of the OECS economies (-2%), owing to the sector’s perennial technical and financial difficulties and to unfavourable external conditions.
In addition, in the near future agricultural producers will have to deal with the problems arising from the gradual dismantling of preferential market access.
Banana production declined in Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines because of poor weather conditions and a downturn in international prices.
Grenada was an exception to the general trend, however, w ith an increase in the production of cacao and ground nutmeg thanks to efficiency improvements and rising productivity, despite the pest problems that affected the nutmeg harvest.
As in previous years, manufacturing grew very sluggishly (1%) as a result of low levels of technology, high production costs and lower productivity, which prevented the sector from improving its competitiveness.
By contrast, in Dominica, the region’s leading producer and exporter of soap and toothpaste, there was a slight upturn.
The performance of construction (2%) reflected the implementation of public and private projects.
Private investors concentrated on residential buildings and tourism, while the public sector turned its efforts to the construction and renovation of physical infrastructure.
In 2004 growth will probably continue to be slack in the OECS economies, since the positive effects of the upturn in tourism may be offset by stagnation in agriculture and manufacturing and by the effects of macroeconomic imbalances.
This was slightly higher than the 2002 rate of 0.6%, as a result of increased economic activity, though it was attenuated by international price stability.
The higher inflation was also partly due to an increase in airport fees in Anguilla and higher telephone charges in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines.
The balance of payments was negative, since the current account deficit (19% of GDP) was not fully offset by the surplus on the capital and financial account (9% of GDP).
The current account position resulted from the poor performance of goods exports and the modest increase in the surplus in non-factor services.
The capital and financial account balance reflected inflows of foreign direct investment to the tourism sector and official donations.
The expansion of the merchandise trade deficit (4.5%) was largely attributable to the poor export results.
In particular, banana exports were down in the Windward Islands owing to domestic problems, while dips in international prices hurt exports of electrical components from Saint Kitts and Nevis and exports of ground nutmeg (-4%) and mace (-6%) from Grenada.
Non-factor services climbed by 4.7% with respect to 2002, basically because of the upturn in the tourism sector.
The balance on the factor services account was negative owing to profit repatriation.
Another factor is that external saving is the sum (with the sign reversed) of the current account balance and the capital account balance, as the latter is defined in the fifth edition of the International Monetary Fund Balance of Payments Manual.
Net capital inflows are equal to the capital and financial account balance plus errors and omissions, IMF loans and credit and exceptional financing.
Includes reinvested profits. b In accordance with the fifth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual, all transactions between non-financial direct investment enterprises and their parent companies and affiliates are included in direct investment. c Preliminary figures. d In 1999, includes the value of the investment by REPSOL in Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales.
In the balance of payments, the value of those shares is reflected in a debit under portfolio investment. e Figures are not comparable from 1998 on because no official records were kept until 1997. f In 2001, includes the value of the investment made by Citigroup in BANAMEX.
Both rates are calculated using the nominal exchange rates for each country’s main trading partners.
These figures are then deflated by variations in the consumer price index in each country and, lastly, weighted according to the share of total imports and exports accounted for by bilateral trade.
The trade pattern for 2001 was used to calculate the indices for 2002 and 2003. b Annual averages. c January-October average. d Simple average.
Annual subscription costs for 2003 are US$ 30 for the Spanish version and US$ 35 for the English version.
Revista de la CEPAL, número extraordinario: CEPAL CINCUENTA AÑOS, reflexiones sobre América Latina y el Caribe, 1998, 376 p. (out of stock) Annual reports Issues for previous years also available • Panorama social de América Latina, 2001-2002, 272 p.
The first, comprising chapters I and II, tracks recent poverty and income distribution trends as well as citizen perceptions of inequality and trust in The 2009 edition of Social Panorama of Latin America contributed substantial information on this topic by exploring the burden of unpaid care work, which falls mainly to women.
Time-use surveys have been instrumental in turning the spotlight on these gender asymmetries, and this has helped to gain recognition of the issue and raise awareness of the need to work towards a new gender covenant in households and towards public policies that underpin better reconciliation of paid and unpaid work. institutions.
Chapter I sets out updated figures on poverty and indigence in Latin America up to 2011.
Both of these continued to fall in the region and have reached 30-year lows.
Most —but not all— of the countries of the region saw poverty decline during the most recent period.
The rise in income among the poor has come primarily from higher wage income, in keeping with the trend over the past few years.
Chapter I also provides an overview of persons living in poverty: where they live; the sex and age of household members and heads; education level, employment status and access to certain basic services.
Even though the profile of persons living in poverty is similar to the one seen in the late 1990s, regionwide trends have brought a few changes.
Among them are the increase in the number of female-headed households, higher education levels and smaller average household size.
The new figures available show a continuing trend towards less income concentration.
Although inequality indicators have come down only slightly, there has been a substantial cumulative decline since the early 2000s.
Despite this progress, the region is still among the most unequal in the world and, not surprisingly, perception surveys show that citizens perceive great inequality.
Both distrust of the State’s political institutions (the legislature, the judicial power and political parties) and perceived unfairness are high, and they are correlated.
Citizen dissatisfaction with how these institutions work and how economic, social and political goods are distributed is a factor to be taken into account by strategies that aim to promote a social covenant for greater equality.
Of that total, domestic workers account for 5% and the other care-related occupations account for 1.7%.
Nearly 71% of care workers are female domestic workers; 23% are women in other care-related occupations (fairly equally split between education and health services).
The remaining 6% are male domestic workers (3.7%) and men in other care-related occupations.
In the care sector, young persons and older persons both account for a lower percentage than in other occupations.
Those that do work in domestic care have lower education attainment levels and less access to social protection than the employed population as a whole.
Hourly wage gaps (adjusted for type of worker) show that pay for domestic workers is lower than the average for the employed population in the vast majority of the countries.
Health-care pay is higher than the overall average; wages for education workers are near average.
These differences reflect dual models of labour protection and regulation in the region, where domestic employment is underregulated and poorly paid, has little access to social protection and is subject to discrimination and very precarious working conditions.
This equation is further complicated by the concentration of migrant women in domestic work and other care-related occupations in many of the countries of the region and worldwide.
The first section of chapter IV examines recent trends in public social spending.
As noted in earlier editions of Social Panorama of Latin America, both the absolute amount of resources allocated to social expenditure and its percentage share of total public expenditure and GDP continued to trend up through 2010.
Much of the effort to boost this spending was linked to measures aimed at addressing the impact of the recent global financial crisis, making public social spending clearly countercyclical in nature.
Most of the increased expenditure was in social security (including redistributive components, such as establishing or expanding non-contributory pension schemes) and in sharply higher funding allocated to social assistance programmes.
But more recent data on budget execution in the social sphere points to slower growth in social expenditure starting in 2011 because of the need to bolster public finances in the face of lower revenues coupled with instability and uncertainty in the more developed economies.
The reason for controlling spending was to lower the fiscal deficits recently posted by many of the countries of the region.
The second part of chapter IV takes up private spending on care, using data from the most recent round of income and spending surveys conducted since 2000 in a number of countries in the region.
The vast majority of households do not have the capacity to hire paid care services.
As would be expected, among the households reporting expenditure on care, the amount varies substantially in accordance with socioeconomic level.
Nevertheless, the amount spent as a share of total household income is fairly consistent, revealing the irreducible nature of care needs.
The entrenched asymmetrical gender roles and the constraints that families face in paying for care services still mean that care is primarily provided by women, making it hard or impossible for them to participate in the labour market and thus undermining the family’s ability to increase its income level.
Households with older people tend to spend more on care which, given population ageing, is a warning sign for the future.
Chapter V examines the position of persons with disabilities in Latin America and the Caribbean, their care needs and the public policy challenges in this regard.
It proposes a statistical approach and offers a comparative review of the situation of persons with disabilities in the region.
Persons with disabilities are overrepresented among individuals who live alone, but most of them receive care and support from their closest family members in a variety of living arrangements.
This situation usually impacts the family’s emotional and financial well-being and calls for expanding the supply of care services provided by the State, the market and civil organizations.
Censuses, the main source of measurements, still do not allow comparability between countries, because they compile the data very differently, sometimes leading to over- and under-representation.
For this reason it is essential to make progress towards standardization and access mainstream education, employment and social security coverage.
Lastly, chapter VI looks at a number of care policies and programmes in the region, proposes conditions and content standards for a social and fiscal covenant for care with equality, identifies the challenges in building integrated, more equal care systems and explains how those challenges fit into the broader picture of social protection and social security systems.
Care policies involve rebalancing the relationship between the State, the market, communities and families.
Leaving it up to the market to address the care needs of families increases inequality by subjecting access to services to the individual’s ability to pay for them.
In a care strategy guided by equality, the State should ensure that access gaps are narrowed, build capacities to generate a broad supply of care and meet the care needs of large segments of the population in order to prevent vulnerabilities from growing.
Moreover, beyond the direct provision of services, good care requires infrastructure, appropriate facilities and training for human resources with varying degrees of specialization that can become a new source of jobs.
Turning care into a pillar of social protection and public policy, and seeing it as a source of social rights, involves many challenges.
Among these are funding, coordinating and regulating a network of public, private and mixed providers of the services needed.
Changes in the regulation of production and in labour organization are essential for putting men and women on an equal footing in the workplace and enabling them to combine productive activities with care rights and obligations. consensus regarding questionnaires, in order to capture data that are comparable between countries and over time.
It is also important to ensure that household surveys include questions on disabilities, so that the social situation of persons with disabilities can be examined from the angles of different social and demographic variables.
Part I Poverty, income distribution and citizen distrust Chapter I Poverty: profile and recent trends Recent progress in reducing poverty GDP growth in Latin America was 4.3% in 2011, equivalent to a 3.2% expansion of per capita output.
While lower than the 4.9% per capita growth posted in 2010, this performance consolidates the regionwide recovery following the 3.0% decline in 2009.
The region’s employment rate trended up, with the average unemployment rate falling from 7.3% in 2010 to 6.7%.
The steady downtrend in the unemployment rate since 2002, interrupted only in 2009, has yielded the lowest figures since the mid-1990s: below 8% in virtually all of the countries of Latin America.
Real labour income was boosted by continuing low rates of inflation in most of the countries: the 6.9% average for the region is just 0.4 percentage points above the inflation rate for 2010.
In this setting, estimates based on household surveys available as of 2011 put the regional poverty rate at 29.4%, including 11.5% living in extreme poverty or indigence.
The figures for 2011 show that the poverty rate is 1.6 percentage points lower than in 2010 and that the indigence rate dropped by 0.6 percentage points.3 This decade-long downtrend has brought both rates down to 30-year lows.
Latin America and the Caribbean continued to grow in 2012, with the average for the year estimated at 3.2% (1.1 percentage points lower than in 2011).
The pace of growth is expected to remain slow, especially because annual inflation to June 2012 (simple average of 5.5%) is the lowest since November 2010.
Projections of positive economic growth and moderate inflation in 2012 suggest that poverty will continue to trend down, although not as sharply.
The poverty rate is expected to drop by at least a half percentage point; the indigence rate is forecast to hold at the level seen in 2011.
The projections in Social Panorama of Latin America 2011 assumed that spiralling food prices could drive the indigence rate up.
Although food prices did rise, on average, 1.3 times more than prices for other goods, higher income and improved distribution in a number of countries translated into a lower regional indigence rate.
Of the 12 countries with information available for 2011, 7 saw their poverty rates fall: Paraguay by 5.2 percentage points; Ecuador by 3.7 percentage points; Peru by 3.5 percentage points; Colombia by 3.1 percentage points; Argentina by 2.9 percentage points; Brazil (by 2.0 percentage points per year between 2009 and 2011); and Uruguay by 1.9 percentage points.
In the seven countries with significant drops in poverty levels, labour income accounted for at least three quarters of the variation in total per capita income.
Transfers (public and private, including pensions and retirement benefits) and other income (capital income, imputed rent, and others) also helped bring the poverty rate down, albeit to a lesser degree.
The discrepancy is due basically to the fact that the price deflator used by the Institute to adjust the indigence line —which reflects the variation in the prices of the specific products that make up the basic consumption basket— rose less than the deflator used by ECLAC, which reflects changes in food inflation and is therefore composed differently.
The trend observed in the Dominican Republic does not entirely match that reported by the country’s official statistical office.
The discrepancy is due to minor methodological differences related to the calculation of aggregate income and the value of the lines used.
The figures above the bars are the percentages and total numbers of poor people (indigent plus non-indigent poor).
Patterns of poverty In addition to understanding the scope and trend of poverty in each country and for the region as a whole, it is useful to see how the poverty rate differs across segments of the population.
Changes in demographic factors, labour markets, the overall economic climate and institutional responses to poverty, along with falling poverty rates, could have gradually reshaped the profile of persons living in need.
For analytical purposes, the poor population is divided into two groups: the indigent and the non-indigent poor.
The non-poor population is divided into the vulnerable (persons whose per capita income is above the poverty line but less than 1.5 times this threshold) and the non-vulnerable.
Comparing the four groups at the regional level shows that area of residence is one of the dimensions that vary the most among persons according to their income level.
Persons living in indigence are evenly divided between urban and rural areas; nearly three of every four non-indigent poor persons live in urban areas (see figure 2).
There are also clear differences in age structure among the poor and the non-poor.
Minors (aged 17 or under) make up 51% of the indigent population and 45% of the non-indigent poor.
In other words, practically half of those living in poverty are children.
The percentage falls to 38% among the vulnerable population and 23% among the non-vulnerable.
The opposite is true of persons aged 50 or over: they account for some 12% of the poor population, climbing to 27% of the non-vulnerable population.
There are, as well, substantial differences in education level among the groups.
Half of the adults (aged 25 to 65) living in indigence had not completed primary education.
This percentage shrinks as income rises, to stand at 14% of the non-vulnerable group.
Those who completed primary education but not secondary education make up the largest group (some 45%) among the non-indigent poor and the vulnerable.
A large share (41%) of the non-vulnerable completed secondary education but not higher education.
Among the poor and the vulnerable, the percentage of persons having completed higher education is very small (less than 1% and 3%, respectively); among the non-vulnerable the proportion is markedly larger, at 13%.
Although paid work might be expected to be one of the main routes out of poverty, most of the poor and vulnerable aged 15 or over are already employed.
Only about 8% of the indigent and 6% of the non-indigent poor are unemployed, highlighting once more a persistent pattern in the region stemming from its heterogeneous production structure: not all paid work guarantees an exit from poverty.
More than 60% of the men in the four categories reviewed are employed.
In none of them do women reach that level, because most of them are not participating in the labour market.
The persistent pattern of integration of the poorest in the traditional production sector is confirmed by the fact that a large portion (43%) of the indigent who are employed are own-account workers and less than one third (31%) are employees.
In the other groups, employees account for the largest share (50% of the non-indigent poor, 57% of the vulnerable and 64% of the non-vulnerable), showing that wage employment does not protect people from the risk of slipping into poverty.
There is a gender gap here, as well; among women (particularly among the indigent and the non-indigent poor), a larger percentage are unpaid family workers and domestic workers.
Access to electricity is widespread among low-income persons (86% of the indigent and 95% of the non-indigent poor have access).
Among the indigent, 71% have access to drinking water; among the non-indigent poor the figure is 81%.
These groups are least likely to have access to sanitation: 47% of the indigent population and 61% of the poor.
The poverty rate in Latin America fell sharply —by more than 14 percentage points— between 1999 and 2011.
However, the pattern of poverty is, in a number of aspects, much the same as in the late 1990s.
There have been some changes, though, and most of them have to do with demographic and education trends throughout the region.
The breakdown of poor groups by sex is similar to the one seen in 1999, but a major shift has occurred in the percentage of persons living in female-headed households —from 18% of all indigent households in 1999 to 28% in 2011.
This indicates a need for more care alternatives (especially for those who cannot afford to buy care in the market) in order to make it easier for women to participate in the labour market, which is crucial for female-headed households living below the poverty threshold.
On another front, the rising average age of the population is gradually changing the makeup and size of poor households.
The share of the adult population living in indigence ticked up slightly, from 9% of the population aged 50 or over in 1999 to 12% in 2011.
As for average household size, among the indigent population it shrank from 5.4 members in 1999 to 4.6 members in 2011; among the non-indigent poor it went from 4.8 members to 4.4 members.
Employment status (women aged 15 or over) Incomplete primary Incomplete higher G.
Among the poor, the percentage who know how to read and write increased from 82% to 85%; school attendance among children aged 6 to 15 climbed from 90% to 94%.
The share of young people having completed primary education rose from 79% to 88%; the proportion having completed secondary education went from 19% to 33%.
While rising levels of school enrolment among the poorest is a positive trend, secondary education completion rates are still low.
In 2011, 29% of the income-vulnerable population had either attended or completed higher education.
As for basic services, the proportion with access to electricity, water and sanitation rose by 6 percentage points, 7 percentage points and 9 percentage points, respectively.
Complementary perspectives on absolute poverty time spent on domestic and care work meets the needs of self-care and of caring for other members of the household.
Household well-being, in turn, depends on income and consumption levels and on decisions as to the time devoted to paid work.
Moreover, households need a minimum of hours for domestic and care work, for rest and for leisure.
One is relative monetary poverty, which expands the traditional concept of absolute poverty to take fuller account of what people need to fully participate in their society.
Poverty is most commonly measured by determining an income threshold, or poverty line, stated as a percentage of the median income of the population.
Because choosing the percentage to use is discretionary, it is standard practice to estimate relative poverty based on a range of values: typically, 40%, 50%, 60% and 70% of median income.
Given the reasoning behind the way relative poverty is estimated, the value of the relative poverty line or monetary threshold would be expected to be higher than the absolute poverty line because it includes a broader set of needs and satisfactors.
But for most of the countries of the region, the relative poverty lines determined using this methodology are lower than the absolute poverty lines.
Therefore, the standard methodology for estimating relative poverty cannot be followed across the board in the region.
The conventional way to measure relative poverty yields results that are very similar across the countries of Latin America.
Using a threshold of 60% of median per capita income yields poverty rates ranging between 23% and 33%.
The other thresholds (50% and 70% of median income) also produce this narrow dispersion.
These outcomes stand in sharp contrast to those obtained using an absolute poverty threshold, which range from less than 10% to nearly 70% (see figure 3).
Even though this method for measuring relative poverty cannot be used throughout the region, in some countries it provides useful information.
Using 60% of median income as an indicator of the cost of meeting social needs, the relative poverty rate is higher than the absolute poverty rate in six countries in the region.
In these countries in particular, but also regionwide, falling absolute poverty rates will make it increasingly useful to take account of these needs in order to identify the economically disadvantaged population.
Another perspective comes from considering time deprivation as relevant input for measuring individual well-being.
The time spent on paid work generates monetary resources for meeting a variety of needs; the Relative poverty (70% of the median) Absolute poverty a Data for 2011, except El Salvador (2010), Guatemala (2006), Honduras (2010), Mexico (2010), Nicaragua (2009) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (2009).
The region has yet to systematically include the time spent on care work and unpaid work in poverty assessments.
Doing so would produce a deeper understanding of poverty and of gender inequality and should enhance policy design.
Drawing an analogy with monetary resources, “time poverty” can be measured when it is defined, for example, as the lack of time for rest and leisure because too much time is spent on work and on household chores.
Measuring time poverty poses a number of challenges, both in conceptualizing it and in defining time poverty standards and thresholds.
Nevertheless, it appears to be a useful way to gain a better understanding of the dimensions of individual well-being.
In most of the countries, a large share of all income is concentrated in a small segment of the population while the poorest receive a very small proportion.
The simple average of figures for the 18 countries on which relatively recent data are available shows that the wealthiest 10% of the population receives 32% of total income while the poorest 40% receives 15% of total income.
Relatively high levels of income concentration are seen in Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Honduras and Paraguay, where the share approaches 40% for the wealthiest and ranges between 11% and 15% for the poorest.
In Costa Rica, Panama and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the share going to the poorest segment is similar, although the income share for the top decile is slightly smaller.
In Argentina, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua and Peru, the values at the lower end of the distribution are higher (16% to 17%) and those for the wealthiest 10% are somewhat lower (in the area of 30%).
Income concentration is lower in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay, with shares at each end on the order of 20% to 23%.
Persistently high income inequality should not overshadow the progress that has been made in recent years.
A clear downtrend has been evident in income concentration since the early 2000s.
It has been one of the hallmarks of the development process in Latin America over the past 10 years and is a reversal of the trend that had held for at least 20 years before that.
A comparison of recent findings with data from around 2002 show that distribution has improved in most of the countries of the region.
The Gini coefficient fell by at least 1% per year in 9 of the 17 countries examined.
Those recording the sharpest decreases include Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Nicaragua and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, in all of which the Gini coefficient fell at an annual rate of more than 2%.
This trend was not especially impacted by the economic crisis that broke out in 2008.
The past year saw a slight but statistically significant decrease in inequality in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador and Uruguay.
In the rest of the countries, including those whose Gini coefficient is higher than in 2010, the new findings are not statistically different from those for the previous year.
Paid work is the most important source of household income, accounting for, on average, three fourths of the total.
Unequal distribution of labour income is the chief determinant of income inequality.
For the region as a whole, the simple average of the Gini coefficient for labour income for the employed population is similar to the coefficient for per capita income.
At the country level, however, both variables show differing degrees of concentration.
Data for 2010 refer to figures for 2009 in Brazil and Chile. and office workers.
The share of officials and operators is the same in the first four quintiles and lower in the highest income quintile.
Breaking labour income down between wages and salaries earned by persons working for others and by the self-employed shows that in most cases the decreases have been sharpest (or the increases smaller) for the former (see figure 6).
Lastly, the employed population across the income distribution was grouped by labour income quintile (see figure 7).
There is a positive correlation between average age and income level, and between income and education level.
The analysis of job attributes shows that the proportion of wage employees and employers increases along with labour income and that the share of own-account, domestic and unpaid family workers declines.
This correlation is linked to the region’s high level of production heterogeneity, which is also associated with the greater prevalence, in the lower income quintiles, of employees of small establishments (less than five persons), whose share in the higher income quintiles is lower.
A look at the structure of the quintiles by occupation shows that the higher the income quintile, the lower the proportion of unskilled and agricultural workers.
The opposite is true for the proportion of senior managers at public and private enterprises, professionals, technicians Per capita income Labour income a Data for 2008 are from 2008 except for Argentina (2006), Chile (2009), El Salvador (2004), Honduras (2007), Nicaragua (2005) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (2007).
Citizen distrust: recent trends and associated factors Despite recent progress, the countries of Latin America still have high levels of inequality, coupled with marked distrust of institutions (legislature, judicial power and political parties) and high levels of perceived unfairness.
Persistent citizen dissatisfaction with those institutions is both an obstacle and a challenge for a general sense of ownership and for building social covenants based on equality.
The Latin American population still evinces a high degree of perceived distribution unfairness in the countries.
In 2011, 79% of the region’s population reported thinking that income distribution in the country in question was unfair or very unfair.
In 2011, 6 out of every 10 Latin Americans reported having very little or no trust in political and State institutions; this is a very high percentage.
Throughout 1997-2011 there was a correlation between perceived unfair distribution and distrust of the legislature, judicial power and political parties.
Distrust and perceived unfairness were consistently lower in some countries (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Costa Rica and Uruguay) and at medium levels in others (Colombia and Mexico).
There were also countries (Argentina, Guatemala and Peru) in which perceived income distribution unfairness and distrust in institutions were consistently high throughout the period examined (see figure 8).
Between 1997 and 2010, perceived unfair distribution and distrust of the institutions referred to were correlated with the Gini coefficient.
For the countries and years with greater objective inequality in income distribution, both perceived distribution unfairness and distrust of institutions were higher (see figure 9).
Respondents were asked to rate each institution according to the following ordinal scale: (1) a lot; (2) a fair amount; (3) a little; and (4) not at all.
Responses to the three questions were averaged and recoded; responses with values between 3 and 4 were taken as “a little” or “no” trust. c Several years of data are included for each country; accordingly, each point in the figure corresponds to a particular country and year.
Respondents were asked to rate each institution according to the following scale: (1) a lot; (2) a fair amount; (3) a little; and (4) not at all.
Averages between 3 and 4 were taken as “a little” or “no” trust. c Several years of data are included for each country; accordingly, each point in the figure corresponds to a particular country and year.
The strong correlation between distrust of institutions and perceptions of unfair distribution throughout 1997-2011 suggest profound, persistent citizen dissatisfaction with how these institutions work and how economic, social and political goods are distributed in the countries.
The correlation between objectively measured inequality and dissatisfaction with these institutions also suggests that these high levels of wealth concentration and social differences are or could become conflictive.
Part II Some aspects of care in Latin America and the Caribbean: employment, household expenditure and persons with disabilities Introduction Care: concept, relevance and challenges With care come life, well-being and development.
Care means ensuring, on a daily basis, the physical and emotional well-being that people need throughout life.
It spans from stimulating cognitive fundamentals in infancy to seeking, as far as possible, to preserve the capacities and self-determination of fragile older persons and persons with disabilities.
Doing so calls for creating and managing goods, resources, services and activities to ensure nourishment, safeguard health and personal hygiene and foster cognitive and social development and learning.
In Latin America care is provided overwhelmingly by unpaid means within families, mainly by women.
Far from being acknowledged as crucially important as the foundation for social reproduction, in the main this work goes unrecognized and little valued, and the activities involved are absent from the statistics and the national accounts.
Accordingly, to bring the care economy onto the agenda and to turn the spotlight on the huge contribution that unpaid care makes to society is to rethink the boundaries of human labour itself.
It is, then, essential to make care work visible within the economic rationale, because it is essential for reproducing the labour force and because the way it is organized and distributed in society exposes yawning gender inequalities.
This calls for including care in the economic analysis (care as the “shadow of work”), understanding its relationship to gender oppression and recognizing its value as a meaningful activity and a responsibility of citizenship.
Care in order to nurture and care for reproducing the workforce are intertwined dimensions.
The care needs of children (at present, 27.7% of the population of Latin America) are, increasingly, compounded by the needs of fragile older persons (those with a high degree of dependence).
Just for the sake of setting a cut-off age, there is no question that beyond the age of 80 the fragility rate is high, independence is inconsistent and there is a risk of functional loss.
Older persons can often require hospitalization, fall frequently, take medicines or have chronic health problems that can be disabling.
In Latin America, this segment makes up 15% of the population of adults aged 60 or over; because it is growing at nearly 4% per year it will double by 2070.
By the end of the twenty-first century, 36.6% of the population of older adults will be in the elderly age bracket (80 or over).
Persons with disabilities account for some 12% of the population of Latin America and the Caribbean (see chapter V).
The tensions that come with changes in the social model for distributing care responsibilities have been examined from different angles.
For example, the “care crisis” comes at a point in history when paid wage work and unpaid domestic work are being rearranged while the rigid gender distribution of household work and gender segmentation of the labour market remain unchanged.
The resulting asynchronies show that the traditional balance of care no longer works.
The rights-based approach to care implies a criticism of welfarism because it concerns women’s agency and the autonomy of both the subjects and the providers of care.
It also brings up the need to challenge the activity-passivity dichotomy in the relationship between provider and subject.
Defining the objectives and strategies for care under the rights-based approach also involves weighing other factors pertaining to the subjects of care that are in tension with one another: autonomy, dependence, fragility and fragilization.
Autonomy has to do with the ability to perform the functions of daily life with as little help as possible; it can be tied to the notion of independence.
Autonomy has both a public dimension (active participation in the organization of society) and a personal one (an individual’s ability to make and carry out his or her own life plans and make his or her own decisions).
In both cases, self-determination and the ability to decide for oneself are the basis of autonomy, even if help and support from others is needed in order to achieve it.
Dependency is understood as a restriction on the exercise of autonomy due to a physical or mental constraint that, in practice, diminishes the capacity to freely make decisions or take action.
Fragility is a precursor of dependence; it arises from the accumulation of deficits.
With age, for example, increasing morbidity and the individual’s relationship with his or her surroundings translate into vulnerability because of the risk of shortand medium-term adverse health events.
Fragilization is the process of becoming fragile and derives from the surroundings and from social obstacles, not from the functioning of individuals.
It happens because societies marginalize those who have certain functional limitations and keep them from realizing their potential.
The tension between the four elements (autonomy, dependence, fragility and fragilization) helps define the kind of care that children, fragile older persons, persons with disabilities and persons with health-related dependence.7 In terms of the binomials set up, children, older persons in various age brackets, persons with health-related dependence and persons with disabilities are in different quadrants (see diagram 1).
Obviously, reality does not fit neatly into a conceptual scheme, but looking at it in this way helps distinguish between the components of care based on the characteristics of the subject and shows that the objectives, as well as the strategies for implementation, are different in each case.
Caring for children is on the dependence-autonomy axis because children’s young age makes the arrangement a temporary one.
Elderly persons (aged 80 or over) and persons of any age with health- or disability-related dependence are in the fragility-autonomy quadrant; their care should focus on providing targeted, technical support that manages their dependence in the best possible way and compensates for their current or potential limitations.
The fragilization-autonomy quadrant has to do with the quality of care and preventive measures; requirements include changing the physical and social surroundings, providing services for an ageing society and addressing the obstacles that persons with disabilities face.
Quality care and prevention are essential for slowing the transition from fragilization to fragility and for keeping fragility from being a prelude to dependence.
Autonomy should be seen as a moving goal and, instead of being mistaken for self-sufficiency, should be cast in the light of respect within care relationships.
Looking at care as a policy framework, objective and focus opens another avenue for defining and enhancing the social rights agenda, especially in the area of universal access to certain services with certain quality standards, because it highlights the need for regulating care services.
Advancing the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons is, therefore, linked to the development of care and the quality of related services.
The following chapters seek to further both the assessment of the dimensions of care and the framing of policies for care.
Chapter III, in describing paid care work in the countries of Latin America, makes a significant contribution to understanding the issue because previous studies tended to focus on unpaid care work.
Chapter IV provides an update on social expenditure patterns in Latin America and analyses private household spending on care services.
This, too, is a new kind of data, with limitations inherent to the sources, but they identify interesting trends among different social groups.
Chapter V uses the most recent censuses and other sources to offer an overview of the situation of persons with disabilities in Latin America and the Caribbean; it describes care arrangements and the care services that persons with disabilities need.
Lastly, chapter VI lays out care policy challenges as a core component of social protection systems in the region.
Chapter III Paid work in the care sector In order to understand how care and the care economy are constructed and valued in modern societies, both unpaid and paid care work must be brought into the picture.
Research has also progressed as regards the recognition of unpaid work in the economy and the reconciliation of productive and reproductive work.
One of the main challenges that such research has faced has been what criteria to use to identify paid workers in the care sector.
A review of the literature reveals the lack of a single definition and the existence of widely varying approaches for deciding what paid jobs should be included in the care sector.
This study on Latin America is based on the approach that defines paid care work as the provision of a service for dependent persons (children, the sick, older persons, persons with disabilities), is enough statistical information available for such an examination.
The following pages seek to fill in these research gaps, flagging the situation in a key sector of the labour market where conditions, comparative to the overall employment picture, reflect the low ranking of care on the public policy agenda.
This has a marked impact on the quality of care services. including relational and non-relational reproductive work.
This classification of care workers does not include teachers at the primary, secondary or higher education level, physicians or other health professionals because the services they provide do not fit the definition of care.9 Paid care work Wage employment in the care sector accounts for 6.7% of total employment across the region.
In Uruguay, Brazil and Chile, paid care work accounts for more than 8% of all employment (9.2%, 8.5% and 8.3%, respectively, in 2010).
At the other extreme, in 6 of the 14 countries examined (Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua and Peru), the figure is below 5% of all employed persons.
On average, 5% of the people employed in the care sector are providing domestic services; 1.7% are in other care-related occupations (see figure 10).
This breakdown is a major factor in defining this set of workers.
Regarding the definition of care, see the introduction to part II of this edition of Social Panorama of Latin America.
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay are for urban areas. b Weighted average.
The proportion of employed persons in the care sector held fairly steady between 2000 and 2010.
In 2000 they accounted for 6.2% of total employment, so any change over the decade was negligible.
Nor have there been major shifts in the breakdown between domestic workers and other providers of care.
Workers in care-related fields form a very heterogeneous set comprising vastly differing subgroups.
For one, in Latin America three fourths (74.5%) of all care workers are domestic workers; the remaining one fourth (25.5%) work in other areas (see figure 11).
Another view groups employed persons into education services, health services and household or other community services.
Almost 8 of every 10 (79.8%) workers in the care sector are in this last category.
Of the remaining 20%, 11.5% work in health services and 8.7% work in education services (see figure 12).
In both of these breakdowns, the distribution has remained fairly unchanged over the past decade.
In Latin America, work in the care sector is highly feminized, showing how the gender bias that determines the distribution of unpaid care work transcends the household to naturalize the overrepresentation of women in these occupations.
Nearly 71% of all care workers are women in household domestic work; 23% are women in other care-related occupations (fairly evenly split between education services and health services).
The remaining 6% are men in domestic work (3.7%) and in other care-related occupations (see figures 13 and 14).
The data for Nicaragua are from 2005; for the Plurinational State of Bolivia, from 2007; for Brazil and Chile, from 2009.
As this configuration shows, the care sector as a whole is a major source of jobs for women and a virtually non-existent source of employment for men.
Of all employed women in the region, 15.3% work in the care sector and a large percentage (11.6%) are in domestic work.
There are other ways to describe the unique profile of care workers as a group, as well as the differences between domestic work and other care work.
Young persons (aged 15 to 24) and older persons account for a smaller share of all care workers than of other groups of employed persons.
On average, they tend to have a lower education level than workers outside the care sector, although there are sharp differences within the care sector: women in domestic work have considerably less schooling than women working in education and health care.
Among care workers, the proportion of heads of household is smaller than among other employed persons.
The same trend (albeit with small differences) holds when looking only at employed female heads of household.
They account for a larger percentage of female workers in the care sector than of employed women in other sectors.
Slightly less than one third (31.7%) of female domestic workers are heads of household, versus 27.9% of female workers in other care sectors.
The percentage of female heads of household who work in the care sector (especially in domestic work) has risen much more than their share in other sectors.
In short, the percentage of workers in the care sector who have family responsibilities is notable, and it is growing.
Care workers live in households whose per capita income is, on average, lower than that of other employed persons.
It is unsurprising, therefore, that the poverty rate among care sector workers is higher than for other employed persons (24.1% versus 20.2% in 2010).
But here, too, there are sharp differences among those employed in care-related fields.
The poverty rate for domestic workers is 29.1% (2010); for other care sector workers it is just 9.6%.
Labour conditions Care workers are grouped in a wide variety of occupational categories.
The vast majority of men and women in domestic work are private-sector wage workers, while a large proportion (nearly half) of other care workers are in the public sector.
The proportion of care sector workers who lack social protection (that is, who are not covered by social security) is somewhat higher than for other workers (63.2% versus 56.9% in 2010).
The main reason is the high percentage of uncovered domestic workers; only 23.7% contributed to social security schemes in 2010.
Social security coverage has increased over the past decade, both for employed persons in the care sector and for other employed persons.
But most of the improvement among care workers has been among education and health workers; the trend among domestic workers is in the same direction but not as marked.
First, workers in the care sector work fewer hours a week than other employed persons (36.6 hours versus 42.3 hours in 2010).
This pattern is driven mainly by the hours of domestic workers and, especially, education workers, because the number of hours for health sector workers is similar to that for other occupations.
Second, multiple job-holding is less common among care workers as a whole than in other occupations, a pattern driven again by domestic workers.
Last, there tends to be a wage penalty for domestic work; for education workers the pattern is not clear.
There is a wage premium for health workers compared with peers in other sectors, probably because a high proportion of them work in the public sector.
Domestic employment: vulnerabilities and discrimination A specific population profile, basic asset deficits and more precarious labour conditions are all part of the domestic employment picture.
The evidence set out herein confirms the findings of other research: domestic employment is more highly feminized than other care-related occupations; domestic workers tend to have a lower education level; a higher percentage of them live in poverty or indigence; and the share of indigenous persons is higher than among other workers in the care sector.
Domestic employment is the category with the highest concentration of female heads of household and women in households with children and adolescents.
There is a strong correlation between domestic employment and single-parent households headed by women, reflecting a core inequality grounded in a disadvantaged position, a high degree of dependence on income from long workdays and the challenges posed by reconciling paid and unpaid work.
The sharp socioeconomic differences between domestic workers and other care workers reflects the region’s dual models of labour protection and regulation.
In this two-tier system, domestic employment is beset by underregulation, low wages, minimal access to social protection, discrimination and extremely precarious labour conditions.
This equation is made even more complicated by the fact that in many countries in the region and throughout the world, migrant women are concentrated in occupations such as domestic work and care activities.
As for internal migration, 2010 census round data for some countries suggest that internal migrants no longer account for such a significant share and the trend is towards convergence with the non-migrant population.
The association between international migrants and domestic employment is much stronger and more persistent.
In the countries of Latin America, the flow of migrant women tends to be for employment reasons; migrant women increasingly report that their decision to migrate was based on economic factors.
A large portion of them engage in domestic work in their destination country, where they fined real opportunities for economic integration.
There is a high degree of labour segregation by gender and by country of origin, however.
Increasingly, migrants from the same country perform the same kind of work in their destination countries; for women, domestic employment is one of the preponderant occupations.
Another clear tendency is that in the main destination countries, most female migrant household workers are mothers.
This is relevant, first because it means that they are supporting their children financially and, second, because it is a palpable indication that women’s freedom to take the decision to migrate alone —i.e. leaving their children behind in their home country— is highly relative.
Chapter IV Recent trends in social spending and private spending on care in Latin America and the Caribbean Before the mid-2000s, public social spending tended to be highly procyclical.
During the second half of the decade a number of countries launched systematic efforts to enhance social programmes, especially those aimed at fighting poverty.
Each of these three developments shaped fiscal and social policy to some degree or other.
Along with enhanced major social programmes (to fight poverty and boost social protection, primarily through the solidary or non-contributory pillar) came measures to redirect spending (and taxes) to avoid the regressive impacts of rising commodity prices, primarily in 2007 and 2008.
After the outbreak of the financial crisis, governments took steps to stabilize domestic demand by ramping up public non-social spending (chiefly by investing in infrastructure) and, above all, social spending.
The fiscal priority of social spending as a share of total public spending had already been growing since the and the higher fiscal priority accorded to social spending were triggered more by a drop in non-social public spending and thus by the falling share of total public spending, particularly between 1999 and 2004.
Starting in 2010, some countries launched fiscal reforms on both the income and spending sides in order to consolidate public finances, as some five years (20032008) of primary surpluses and falling public debt were followed by public account deficits triggered by higher public spending.
Although the figures for 2010 show a countercyclical expansion of spending, the greatest growth was in public social spending while in some cases non-social public spending actually fell.
Partial data for 2011 point to a shrinking share for social expenditure (lower economic priority as a percentage of GDP: 0.8 percentage points less than in 2010 as a simple average for eight countries) but not necessarily a drop, in absolute terms, of resources allocated to the social sectors.
Although there are clear overall trends, the region’s countries differ a great deal in terms of the amount of resources they can effectively channel towards social sectors and in terms of the macroeconomic effort represented by the public social budget.
Social spending in the countries Except during certain periods, all the countries have made an effort to increase the share of total spending allocated to public social spending (fiscal priority of social expenditure) as a macroeconomic priority, often by boosting social spending as a percentage of GDP.
By the end of the period reviewed, the macroeconomic priority of social spending had risen significantly virtually across the board in the region.
A number of countries had been allocating more than 15% of GDP to social spending since the early 1990s; Chile, Costa Rica and the Plurinational State of Bolivia are now part of this group (see figure 17).
Despite persistent differences in the macroeconomic priority of social spending, a few countries have made a proportionally larger effort to increase the percentage allocated to such spending.
As a ratio of GDP, El Salvador increased the macroeconomic priority of public social spending by more than 300% (from 2.9% of GDP to 13% of GDP).
By contrast, the increase in Chile, Panama and Trinidad and Tobago over the past 20 years was minimal.
Social spending becomes less procyclical The measures implemented to deal with the rising price of food and other commodities and then to mitigate the impacts of the international financial crisis have led to a certain decoupling of fluctuations in social spending from the economic cycle in the past few years.
This would explain much of the increase in social spending over the past two years, equal to 2 percentage points of GDP.
Most of the increase (50%) has been in social security and assistance, partly because of social security commitments whose behaviour tends to be inertial and somewhat independent from the economic cycle, and partly because some countries have enhanced the non-contributory components of social security (solidarity-based pensions).
Moreover, social welfare programmes targeting the individuals and households most at risk during the economic downturn have been created or expanded.
Partial data for 2011 suggest that social spending is contracting without necessarily translating into fewer resources, in absolute terms, allocated to the social sectors.
Among the contributing factors could be continued uncertainty flowing from the developed economies beyond the 2008-2009 financial crisis, along with persistent balance-of-payments current account deficits that could affect fiscal revenue and drive the fiscal deficit up.
This usually goes hand in hand with weak public care policies and programmes that provide scanty coverage and are fragmented and underfunded.
The right to provide and receive care still depends mainly on the time and effort that women in the household can devote to it, on intergenerational solidarity within families, and on individual ability to pay for care services.
It also limits women’s options for entering the labour market (see figure 20).
Income and expenditure surveys in a number of countries show that household care needs can translate into spending on hired care, be it direct or indirect care or a combination of the two.
The vast majority of households do not have the capacity to pay for such services.
For households that do report care spending, the actual market demand expressed in monetary terms depends on total household income and on the range of needs they need, want and are able to meet.
Rep. of) 2010 Dominican Rep. 2010 El Salvador 2010 Guatemala 2006 The structure of care spending Depending on data availability, expenditures were grouped by types of domestic work that provide care for the family as a whole or for family members of different age ranges.
Spending on health care inside and outside the household was grouped together, showing that most of this spending goes on older persons in the household, the sick and persons with disabilities.
Lastly, spending on childhood education, from birth to preschool, was grouped together.10 The surveys examined show that the cost of domestic services and nursing services varies widely because they are provided at home either continuously or discontinuously.
Conversely, spending on health care may be covered in part by some kind of public or private insurance.
Spending on child care may reflect payments for private education services with or without public subsidies, co-payments for public education services, and other types of payments. between quintiles V and I are far larger: a simple average of 17 times more for this subset.
At the other end of the distribution, the countries with the least inequality between extreme quintiles are the Dominican Republic, Peru and Uruguay.
In this subset, the wealthiest quintile spends 50% more than the poorest.
Nevertheless, as figure 21 shows, the share of total household income devoted to care does not vary significantly by income quintile.
As for distribution by extreme quintiles, on average just 7.6% of the first quintile of households (the poorest) spend on care, compared with 32% of the wealthiest quintile.
The difference between the most and least wealthy households is largest in Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay.
Two-parent families in which both spouses are employed are more likely to spend on care, as are households with children under five years of age.
Nevertheless, a very high percentage of the latter spend nothing on care; this highlights the crucial role of unpaid care work performed by women.
Inequality and irreducibility of care For the region as a whole, absolute spending on care services rises sharply as disposable income increases (see figure 21).
For the 14 countries, the wealthiest families spend an average of four times more than the lowest-income families.
Spending on care as a percentage of total household spending (left scale) Spending on care in PPP dollars (right scale) a Only includes households that spent on care.
Male-headed households (most of which are two-parent households) spend, on average, 16% more on care than female-headed households.
But in households headed by women, spending on care accounts for a higher share of total spending than in households headed by men.
A comparison of the different capacity of poor and non-poor households to spend on care reveals the following points to bear in mind: unequal access in terms of the amount of care that can be bought; the monetary variable as a barrier to access to services; and the unequal quality of care that can be bought.
Not only does spending capacity affect the quality of care; it also impacts the employment conditions of those who provide direct or indirect paid care services (see chapter III).
Paid and unpaid care in households with small children and older persons: a picture of contrasts In 11 of the 14 countries examined, households with children spend even less on care than those without children.
This shows that the needs of those children are, to a large extent, met with unpaid care provided by the mother, other relatives or female neighbours.
When the woman works outside the home, spending on paid care tends to be higher.
Households with older adults tend to spend more on care, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of total spending (see figure 22).
On top of that, older women must often take on the role of main care provider for their spouses— a task that can be hard enough to even hasten their own vulnerability.
State of) PPP dollars Households without older persons a Includes households which report expenditure on care.
Chapter V Care of persons with disabilities in Latin America and the Caribbean: a comprehensive approach Introduction Since the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was adopted in 2006, discussions on disability-related matters have taken firm root in social and political agendas the world over.
Although the Convention affirms the right of all persons with disabilities to live in the community on an equal basis with the rest of the population, ensuring that this right can be realized in practice requires setting up a proper network of home care, staff and other support services and technical aids.
This chapter presents the results of a comprehensive review of the information available on the situation of persons with disabilities in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It is important to bear in mind, however, that the data available are not entirely comparable between countries, because the questions contained in the various measurement instruments —which can be censuses, household surveys or specialized surveys— refer to very different degrees of disability.
The chapter also offers a regional overview of the needs arising from the growth of this group of the population, bearing in mind that anyone can come to belong to this group —or to be linked to it through the care of another person— at any point during the life cycle.
In this approach, disability is considered a product of a complex interaction between altered health and environmental factors.
This is the classification on which current measurement efforts are based. formulation, taking into account that the care received by persons with disabilities may be instrumental to their achieving a more independent life and taking control of decisions encompassing the full range of their needs.
Care for persons with disabilities can be the mechanism for ensuring the exercise of their rights and participation in society.
Accordingly, functionality is defined as the ability to perform activities to meet everyday, instrumental and functional needs, and whose loss implies the risk of disability and dependence.
These two conditions are part of the quality of care and are enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (article 19) and are widely promoted by organizations that uphold the rights of persons with disabilities.
Scale of disability in Latin America and the Caribbean The scale of disability in Latin America and the Caribbean can be gauged from information available from the census rounds of 2000 and 2010 and from specialized surveys.
However, the measurement criteria used —principally as regards the type and severity of limitations and impairments recorded— vary so widely that the figures are not really comparable enough to draw an accurate map of disability in the region.
For example, in countries which have already conducted the 2010 census round, the prevalence of disability ranges from 5.1% in Mexico to 23.9% in Brazil (see figure 23), and in the Caribbean the figures range from 2.9% in the Bahamas to 6.9% in Aruba.
Given this disparity, greater efforts are needed to standardize measurement criteria in the interests of building comparable regional information.
Be this as it may, around 12.0% of the population of Latin America and the Caribbean —around 66 million people— may be estimated to live with at least one type of disability.
In over half the countries, disabilities are more prevalent among women than among men (see figure 24), especially in the population aged 60 and over.
This may be because women’s higher life expectancy increases their chances of acquiring a disability as a result of an accident or chronic illness.
Whatever the reason, during this stage of life women are more economically vulnerable, which further increases the risk of any health impairment becoming a disability for those who cannot afford the support services and technical aids needed to lessen the impact of age-related limitations.
Not only women, but also those population groups which are most economically and socially vulnerable, exhibit higher rates of disability: older adults, rural-dwellers, indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants, and those with lower incomes.
These groups show a higher incidence of disability (or a greater degree of disability) owing to lack of timely care and lack of resources or access to suitable services.
In Latin America, recent household surveys in three countries —Chile, Costa Rica and Mexico— show a higher prevalence of disability at in the lower income quintiles as people grow older.
The disparity —already evident after the age of 40— is glaring from the age of 60 onwards.
This makes is all the more important to craft policies to counter these income-driven differences in life trajectories.
In combination, these households’ lack of resources, the cost of technical aids and care services and the obstacles to income generation faced by persons with disabilities and their caregivers multiply the impact of disability on quality of life for all concerned, leading to impoverishment.
Quality of life with different types and levels of disability For persons with disabilities, quality of life also has much to do with the type and level of disability.
Both the difficulties inherent to a particular impairment —be it sensory, mental or physical— and the different types of response from the environment in terms of capacity for self-care, adaptation of the physical context, participation in society, range of education and employment opportunities and respect for the right to self-determination.
Census data for 18 countries of the region show that vision and mobility impairments were the most common in Latin America and the Caribbean overall.
These were followed by hearing and speech disabilities in Latin America and by mental or intellectual impairments and reduced manual dexterity in the Caribbean.
Vision and motor disabilities have the least impact on access to education and employment; persons with cognitive and mental disabilities and those with limited capacity for self-care face the greatest difficulties in terms of integration into economic and social activity.
Difficulties in meeting the care needs of persons living with disabilities depend on their degree of functional autonomy and independence, which have to do with the nature of their disabilities, be they visual, auditory, cognitive, communicational or related to mobility, selfcare or mental function.
Type of disability also heavily influences people’s opportunities for participation in society.
For example, school attendance data on persons with disabilities aged between 13 and 18 years in 17 Latin American and Caribbean countries shows huge disparities in access to schooling by type of disability.
The percentage attending school range from a low of 17% for persons with mental disabilities in El Salvador to 100% for persons with auditory disabilities in Bermuda and those with speech impairments in the Cayman Islands.
Educational achievement, in turn, is least impacted by visual and auditory disabilities and difficulties with walking and mobility.
Difficulties in speaking, learning, relating to others (mental disability) and capacity for self-care present the greatest obstacles to school completion.
The economic activities of persons with disabilities also vary by type of disability.
In 14 countries, persons with visual limitations were found to be the most integrated into the labour force, with a higher participation rate than that for all persons with disabilities in all the countries, except for Barbados and Saint Lucia.
Persons with auditory, speech and motor disabilities also had greater employment opportunities than those with cognitive and mental disabilities, reduced manual dexterity or difficulties with self-care.
In all cases, a much lower percentage of persons aged 15 and over with one or more types of disability are economically active than those who have no disability.
Care for persons with disabilities According to the World Report on Disability, published in 2011, many persons with disabilities require assistance and support in order to achieve a good quality of life and to participate in economic and social aspects of life on an equal basis with others.
Although a significant percentage of persons with disabilities in the region live alone, the great majority receive care and support from immediate family members through varied shared living arrangements.
This situation impacts heavily, both emotionally and financially, on family well-being, and highlights the shortfall in the supply of care services provided by the State, the market and civil society organizations.
The governments of a number of Latin American and Caribbean countries have also developed programmes of integration and inclusion in education for children with disabilities.
Headway is being made, as well, with different modalities of employment and training schemes for persons with disabilities.
These have an impact not only on the income of persons with disabilities but, insofar as they pay into social security systems, on their long-term economic autonomy too.
The analysis shows that a minority of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean offer non-contributory benefits independently of employment.
Most, however, provide a family benefit, targeted benefits or a guaranteed minimum pension for a person who has or whose child has a disability, and who has paid into the social security system for a certain length of time.
Summing up The outcomes of this exploration have shown that more coordination and agreement is needed to standardize criteria for making thorough diagnoses and to underpin a more unified regional approach that would, moreover, accommodate changes over time in a dynamic manner.
In terms of values and policies, the international community has arrived at a consensus on a rightsbased approach, in whose framework care for persons with disabilities must be governed by the principle of autonomy as an ethnical value.
This is not to disregard the fact that various disabilities introduce a degree of dependence in people’s lives.
The idea is to seek, within that reality, a care relationship in which persons with disabilities have the greatest possible capacity to make decisions on matters that affect them, plan and lead their lives with as much freedom and dignity as possible, and be seen and heard as they are and in their demands for proper treatment.
Chapter VI State of care policies and challenges in the region The social contract for care Care needs are being shifted by the new roles being played by women and men and by rapid sociodemographic changes: women’s greater labour-market participation, shifts in family structures, population ageing and changes in the epidemiological profile.
These changes are also making it increasingly unreasonable and highly questionable that the unpaid work performed by women in the household continues to form the backbone of care provision.
The roles of the State, the market and the family and community in care provision urgently need to be rebalanced.
For this to happen, a new social covenant must be forged to distribute roles and resources more fairly between women and men within families and within society, and to form a new and stronger nexus between the public and private spheres of work with positive impacts on production development.
The State must set up national care systems with public institutions that are capable of integrating care policies and services, bringing together organizations and public, private and civil society resources, and ensuring that services are relevant, comprehensive and of good quality, with an awareness of the particular traits and needs in each context.
In the framework of social covenants for greater equality, the care system and the policies that underpin it are based on the definition of care as a right of citizenship.
The guiding principles of this right are equality and universal access, where all citizens of a country have equal access to care and all persons are rights holders.
The goal is, therefore, the progressive universalization of care as a pillar of social protection, combining the aim of universal access with affirmative action and targeted policies for achieving equal rights to care.
Solidarity takes the form of taxes and social security contributions that fund progressive benefits and transfers.
And the principle of joint responsibility calls for a new gender contract based on the understanding that a more equitable distribution of roles and resources between men and women (both within families and in society as a whole) is essential for achieving a fair solution for the region’s care needs.
Intergenerational solidarity in meeting care needs allows for mutually beneficial exchanges by making it possible to share rights, responsibilities and risks.
The family and the State are the best institutions for building solidarity; associations and the community can foster it.
The exchange of time and money between generations works best when there is relative demographic equilibrium, so it should be acknowledged that intergenerational solidarity is, to varying degrees, currently under threat and subject to tensions concomitant with population ageing and formal and informal provision of care.
Care policies impact the balance of responsibilities among the family, the community, the State and the market and should seek to balance the resources allocated to each age group.
Public policy impacts monetary and non-monetary transfers between generations; this is a complex aspect of the social contract for care.
Current policies and programmes The region’s largest strides towards greater equality of care have been taken in the legal, regulatory and even constitutional spheres.
While there have been no substantial systemic changes, in some countries the consolidation of national systems and care service networks is making its way onto the policy agenda.
In other countries the discussion centres on making care one of the pillars of social protection.
In a number of countries (among them, Costa Rica and Uruguay), service coverage is being expanded and steps are being taken to organize care systems.
Some are considering legislation to deepen the right to provide care by linking it to work-life balance policies; this could also enhance labour rights.
Care services tend to provide poor coverage and, above all, operate in a weak institutional framework.
Because this dimension has not been a public policy focus in the past, national programmes that directly or indirectly refer to care are often part of programmes aimed at reducing poverty or providing social assistance to poor and vulnerable people or families.
Other programmes touch upon care issues by providing meals for children or older persons; many of these have health-care components.
Available records show that the vast majority have low budgets and provide little coverage: in no case does the budget exceed 1% of GDP, and only a few have budgets of more than US$ 100 million.
Most are for children, followed by older persons and then persons with disabilities.
Childhood schemes target day care centres and kindergartens for poor or vulnerable children; the most typical benefits (besides those directly related to care) are combinations of meals, health and education.
Even with broader, larger-budget programmes, these complementary benefits (except for specific, more complicated health services) are usually clustered and provided at care centres.
Some public programmes provide home care services; at the few offering both kinds, home care is secondary.
Several countries have developed combined public-private arrangements for home-based assistance for older adults, the chronically ill and persons with disabilities.
The services are basic and usually include personal hygiene assistance, housecleaning, cooking, shopping and companionship.
What little private care is available is, in all of the countries, so costly that only high-income families can afford it.
Public services tend to have very limited coverage; they are often pilot programmes that are yet to be consolidated.
In a number of countries the State provides varying amounts of financial assistance to pay for care services and rehabilitation for persons with disabilities.
The State should play a growing role in structuring the supply of care for children, older persons and persons with disabilities.
In the process of improving quality, the role of the State is to regulate and supervise benefits and promote certified, comprehensive services. (iii) Tailor the supply of services to the needs of workers with family responsibilities.
This calls for action to facilitate time management; strategies for reconciling paid and unpaid work; and time policies that are not limited to maternity and paternity leave but also include child-rearing breaks and work schedules and modalities that allow for workers’ family responsibilities. (iv) Expand care options for families.
Mechanisms for accrediting and certifying competencies should be put in place to protect the rights of the providers and subjects of care. (vi) Focus on the occupational segregation of paid care work, which contributes to wage gaps and the strong association of these occupations with poverty and vulnerability.
Occupational segregation by sex is the most obvious sign of inequality and undervaluation of caregiving as paid work.
Accordingly, assess sectoral budgets from a care perspective, including accountability as a policy follow-up mechanism.
Funding care from a social protection perspective Funding for care policies should be designed to ensure that meeting the care needs of dependent persons does not rely on informal care within the family or on individual capacity to pay for services.
For society as a whole, both approaches are at the root of striking inequality.
The social and fiscal covenant for care should include funding from general taxes whose redistributive impact is clearly determined by fiscal pressure, the tax structure and the amount and source of resources allocated for this purpose.
But this covenant must also include insurance within the framework of social protection systems, of which care should become a pillar.
This is a major shift in the principles of the welfare State, where guarantees were originally linked exclusively to wage work while gender and family issues were considered only to the extent they affected the male labour supply.
The solidarity of redistributive funding and universal access to services is at the heart of the covenant for care.
It is grounded in the need to spread the risks and work towards higher-quality services.
Child care, on the other hand, is a desired situation, not an unpredictable one, and bound up with needs inherent to this stage of development.
Here, the risks are associated with access to services whereas, for undesired events, the risk is two-fold: the event itself and the ability to deal with it.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the social protection systems for pensions and health are so unequal and have proven so hard to reform that funding for long-term care should not be aligned with existing social security schemes.
It should be based on the principle of equal care, with an architecture built on the principles of solidarity and universal access, funded out of general taxes and solidarity-based insurance regimes (both contributory and non-contributory).
A network funded in this manner should ensure that care services (health and social assistance) interact effectively with the existing network of social protection providers, with regulations that prevent market skimming and safeguard quality by upholding the universality enshrined in the principle of equal access to care.
Poverty The region’s poverty and indigence rates fell yet again in 2011.
While poverty rates remain high in a significant number of countries, the rate for the region as a whole is the lowest to be attained in the last 20 years.
Economic context GDP growth in Latin America came to 4.3% in 2011 (3.2% in per capita terms).
While this was lower than the 4.8% per capita growth rate posted in 2010, it nonetheless consolidates the region-wide recovery from the 3.0% downturn seen in 2009.
Argentina (7.9%) and Panama (8.9%) boasted the highest per capita growth rates, followed Chile (5.0%).
The region’s employment rate trended upward in 2011, with the average unemployment rate falling from its 2010 level of 7.3% to 6.7%.
The steady downtrend in this rate seen in every year since 2002 except 2009 has yielded the lowest figures since the mid-1990s, and almost all of the Latin American countries had rates below 8%.
The countries that posted the steepest reductions in unemployment were Panama (2.3 percentage points), Ecuador (1.6 percentage points), Chile (1.1 percentage points) and Colombia (0.9 percentage points).
The largest increases in unemployment were seen in Costa Rica (0.6 percentage points) and Honduras (0.4 percentage points).
Real wages in the formal sector of the economy climbed by one percentage point or more in nine countries for which statistics were available, and the real minimum wage also increased.
Real labour income was boosted by the low rates of inflation that continued to be seen in most of the countries, with the 6.2% average for the region being just 0.4 percentage points above the inflation rate for 2010.
Even in the highest-inflation countries, rates were below 8% except in Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The sharpest upswings were registered in El Salvador and Peru, whose annual inflation rates were between 2.6 and 3.0 percentage points higher than in 2010.
The unemployment figures given for Peru are for the city of Lima. c The coverage of this indicator is generally very spotty.
In most of the countries, it refers only to formal-sector industrial workers. d December - December variations.
The regional aggregate is the simple average of the different rates of variation.
The Latin American and Caribbean economy has continued to grow in 2012, with the average for the year estimated at 3.2% (1.1 percentage points lower than in 2011).
The pace of price increases is expected to remain slow, since annual inflation to June 2012 (a simple average of 5.5%) was the lowest since November 2010.
The main labour-market indicators are expected to continue to improve, with the employment rate rising slightly and the unemployment rate remaining steady or declining somewhat (ECLAC, 2012).
Recent poverty trends Poverty estimates based on household survey data available as of 2011 indicate that the poverty rate for the region in that year stood at 29.4%, with an extreme poverty or indigence rate of 11.5%.
The figures appearing above the bars are the percentages (in the graph on the left) and total numbers (in the graph on the right) of poor people (indigent plus non-indigent poor).
The decade-long downtrend in poverty and indigence continued, with the poverty rate falling by 1.6 percentage points and the indigence rate by 0.6 percentage points relative to their 2010 levels.
This means that 8 million fewer people were living in poverty and 3 million fewer were living in extreme poverty in 2011.
For the years from 2007 to 2009, that difference was the main reason why indigence rose at the region-wide level while poverty declined.
Although food prices also outpaced prices for other products in 2011, the gap between the two price indices was considerably narrower than it had been four years earlier.
The upswing in the consumer price index (CPI) for food products was 1.3 times greater than the increase in the CPI for all other products, whereas the corresponding figure for Moderate inflation and economic growth projections for 2012 point to a continued downward trend in poverty, although the decline may be somewhat slower than it has been until now.
The poverty rate is likely to fall by at least one half of a percentage point, while the indigence rate is expected to hold more or less steady at its 2011 level.
The figures for 2009 - 2011 are somewhat lower than those given in the Social Panorama of Latin America, 2011 because more recent poverty figures and population projections have been used for some countries as a basis of calculation.
The projections cited in the Social Panorama of Latin America, 2011 were based on the assumption that spiralling food prices could drive up the indigence rate.
The improvements in income levels and income distribution were greater than expected, however, spurring a decline in the regional indigence rate.
Indigence rates were also down fairly sharply in these countries (see figure I.2).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela saw a slight uptick in poverty and indigence rates (1.7 and 1.0 percentage points, respectively).3 In Chile, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic4 and Panama, poverty levels remained more or less steady, with the rate changing by less than 1 percentage point per year.
Because the different countries’ populations vary so much in size, there is no direct correlation between the extent of changes in these rates at the national level and their influence on the changes recorded at the regional level.
In point of fact, although Brazil did not have one of the sharpest reductions in poverty, it nonetheless accounted for half of the decrease in the region-wide poverty rate in 2011.
The drops in extreme poverty in Colombia and Peru together accounted for 70% of the reduction in indigence at the regional level.
These trends are in line with those seen in the indices for the poverty gap and the poverty gap squared.
The way in which the poverty gap index is calculated takes into account the difference between the mean income of the poor sector of the population and the poverty line (weighted by the percentage of poor people), while the poverty gap squared also takes into consideration the way in which income is distributed among the poor.
The percentage variations seen in these supplementary indices between 2010 and 2011 are similar to those observed in the poverty rate except in Chile, Colombia and Ecuador, where the supplementary indices reflect a slightly greater reduction than the poverty rate does.
This indicates that, in addition to the decrease in the poverty rate in those countries, there was also a further improvement in the poverty gap and in income distribution among the poor.
The opposite was the case in countries such as Argentina and Paraguay, where the reduction in poverty was not coupled with a decrease in the mean This trend does not coincide with that reported by the National Statistical Institute of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The Dominican Republic was the only countries in which the supplementary indicators pointed to a divergence from the trend in the poverty rate, but this is not surprising, given how small the changes were (see box I.3 and figure I.2).
Poverty trends spanning a somewhat longer period that includes the 2009 crisis are also favourable for most of the Latin American countries.
The percentage change seen between 2008 and the time when the most recent statistics were compiled is a sign of considerable progress.
In most cases, the percentage reductions observed in the poverty gap and poverty gap squared indices were larger than the drop in the poverty rate.
This means that, despite the crisis, not only has there been a reduction in the percentage of the population with incomes below the poverty line, but there has also been an improvement in the mean income levels of the poor and in the distribution of that income (see figure I.3).
Poverty lines, expressed in each country’s currency, are calculated from the cost of a basket of goods and services using the “cost of basic needs” method.
The basic food basket that is used to measure poverty contains the goods required to cover people’s nutritional needs, taking into account consumption habits, the actual availability of foodstuffs and their prices, for each country and geographic area.
In most cases, data on the structure of household consumption patterns for both foodstuffs and other goods and services are derived from national household budget surveys carried out in the 1980s.
The total value of the poverty line is calculated by taking this figure and then adding the amount that households require in order to meet their basic non-food needs.
In order to carry out this calculation, the indigence line is multiplied by one factor for urban areas and another for rural zones.
For the 2006 poverty estimates, a factor of 2 was used for urban zones and a factor of 1.75 was used for rural areas.a The factors applied since 2007 vary depending on the differentials between trends in the prices for foodstuffs and for other goods and services.
Indigence lines and poverty lines are updated each year to reflect cumulative changes in the CPI.
For the estimates calculated prior to December 2006, the same rate of variation was applied to both lines.
Household income data have been taken from household surveys conducted in each country in the years corresponding to the poverty estimates presented in this edition.
In line with standard ECLAC practice, the data have been corrected to account for the non-response rate for some incomerelated questions from wage earners, the self-employed and retirees and to mitigate probable underreporting biases.
This latter operation is carried out by comparing the responses to income-related questions in the survey with estimates based on the household income and expenditure accounts included in each country’s system of national accounts.
The income figures used for this purpose refer to total current income, i.e., income from wage labour (in both money and kind), self-employment (including self-supply and the consumption value of products generated by the household), property income, retirement and other pensions, and other transfers received by households.
In most countries, household income also includes an imputed rental value for owner-occupied dwellings. a The sole exceptions to this general rule are the calculations for Brazil, Colombia and Peru.
For Brazil, this study has used the indigence lines estimated by the Brazilian Geographical and Statistical Institute (IBGE), the Brazilian Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA) and ECLAC as a joint effort in the late 1990s.
Changes in poverty levels: underlying factors Of all the different sources of household income, labour income was the most influential factor in the variation in income for poor households.
In the countries where poverty lessened, labour income accounted for half or more of the change in total per capita income.
Thus, in this most recent bout of poverty reduction, the labour market has been one of the main drivers of the upswing.
Public and private transfers (which include retirement and other pensions) and the category “other income” (capital income, imputed rent, etc.) also contributed to the increase in the incomes of poor households, although to a lesser degree (see figure I.4).
Between 2008 and 2011 (a period that encompasses the most recent economic crisis), labour income was the component of poor households’ total income that increased the most.
In half the countries, labour income for employees rose more sharply than labour income for the self-employed while, in the other half, just the opposite occurred.
Chile, the Dominican Republic and Panama were the only countries in which the main cause of the increase in household income was primarily transfers rather than labour income (see figure I.4).
An increase in per capita labour income may stem from an increase in the pay received by individual employed persons or from an increase in the percentage of employed persons in each household.
For 2010-2011, in the nine countries in which poor households’ labour income rose, both of these things happened (except in Peru, where the percentage of employed persons fell).
The percentage increase in employed persons’ pay levels outstripped the increase in the number of employed persons per household except in Chile and Uruguay.
In the four countries where per capita labour income fell, the main reason was a drop in employment in one (Panama), whereas, in the other three, the main factor was a decrease in pay (see figure I.5).
For the period 2008-2011, there were more countries in which the increase in per capita labour income was chiefly a result of the higher remunerations received by individual workers.
Of the 14 countries in which per capita labour income in poor households rose, it was only in Colombia, El Salvador and Honduras that the more influential factor was an upturn in the percentage of employed persons rather than an increase in pay levels.
In fact, in six of the countries in this group, the percentage of employed persons actually shrank.
This implies that, at least as far as the income of the poor is concerned, the main impact of the economic crisis and the recovery has been felt in terms of the number of available jobs; this effect has not been strong enough to actually drive down per capita labour income, however.
The data given for 2011 are for that year except in the cases of Bolivia (Plurinational State of), Costa Rica and Nicaragua (2009) and El Salvador, Honduras and Mexico (2010). c For 2009-2011 in the cases of Brazil and Chile. d Urban areas.
It is important to determine how much of the change in poverty and indigence rates is attributable to an upswing in the mean incomes of individual workers (the growth effect) and how much is attributable to changes in the way in which that income is distributed (the distribution effect).
In the years between 2008 and the most recent year for which poverty estimates are available, these two factors have had complementary impacts.
The growth effect is measured as the change in the poverty rate that would have been caused by the observed change in mean household income if income distribution were to remain constant during the review period.
This factor contributed to a reduction in poverty in most of the countries of the region, with the exception of Mexico, Nicaragua and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where the fall in mean incomes in real terms tended to drive up the poverty rate.
Countries where this effect was a major force underlying the reduction of poverty included Argentina, Colombia, Paraguay and Peru.
The distribution effect indicates how much the poverty rate would have changed if mean income had remained steady in the review period.
This effect also helped to lower poverty levels in a majority of the region’s countries (with the exceptions being the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Panama).
It was the main factor underlying the reduction in poverty observed in Bolivia, Brazil, Ecuador and Uruguay.
The face of poverty The traits of persons in low-income sectors of the population differ in various ways from those exhibited by persons with higher incomes.
Indigents live in households where there are more children, are less educated and have a higher unemployment rate than persons living in wealthier households.
This profile of poor households has remained fairly constant over time, but some changes are beginning to be seen as current sociodemographic trends in the region begin to make themselves felt.
In addition to measuring poverty levels and poverty trends in each country or in the region as a whole, it is important to look at the poverty rates of different groups within the general population.
An analysis of poverty profiles can provide input for the development of hypotheses about the processes and factors that play a role in the perpetuation or reduction of poverty.
This information is also needed in order to devise anti-poverty strategies and programmes that address such factors as the specific demographics and differing degrees of access to services and to employment opportunities of the poor.
The task of identifying the main features of poor sectors and of seeing how they are alike and how they differ from other groups within the population cannot be pursued without reference to the context in which those characteristics have arisen.
The changes that have been taking place in Latin America’s demographic variables, labour markets, overall economic climate (growth, income distribution) and government anti-poverty initiatives combine to shape an overall context for the interpretation of poverty profiles and recent changes in those profiles.
The shifting demographics seen in recent decades in the countries of the region have encompassed two different transitions to varying extents: a demographic transition and an urban one.
The demographic transition has been reflected in declining fertility and mortality rates and increases in life expectancy, which have in turn been reflected in the ageing of the population and a decrease in average household size.
The family structure has also been changing as more and more households are headed by a single parent and the percentage of nuclear families declines.
Recent decades have also seen such a sharp upswing in the urban population that the countries of the region now have urbanization rates that are on a par with those of developed countries or that are actually outpacing them (Rodríguez, 2006).
This should, generally speaking, increase the population’s access to basic utilities such as electricity, drinking water and sanitation, as well as to education and health services.
One trait of the region’s economies that has remained largely unchanged over time and that is closely tied to poverty and inequality is their structural heterogeneity, i.e., the coexistence of producers that have sharply differing productivity and wage levels (ECLAC, 2012).
At the same time, over the last two decades, the structures of the production sector and labour market have shifted in ways that may have an impact, either directly or indirectly, on poverty profiles.
And although government transfers have not been the most important factor in the reduction in poverty in recent years, the increased institutionalization and coverage of anti-poverty policies since the start of the preceding decade have certainly played a role in this respect.
These initiatives have targeted people living below the extreme poverty line and especially households headed by women in which some of the members are below 18 years of age.
They have differed, however, from one country to the next in terms of their coverage and the size of the transfers that they provide.
There are also two other issues associated with poverty profiles and their recent variations that remain to be addressed.
The first is the hypothesis referring to the feminization of poverty, which is based on poverty dynamics in developed countries and has been applied in studies on changes in poverty profiles in the region.
One of the fundamental considerations in this respect is the empirical evidence which indicates that, from time to time, some households rise above and then fall below the poverty line (ECLAC, 2000).
These segments have not been a prime public policy target, at least in the past few decades.
Thus, analyses of the at-risk population are of interest not only because they provide a framework for comparing features of the poor population with the population at large, but also because these groups should be targeted by more proactive government policies.
Poverty profiles more than 1.5 times the value of the poverty line) live in rural areas (see figure I.6).
This does not mean, however, that the rural indigent population is larger than the urban indigent population.
The percentage of the population associated with a minority ethnic group increases as household socioeconomic status declines.
In 2011, 29% of all indigents belonged to a minority ethnic group.
For the non-indigent poor, the figure was 15%, and it was even lower in the two other groups (13% for the at-risk group and 6% for those not at risk).
These data point up the complexity of the situation to be addressed by anti-poverty policies, in the broad sense of the term, when dealing with sectors where ethnic identity is a significant factor, since, in these cases, policy initiatives have to focus on basic needs satisfaction, recognition, and social and cultural inclusiveness at one and the same time.
These changes in demographics, labour markets, the overall economic situation and institutional efforts to address the problem of poverty, along with reductions in poverty rates, may be driving a gradual shift in the characteristics and profiles of people who are living in poverty.
This section will present a discussion of some of the main features of the poor and non-poor populations.
For the purposes of this analysis, the poor sectors of the population are divided into two groups: the indigent and the non-indigent poor.
The non-poor population, for its part, is subdivided into persons who are at risk of poverty (those with a per capita income above the poverty line but less than 1.5 times that value) and those who are not at risk.
A comparison of these four groups at the regional level shows, first of all, that area of residence is one of the factors that differs the most by income level.
While indigents are almost equally distributed between urban and rural areas, nearly three out of every four non-indigent poor people live in urban areas.
Among the indigent and the non-indigent poor, minors (up to 17 years of age) make up 51% and 45%, respectively, which means that children account for nearly half of the poor population.
This figure drops to 38% for the at-risk population and to 23% for those who are not at risk of poverty.
The opposite is true for the age group of 50 years and over, which accounts for about 12% for the poor population but 27% of the members of the population group that is not at risk of poverty.
The educational levels of the various groups differ a great deal.5 Half of all indigent adults (25 years or older) This comparison has been limited to people between 25 and 65 years of age in order to avoid including, insofar as possible, people who may still be in school. have not completed primary school.
This percentage diminishes as income levels rise to the point where only 14% of the group classified as “not at risk” have not completed this level of education.
The largest category in the group of non-indigent poor and those at risk of becoming poor is made up of those who have completed primary school but have not completed their secondary education (about 45% in each of these groups).
The largest single category in the group of persons who are not at risk is made up of people who have completed secondary school but not the tertiary level of education (41%).
Very few people in the poor or at-risk groups have completed their higher education (fewer than 1% and 3%, respectively), whereas 13% of the people in the group that is not at risk have done so.
These kinds of educational differences are found among children and young people, as well as adults.
Some 8% of indigent children between 6 and 15 years of age do not attend school, while this figure falls to 2% for children in households that are not at risk.
The percentage of persons between the ages of 15 and 19 that have not completed their primary education stands at 17% for indigent youths, 10% for non-indigent poor youths, 6% for young people at risk of poverty and 3% for those who are not at risk.
School attendance figures do, however, indicate that lack of access is not a widespread problem, even for poor children.
The groups that appear to have encountered greater difficulty in completing their primary education are the 15-19 age group and, above all, those between the ages of 25 and 65.
The distribution of the poor sector of the population by sex differs very little from the distribution for those above the poverty line, with women representing between 51% and 52% of the population in all the four groups being analysed.
The disaggregation by sex of data on heads of household is much the same, with the percentage of persons in female-headed households representing about 28% of both the poor and non-poor groups.
When the poverty analysis is limited to persons of working age, however, it becomes clear that women represent a higher proportion of the poor in that group (see box I.3).
The analysis of poverty probabilities presented later also shows a correlation between poverty and sex that is unfavourable to women, particularly in countries with lower poverty levels.
Yet analysis of the working-age sector of the population shows notable gender differences in the magnitude of poverty.
The femininity index of poverty for those aged between 20 and 59 indicates a higher poverty rate among women than among men in all the countries of the region.
Although this index —the ratio between the male and female poverty rates multiplied by 100— does not fully capture gender disparities, it clearly illustrates the link between poverty and gender in the region.
In all these countries, the poverty rate for women aged between 20 and 59 years is at least 30% higher than the rate for men of the same age.
In addition, public transfers are concentrated among older groups and among formal wage earners. (iv) Cultural factors: despite changes in recent years, some poor sectors may maintain traditional perceptions of gender roles, according to which women are supposed to take responsibility for unpaid household work.
Although paid employment is thought to be one of the main avenues for escaping poverty, a majority of the people aged 15 or over in the poor and at-risk groups are already employed.
In fact, only about 8% of the indigent and 6% of the non-indigent poor are unemployed.
This once again points up the continued existence of a situation that stems from the heterogeneity of the region’s production structure: having access to some type of remunerated employment is no guarantee that a person will not be poor.
Meanwhile, 40% of the non-indigent poor and 46% of the persons classified as indigent are not economically active, with this figure falling to 37% for those at risk of poverty and 32% for those who are not.
The percentage of men who are employed is above 60% in all four groups, while the percentage of employed women does not reach that figure in any of the groups.
The fact that, in all of the groups, a majority of the women do not participate in the labour market shows how persistent the traditional division of labour between the sexes is in terms of the unpaid domestic work performed by women in the home.
The percentage of women who are employed climbs from 30% for indigents to 54% for those not at risk of poverty, while the percentage of women who are not economically active falls from 64% to 43%, respectively.
Thus, the poorest groups have the greatest imbalance in terms of the distribution between the sexes of unpaid domestic work, which is yet another factor that militates against these households’ ability to lift themselves out of poverty.
In the other groups, the largest proportion are employees (50% for the non-indigent poor, 57% for those at risk of poverty and 64% for those not at risk); this nevertheless indicates that being employed as a wage earner does not provide protection against the risk of poverty.
Chapter II provides a fuller description of labour profiles by income level. the other groups (8% for the non-indigent poor, 5% for people at risk of poverty and 3% for those not at risk).
Home ownership/rental is not a significant factor, since 70% of the poor own the dwelling that they live in, which is very close to the figure for at-risk sectors and no more than slightly below the figure for the sectors that are not at risk of poverty (75%).
Renters account for between 12% and 17% of the total, and there is no clear correlation between these figures and poverty status.
The only kind of situation in which the type of tenure appears to correlate more directly with income levels is when ownership is unclear or undocumented, since the percentage of people in this situation descends from 16% in the lowest-income group to 9% in the highest-income group.
Access to basic services varies depending on the type of service concerned.
Most low-income households have access to electrical power (86% of indigents and 95% of the non-indigent poor).
In the case of drinking water, 71% of indigents and 81% of the non-indigent poor have access.
Sanitation infrastructure is the least accessible service, with the corresponding figures being only 47% for the indigent population and 61% for the poor population.
The fact remains that access to basic services is one of the mostly closely correlated factors with income level, as the rates of access to the above-mentioned services (electricity, drinking water and sanitation systems) are 99%, 94% and 95%, respectively, for the sector that is not at risk of poverty.
The discussion up to this point has focused on the region as a whole, without taking into account how much the situation varies from one country to the next.
The results show how certain characteristics of the poor population change depending on the living conditions existing in their country of residence.
Although, by definition, all poor people share the characteristic of The wealthiest countries —Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay— have a weighted average poverty rate of 9%.
The next group —made up of Brazil, Panama, Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela — have a mean poverty rate of 23%.
The group with fairly high poverty levels —the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Mexico— has a mean poverty rate of 36%.
The portion of the population in the fourth group —formed by El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Paraguay— amounts to 56%. having incomes that are too low to enable them to meet certain basic needs, those who live in countries with high poverty levels generally have less access to education and basic services, for example.
All this may be attributable, at least in part, to the fact that constraints on access to basic services and education have traditionally been coupled with lower levels of urbanization.
The populations of countries with high poverty rates generally are more rural.
In the poorest group of countries, 47% of the population lives in rural areas, whereas, in the countries with the lowest poverty rates, only 8% do.9 In addition, there is a close correlation between people’s economic status and their area of residence in all four groups of countries.
The differential between the percentages of persons living in rural areas who are in the poorest group (indigents) and in the wealthiest group (those not at risk of poverty) ranges from 10 percentage points in countries with low poverty rates to 35 percentage points in those with high poverty rates (see figure I.7).
The higher a country’s poverty rate, the larger the percentage of people between the ages of 25 and 65 who have not completed their primary education.
In the poorest countries, 69% of the indigent and 51% of the non-indigent poor have not reached that level of education.
In the countries where poverty rates are somewhat high and somewhat low, these percentages hover around 46% and 32%, respectively, for the indigent and the non-indigent poor.
In the countries with low poverty rates, the percentage of the indigent and the non-indigent poor who have not finished the primary cycle of education is less than 21%.
The poorer a country is, the weaker the link between unemployment and poverty.
In the richest group of countries, the percentage of unemployed persons shrinks significantly as household incomes rise above the poverty line.
This trend is also seen, although not as clearly, in the next-richest group, whereas, in the poorest group of countries, the unemployment rates for the poor and the non-poor are quite similar.
In high-poverty countries, the population also has less access to basic services.
The percentage of people without proper access to drinking water is below 2% in the low-poverty countries, hovers around 12% in the countries with somewhat high and somewhat low poverty rates, and stands at 24% in those that have high poverty rates.
These differences are not necessarily as stark, however, when the comparison is limited to low-income households.
For example, the percentage of indigent persons who lack access to drinking water comes to around 30% in countries with fairly low and fairly high poverty rates and in the poorest group of countries.
Somewhat more than 20% of persons who are at risk of poverty and live in high-poverty countries do not have access to drinking water; the percentage is somewhere between 10% and 15% in the case of persons at risk of poverty who live in countries with fairly high or fairly low poverty rates.
In countries with low poverty rates, the figure is less than 5%.
When these results are compared with the figures compiled in or around 1999, it becomes apparent that, even though poverty levels have come down by over 14 percentage points since that time, the profile of the poor population has not changed very much, in several respects, since then.
What differences there are appear to be associated, in most cases, with demographic shifts and trends in education in the region as a whole.
One of the most striking changes is the increase in the percentage of people living in female-headed households.
In the case of the indigent and the non-indigent poor, the portion of female-headed households jumped from around 18% in 1999 to 28% in 2011.
This underscores the importance of providing greater access to childcare, especially for households that cannot afford to pay market prices for such services, since this would enable more women to enter the labour market and would be a pivotal element in opening up opportunities for female-headed households that are below the poverty line.
The increase in the number of female-headed households is not, however, mirrored in changes in the sex distribution of the different groups.
Between 1999 and 2011, the percentage of women in the indigent and non-indigent poor groups held nearly steady (rising from 51% to 52%).
Yet the gap between male and female poverty rates has increased for the 20-59 age group in recent years, however, which points to a deterioration in women’s relative position (see box I.5).
The concurrent increase in the mean age of the population is gradually reshaping the profile of poor households and contributing to their reduction in size.
This is particularly the case for indigent households, where the percentage of household members aged 17 or less shrank by 4 points between 1999 and 2011.
The drop has been smaller (1 percentage point) for non-indigent poor households.
At the same time, there were relative increases in the adult population of 3 percentage points among the indigent and 1 percentage point among the non-indigent poor (bringing the proportion to 12% in both cases).
In relative terms, the downtrend in average household size has been the steepest for indigent households (14.6%)10 and the non-poor (-8.1%).
Among the poor, the percentage who know how to read and write has increased from 82% to 85%, while school attendance among children aged 6 to 15 has climbed from 90% to 94%.
The share of young people having completed their primary education has risen from 79% to 88%, and the proportion having completed secondary education has gone from 19% to 33%.
While rising levels of school enrolment among the poorest is a positive development, secondary education completion rates are still low.
Between 1999 and 2011, the percentage of poor persons with access to drinking water, sanitation systems and electricity climbed by 7, 11 and 8 percentage points, respectively.
The distribution of the poor population in terms of economic activity and occupational category did not This suggests that the long-standing tendency for the demographic transition to occur more slowly in poor sectors of the population could be a thing of the past.
Because of the limited nature of the available data, this analysis does not address the issue of inequities in terms of the quality of education, which may be a highly significant factor in the perpetuation of poverty and inequality in the short and long runs. change to any great degree during the period under analysis.
Strictly speaking, the most notable change was an increase in the percentage of indigents who were not economically active, with the figure rising from 39% in 1999 to 46% in 2011.
The percentage change was smaller in the case of the non-indigent poor (an increase of 3 percentage points), the sector at risk of poverty (an increase of 2 percentage points) and the non-poor (a decrease of 2 percentage points).
Probabilities of poverty As a complement to the results set forth in the previous section, it is interesting to assess the extent to which the traits examined correlate with poverty when they are examined simultaneously.
Owing to lack of sufficient information for all the countries, complex survey design was not taken into account in the calculation of statistical significance.
Instead, a logit function is used, in which it is assumed that the probability of a household being poor (denoted by P(y=1)) is distributed logistically, as described by: Although the probability of being poor is a non-linear function, the log odds ratio is not.
This ratio indicates how much more likely a household is to be poor than nonpoor.
Expression of equation (2) as a log odds ratio gives: Equation (3) is a linear equation in which the dependent variable is the log odds ratio of poverty and whose parameters may be estimated using the maximum likelihood method.
For ease of reading, los parameters shown in this chapter correspond to the expression exp(β) and indicate the change in the log odds ratio of poverty with a marginal change in each explanatory variable.
Notably, β parameters are not linear either in themselves or with respect to the probability of poverty.
Accordingly the effect of any one variable on the probability of poverty will depend on the initial probability value.
This implies that the impact of an explanatory variable on the probability of poverty cannot be calculated without choosing a baseline scenario.
The findings show that the household characteristics with some predictive power regarding poverty are highly varied in the countries of the region.
Only three of the variables analysed —household size, number of employed household members and complete primary schooling of the head of household— are statistically significant across all the countries.
This does not necessarily mean that these are the variables with the greatest impact on the likelihood of poverty, as shown later, but that in all cases they provide useful information for assessing a household’s probability of being poor.
And while the other variables analysed are not always significant, they are in at least half the countries with information available.
Sex of head of household is the variable which is significant in fewest countries (9 of 18).
Notably, the countries in which this variable is significant are those with the lowest poverty levels (except for Costa Rica), which tends to suggest that poverty becomes feminized as it becomes less widespread in general or, put another way, poverty reduction is slower among female-headed households.
By looking at all the explanatory variables simultaneously, it is possible to identify which is most strongly associated with poverty.
Area of residence (urban or rural) is an interesting example, because the associated odds ratio is lower than one in several countries, suggesting that living in a rural area lowers the probability of poverty, contrary to what might be expected given the higher incidence of poverty in rural areas.
This finding suggests that there must be an interaction with other variables, especially level of education, in the relationship between poverty and rural residence.
So, the higher incidence of poverty in rural areas appears to be linked to lower average schooling in those areas, not the fact of living in a rural area by itself; accordingly, a rural household’s probability of being poor falls considerably as the head of household’s schooling level rises.
In fact, if the education variable is left out of the regression, the probability ratio associated with geographical area rises above one in most countries.
This observation does not hold true for the entire region, however, since in Brazil, Panama and Peru the odds ratio associated with geographical area is appreciably higher than one, even when educational traits are included.
With respect to the magnitude of the parameters, figure I.9 shows the simple average of the (statistically significant) values estimated for each country.
The variables that most increase a household’s probability of being poor are, in order of magnitude, unemployment of the head of household, lack of electricity or belonging to an ethnic group.
Based on the average of the parameters estimated for those countries in which they are significant, a household with an unemployed head is almost three times as likely to be poor as a household whose head is employed.
Lack of electricity or belonging to an ethnic group produces twice as high a probability of poverty.
The high impact of indigenous identity on likelihood of poverty warrants particular attention, because it is indicative of exclusion based on a group identity, regardless of these groups’ more limited access to education or to basic services.
The number between brackets shows the number of countries in which the parameter is significant with respect to the total number of countries for which the variable is available.
Conversely, the variables that most reduce a household’s probability of being poor are number of employed members and completion of the various levels of schooling, which are, moreover, significant in virtually all the countries.
As well, the higher the level of schooling attained, the greater the additional impact in terms of reducing poverty probability.
As noted earlier, the parameters estimated in the regression are linear with respect to the odds ratio, but not with respect to the probability itself.
This suggests that the impact of a change in an explanatory variable on the probability of being poor depends on the initial value of that probability.
The base scenario used to present the findings is an urban household with four members, including children under age 12, headed by a man aged between 30 and 49 with complete secondary education and a paid job, and no unmet needs in terms of water, sanitary infrastructure or electricity.
This scenario is then used as a starting point to show how the household’s probability of poverty varies in the event of a change in some of the variables.
The first point to note in figure I.10 is the high impact of household size on poverty probability.
Keeping all the other traits constant, a household of five members has a probability of poverty between 1.2 and 1.7 times higher than the baseline household.
According to this model, household size has the highest impact on poverty probability in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Panama and Uruguay.
Except in countries where the baseline household has a low poverty probability, completion of an additional level of education reduces the probability of poverty quite appreciably.
For example, in most countries the poverty probability associated with having completed secondary education is only half that associated with not having completed primary education.
The regression model used summarizes household labour characteristics in two variables: the number of persons employed and the employment status of the head of household.
As may be expected, the ratio associated with the first variable is lower than one (the more household members are employed, the lower the probability of poverty) and it is significant in all 18 countries analysed.
In turn, unemployed status of the head of household increases the probability of poverty and is significant in 14 countries.
These results corroborate the importance of employment as a factor in improving a household’s chances of rising out of poverty, particularly in countries with lower poverty levels.
Even so, it must be borne in mind that a high percentage of indigents and poor are employed, so clearly the mere fact of being employed is not enough to ensure that the household’s basic needs will be met.
In addition, the higher poverty probability arising from larger household size and the decrease associated with the number of employed household members are similar in scale where the percentage of employed household members remains constant.
The probability of poverty of a six-person household with three employed members is similar to that of a four-person household with two members employed (see figure I.10).
Household size 3 members 5 members 4 members 2 members 6 members B.
Level of schooling of the head of household The results for 2011 differ little from those arising from surveys conducted at the end of the 1990s.
There was no evidence of great changes in the magnitude of the parameters either, except in the case of access to electricity and, to a lesser extent, the presence of children in the household.
Both variables —lacking electric power or having children under age 12 in the household— increased the probability of poverty, but the effect was weaker in 2011 than in 1999.
The variable on belonging to an ethnic group was excluded from this analysis, since only three countries had information on which to base a comparison.
Two complementing approaches to absolute poverty Poverty is a phenomenon that can be measured and analysed from different perspectives.
One is relative monetary poverty, which expands the traditional notion of absolute poverty to encompass needs for adequate participation in society.
As the region makes strides in reducing absolute poverty, it is becoming increasingly important to consider this sort of need when identifying the disadvantaged population.
Time shortage, as an important element in measuring well-being, offers an additional perspective.
Lack of time is especially damaging for the poor, because it deepens and reproduces poverty, especially for women and children.
Relative monetary poverty Whereas in developing countries poverty is usually conceptualized and measured in terms of absolute poverty, in developed countries it is more relevant to examine poverty as a relative phenomenon.
The notion of relative poverty emerged as it became clear that the absolute approach was inadequate to describe the privations experienced by the population in developed countries.
It originated in a particular historical context (the United Kingdom in the mid-twentieth century) in which, although most families’ subsistence needs were met, many had living standards far below those of the general population, which excluded them from full participation in society.
The idea of relative poverty expands the way poverty is conceptualized precisely in order to encompass this type of deprivation, which may be becoming more relevant in several Latin America countries, especially in those where absolute poverty has fallen, but inequality is still very high.
Taking the absolute approach to poverty measurement means assuming the existence of an irreducible core of poverty consisting of privations that would be viewed as such in any society and that, therefore, do not depend on the extent to which those needs are met in society on average.
The most obvious of these requirements is food, because malnutrition can be understood as a privation regardless of the context in which it occurs15 (Sen, 1983).
The proponents of the relative approach question the absolute approach because it is based on a concept of well-being that considers only physical subsistence needs but fails to give due attention to other, social needs and ignores the fact that needs arise and shift in the context of the societies to which individuals belong.
People may have sufficient resources to feed themselves and live in decent housing, but not enough to participate adequately in their societies’ customary activities (Townsend, 1979).
Relative poverty is seen in people being unable to afford to visit friends or to turn on the heating, being unable to For that very reason, the need for proper nourishment is an essential part of measuring absolute poverty.
The poverty line is based on the cost of a basket of goods that meet food needs, plus the cost of meeting other basic needs.
Most often in this method, income is expressed in adult equivalent units, not in per capita terms.
This unit takes into account the fact that the cost of meeting one person’s needs varies by sex, age and household size.
For simplicity’s sake, the analysis here is conducted in per capita terms. in average well-being.
So, an increase in average income, however large, does not reduce relative poverty unless distribution improves at the same time.
By the same token, a fall in income across the board may not increase poverty and may even reduce it, if it occurs alongside an improvement in distribution.17 These caveats aside, it is interesting to examine the extent to which the quantification of relative poverty used in developed countries provides useful information on living standards in Latin America.
With that in mind, three relative poverty lines are used: 50%, 60% and 70%, respectively, of median per capita income.
The first point to note is that, in most of the region’s countries, relative poverty lines are below absolute poverty lines, as shown by the values less than 1 on the vertical axis of the figure.
The rationale of the relative poverty approach suggests that this method is not suitable for countries which give this type of result.
Since the point of relative poverty measurement is to broaden the concept of poverty to include additional needs relating to engagement in society, it must necessarily portray an increase in monetary thresholds over the absolute measure.
Therefore, the traditional methodology cannot be applied for every country in the region.
As noted earlier, there is a consensus that a relative definition of poverty is more suitable for higher-income countries, because more advanced societies seek to have the whole population share in the benefits of high average prosperity.
In turn, absolute measurements are usually considered to be the most suited to the situation in developing countries, since the challenge for them has been to move larger segments of their populations over basic thresholds of basic needs satisfaction.
Accordingly, this is the type of poverty indicators that have traditionally been used in Latin America.
A number of changes that have taken place recently, however, suggest that relative poverty measurements need to be explored in relation to the region, especially in the relatively more developed countries.
Strictly speaking, in the last few years, average standards of living have risen and absolute poverty has fallen in the region, amid still very high levels of inequality.
The convergence of these phenomena could not only precipitate a change in the measures and social standards considered to represent poverty, but also fuel sentiments of relative deprivation in broad segments of the population, including among those who are not under the absolute poverty line but lack sufficient resources to participate fully in society.
The most common method for measuring relative poverty is to determine a minimum income threshold, or poverty line, as a percentage of the population’s median income.
The choice of percentage is discretionary, and so most often relative poverty estimates are performed using several values, typically 40%, 50%, 60% and 70% of median income.16 A threshold set using this method can be raised in real terms as the resources available to society increase.
Researchers need to be aware that the relative poverty approach can, however, produce some paradoxical results (Rio Group, 2007).
This is because the indicator identifies the percentage of people who diverge excessively from a central trend statistic —the median— but does not represent an evaluation of the living standards observed in that situation.
Strictly speaking, the relative poverty indicator reflects changes in distribution, not variations 70% of the median a The data refer to 2011, except for the Plurinational State of Bolivia (2009), El Salvador However, using a relative poverty line is not equivalent to measuring inequality and should not be taken to imply that poverty cannot be eradicated (Foster, 1998).
Here, the conventional means of relative poverty measurement produces very similar results for the various countries in the region.
Applying a threshold of 60% of median per capita income, poverty rates vary between 23% and 33%.
This small dispersion also occurs with thresholds of 50% or 70% of median income.
These results contrast sharply with those obtained using the threshold of absolute poverty, which gives values that range from less than 10% to almost 70%.
The European countries, too, found that a very limited data dispersion was obtained using the conventional method, and this has recently led to the introduction of a multidimensional measurement of relative poverty in the European Union (see box I.5).
The data also confirm that the indicator used in the European Union is closer to an indicator of inequality than one of poverty.
In fact, the rate of correlation between absolute and relative poverty rates is 0.6, compared with 0.8 for the correlation between relative poverty and the Gini index.
Multidimensional measurement is based on indicators of deprivation that identify goods and activities whose lack denotes relative poverty.
This line of work was explored initially by Mack and Lansley (1985) and Gordon and others (2000).
Following this approach, the European Union recently created a multidimensional relative poverty indicator to assess fulfilment of the target of lifting at least 20 million people out of poverty and exclusion, an aim set under the Europe 2020 strategy.
The nonmonetary measures were proposed by Guio (2009), on the basis that income-based measurements did not properly reflect the diversity of living standards in the European Union, especially after intakes of member countries in 2004 and 2007.
For building material deprivation indicators, information was compiled on the extent to which people are prevented from having certain goods they wish to have or participating in society activities to the extent they would like by factors outside their control (Fusco, Guio and Marlier, 2010).
The percentage considered deprived in the multidimensional indicator are those who cannot afford at least three of the nine items (Guio, 2009).
The adoption of a multidimensional indicator has generated heated debate in the European Union.
Atkinson, Marlier and Wolf (2010) argue that selecting a particular set of dimensions is equivalent to attributing zero weight to other aspects which are not included, and question whether the various items should be weighted the same in the different countries.
The inclusion of material items has also been questioned on the basis that the social meaning of goods and activities essential for social participation differs from one country to another (Till and Eiffe, 2010).
In turn, Fusco, Guio and Marlier (2010) warn that this method combines diverging concepts of poverty (income as opposed to deprivation) and mixes different standards for making them operational (the situation in one country relative to a European standard).
On the basis of these findings, the multidimensional indicator appears better for capturing the differences in living standards from one country to another as well as the distribution of wealth within each.
Although this method of measuring relative poverty is not suitable for the entire region, it provides useful information for certain countries.
Adopting the 60% median line as an indicator of the cost of meeting social needs yields six countries with relative poverty rates above absolute poverty.
There are differences in the way relative and absolute poverty have evolved in those six countries.
Relative poverty decreased between 2002 and 2010, but not as much as absolute poverty.
This is consistent with the point made previously: it is more difficult to reduce relative poverty, because it requires the incomes of the poorest not only to rise, but to rise by more than the incomes of the wealthiest.
Relative poverty (60% of the median) Argentina a Uruguay a a Urban areas.
In 2002, the relative poverty line (with the threshold set at 60% of the median) was higher than the absolute poverty line in only three countries (Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay).
So, insofar as the trend towards lower absolute poverty continues in the region, it becomes increasingly important to take the relative perspective into account in poverty measurement.
Lastly, it must be borne in mind that the absolute poverty measurements prevailing in the United Kingdom when the proposals on relative deprivation were developed were based on minimum consumption baskets.
For example, Rowntree’s work of 1936 included: (i) intake of food to maintain health and the ability to work; (ii) a house with three bedrooms, a living room, kitchen and bathroom; (iii) clothing fit to maintain bodily health, and (iv) cleaning materials and repair or replacement of household utensils.
Although Rowntree also included non-subsistence goods (newspapers, books, radio, beer, tobacco, holidays and gifts), this model did not afford a key place to aspects of relative deprivation; rather, its purpose was to capture what were considered at the time to be minimum subsistence needs (Linsley and Linsley, 1993).
Although the method commonly used to measure absolute poverty is inspired by the work of Rowntree, it qualifies the type of needs.
First, the food basket takes into consideration the habits prevailing in society.
The way in which households assemble the calories they need varies from one country to another and, in higher-resource countries, households purchase more expensive calories.
Non-food needs are not specified directly, but correspond to the spending ratio observed in households close to the poverty line.
This ratio, known as the Orshansky ratio, tends to rise with income level, owing party to changes in relative prices (in developed countries non-tradable goods are more expensive) and partly changes in habits and tastes at higher levels of purchasing power.
So absolute poverty lines calculated in this way already encompass part of relative needs.
It may be concluded, then, that the absolute poverty method commonly used is capable of incorporating some elements of relative poverty.
The extent to which the results differ will depend on how, and how often, the thresholds are updated.
Poverty is deprivation in dimensions that are indispensable for meeting basic needs and for enabling people to function.
Time devoted to paid work generates resources to cover basic material needs, and time spent on household work meets needs for self-care and the care of other household members.
In turn, household well-being is a function of its levels of income and consumption as well as decisions about time spent on unpaid work, in addition to which households need a minimum of hours to carry out domestic and care tasks, as well as time for rest and leisure.
The allocation of resources, functions and time within households reflects inequalities in the preferences and power of individuals.
So time deprivation has harmful impacts on the poor, because it deepens and reproduces poverty, especially for women and children.
Time spent on care tasks and unpaid work has not yet been systematically incorporated into poverty analysis in the region.
Examining this aspect would add depth to the analysis of poverty and gender inequalities and should be a consideration in policymaking.
Time use can be studied in terms of its links with poverty as a dimension in a multidimensional poverty index, or in terms of its objective and subjective expressions.
To draw an analogy with monetary resources, time poverty can be measured similarly to monetary poverty.
For example, time poverty may be defined as the lack of time for rest and leisure, owing to an excess of time spent on work and domestic tasks, and it can be estimated using an absolute or a relative approach.
Both can be used to measure the prevalence, depth and severity of poverty.
This author used the absolute approach and defined time poverty as lack of time for households to manage everything they have to do (for example, care work and domestic production).
M0 is taken to be the monetary poverty threshold and T0 the time poverty threshold, so that a household whose time available to do everything it needs to do is less than T0 is time-poor.
If the household’s disposable income is less than M0, it is resource-poor.
The problem lies in the trade-off between time and income, since to raise a poor household’s income above M0, its time has to be reduced to less than T0.
Conversely, if a household slightly above the monetary poverty line tries to increase its free time to a value equal to or greater than T0, its income will fall below M0.
Therefore, a poverty threshold that incorporates time and money must have a minimum monetary level (M0), a minimum time value (T0) and a trade-off between the two.
Burchardt (2008) developed a time-income index based on the absolute approach, which combines obligations, resources, disposable income (Y) and available time (T).
Disposable income is the net amount available after paying for goods and services needed to meet obligations, and time available is the amount of time left after paid and unpaid work.
Households thus have a range of alternatives (a, b, c…n) of time allocation to paid and unpaid work.
If all the options (a, b, c…n) produce income above the income poverty threshold and available time above the time poverty threshold, households are time poverty free and income poverty free.
Bardasi and Wodon (2006) adopt a relative approach to measuring time poverty in Guinea, defining it as the lack of time for rest and leisure after taking into account the time spend on paid and unpaid work.
Operationally speaking, measurement is based on time use distribution in the population, with two thresholds: the first 1.5 times the median number of hours of paid and unpaid work (70.5 hours per week) and the second twice the median value.
They started from the assumption that a rational individual maximizes his or her utility or satisfaction as a function of consumption (C) and leisure (L), subject to time and budget restrictions, and they used the criterion of satisfaction with life to evaluate the effects of substitution between leisure time (L) and income (I).
The time poverty threshold was set at 60% of median free time (the sum of time devoted to social life, sport, hobbies and culture consumption).
As a first step, they quantified the trade-off between time and income using a constant elasticity of substitution utility function.
Then the multidimensional poverty threshold was set at the utility point where the time and income thresholds meet and, lastly, individuals were classified in different poverty regimes (see diagram I.1).
A number of difficulties arise with measuring time poverty, including how to conceptualize it and determine standards and thresholds.
On the first point, Goodin and others (2005) state that time poverty should not be defined in terms of the way people spend their time and how much free time they have left, but in terms of the time they strictly need to spend in comparison with the time they have available to spend.
These authors propose that people spend more time than is strictly necessary on paid and unpaid work and much of the time pressure they perceive is discretionary.
Time poverty should therefore be understood as a lack of discretionary time once needs have been met (or the time potentially available for people to do what they want), and standards should be defined as the amount of time strictly necessary for people to perform the unavoidable activities of daily life (paid and unpaid work, personal care and others).
On the second point, standards and thresholds, Burchardt (2008) and Goodin and others (2005) point out that no normative parameters exist on which to base an operating definition of domestic work.
Vickery (1977) argues that thresholds should be built taking into account household composition and habits of eating, household management and purchase of goods.
Given the lack of established standards, Burchardt (2008) used an operating definition based on the behaviour of a reference group, taking minimum time spent on domestic work to be the average time spent on those tasks by households around the poverty line which do not receive state assistance and do not pay for domestic services on the market.
Goodin, Robert and others (2005), “The time-pressure illusion: discretionary time vs. free time”, Social Indicators Research, No. 73.
Marlier (eds.), Luxembourg, European Union. (1985), “A sociological approach to the measurement of poverty.
Vickery, Clair (1977), “The time-poor: a new look at poverty”, Journal of Human Resources, vol. 12, No. 1.
Figures not comparable with those of earlier years. j Estimate for 18 countries of the region plus Haiti.
Recent progress in reducing distribution inequality Figures through 2011 confirm the trend towards better income distribution.
But the changes are slight, and Latin America is, in general, still a highly unequal region.
Per capita income inequality One of the major challenges still facing Latin America is how to bring down its high levels of income distribution inequality.
The simple average of figures for the 18 countries on which relatively recent data are available shows that the wealthiest 10% of the population receives 32% of total income while the poorest 40% receives 15% (see figure II.1).
While inequality is high throughout the region, it varies in degree from country to country.
In 7 of the 18 countries examined (Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Honduras, Guatemala and Paraguay), the wealthiest 10% of the population receives nearly 40% of all income while the share going to the poorest 40% ranges between 11% and 15%.
In Costa Rica, Panama and the Plurinational State of Bolivia the share going to the poorest segment is similar, although the percentage for the top decile is slightly smaller.
Income concentration is lowest in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay, with shares at each end on the order of 20% to 23%.
The synthetic indicators of inequality paint a similar picture (see box II.1).
With few exceptions, the ratios set out herein (the standard ones for gauging distribution inequality) show high average concentration and confirm the aforementioned ranking of countries (see figure II.2).
While several indicators point to high inequality with a certain degree of intraregional heterogeneity, caution is due when comparing income distribution across countries.
All of the comparisons herein are based on statistical data from household surveys, but there are some differences in survey methodology from one country to the next.
This chapter uses three of the best-known inequality indicators: Gini coefficient: 1 n n ∑∑ yi − y j Atkinson index: Theil index: 1 n yi ∑ log µi  n i =1 µ where n = population size, yi = per capita income of the ith individual, μ = mean income, and log = natural logarithm.
The Gini coefficient is the best-known of the indicators used to measure income distribution.
Its formula is expressed graphically because it corresponds to the area between the Lorenz curve and the equidistribution line.
The greater the income concentration, the larger the area and the higher the value of the indicator.
Despite its popularity, the Gini coefficient does not satisfy the transfer sensitivity axiom, which is a desirable property for inequality indicators.
According to this principle, inequality should decrease more in response to a progressive transfer of income (that is, from a wealthier household to a poorer one) between poor individuals than when the transfer is between rich individuals.
That is why the measure should be complemented with other indicators that meet this property, such as the Theil and Atkinson indices.
For all three indicators, the higher the value the greater the degree of inequality.
Nevertheless, while the Gini coefficient and the Atkinson index take values in the range of zero to 1 (where zero is absolute equality and 1 is absolute inequality), the maximum Theil index value is the logarithm of population size, which exceeds the value 1.
The greater the value used, the higher the weight given to observations in the lower part of the distribution.
Because each of them measures partial aspects of inequality, they can generate different rankings for the same distribution.
The ranking of a group of distributions can be considered definitive only if it does not vary between indices.
It is therefore best to see inequality indices as complementary to each other and analyze the findings together.
The region does have high levels of distribution concentration, but there has been progress over the past few years.
While not so noticeable over short periods, a comparison with the early 2000s reveals a clear downtrend in inequality.
This movement has been a hallmark of the development process in Latin America over the past 10 years.
Falling inequality during the 1990s broke the pattern of income concentration that had prevailed for at least 20 years.
According to the most recent figures, 2011 brought a slight, but statistically significant, decline in inequality that was, nonetheless, statistically significant only in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Ecuador and Uruguay.
In the rest of the countries (including those where the Gini coefficient was slightly higher than in 2010), the new levels are not statistically different from the previous year’s (see figure II.3).
Atkinson index (e=1.5) A comparison of recent findings with data from around 2002 confirms a marked trend towards improved distribution.
The Gini coefficient fell by at least 1% per year in 9 of 17 countries.
The countries with the most significant decreases were Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Nicaragua and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, all of which saw their Gini coefficient fall by more than 2% a year.
Even though the inequality indicators for the Dominican Republic and Costa Rica did not improve, they did not go up appreciably, either (see figure II.4).
The economic crisis that broke out in 2008 and had its greatest impact on GDP in 2009 had no particular effect on the improvement in distribution.
As with the poverty rate, this behaviour of distribution during a cycle episode differs from the pattern most frequently seen in similar situations in prior decades, when distribution usually worsened (often significantly) and recovery took several years.
As income distribution improved in Latin America, income concentration rose in the developed countries.
According to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, 2011), the Gini coefficient for OECD countries went from 0.29 in the mid-1980s to 0.316 in the late 2000s —an increase of nearly 10%.
It rose significantly in 17 of the 22 countries with long-term series available. a Data for urban areas in Argentina, Ecuador and Uruguay.
The decrease in inequality means that income for the wealthiest grew more slowly than income for those who have less.
The improvements in distribution took place in a context of rising average income for virtually all population groups.
It is this distribution trend that brought the poverty rate down by more than would have been achieved with higher average income alone, both in recent years (see chapter I for growth and distribution effects) and over the past 10 years (see ECLAC, 2011).
In some countries (especially those where inequality decreased the most) income for the wealthiest households fell in real terms.
Particular attention should therefore be paid to this source of income (ECLAC, 2012).
At the regional level, the simple average of the Gini coefficient for labour income for employed persons is similar to the simple average of per capita income.
At the country level, however, the relationship between the degrees of concentration of both variables can differ.
In half of the countries examined, per capita income inequality is higher than labour income inequality per employed person.
The most striking differences are in Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where they are nearly one tenth of the Gini coefficient (see figure II.6).
A breakdown of labour income shows that the degree of inequality varies markedly according to occupational category.
In all of the countries reviewed, the Gini coefficient for employee wages and salaries was lower than the earnings of own-account workers (see figure II.7).
In cases like El Salvador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the drop in wage concentration even offset the increase in the concentration of self-employment earnings.
Labour income makes up such a high proportion of total per capita income inequality that it is no surprise that it also accounts for most of the improvement in distribution between 2002 and 2011.
With a few exceptions, changes in the Gini coefficient for the distribution of both kinds of income have been very similar in all of the countries reviewed.
In most of the countries examined, the decrease in the Gini coefficients for wages and salaries has been sharper than for self-employment earnings (or the increase has a Data from 2011, except for El Salvador (2010), Guatemala (2006), Honduras (2010), Mexico (2010), Nicaragua (2009) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (2009).
Gini coefficient for wages and salaries Gini coefficient for self-employment earnings Wages and salaries Self-employed earnings a Data for 2008 are from 2008 except for Argentina and Chile (2006), El Salvador (2004), Honduras (2007), Nicaragua (2005) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (2007).
Several factors are considered to be behind the overall decrease in wage and salary inequality.
Among those most frequently cited in available studies are slower growth of the demand for less-skilled labour, a slight decrease in the impact of technical change on the demand for higher-skilled workers, an increase in formal wage jobs and the impact of labour and income policies implemented in some countries.
The employed The placement of employed persons along the income distribution is not random.
The strata have welldifferentiated profiles according to the variables associated with individuals, be they personal attributes or other factors linked to their insertion in the production system.
The average age of employed persons is clearly associated with income; average age increases along with income quintile.
This relationship seems to stem from the fact that the income curve tends to rise over the life cycle and the fact that the poorest households usually have more young persons (see figure II.9).
A similar positive association with education has been widely examined and documented.
One of the more typical findings of distribution analyses is that education level is the one variable that explains most of the variation in income level between individuals.
However, how an employed person is situated in the production apparatus also affects his or her income.
An examination of the quintile structure according to a number of relevant dimensions provides evidence of this.
The reason is the marked structural heterogeneity of Latin America, which drives many workers into independent, low-productivity, low-income activities because of the constraints that keep them from entering formal enterprises or working more productively and thereby increasing their income.
These same conditions are reflected in the composition of quintiles according to the size of the establishment where the employed person works.
The higher the quintile, the smaller the proportion of persons working in small establishments.
The breakdown of quintiles according to sector of activity reflects the negative association between income and the proportion of agriculture and construction, while the reverse is true of manufacturing, financial services, public administration and social services.
The share of commercial activities does not vary significantly between the second and third quintiles, although it is lower in the first.
One dimension that is very closely associated with education is type of occupation, which is usually (albeit not exclusively) associated with level of formal schooling.
While there is an association between education and type of occupation, there is another, perhaps more indirect, interplay among the other dimensions.
For instance, it could be that persons working in low-productivity units or small establishments are concentrated in the lower quintiles because they tend to have a low education level.
In an extreme case, all of the income differences between strata in those dimensions (or changes in quintile composition according to those dimensions) could be due to the different education structures in those strata.
But there is evidence suggesting that the variables reflecting different characteristics of the production structure (such as the two mentioned earlier) help explain the differences in income among employed persons, regardless of education level.
Perceptions of distribution and citizen distrust: recent trends and associated factors Despite recent progress, the countries of Latin America are trapped in a vicious circle of great objective inequality, coupled with deep distrust of institutions and high levels of perceived unfairness.
These negative perceptions could stand in the way of a social covenant based on equality and should be taken account of in any strategy aimed at expanding guarantees and core rights for the population.
It could be asked whether more favourable economic and social conditions over the past few years might have brought perceptions of distributive inequality and citizen Recent trends in perceptions of distribution and citizen distrust Earlier research has shown that Latin Americans have very negative perceptions of distribution fairness in their countries (ECLAC, 2009, 2010).
This was still the case in 2011: 79% of the region’s population felt that income distribution in the country in question was very unfair or unfair (see figure II.10).
This report therefore examines recent trends in some indicators of dissatisfaction with institutions, such as perceptions of unfair distribution and distrust of political and State institutions.
It also explores the relationship between these patterns and the behaviour of objective indicators of inequality, public social spending and economic growth in the countries of the region.
The statistical significance of the difference at the regional level between 2009 and 2011 cannot be precisely determined because the methodological report for the 2011 Latinobarómetro poll is still not available.
Besides, sampling for the poll is done separately for each country, with different sampling errors.
The sampling errors for the countries in the 2009 poll ranged between 2.8% and 3.1%.
If the errors are the same in 2011, a 1-percentage-point difference would fall within the sampling error.
Perceptions improved between 2002 and 2007, when the countries recorded strong economic growth; in 2007, the percentage of the population thinking that distribution was unfair or very unfair was 9 percentage points lower than in 2002.
In 2011, Chile fared the worst, with 94% of the population feeling that income distribution was very unfair or unfair (see figure II.11).
In 2011, the share of the population believing that distribution was unfair or very unfair was 9 percentage points higher than in 2009 (rate of variation of 11%).
After Chile, in 2011 the Dominican Republic, Colombia and Honduras had the highest shares of the population feeling that income distribution was unfair or very unfair.
The opposite was the case in Ecuador, where 56% of those polled said that income distribution was very unfair or unfair, followed by Panama, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay.
Chile’s score in 2011 is the fourth in the entire series and matches the score for Paraguay in 2007.
Between 2002 and 2011, the countries that posted the largest drop in the percentage of the population feeling that income distribution was very unfair or unfair were Ecuador (down by 36%), Panama (28% drop) and Uruguay (22% lower).
These three countries had high levels of perceived unfairness in 2002 (88%, 92% and 92% respectively).
The largest increases during 2009-2011 were in the Dominican Republic and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (rates of variation of 28% and 22%, respectively).
Comparing the situation in 2003 with the one in 2011, figure II.13 shows that in 17 countries out of 18, distrust of institutions decreased.
Respondents were asked to rate each institution according to the following ordinal scale: (1) a lot; (2) a fair amount; (3) little; and (4) not at all.
Responses to the three questions were averaged; values between 3 and 4 were taken as “little” or “no” trust.
This could be due, in part, to the greater number of observations in the series.
Despite the favourable trends seen, above all, between 2003 and 2006, in 2011 6 out of every 10 Latin Americans had little or no trust in political institutions or the State.
Disaggregating by countries, Peru had the worst ranking in 2011; 77% of the population had little or no trust in institutions.
The lowest levels of distrust in 2011 were observed in Uruguay, the Bolivarian Republic of basis of special tabulations of data from Latinobarómetro 1997, 2002, 2007, a Sum of the percentages of people responding that distribution is very unfair or unfair.
Dominican Rep. b basis of special tabulations of data from Latinobarómetro. a Includes trust in the legislative branch (congress), the judiciary and political parties.
Responses to the three questions were averaged; averages between 3 and 4 were taken as “little” or “no” trust.
Between 1997 and 2011, some countries had consistently lower percentages of distrust and perceived unfairness (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Costa Rica and Uruguay); others had intermediate values (Colombia and Mexico).
A third group (Argentina, Guatemala and, particularly, Peru) had very high levels of distrust and perceived unfairness throughout the period.
Includes trust in the legislative branch (congress), the judiciary and political parties.
Responses to the three questions were averaged and recoded; responses with values between 3 and 4 were taken as “little” or “no” trust.
Summing up, distrust of institutions and perceptions of unfair distribution are both still very high in the region; these feelings of dissatisfaction are correlated.
But this might seem less dramatic, comparatively speaking, if such feelings were equally prevalent in other regions of the world.
Unfortunately, the lack of comparable data makes it impossible to verify this hypothesis for dissatisfaction with income distribution.
However, a preliminary exercise can be conducted taking distrust of political institutions as a reference.
One example is Chile: in 1990, the year of the return to democracy, 27% of the population had little or no trust in political institutions.
By 1996, the percentage was 51% (estimated by the authors based on data from the World Values Survey).
And there are gaps in the series, meaning that for some countries there is only one observation (so the averages for 2000-2009 for continental Europe and Asia would change if the estimates were based on countries for which two measurements are available).
Respondents are asked to rate each institution according to the following scale: (1) a lot; (2) a fair amount; (3) little; and (4) not at all.
Perceptions and objective factors Any exploration of the relationship between dissatisfaction with institutions and objective indicators of inequality, public social spending and economic growth should be undertaken with caveats, because of information constraints and the lack of suitable conceptual frameworks.
An initial dilemma is whether the subjective indicators should be taken as dependent variables or independent ones, since there are arguments to support either choice (for example, one plausible hypothesis is that, faced with rising dissatisfaction, governments could step up public spending).
For the purposes hereof, indicators of perception were taken as dependent variables because public social spending patterns can be shaped by factors that are endogenous to institutions and because evidence from other regions shows that public opinion “reacts” to changes in the socioeconomic environment (see box II.2).
In the past few years, the role that these orientations and perceptions play in initiatives for shrinking the welfare state has also been examined, amid pressure to cut spending sparked by economic crises in developed countries and mounting demographic pressures associated with population aging and rising economic dependence rates.
Researchers’ interest in how distribution beliefs and preferences shape social public spending patterns is rooted in the shortcomings of self-interest models where each individual desires the level of distribution that will maximize his or her own well-being.
Under this rationale, the redistribution policy chosen by a majority-elected government will be the one preferred by the average voter.
Because distribution will skew towards lowincome groups, the average voter will demand greater distribution.
But income is a weak predictor of support for redistribution; a large fraction of the poor opposes redistribution, and a substantial segment of the wealthier supports it (Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote, 2001; Fong, Bowles and Gintis, 2006).
One possible explanation is that some people living in situations of poverty oppose redistribution because they believe they will move up the income ladder, while another group, whose level of well-being will decline, will demand more redistribution (Hirschmann, 1973; Bénabou and Ok, 1999; Ravallion and Lokshin, 2000).
This factor could explain the differences between welfare regimes in Europe and the United States.
Americans are convinced that their society is very mobile, and Europeans believe that their societies have very little mobility.
For Alesina and Glaeser (2006), though, evidence does not support the ability of conventional economic models to explain the differences between European and United States welfare regimes.
According to them, the main causes are differences in political institutions and the effects of ethnic heterogeneity on attitudes and ideology.
As for political institutions, proportional representation is seen as enhancing the political power of the poor and leading to greater public social spending, while majority-based systems are associated with lower spending (Crepaz, 2008).
Evidence of this relationship comes from a panel study covering 1970-2005 that includes developed and developing countries as well as countries with majority-based systems such as Belarus, Botswana, Chile, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Ukraine, United States, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and New Zealand (Gregorini and Longoni, 2009).
As for ethnic heterogeneity, racial animosity in the United States makes redistribution to the poor (a large proportion of whom are AfricanAmerican) unattractive for many voters.
To oppose higher spending, critics of redistribution have even resorted to the argument that welfare recipients are undeserving (Sommers and Block, 2005).
Europeans, on the other hand, are more likely to think that poverty is caused by social injustice (Alesina, Glaeser and Sacerdote, 2001).
It has been suggested that different social protection architectures can have different effects on patterns of social integration, on support for redistribution and on trust in institutions.
Korpi and Palme (1998) note that in universalist schemes built on alliances between classes, most of the population benefits and divisions between groups do not arise.
This stands in contrast to selective schemes that make coalitions highly unlikely and can, moreover, be stigmatizing (Kumlin and Rothstein, 2003).
In any event, a universalist system could also weaken networks of civic association and erode reciprocity and trust because citizens could claim that paying taxes absolves them of responsibility vis-àvis those who have less (Fukuyama, 2001).
Responses were on a scale from 0 to 10, where 0=no trust and 10=total trust.
A principal components model was used to ensure that the responses were explained by an underlying factor (78% of the variance).
The standardized scores for the trust in institutions factor were determined by regression.
Svallfors (1997), Jaeger (2009) and Jakobsen (2010) conclude that support for redistribution is greater in social democratic and conservative regimes and lower in liberal ones.
But there are studies that have not observed these effects (Gelissen, 2000; Jaeger, 2006).
There has also been research into the combined effects of changing economic conditions and the level of public social spending on support for redistribution.
Blekesaune (2007) notes that the employment rate is negatively correlated with demands for State support, but for the United States inflation is the factor that most impacts demand for social assistance (Kam and Nam, 2008).
Nelson (2011) concludes that in Europe a worsening economy increases demand for redistribution and that heightened economic prosperity, along with higher public social spending, reduces it.
Some studies have shown positive correlations between the Gini coefficient and support for distribution (Finseraas, 2009); this correlation holds when controlling for measures of economic affluence (Dallinger, 2010).
As for trust, evidence points to greater trust across all dimensions (interpersonal and institutional) in social democratic regimes (Kumlin and Rothstein, 2003; Kääriäinen and Lehtonen, 2006; Kouvo, 2011).
Gaps in trust of institutions according to socioeconomic status do not seem to be tied to welfare regimes (van Oorschot and Finsveen, 2010) but rather to economic openness and public spending.
White and Nevitte (2007) note that the largest differences in levels of trust in national institutions according to socioeconomic status are in countries with the most openness and the lowest levels of spending.
The obstacles that efforts to shrink welfare states ran into during the 1980s illustrate the challenges involved in reversing earlier social policy achievements (path dependence).
These challenges are due to public support for the new regime (among policy beneficiaries and operators) and the relative autonomy of the State (Pierson, 2000).
But retrenchment can be accepted on certain terms and under certain strategies followed by political actors (blame avoidance, responsibility-shifting) (Fridberg, 2012; Del Pino, 2007; Campillo, 2007).
And consideration must be given to the impacts of the economic crisis sweeping the countries of Europe and the fact that immigration is a complicated issue for the more generous welfare regimes in Europe (van Oorschot and Uunk, 2007).
As noted, it is useful to contrast the relationship between indicators of perceptions and objective measures of inequality, the impact of public social spending and economic growth.
For inequality, the Gini coefficient was chosen because it is one of the most widely used indicators of inequality in international research on the relationship between objective and subjective measures of well-being and inequality.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia form a separate grouping because the relationship between objective indicators and indicators of dissatisfaction with institutions could differ from the rest of the region as a result of the particular political This problem arises when the predictors are highly correlated.
This affects the regression models, since the influence of each of the predictors is indistinguishable.
See table 3 in the annex. and institutional processes that have unfolded in these countries in recent years (ECLAC, 2010).
An initial ordinary least squares regression model was constructed including perceived distribution as a dependent variable and the Gini coefficient, GDP variation, GDP per capita and the social spending-toGDP ratio as predictors.
The findings are set out in table II.A-3 of the annex and indicate that perceived unfair distribution is significantly associated only with the Gini coefficient.
As objective income distribution inequality grows, so does perceived unfair distribution (see figure II.17).
Some countries with the lowest objective levels of inequality in 1997-2010, such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Costa Rica and Uruguay, also had a lower level of perceived unfair distribution.
Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Colombia, which recorded higher Gini coefficients during the same period, also had a higher level of negative opinions as to income distribution.
It should be noted that the observed significant correlation between perceptions of distribution and the Gini coefficient differs from the finding reported by ECLAC (2010).
This could be due to differences in approach (that study examined relationships between changes in perceptions of distribution and monetary inequality) and, primarily, to the scarcity of observations available during the study.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia were considered separately because of the peculiarities of the political process in these countries.
The same procedure used for perceptions of distribution was used to examine distrust in political and State institutions.
The findings indicate that distrust is associated with the Gini coefficient and public spending as a percentage of GDP, not with indicators of economic growth (GDP per capita and rate of variation of GDP) (for details, see table II.A-4 in the annex).
Distrust of institutions increases as the Gini coefficient increases, and it decreases when social spending as a percentage of GDP increases.
Replicating the analysis controlling for social protection system robustness shows that the significance of the relationship between distrust and objective inequality holds in countries with more robust systems and in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia and does not hold in the countries with less robust protection systems (see figure II.18).
As for the association between social spending as a percentage of GDP and trust, it holds only for the grouping of countries with more robust social protection systems (see figure II.19).
Respondents were asked to rate each institution according to the following scale: (1) a lot; (2) a fair amount; (3) little; and (4) not at all.
Averages between 3 and 4 were taken as “little” or “no” trust.
The regression coefficients, their significance and number of observations are: Countries with more robust protection systems: (b=0.347, p=0.001**, n=74); Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador and Plurinational State of Bolivia (b= 0.573, p=0.003**, n=25); and countries with less robust systems (b= 0.008, p = 0.962, n=34).
Statistics from a regression with two predictors: Gini coefficient and social spending as a percentage of GDP.
As discussed earlier, a possible explanation for the increased public perception sensitivity to changes in the objective indicators in countries with more robust protection systems is that the public may have greater critical awareness of how State institutions work, either in terms of commitment to greater equality or in terms of actual redistribution capacity.
It should not be forgotten that modern welfare regimes have evolved as citizens have grown more demanding and aware of their rights (see box II.2).
However, this greater perception sensitivity to changes in objective indicators could also be explained by the higher variability of these indicators in countries with more robust protection systems, which could mean that there are changes in living conditions that are perceived directly by the population.
Statistics based on a regression with two predictors: Gini coefficient and social spending as a percentage of GDP.
Discussion and implications saw a slight decrease in perceived unfair distribution and a larger decline in distrust of political and State institutions.
However, distrust and perceived unfairness stopped decreasing between 2009 and 2011; both indicators were still very high in 2011.
The strong correlation between distrust of political and State institutions and perceived unfair distribution throughout 1997-2011 is a symptom of a profound and persistent citizen dissatisfaction with how institutions work and how economic, social and political goods are distributed in the countries.
In turn, the association between objectively measured inequality and dissatisfaction with institutions could mean that the high levels of wealth concentration and social differentiation in the countries would feed into many social conflicts in the region (Calderón, 2012).
Besides, dissatisfaction with distribution in the region is closely associated with a larger perceived tax burden, with distrust of the ability of States to spend tax revenue well (see figure II.20) and low perceived transparency of the State (see figure II.21).
Perceived distribution fairness indicates the level of an individual’s satisfaction (or dissatisfaction) with income distribution among social groups.
This judgment likely stems from a subjective assessment of one group or another’s deservingness of poverty or wealth, including what the respondent thinks of his or her own situation.
This indicator will not always be a good proxy for preferences because preferences are situation-driven and refer to potential alternative situations where the response indicates decision utility.
On the other hand, perceptions of fair distribution are a proxy for “experienced utility”.
For more details on both types of utility, see Kahneman, Wakker and Sarin (1997).
The convergence of distrust of institutions and perceived unfair distribution reveals sharp divisions between groups.
Rothstein and Uslaner (2005) argue that many developing countries are trapped in a vicious circle of inequality and distrust, with dysfunctional institutions.
High levels of inequality lead to lower levels of trust in institutions and thus to policies that can do little to narrow social gaps and create a greater sense of trust, well-being and equality, exacerbating tensions between groups and eroding the possibility of implementing policies based on the notion that different groups have a shared destiny.
Rothstein and Uslaner (2005) add that even if political conditions were to support universal programs, the public might not trust the institutions to provide services fairly and there would be considerable risk of implementation failure if there is more or less widespread corruption.
In a similar vein, Alesina and Glaeser (2006) argue that a generous welfare system cannot work well where management problems or cheating (such as tax evasion and social security claim abuse) are common.
In any event, this does not mean that a covenant for progress in guaranteeing citizen rights cannot be implemented in the region.
There is an obvious need to design a strategy that can be phased in gradually; this calls for prioritizing some sectors even if many urgent reforms are needed.
Moreover, the association between objectively measured inequality and feelings of dissatisfaction indicates that perceptions can be expected to improve if progress is made in reducing distribution asymmetries.
This requires improving the management and operational capacity of the States and stressing transparency and accountability.
Along with this, designing the social protection architecture of the countries of the region should not be decoupled from the goal of addressing problems of democratic representation in order to ensure greater participation of traditionally excluded groups, rebuild the links between groups and boost confidence in institutions.
Blekesaune, Morten (2007), “Economic conditions and public attitudes to welfare policies”, European Sociological Review, vol. 23, No. 3.
Dallinger, Ursula (2010), “Public support for redistribution: what explains cross-national differences?”, Journal of European Social Policy, vol. 20, No. 4.
Del Pino, Eloísa (2007), “Las actitudes de los españoles hacia la reforma del Estado de bienestar”, Política y Sociedad, vol. 44, No. 2.
Finseraas, Henning (2009), “Income inequality and demand for redistribution: a multilevel analysis of European public opinion”, Scandinavian Political Studies, vol. 32, No. 1.
Hirschman, Albert (1973), “The changing tolerance for income inequality in the course of economic development, with a mathematical appendix by Michael Rothschild”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, No. 87.
Jakobsen, Tor Georg (2010), “Welfare attitudes and social expenditure: do regimes shape public opinion?”, Social Indicators Research, vol. 101, No. 3.
Jæger, Mads Meier (2006), “Welfare regimes and attitudes towards redistribution: the regime hypothesis revisited”, European Sociological Review, vol. 22, No. 2. (2009), “United but divided: welfare regimes and the level and variance in public support for redistribution”, European Sociological Review, vol. 25, No. 6.
Kam, Cindy D. and Yunju Nam (2008), “Reaching out or pulling back: macroeconomic conditions and public support for social welfare spending”, Political Behavior, vol. 30, No. 2.
Kääriäinen, Juha and Heikki Lehtonen (2006), “The variety of social capital in welfare State regimes – A comparative study of 21 countries”, European Societies, vol. 8, No. 1.
Korpi, Walter and Joakim Palme (1998), “The paradox of redistribution and strategies of equality: welfare State institutions, inequality, and poverty in the Western countries”, American Sociological Review, Kouvo, Antti (2011), “The sources of generalized trust and institutional confidence in Europe”, Research on Finnish Society, No. 4.
Uslaner (2005), All for all: equality, corruption, and social trust”, World Politics, Somers, Margaret and Fred Block (2005), “From poverty to perversity: ideas, markets, and institutions over 200 years of welfare debate”, American Sociological Review, vol. 70, No. 2.
Svallfors, Stefan (1997), “Worlds of welfare and attitudes to redistribution: a comparison of eight Western nations”, European Sociological Review, vol. 13, No. 3.
Van Oorschot, Wim and Wilfred Uunk (2007), “Welfare spending and the public’s concern for immigrants: multilevel evidence for eighteen European countries”, Comparative Politics, vol. 40, No. 1.
Content, ethical background and actions arising from a polysemic term Providing for or tending to someone’s needs is generally referred to as “care.” The word “care” derives from the Old English caru or cearu “sorrow, anxiety, grief,” also “serious mental attention,” from Proto-Germanic karo (cf.
The meaning “charge, oversight, protection” dates back to c.1400.1 The concept of care was the subject of philosophical analysis in the twentieth century.
Foucault points out that in ancient Greece and Rome, a distinction was made between a person’s concern for “self” and “care of the self”.
The original Spanish text gave the etymology of cuidado which derives from the Latin roots cogitatus, thought, the participle of cogitare, and agitare, to agitate or trouble (Gómez de Silva, 1998 and Robert, 1979 in Flores-Castillo, 2012).
It is considered to be a regulatory component, expressed in terms of self-knowledge and skill in the quest for the principles of truth, which can encompass such widely diverse spheres as death, illness, suffering and political life, and, by the same token, judgement as to the value of the actions that the individual carries out (Foucault, 2005).
Care of oneself is knowledge of self and the compilation of a certain number of rules of behaviour or principles which are at the same time truths and prescriptions: thus ethics and the game of truth are linked.
The subject is formed actively through practices relating to the self, but these practices are not invented by the individual but rather are patterns that are found in his or her culture and which are proposed, suggested, imposed by that culture, its society or the person’s social group (Foucault, 1984).
Heidegger addresses the issue of care from an existential perspective, as an explanation of how the particular potentialities and possibilities of a person’s development are constituted from his birth until his death.
Care (Fürsorge) is revealed as the meaning and the fundamental existential structure, since individual human beings find themselves in a reciprocal and inseparable relationship with the world that surrounds them and can only understand themselves in relation to those who form their immediate reality and the circumstances in which they live.
This potentiality-of-being as it relates to care occurs within a temporal context: it is based on anticipation of the future; its fulfilment stems from having-been-in-the-world in the past and being-in-theworld in the present in interaction with the immediate world (Rivera, 2012).
Broadly speaking, the current connotation of the term emphasises concern for someone’s well-being, which includes attentiveness, thoughtfulness, carefulness, protection, concern, interest and vigilance.
This watchfulness implies an affective involvement, which moves and mobilizes the caregiver into action (Malvárez, 2007; Batthyány, 2004).
In these terms, it would mean placing one’s own well-being and that of other persons at the centre of human existence (Tronto, 2006).
As this brief review shows, the concept has always been defined by considerations relating to its content and the manner in which it should be provided.
Against this backdrop, current caregiving actions are defined, their nature is specified, the social asymmetries involved are revealed and the need for public policies in this area is demonstrated.
Whether within or outside the sphere of the family, care is defined and justified on the grounds of a given type of relationship, and it encompasses ethical dimensions of duty and responsibility.
This delegation of knowledge generally goes hand in hand with relationships of power, a factor which will be dealt with below in relation to the rights of the recipients of care and caregivers, who, more often than not, are women.
In abstract terms, care has been defined as a set of specific activities including everything that people do to maintain, continue and repair our world so that we can enjoy the best possible life.
This definition indicates that it is not an activity that occurs strictly between individuals, but as part of a process whose social and political function is culturally defined (Flores-Castillo, 2012).
Care encompasses a range of activities, as well as goods and relationships that promote the physical and emotional well-being of those persons who are partially or totally unable to perform them by themselves and which enable them to be fed and educated, to lead a healthy life and live in an enabling environment.
Care thus has a material side (which involves working) as well as a psychological one (which entails an emotional bond and also has an economic cost) (Kofman 2012; Batthyány, 2004).
The degrees of dependency of those who are cared for by others vary with age, the degree of vulnerability and the state of health.
Bearing in mind the cultural factors inherent in gender relationships, five broad categories may be identified within the family structure: children, the sick, the elderly, those who work long hours in paid employment and those who, by and In this article, the authors analyse how the concept has evolved. large, look after themselves4 (Durán, 2003 and 2012).
This is an important point, since, in fact, a great deal of care time is spent covering the needs of healthy adults (Folbre, 2011).
Within families, there are other specific categories, such as persons with disabilities, which are dealt with in another chapter.
An important distinction should be made between direct care, which entails personal and emotional involvement, and indirect care activities, which provide support for direct care and can encompass a host of other broad, residual tasks including the domestic activities that are indispensable for this purpose (Folbre, 2011, p. 284).
In this context, many activities carried out within the family are indivisible and, moreover, generate economies of scale because the fruits of these activities are consumed collectively by family members.
Admittedly, some are specific owing to the needs of their members: feeding or washing the sick or disabled persons, or reading aloud to small children.
Care provides subsistence as well as well-being and development, and it encompasses the services indispensable on a daily basis for the physical, affective and emotional well-being of the person throughout his/her life cycle.
It includes stimulating the cognitive functions of small children and seeking –to the extent possible– to preserve the capabilities and decision-making faculties of frail elderly persons and persons with disabilities.
Maintenance requires generating and managing goods, resources, services and activities in order to meet the care receiver’s needs in a sustainable manner, that is, by providing food, ensuring health and personal hygiene and stimulating cognitive and social learning.
Within the family, roles and responsibilities, spaces and cycles overlap; the time, intensity and effort involved are not easy to quantify (Durán, 2003 and 2012; Sojo, 2011).
They may also be delegated without payment to persons outside the family or be provided formally through an institution.
The paid or unpaid delegation of caregiving to persons or institutions does not mean that the work or effort involved is simply replaced or eliminated.
If caregiving is to be viable, coordination, organization and other tasks normally performed by the person delegating the duties must still be carried out.
If the quality of the services or related infrastructure (for example, transport infrastructure) is not up to standard, these tasks may take longer or be more difficult to complete owing to the distances involved.
Delegating care is closely linked to reconciling work and family life in terms of the compatibility between working hours and the opening hours of the care centres, continuity or discontinuity between postnatal periods and access to care services (Saraceno, 2011, summarized in Sojo, 2011).
Of particular interest are certain aspects of the concept of social care, that is, the activities and relationships that link the physical and emotional requirements of dependent adults and children with the regulatory, social and economic frameworks that are assigned to them socially.
Social care is tied to place; in other words, the social relations that determine who provides the care (in what form, quality and quantity) are closely linked to the scenarios of meaning and interaction that, together, shape them.
In addition, the concept of social care provides a fundamental look at the binomes of production and consumption, public and private sectors and formal and informal spheres that characterize the place of the action (Daly and Lewis, 2000; Hanlon and others, 2007, pp. 467 and 479).
It is therefore important to underscore that the definition of care actions implicitly designates a place where this care is provided, the person who is to assume the responsibility, and a time factor (duration, deadlines, frequency, timetables).
These criteria are useful, for example, for distinguishing between the care and treatment that are necessary to prevent morbidity, restore health or treat chronic diseases but are within the purview of the health sector and its providers, and complementary health-related activities that are dispensed within the framework of care, for the most part within the home.
Both place and time are crucial when defining public policies in this sphere, as will be revealed throughout this analysis.
No simple or single definition of care will be given for fear of running into narrow and exclusionary descriptions; the contemporary debate therefore remains open (Carrasco, Borderías and Torns, 2011, p. 74).
The formal definition espoused by Thomas under the heading “unified concept of care” (see table 1) is useful for the analysis in this Social Panorama of Latin America as it looks at the care labour market and household spending on care services.
This descriptive and empirical concept is based on the concrete manifestations of what is usually understood as people-centred services, whether in the public or the private sphere, in relation to seven dimensions (Thomas, This term is used to replace the original term for the fifth category (self-sufficient), as defined by the author.
This formal classification dates back to 1993, when the article was first published; it has not changed over time.
Urgent need for action on care Paid and unpaid care, as well as human reproduction, have been treated as alien to the economic system.
Over time, many economic concepts have overlooked, misanalysed or only partially analysed the role of the domestic sphere and its relationship with the economic system (Carrasco, 2003; Picchio, 1999).
Running counter to this tradition, the concept of the care economy was developed.
It refers to the broad range of goods, services, activities, relationships and values that concern the most basic needs and are crucial for the existence and reproduction of persons.
As in the case of any emerging concept, the scope and limits of the concept of care may appear blurred, since, admittedly, it could be argued that the ultimate aim of all human activity is, in reality, reproduction of human beings and of the social system (ECLAC, 2009, p. 174).
Nevertheless, the concept is still very broad in that it could encompass much of the field of education.
Care work must gain visibility within the logic of economics, since it is crucial for reproducing the labour force and because its social organization and distribution reveal serious gender inequalities (Rodriguez, 2012).
This dimension must therefore be mainstreamed into economic analysis (care as “shadow work”), and it must be understood in terms of its association with the oppression of women.
Its true worth as a significant activity and as a citizenship responsibility must now be recognized (Williams, 2002, quoted in Roberts and Mort, 2009).
Care in nurturing and educating is part and parcel of the care required for reproduction of the labour force (Flores-Castillo, 2012).
In this respect, it is relevant to recall Durán’s categories relating to the work carried out within the family in looking after children, the sick, the elderly, those who work long hours in paid employment and those who are basically self-sufficient.
The common trait among the first three categories is that they are not solvent.
In other words, they cannot pay market prices for assistance, and they need someone to meet their needs: the State, through public services; relatives and friends; volunteers; or some other social group.
Those who work long hours in paid employment sell their time to the market and, when there is a high price differential between their income and the price of care, they can opt to buy that care.
Most middle- and low-income persons, especially women, must look after themselves and their family because the level of their wages, the amount of work that they sell to the market and other cultural components make it difficult for them to contemplate paying for care.
Durán notes that if gender identities change profoundly, only one category of demanders of care is likely to shrink: those who do not need to provide their own care, thanks to gender asymmetries.
This gives rise to supply and demand mismatches at the social level; personal and family tensions build up and translate into deficiencies or add to the burden of work of the groups that are socially and politically less able to redistribute group responsibilities (Durán, 2003 and 2012).
In this context, it should be pointed out that the care market —even in most of the developed countries— is generally very precarious and highly stratified, both in terms of its potential coverage and in terms of quality.
The problem is more acute in the case of care for extremely dependent persons.
In a globalized world, such demand and supply mismatches have given rise, among other things, to the emergence of global care chains.
With more and more women migrating, care work is transferred from households in certain countries to households in receiving countries.
This gives rise to transnational households in which motherhood is practiced from a distance and care tasks are reassigned within the sending family.6 This is significant in Latin America and the Caribbean, given the high rates of emigration to developed countries such as Spain (Cerrutti and Maguid, 2010) and to some countries within the region (Arriagada and Todaro, 2012).
In Latin America, a vital mechanism for adjusting the supply and demand of care is still paid domestic service, which is almost exclusively the province of women, has low wages and often lacks social protection —an issue dealt with separately in this edition of the Social Panorama of Latin America.
As regards the developed countries, a decade ago Esping-Andersen remarked impressionistically on the disappearance of housewifery and to the urgent need to bring care services under the umbrella of public policy (Esping-Andersen, 2002).
The care requirements of children —who currently account for 27.7% of the population in Latin America— are being compounded by those of frail older persons, that is older persons with a high degree of dependency.
From the age of 80, if such a cut-off age can be used, the incidence of frailty is high, independence is unstable and functional autonomy is at risk.
Persons 80 years or over often require hospitalization, fall frequently, use medication and suffer from chronic illnesses that tend to be disabling (TFW, 2012; García-García and others, 2011).
In the region, this segment accounts for 15% of all adults aged 60 or over and is growing at a rate of close to 4%.
It is expected to double towards 2070; by the end of the century, 36.6% of the older population will be very elderly (ECLAC, 2012).
Estimates based on official figures for 2001-2010 put persons with a disability at around 43.5 million, or 8.3% of the total population.
The tensions concomitant with the transformations in the social model for distributing care responsibilities have been analysed with emphasis on different factors.
Thus, account must be taken of the existing demand for care, the people who provide the services and the welfare system that has to meet that demand.
For a discussion on the evolution of the concepts of crisis in social reproduction and the care crisis, see Carrasco, Borderías and Torns and 2009).
The sexual division of labour underlying the social organization of care, based on the expectation that women are going to provide a free service, is an exclusionary development model in crisis.
Thus, the time spent on care must now be redistributed between men and women and between State institutions, the market and the family (Montaño, 2012).
The family’s contribution to meeting the care needs of its members has been and is possible thanks to the low participation rate of women in the labour force.
This low rate has enabled the public sector to play a subsidiary role in this area, so practically no consideration was given to care needs as a risk in social protection systems (TFW, 2012).
Hence, the issue of care gives insight into, and makes it possible to address, the obstacles that women face in seeking to participate on an equal footing in the labour market and in other spheres of society (Drancourt and Catrice, 2008).
It also helps to understand the stratification of society and the way inequality is reproduced (ECLAC, 2009).
As more and more women join the paid labour force, they have less time to devote to caring for the family and time use becomes more intensive.
Closely linked to the struggle for gender equality and the exercise of rights, the incorporation of women into the labour market becomes problematic if arrangements to cover the absence of the traditional caregivers are inadequate or if the women are overburdened by their combined roles in the workplace and the home.
Relying on the market to meet the care needs of families only serves to heighten inequality, since, in each case, it is purchasing power that determines whether a family can afford to pay for services.
On the other hand, allowing care tasks to be taken over publicly by volunteers, without policies and without funding to ensure that the growing demand for care is met, is unsustainable in the medium and long term.
In adopting a care strategy geared towards equality, the State should seek to close gaps in access, build capacities for the emergence of a wide range of care services and cater for the needs of large population groups in this area so as not to increase their vulnerability.
At the social level, this may help to reduce poverty and make households less at risk of falling into it, by enhancing the capacity of lower-income women to find better quality work.
It can also help rejuvenate the population through the free exercise of the right to motherhood or fatherhood by removing obstacles to reconciling work and family life.
This array of policies is good for society, because a younger population contributes to the sustainability of social protection funding in the medium and long term by changing the balance between the paid working population and the dependent population (Sojo, 2011, p. 9).
Converting care into another pillar of social protection and public policy and considering it as a source of social rights involves many challenges.
A network of public, private and mixed entities will need to be funded, coordinated and regulated to provide the necessary services.
Approaching the asymmetries and tensions underlying care from a rights perspective The rights perspective cuts across care at many different levels, one significant area being the rights of women.
The drive to create effective conditions of equal opportunities for women did not initially focus enough on the sexual division of labour within the home.
The failure to recognize the social responsibility of care resulted in unequal gender relationships in terms of the social identity of caregivers, which is why use of the term dates back to the conceptualization of the status of women (Daly and Lewis, 2000).
In order to be recognized as a fundamental human right, care must be approached from two viewpoints: the right to provide and the right to receive care.
The related institutions include the family, the education system and the labour market and its conditions.
The field in question is directly impacted by the way the family, the State, the market and the community interact within the social fabric of care.
The scope for individualization differs significantly when institutional resources such as human rights, education and the welfare State can be harnessed to address the risks of individual biographies, as opposed to modern “atomization”, when such resources do not exist (Beck and Beck-Gernsheim, 2003).
Moreover, the individualization processes in this field, due to the role played traditionally and still played by women as caregivers, will have implicit or explicit gender implications that will need to be analysed (Daly, 2011, p. 8).
The rights perspective implies criticism of welfarism because it is related to women’s capabilities as agents and to the autonomy of care receivers and caregivers (Montaño, 2012).
But it also raises the need to challenge the dichotomy between the active role of the caregiver and the passive one of the care receiver (Williams, 2002, in Roberts and Mort, 2009).
Four conflicting factors relating to the subject of care should be considered when defining the objectives and action strategies of care: autonomy, dependence, frailty and fragilization.
Autonomy is associated with the capacity to perform the functions of daily life with as little assistance as possible and can be linked to the notion of independence.
It implies both a public dimension —which has to do with active participation in organizing society— and a personal one, expressed in terms of the ability to formulate and implement one’s own life plans and to make decisions based on one’s own preferences.
In both cases, autonomy is based on self-determination and the freedom to decide for oneself, even though the help and support of others may be necessary to achieve it.
For the purposes of this analysis, dependence is understood as a restriction in the exercise of autonomy due to a physical or intellectual limitation, which in practice reduces the chance of making decisions and acting freely (Etxeberría, 2008).
This definition is consistent with that of the Council of Europe, which describes dependency as “such a state in which people, who —for reasons connected to the lack or loss of physical, mental or intellectual autonomy— require assistance and/or extensive help in order to carry out common everyday actions,” in particular, those relating to personal care” (ECLAC, 2012).
In the case of children, dependency does not stem from a loss, but is due to the child’s stage of development.
Therefore, caring for them calls for a respectful and affective relationship and intervention to provide them with the essential foundations needed for human learning, which occurs during these stages, and for jointly enhancing the future exercise of their autonomy.
However, the fact that given population groups have different degrees of dependency and that caring for them requires more time, energy or knowledge should not be understood as a dichotomy between dependence and independence.
Indeed, all people require different types of care over their life cycle and, in this regard, are all socially and humanly interdependent, since vulnerability is inherent in the human condition (Carrasco, Borderías For its part, frailty is a precursor of dependency, which arises from an accumulation of inadequacies.
With age, for example, increased morbidity and interaction with the environment result in vulnerability, due to the risk of exposure to adverse health events in the short and medium term (García-García and others, 2011).
Fragilization is the process leading to a state of frailty, which comes from the environment and social obstacles, not from how people function (Etxeberría, 2008; Huenchuan, 2011); this occurs because societies marginalize those with certain functional limitations and prevent them from developing their capacities.
Such is the nature of the obstacles faced by people with disabilities.
The human rights approach addresses the concept of care from different angles.
One of them, in accordance with the aforementioned element of autonomy, is to consider the action of the subject receiving care.
It is argued that care also requires a positive attitude on the part of the recipient, not only in the sense of worrying or being concerned but also in the sense of caring about someone’s welfare.
To the extent that this subject is worried about himself, takes responsibility for himself, and is concerned about and looks after his own welfare, he will also succeed in moving from dependency to autonomy (Soberón and Zarco, 2011, quoted in Flores-Castillo, 2012).
Another aspect of care is its mutuality; this refers to the importance of this relationship, in terms of overcoming the belief that the recipient is the only one that shows need and dependency.
In those terms, the caregiving relationship is part of civic and personal development and grows into a mutual relationship of need and a dialectical process, since it is generated interactively.
This is because the elderly (even those with disabilities or dependency) are in a position to give care as well as receive it since they have a wealth of lifelong learning and knowledge that can be used productively (Dennefer and others, 2008).
Obviously, the argument relating to autonomy must be qualified insofar as degrees of dependency in early childhood are concerned.
To paraphrase Foucault, similar concerns also emerge when analysing care from the viewpoint of the microphysics of power,10 having to do with the complexity For Foucault, power is always present in human relationships, at very different levels: between individuals, in the political field, within the family, in teaching relationships.
In these different relationships, practices and discourse act as forms of subjection, dominance and coercion, and they are shifting situations that can change since they may give rise to different forms of resistance. of the inequalities inherent in these human relationships and the asymmetries between the care provider and the recipient that can, in the extreme, distort care.
An example is when violence or abuse is exerted in caring for children, the elderly or disabled persons.
These asymmetries are problematic in various spheres, but they have been highlighted especially in the discourse on persons with disabilities (Dennefer and others, 2008; Williams, 2010; Bedford, 2010).
Care is considered to be oppressive and exclusionary when caregivers subject persons with disabilities to unwanted positions of dependency and prevent them from exercising control over their lives.
In this context, it is contended that independence does not mean self-sufficiency but rather the ability to make choices and decisions concerning one’s own life.
The important point is to ensure that these persons have a say and a visible place in society and in the cultural environment, calling for greater self-determination and the opportunity for them to voice their opinion and have control over their relationships with professionals (Williams, 2010).
Attention should be drawn to the instrumentalization that occurs when people who lack the proper support are perceived only as incapacitated users of a rehabilitation model whose purpose is to integrate them into society by reducing their functional diversity to the minimum (Quinn and Deneger, 2002; Etxeberría, 2008).
It shows that the objectives —and the strategies to be implemented— are different in each case.
As shown in the diagram, childcare is located on the dependency-autonomy axis to emphasize its temporary nature, since it is only needed for young children.
Elderly persons (aged 80 or over) and persons of any age with serious dependency for health or disability reasons are located in the frailty-autonomy quadrant.
The care they receive should be specific and include the technical support needed to enable them to manage their dependency to the best of their ability and provide the necessary compensations to make up for the limitations they suffer or to which they may be exposed.
Lastly, For an estimate of the population in a position of dependency due to ill-health, see Huenchuan (2011). the fragilization-autonomy quadrant relates to the quality of care and the order of prevention.
The latter includes changing the physical environment, the social environment and the services provided for an ageing society and for overcoming the obstacles facing people with disabilities.
The quality of care and prevention are essential for limiting the progression from situations of fragilization to frailty and for preventing this from becoming a prelude to dependency.
Autonomy should be seen as a moving target, which must be constantly pursued and rebuilt.
It should not be interpreted as self-sufficiency, but rather viewed in terms of respect within the care relationship.
This review of tensions and conflicts between the potential objectives and subjects of care is based on Sojo (2011). their well-being now as children in a world they share as contemporaries of today’s adults.
A similar situation would occur if emphasis were placed unilaterally on the need to increase fertility by suggesting that it is desirable to have children because they are the future of society, a kind of common good.
If children are treated as icons in terms of other functions, the approach acquires an instrumental perspective with respect to the adult world and partially eclipses childhood (Leira and Saraceno, 2008, p. 9 and The emphasis and precedence of the objectives give rise to different constellations of care policies that evolve over time.
Pension systems are a case in point, since they fail to recognize the time women have spent on caregiving activities.
In terms of caregivers, it is worth reflecting on the circumstances and conditions in which social caregiving can effectively help to expand their life choices and well-being.
Doing so brings in many related issues, such as the need for and the capacity to generate decent, good quality jobs (Sojo, 2011).
In short, framing care (along with its objectives and focus) as a policy issue makes it possible to enhance and coordinate the social rights agenda from another perspective.
This applies especially to universal access to specific services that meet certain quality standards, highlighting the significance of quality and the relevant rules and regulations.
Thus, the advancement of the rights of women, children, persons with disabilities and older persons is viewed in terms of the relevance of the care and the quality of the services (Sojo, 2011, p. 59).
Carrasco, Cristina (2003), “La sostenibilidad de la vida humana: ¿un asunto de mujeres?”, Mujeres y trabajo: cambios impostergables, Magdalena T.
A critical look at recent social policy reform in Europe from a gender and family perspective”, Social Politics, vol. 18, No. 1.
The concept of care and the dialectic of critique”, Journal of Aging Studies, vol. 22.
Drancourt, Chantal and Florence Catrice (2008), “Le care: entre transactions familiales et économie des services”, Revue franchise de socio-economie, No. 2.
Durán, María-Angeles (ed.) (2012), El trabajo no remunerado en la economía global, Madrid, Fundación BBVA. (2003), “El trabajo no remunerado y las familias”, Gender and Health Unit, Pan American Health Organization, paper presented at the technical meeting on unpaid home-based health care services, Washington D.C., December.
Folbre, Nancy (2011), “Medir los cuidados: género, empoderamiento y la economía de los cuidados”, El trabajo de cuidados.
Hanlon, Neil and others (2007), “The place embeddedness of social care: Restructuring work and welfare”, Health & Place, vol. 13, Mackenzie, BC.
Kofman, Eleonore (2012), “Rethinking care through social reproduction: articulating circuits of migration”, Social Politics, vol. 19, No. 1.
Picchio, A. (1999), “Visibilidad analítica y política del trabajo de reproducción social”, Mujeres y economía, C.
Deneger (2002), “Derechos humanos y discapacidad: uso actual y posibilidades futuras de los instrumentos de derechos humanos de las Naciones Unidas en el contexto de la discapacidad”, New York, Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (OHCHR).
Rico, María Nieves (2011), “Crisis del cuidado y políticas públicas: el momento es ahora”, Las familias latinoamericanas interrogadas.
Rico, María Nieves and Carlos Maldonado (2011), “¿Qué muestra la evolución de los hogares sobre la evolución de las familias en América Latina?”, Las familias latinoamericanas interrogadas.
Rivera, Julián (2012), “El concepto de cuidado en El ser y el tiempo”, unpublished.
Saraceno, Chiara (2011), “Work-family balance across Europe: a too narrow focus in policy practices and discourses”, Challenge Europe.
Smith J., Susan (2005), “States, markets and an ethic of care”, Political Geography, vol. 24.
Thomas, Carol (2011), “Deconstruyendo los conceptos de cuidado”, El trabajo de cuidados.
Introduction In a region where inequality is rife, and in recognition of the link between care and the many facets of inequality, countries must make redesigning and extending social protection systems a policy priority in order to respond to the emerging demand for care.
Paid care work has multiple policy implications, and the strengths or weaknesses of existing public policies on care can be seen in the prevalence of paid care work and the conditions in which it is carried out, reflecting each country’s approach to resolving growing care needs.
In order to understand how care is construed and valued in modern societies and to fully grasp what is referred to as “the care economy”, both unpaid and paid care work must be brought into the picture.
However, paid care work has not been a research focus in the region; generally speaking, it has not been distinguished as a separate job category despite the fact that (methodological difficulties aside) enough statistical information is already available for such an examination.
At the international level, there have been great strides in research on employment in the care sector.
Studies carried out in developed countries have found that the care sector is distinguished from other sectors by certain specific characteristics: it is highly feminized; it offers limited access to social protection; its workforce has a high proportion of migrants; turnover is high; and pay is low.
Latin America still has a long way to go in terms of research in this area.
However, very few studies have taken a comprehensive comparative look at paid care work.
Casting light on paid care work and the conditions in which it is carried out is important not only because employment in the sector will likely expand owing to factors discussed in chapter II, but also because it has a bearing on inequality of various sorts and its policy implications.
This study looks at the ways in which societies link care with the gender roles attributed to supposedly natural or innate characteristics of women, describes how each country is addressing the growing needs for dependant care (European Foundation, 2006; Recio, 2010) and highlights the strengths and weaknesses of public policy approaches to care.
Developing a public care agenda requires knowledge of the particular characteristics of paid care work in each country, which in turn requires the generation and analysis of information on the topic.
This chapter seeks to narrow the region’s research gap and shine a spotlight on the situation on this key sector of the labour market.
Comparing working conditions in the care sector with those in other fields of employment reveals the status of care work in public policy, which has a significant impact on the quality of services.
The underlying premise is that the State should play a key role in regulating the labour market and in structuring the conditions in which care work is carried out (Razavi and Staab, 2010).
Section C examines the size of the care sector in Latin America and how it has changed over the past decade.
Although it is useful for analytical purposes to treat all care workers as a single, homogeneous group, there are, in fact, two very different subgroups: domestic workers (providing services directly to households) and all other care workers (most of whom work in health and education services).
Particular care is therefore taken to differentiate between these two subgroups, while also analysing the sector as a whole.
Accordingly, sections D and E look in depth at care workers and their employment conditions, highlighting not only the sharp disparities within the sector but also the gulf that separates care workers from other workers.
Section F takes a closer look at domestic employment because it accounts for such a large share of the care sector, addressing aspects such as labour regulation and the link with migration.
The topic was first covered in the sociological literature on the division of labour, but it was a later addition in other disciplines, especially economics.
The development of feminist economics, emphasizing the importance of care in understanding both the functioning of the economy and the well-being of individuals, has eliminated, at least in part, the androcentric bias of the discipline (see Ferber and Nelson, 1993).
As a result of this new approach, national statistics systems began to measure unpaid work using time-use surveys.
The Division for Gender Affairs of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) has encouraged the systematization and dissemination of gender statistics that are comparable across countries, such as those derived from time-use surveys.
While recognizing that significant methodological challenges and problems persist (Araya, 2003; Budlender, 2008; Milosavljevic and Tacla, 2007; Milosavljevic, 2007, among others), these surveys have raised awareness of the significance of these activities and their main features.
Progress has been made in this field thanks to the fresh theoretical approaches applied to the new information sources.
Some common patterns have emerged in the studies that have been carried out.
First, the distribution of unpaid work within households is highly unequal (Esquivel, 2010; ECLAC, 2010a; Espejo, Filgueira and Rico, 2010).
Owing to the number of hours that women devote to these activities, their overall burden of work is heavier than for men.
Income inequalities are also significant: higher-income women devote less of their time to unpaid work, while the proportion of time spent on unpaid work remains relatively steady among men, who devote very little time to care work regardless of their income level (ECLAC, 2010a).
Within the category of unpaid work there is a marked sexual division of tasks and gender segregation (Villamizar, 2011).
Men tend to have a smaller workload than women in terms of the tasks associated directly with the care and socialization of children, and the gender gaps tend to be even wider in relation to care for the sick or elderly (Rodríguez, 2007).
In general, women are responsible for the organization and distribution of chores, laundry, ironing, cleaning and cooking; while men tend to handle household repairs, shopping and errands outside the home (Aguirre and Batthyány, 2005).
The analysis in this box is based on data from the most recent rounds of time-use surveys in Colombia, Mexico and Peru (2010) and Uruguay (2007).
An initial descriptive analysis confirmed the patterns outlined above: women devote more time to unpaid work than men and, as a result, their total workload is heavier, even though they spent fewer hours than men on paid work.
Depending on the country, women spent between 46% and 71% of the time spent by men on paid work.
However, women devoted three to five times more time than men to unpaid domestic work.
The differences were very large in terms of the time spent caring for children or adults, and even greater when other unpaid domestic tasks were taken into account.
As a result, women’s total burden of hours was 19% higher than men’s in Peru, 14% higher in Colombia, 6% higher in Mexico and 3% higher in Uruguay.
The inverse correlation between women’s income level and the number of hours they devoted to unpaid work was confirmed in three of the four countries, while for men, the burden of unpaid work was unrelated to their income level.
Peru was the exception, with the inverse association being true for both men and women.
Since the variable in question (hours of unpaid work), is censored at the lower end, a Tobit model is used.
Two models were estimated for each country: one in which the dependent variable was the number of minutes devoted to domestic tasks (cooking, ironing, laundry, among others) and another in which the dependent variable was the number of minutes devoted to the care of other people.
For both models and in all four countries, men spent less time on both domestic and care tasks.
This first variable had one of the highest coefficients, and it was higher in every country for the models for time spent on domestic work.
This confirmed that, even controlling for other factors, the differences between men and women were more pronounced in this dimension than in relation to caring for others.
Being employed reduced the amount of time spent on both kinds of tasks – significantly so in all cases.
Three binary variables were included to distinguish between persons aged over 25 years, those in the group aged 25 to 45 and those aged 46 to 64.
The signs reported correspond to the coefficients for the youngest group (excluded in the regression).
In all countries, the older the individual, the more time devoted to domestic tasks.
As expected, those in the middle age group devoted more time to these tasks than those in the younger group, who in turn spent more time on these tasks than the group aged 46 to 64 years, reflecting the association between life cycle and time devoted to caring for children.
The survey in Colombia asks about time devoted to caring for children and time spent on caring for sick, elderly and/or disabled persons.
In Mexico, no distinction is made between time spent caring for each group, while in Peru the survey distinguishes between caring for children, the sick and persons with disabilities but does not gather information on time spent caring specifically for older adults.
For the purposes of this analysis, the total time allocated to the care of others was taken.
Three binary variables were included to distinguish between low, intermediate and high education levels.
The first was excluded in these regressions, so the sign of the coefficients should be read in relation to this group.
The patterns detected were different for each country, as were those for domestic tasks and caring for others.
A higher education level meant less time on domestic tasks in Uruguay and Peru; but in Mexico and Colombia, those with an intermediate education level spent more time on such tasks than those in the low education group, while those with the highest level spent the least time on such tasks.
The time devoted to caring for others increased in line with education level in Mexico and Colombia.
In Uruguay, those in the intermediate group spent more time on care activities than those in the lowest education category, who in turn spent more time on care than those in the highest category.
The time spent on both types of unpaid work increased with household income, but in an inverted U pattern, as shown by the quadratic coefficient (which was significant for all countries except for Peru).
Personal income was also positively associated with the time spent on both activities, although the quadratic term also came out positive, indicating first a decrease and then an increase beyond a certain level.
There was no clear pattern in relation to the time spent on care tasks by heads of household, and in many cases this variable was not significant.
Comparing households with just one adult (omitted variable) with households with two or more adults revealed differences depending on the type of unpaid work.
In all countries, individuals in households with one or more additional adults devoted less time to domestic tasks than individuals in households where there was only one adult.
With regard to care, the presence of one additional adult tended to mean more time spent on care activities (but was not significant in the case of Peru).
The care burden of those living in households with more than one additional adult (in addition to the interviewee) did not differ from that of those in households with only one adult.
Lastly, the presence of children (those aged under 12) tended to significantly increase the time devoted to domestic tasks as well as to the direct care of others.
The conceptual and methodological debate According to the definition of care adopted for the purposes of this study, paid care workers ware those who provide services to dependants, whether for their survival or personal development, where there is a direct relationship between caregiver and care receiver.
Workers in the following occupations in the fields of health, education and personal and household services fall under this category: teachers and teaching assistants at the preschool level; and, especially, nannies, nurses and nursing assistants, other care and personal service workers, companions and domestic workers.
At the international level, there is a considerable body of research on employment in the care sector.
It has led to increasing recognition of unpaid work in the economy and the reconciliation of productive and reproductive work.
Nevertheless, although these areas overlap, the subject of paid care work constitutes a separate analytical focus and is of significant consequence for public policy.
One of the main challenges with this research has been deciding what criteria to use to identify paid workers in the care sector.
A review of the literature reveals the lack of a single definition and a wide variety of approaches for deciding which jobs should be included.
The first, and the most general, takes into consideration all occupations linked to physical and emotional care (nurturance) (England, 1992; England, Thompson and Aman, 2001) regardless of whether there is face-to-face contact or the relationship involves the provision of services to dependants.
The set of care-related occupations included under this approach is quite broad (see table III.1).
It also includes doctors and dentists, other technical professions related to medicine, social workers and religious workers (see table III.1).
The third approach further restricts the range of occupations included, arguing that a more varied list undermines the efforts being made to identify the market deficits and poor working conditions affecting those paid to provide care to dependants (children, the sick and older persons) (Razavi and Staab, 2010).
It also holds that the first approach gives precedence to relational elements and nurturance over other aspects of reproductive work, such as cleaning and food preparation (Razavi, 2007).
Work that involves nurturing in a broad sense Includes: Doctors, therapists, technical health-related occupations, medical assistants, nurses, teachers, teaching assistants, social workers, coaches, social services staff, librarians, hairdressers, vendors of various products, domestic workers, child-minders, waiters, elevator operators, religious workers, cashiers, receptionists, taxi drivers, chauffeurs and porters.
Provision of services that help recipients to develop their human capacities England, Budig and Folbre (2002) Includes: Doctors, therapists, technical occupations related to health, medical assistants, nurses, teachers, teaching assistants, social workers, coaches, social services staff, librarians, hairdressers, domestic workers, child-minders and religious workers.
Excludes: Vendors, elevator operators, hairdressers, taxi drivers and chauffeurs, porters, cashiers and receptionists.
Folbre, “Wages of virtue: The relative pay of care work”, Social Problems, vol. 49, Nº 4, 2002; S.
Staab, “Underpaid and overworked: a cross-national perspective on care workers”, International Labour Review, vol. 149, Nº 4, 2010.
Indeed, there are only two that set out specifically to calculate how many care workers there are and to determine their profile and working conditions in specific countries.
Esquivel (2010) examines paid care work in Argentina, analysing the composition of the sector, the characteristics of those employed in the field and the main differences between them and the rest of the workforce.
Using the definition of care work established by England, Budig and Folbre (2002), this study includes doctors and other medical professionals, teachers and teaching assistants (all education levels), domestic workers and other care workers.
Another study looks at paid care work in Uruguay (Aguirre, 2010), identifying care workers using the same classifications of branches of activity and occupations as those used in the household survey.
The approach adopted (which is more restrictive than that used in the Argentine study) includes some categories of personal care workers and other workers providing personal services, as well as some specific occupations in the field of health and education.
Folbre (2006) analyses subcategories of paid care work, looking at the intersection between workers’ labour-market position (formal or informal) and the type of people to whom they provide care services.
The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) distinguishes between professional and non-professional jobs in relation to long-term care work (OECD, 2011b).
Finally, in a study on the characteristics of paid care work and related employment, Simon and others (2008) classify occupations into four broad categories by service sector: social care, childcare, nursing and education.
This yielded a reasonable estimate of paid care work and facilitated comparison across countries.
The criteria selected at the discretion of the authors were drawn from the definitions set out in the previous chapter (which emphasize the type of service provided and the type of person receiving the care) and are suitable for use with the information available from the household surveys.
These criteria were applied to household-survey data for the countries of the region available for two points in time (around 2000 and 2010).
Employment in the care sector in Latin America In Latin America, employment in the care sector accounts for between 5% and 10% of total employment (depending on the country).
In the last decade, the proportion of workers in the care sector has held relatively steady.
There is no significant correlation between a country’s economic well-being or women’s share in the labour force and the size of the care sector.
Three quarters of care workers are household-based domestic workers, while the remaining quarter works in other sectors such as education and health.
Having defined care work and established the methodological criteria to be applied, this section analyses in detail the size of the sector, how it has changed over time and who it employs.
This analysis looks at paid care workers as a whole and, within this group, distinguishes between domestic workers and other care workers.
All preschool teachers and teaching assistants were included, regardless of the age of the children with whom they work.
The grounds for their exclusion can be found in table A.1 of the annex.
Size of the sector and recent developments Examining the size of and employment trends in the care sector brings up three key questions.
The first concerns the proportion of all employed persons who work in the care sector.
The study carried out for this edition of Social Panorama indicates that employment in the care sector currently accounts for 6.7% of total employment.
In Uruguay, Brazil and Chile, for example, employment in the care sector accounts for more than 8% of total employment (9.2%, 8.5% and 8.3%, respectively in 2010).
In the second half of the twentieth century, several developed countries saw a significant rise in the number of care workers (Folbre and Nelson, 2000; Simon and others, 2008; European Foundation, 2006), and the sector is expected to continue expanding.
In Latin America, on the other hand, there is no conclusive data for gauging growth of this sector over a long enough period of time.
Furthermore, the preponderance of domestic workers in the region’s care sector makes for a unique scenario.
Nevertheless, the first steps are now being taken so that long-term trends in this indicator can be monitored in the future.
Between 2000 and 2010, the proportion of care workers in the employed population held relatively steady: in 2000 they accounted for 6.2% of all employed persons, so the percentage increase over the decade was very small (see figure III.2).
Nor were there any major shifts in the breakdown between domestic workers and other care workers. a Data are for urban areas. b Data refer to 2009. c Data refer to 2007. d Data refer to 2005. e Weighted average.
The proportion of total employment corresponding to domestic services is worthy of note, as well.
On average, 5% of all care workers are domestic workers; 1.7% work in other care-related occupations. [no queda claro por qué no suma 100%] This breakdown is a major factor in defining this group of workers.
In view of the significant differences between the two subgroups, which are illustrated in this chapter, information is presented on care workers as a whole and disaggregated by subgroup.
Another hypothesis is that the size of the care sector in each country is linked to women’s participation in the labour market, assuming that greater participation will lead to higher demand for care and more jobs in care-related activities (see box III.2 on the link between female labour supply and care policies).
However, a closer look at the association between the proportion of employed persons in the care sector and female labour participation reveals an even weaker link than in the previous case (see figure III.4), which is also confirmed when considering domestic workers and other care workers separately (see table A-2 in the statistical annex).
First, the period reviewed is too short to analyse this type of time trend, and a number of factors could be exerting pressure in different directions.
For example, demand for these services could be expected to fall as households get smaller.
But other factors that have operated at the same time, such as increased female labour-force participation and population ageing (Rodgers, 2009; Durán, 2012) might be counteracting that drop in demand and helping to keep the indicator at a similar level.
Other potential influences, such as wage trends in line with the market price of care services, remain largely unexplored.
The third question has to do with the variables that explain the size of the care sector in any given country.
The first links the size of the sector to the level of economic well-being, with the former expanding proportionally as people can afford to purchase care services on the market or the State gradually takes on the provision of those services.
A brief look at the correlation between the care sector’s share of total employment and per capita GDP (as a substitute variable for economic well-being) shows a relatively weak but positive association between the two indicators (see figure III.3).
In short, there is no clear correlation in the region between the proportion of jobs in the care sector and countries’ economic well-being.
Nor does economic well-being appear to be associated with the size of the two subsectors (domestic services and other care work) (see table A-2 in the statistical annex).
The per capita GDP figures are from The third hypothesis assumes that the proportion of employment in the care sector is linked to a country’s population age composition, in that the larger the percentage of older adults in the population the larger the portion of employment in care work.
In this case the correlation is stronger: the countries that are further along in population ageing are those with a greater proportion of the working population employed as care workers (see figure III.5 and table A-2 in the statistical annex).
However, it is difficult to establish a causal relationship from an empirical standpoint.
The decision to provide informal care to small children, parents or sick family members may be influenced by a person’s labour opportunities.
In other words, perhaps it is those individuals who are less likely to be successful in the labour market who devote themselves to care, rather than it being their care activities that determine their employment status.
It is therefore not clear whether caregivers choose care duties over paid employment or whether they devote themselves to care provision in the absence of worthwhile job opportunities.
To put this simplistically, if care activities are taking people away from the labour market, policies should focus on providing formal care or promoting employment patterns that are more compatible with care duties.
Many of the aforementioned studies have attempted to address this endogeneity using different methodological tools, but finding the right econometric instruments to solve this problem has proved difficult (Bolin and others, 2008; Heitmueller, 2007; Heitmueller and Michaud, 2006).
In general, although the evidence is not conclusive, the significant negative effect of care on employment probabilities tends to be reduced or lose significance when attempts are made to control for endogeneity.
Other studies found that such measures increased the number of single mothers in the labour force, but not married women (Cascio, 2009; Havnes and Mostad, 2011).
As to studies conducted in the region, Berlinsky and Galiani (2007) analysed the effect of providing free preschool centres in Argentina and concluded that this led to a significant increase in the labour supply of mothers.
By contrast, studies conducted in Chile (Encina and Martinez, 2009; Medrano, 2009; Aguirre, 2011) found that expanding childcare services had no significant impact on the number of mothers in the labour force.
The authors argue that various factors, including cultural aspects, as well as the characteristics of the care supply in terms of the hours it is available and application procedures, may explain this lack of impact.
More research is needed into the interplay between the care sector of the economy and the different welfare regimes in the region, including their respective care systems.8 This would show to what extent societies give precedence to the State or the market in relation to the care of dependants, which directly influences the size of the paid care sector.
And it would help explain the patterns and historical paths that have led countries in the same region to such different care regimes. basis of special tabulations of household surveys conducted in the respective countries and information from the Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre (CELADE)-Population Division of ECLAC.
There is currently a debate on the different types of welfare regime in Latin America and their constituent elements, in particular, the emphasis they place on the role of the State, the market, the family and the community in providing care to dependants.
The composition of paid care work Workers in care-related fields form a very heterogeneous set comprising vastly differing subgroups.
In Latin America, three quarters (74.5%) of all care workers are householdbased domestic workers; the remaining quarter (25.5%) work in other areas (see figure III.6A).
Another way of categorizing these workers is to group them according to whether they provide education services, health services or community and household services.9 Almost 8 out of every 10 (79.8%) workers in the care sector belong to this last category.
Of the remaining 20%, 11.5% work in health services and 8.7% in education services (see figure III.6B).
Regardless of the method of measurement used, the distribution of care workers among these categories has remained fairly unchanged over the last decade.
Profile of care workers Employment in the care sector (in domestic services, education and health) is highly feminized.
In all countries, domestic workers have significantly lower levels of education than those employed outside the care sector, while care workers in education and health care have significantly higher levels of schooling than the rest of the employed population.
Poverty and indigence rates among care workers are higher than average, and they generally have more children and adolescents in their households.
Within this highly heterogeneous sector, domestic workers are much more vulnerable than other caregivers.
Domestic workers account for the vast majority of home-based and other community services.
This finding reflects how the gender bias that underpins the distribution of unpaid care work transcends the confines of the household and leads to the overrepresentation of women among paid care workers.
Latin America is no exception: 94.2% of paid care workers are women.
State of) a a Data refer to 2007. b Data refer to 2009. c Data refer to urban areas. d Data refer to 2005. e Weighted average.
First, despite certain variations between countries in the proportion of women employed in the care sector and other sectors, in all cases the share in the former is at least double the latter.
Second, the overwhelming presence of women among paid care workers has changed little in the last decade in terms of the regional average and for individual countries (see figure III.8).
A look at the distribution of men and women in the different categories of care work reveals some differences.
The proportion of women is higher among domestic workers care workers, and it is higher in education services and community and household services than in health services (94.4% and 95.2%, respectively, in 2000 compared with 85.9% in 2010).
As shown in figure III.9, these shares have changed little over the last decade.
The remaining 6% are male domestic workers (3.7%) and men employed in other care-related occupations (see figure III.10).
This breakdown shows that the care sector as a whole is a major source of employment for women and an insignificant one for men (see figure III.11).
Of all the employed women in the region, 15.3% work in the care sector; a considerable proportion (11.6%) are domestic workers.
Data for Nicaragua refer to 2005, those for the Plurinational State of Bolivia to 2007, and those for Brazil and Chile to 2009.
In comparison with workers in other sectors, there are fewer young persons aged 15 to 24 (13.9% compared with 19.6% among other workers), as well as fewer older persons (1.9%, compared with 4.9% among the rest of the employed population) (see figure III.12).
While the average age of the working population rose across the board between 2000 and 2010, this trend has been more marked among care workers than other jobholders.
The proportion of young people aged 15 to 24 among care workers fell by almost half during the 2000s, while the drop was much less dramatic among the rest of the employed population.
At the same time, the percentage of workers aged over 45 years employed in the care sector shot up by more than 50%, compared with a mere 15% increase in the rest of the working population (see figure III.12).
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. a Data for Nicaragua refer to 1998, those for Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Although the ageing trend was seen in care workers in all the countries studied, in some cases, such as Panama, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Brazil, it was more marked.
In others, such as Uruguay, it was barely noticeable (see table III.3).
There are marked differences between the different subgroups of care workers: the ageing trend is much more evident among female domestic workers than other care workers.
This seems to have resulted in a convergence of the age profile of these two subgroups between 2000 and 2010 (see figure III.13).
In most countries, health workers are, on average, older than those who work in education (see table A-3 in the statistical annex).
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. a Data for Nicaragua refer to 1998, those for Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Care workers tend to have a lower education level than other employed persons.
According to data from 2010, 21.3% of care workers had not completed primary school, 48.5% had not completed secondary school, 18.5% had a secondary-level education and only 11.7% had reached the tertiary level.
In the rest of the employed population, 19.3% had not completed primary school and 38% had not completed secondary school, but 22.4% had completed their secondary-level education and 20.3% —almost double the figure for care workers— had a tertiary-level education (see figure III.14A).
These differences between education levels of care workers and other workers can be explained essentially by the low level of schooling of female domestic workers.
In 2010, 85% of female domestic workers had an incomplete secondary education or less (26.7% had not finished primary school), while only 26.8% of other care workers were in that position (5.3% had not completed primary school and 21.5% had not completed secondary school) (see figure III.14B).
Care workers and the rest of the employed population Complete tertiary Incomplete tertiary (including technical studies) Incomplete secondary B.
The synthetic indicator of years of schooling more clearly illustrates these differences.
In all countries, paid care workers, and especially female domestic workers, have less schooling than the rest of the employed population, even though in Honduras, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia the differences are small.
By contrast, care workers in the education and health subsectors have considerably higher levels of education (see table III.4), which becomes relevant when analysing differences in income, as discussed below.
Paid care jobs are concentrated in urban areas to a greater extent than other occupations.
In 2010, almost 85% of care jobs were in urban areas; the figure for other occupations was 77% (see figure III.15).
In 2010, 6.7% of all employed persons in the region had care-related jobs: 7.6% in urban areas and 4.1% in rural areas.
Nevertheless, it has been increasing (from 22.5% in 2000 to 32.8% in 2010), while the share of heads of household employed in other sectors has even fallen percentage of heads of household was similar among domestic workers and other care workers (33.4% and 30.6%, respectively, in 2010).
Although the percentage of heads of household has risen for both groups, the increase has been more marked among domestic workers (see figure III.17).
Focusing on employed women who are heads of household reveals the same trends, albeit with slight differences according to job category.
For example, the share of female care sector workers who are heads of household is higher than among other female workers.
Just under one third of female domestic workers (31.7%) are heads of household while among other female care workers it is 27.9%.
Lastly, among female care workers (especially, female domestic workers) the percentage who are heads of household has soared, far outstripping the increase seen for other female workers (see figure III.17B).
In short, the proportion of care workers with family responsibilities is already sizeable, and it is growing.
This could be because certain care job characteristics, in particular the working hours, allow workers to strike a balance between paid work and meeting the care needs of their families.
A larger proportion (68.9%) of care workers live in households with children or adolescents than is the case with other workers (63.4%).
This percentage is somewhat higher (71.3%) for domestic workers —especially female domestic workers— and lower (61.8%) for other care workers (see figure III.18).
Furthermore, although the proportion of workers living in households with children has declined across the board owing to changing fertility rates and population ageing throughout the region, the decreases have been more marked in the rest of the employed population than among care workers and less substantial among female domestic workers than among other workers in the care sector.
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. a Data for Nicaragua refer to 1998, those for Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Paid care workers live in households with a lower average per capita income than other workers do.
According to data from 2010, 36.5% of care workers lived in households in the first two quintiles of per capita income and 40% belonged to quintiles IV and V.
In the rest of the employed population, those figures were 30% and 49%, respectively.
Between 2000 and 2010, this distribution worsened somewhat for care workers, while it remained almost the same or even improved slightly for other workers (see figure III.19A).
An analysis of their respective profiles clearly shows that female domestic workers are more vulnerable than other care workers.
In 2010, 43% of female domestic workers lived in households in quintiles I and II (17.6% and 25.7%, respectively), in stark contrast to only 16.4% of other care workers (4.4% in quintile I and 11.7% in quintile II) (see figure III.19B).
Taking these figures into account, it is unsurprising that the poverty rate is higher among care workers than the rest of the working population (24.1% compared with 20.2% in 2010).
Nevertheless, marked disparities once again set apart the different subgroups in the care sector: among domestic workers, the poverty rate was as high as 29.1% in 2010, while among other care workers, that figure stood at 9.6% (see figure III.20A).
A similar scenario was seen in relation to the indigence rate (see figure III.20B).
Working conditions Paid workers in the care sector experience a wide variety of working conditions.
The vast majority of female domestic workers are private-sector wage-earners, while the public sector is a significant employer of other care workers.
The occupational structure of care workers is at odds with that of other groups, where own-account work accounts for a larger share.
Paid care workers, and particularly female domestic workers, have less access to social protection.
On average, they work fewer hours per week and are more likely to work on a part-time basis than other workers.
Hourly wage gaps —adjusted for type of worker— show that there is a considerable wage penalty for domestic work in the vast majority of countries.
While there is no overall pattern in conditions for care workers in the education sector, health-care workers enjoy a wage premium compared with other workers with similar traits.
Modalities of employment differ for each group of care workers according to their occupational category.
While domestic workers are mainly private-sector wage-earners, almost half of all other care workers are employed in the public sector.
In fact, 63% of education workers and 57% of health workers are employed in the public sector.
The occupational structure of care work differs substantially from that of other workers, among whom own-account work is more prevalent (see figure III.21).
In contrast, self-employment is practically unheard of among care workers, with the only exception being the almost 5% of health workers who are self-employed.
Own-account workers make up a relatively large proportion of the sector in Chile, Honduras and Uruguay (see table A-4 in the statistical annex).
Informal production, as defined by the Regional Employment Programme for Latin America and the Caribbean of the International Labour Organization (ILO, 1972), is one of the main problems in the region’s economies.
The concept of informality refers to lowproductivity jobs in marginal segments of the economy and to subsistence economic units.
The operational definition includes domestic workers in the informal group.10 The percentage of other care workers in the informal sector is smaller than is the case for workers outside the care sector (in 2010, 17.8% compared with 42.8%).
However, domestic workers make up such a large share of care workers that the overall level of informality in this sector as a whole is high (79.0%) (see table III.5).
Mirroring the pattern seen for workers outside the sector, the portions of other care workers in the informal sector have been decreasing over the decade.
The low incidence of informal employment among health and education workers is attributable largely to the fact that the public sector is a significant employer of these workers. a Data for Nicaragua refer to 2005, those for the Plurinational State of Bolivia to 2007, and those for Brazil and Chile to 2009.
The definition of informal workers comprises self-employed unskilled workers, unpaid workers, owners and employees of microenterprises (except skilled workers) and domestic workers.
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. a Data for Nicaragua refer to 1998, those for Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, In 2010, the proportion of care sector workers who lacked social protection (that is, who had no social security coverage) was somewhat higher than for other workers (63.2% compared with 56.9%).
The main reason for this gap is that a high percentage of domestic workers lack coverage. 11 Only 23.7% of domestic workers contributed to social security schemes in 2010.
The levels of coverage are considerably higher among education and health workers because a larger percentage of them work in the public sector.
These dramatic differences in social protection coverage between the various care-worker subgroups are seen in all countries (see figure III.22).
Social security coverage has been expanding over the last decade for both care workers and the rest of the employed population.
However, the improvement for care workers is attributable almost exclusively to the better coverage available for education and health workers, since a much smaller degree of improvement was seen for domestic workers (see figure III.23).
Care workers work fewer hours per week than other workers (in 2010, 36.6 hours compared with 42.3 hours) (see figure III.24).
This low average is attributable to the working hours of domestic workers and, in particular, education workers (who work an average of 33 hours per week), since health workers work a similar number of hours to other occupational groups.
Working hours for these groups have remained constant over time but differ depending on the sex of the worker.
In all groups, both in the care sector and in all other occupations, men complete more hours of paid work on average than women.
The difference is more marked in occupations outside the care sector and in domestic service, although it is important to bear in mind that only a small minority of domestic workers are men.12 A key reason for this is the combination of weak labour regulation and greater flexibility to the detriment of workers.
It is difficult to determine the number of hours worked per week through household surveys.
For example, the nature of live-in domestic work makes it hard to quantify hours.
However, live-in female workers, who account for a small portion of the domestic services subsector, tend to report 30% more hours on average than other female domestic workers.
In the case of education, the data might not include hours spent on lesson planning.
In 2010, holding more than one job was less prevalent among care workers (6.1%) than other workers (7.6%) (see table III.6).
Education workers and, to an even greater extent, health workers are far more likely to have more than one job than workers in other occupations.
By contrast, there is a low rate of multiple job-holding among domestic workers.
The pattern of multiple jobs is distinctly different between men and women, especially among care workers, with men being much more likely to have more than one job than women.
Another way of looking at these differences in working hours is to measure the prevalence of part-time work (fewer than 30 hours per week).
Part-time work is less common in the health subsector and very prevalent among education and, especially, domestic workers.
In these two groups there are marked differences between men and women in terms of number of hours worked.
In all cases, men (especially male domestic workers) tend to work less on a part-time basis (see figure III.25).
Education workers Health workers Workers in community and household services a Data for Nicaragua refer to 2005, those for the Plurinational State of Bolivia to 2007, and those for Brazil and Chile to 2009.
The above description of care workers paints a picture of who they are and how they work.
The next step towards better understanding their situation is to examine their income levels and compare them with figures for the rest of the working population.
Previous studies indicate that care work tends to be lower paid than other occupations when controlling for the characteristics of individuals (England and Folbre, 1999; OECD, 2011a).
This bias particularly affects women and is also confirmed by analysing longitudinal data, which show that the same individual earns less in a care-related occupation than in other occupations (England, Budig and Folbre, 2002).
Data of this kind is not available for the region as the studies that have been carried out have focused essentially on identifying the size of the sector and the characteristics of care workers.
One exception is the study by Esquivel (2010) in Argentina, which found that women who work in care occupations do not necessarily incur a wage penalty, while men do.
Disaggregating by type of employment within the care sector reveals a wage penalty for both male and female health workers.
There are no significant differences in other occupational groups.13 Given the limited research on this topic in the region, the aim of this edition of Social Panorama is to shed new light on the income of care workers in comparison with that of other workers.
To that end, it seems reasonable to go beyond a comparison of average income because there are factors at work in both groups (and even among care workers) that might explain, at least in part, any differences in income.
Income differences are analysed by estimating wage equations where the dependent variable is the workers’ income (expressed in logarithms) and the explanatory variables include the traditional controls for the characteristics of the workers.14 The data used are from the most recent round of household surveys available in the countries.
The figures for monthly income are used and adjusted for the number of hours worked.
Owing to the specific focus of this study, variables were included to flag care workers.
First, the care sector as a whole was identified, using a binary variable with a value of 1 for care workers (as defined at the beginning of this chapter) and a value of 0 for non-care workers.
The coefficient of this variable is of interest as it reflects the income gap with other workers as a percentage.
First, for illustrative purposes, the differences in income were analysed without including control variables: this is often termed the “unadjusted gap”.
For monthly income, the coefficient of the binary variable which distinguishes care workers from non-care workers, without adjusting for characteristics, is negative and significant for all countries, except Honduras.
Care workers earn, on average, between 13.8% (Peru) and 89.6% (Costa Rica) less than other workers.
When controlling for the individual characteristics of workers, the gap narrows considerably in all countries and is no longer significant in the case of Nicaragua.
In Peru and El Salvador, the countries with the smallest wage penalties in the region, the difference becomes a wage premium for care workers when controlling for the characteristics of the workers.
Thus, care workers in these economies earn more on average than other workers with similar characteristics.
These are important a unionization or OTHER WORKERS, AROUND 2010 variables for have found that the choice between care occupations and other analysing income differences.
Hourly wages Monthly wages occupations is not one of the factors affecting women’s employment Unadjusted gap Adjusted gap Unadjusted gap Adjusted gap decisions (Budig and Misra, 2010). a Data for Nicaragua refer to 2005, those for the Plurinational State of Bolivia to 2007, and those for Brazil and Chile to 2009. .
Does not include data from Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia or Guatemala. b Coefficient is significant at 1%. c Coefficient is significant at 10%. d Coefficient is significant at 5%.
No correction was made for selection bias since previous studies have found that the choice between care occupations and other occupations is not one of the factors affecting women’s employment decisions (Budig and Misra, 2010).
Unfortunately, in most countries there is no information on worker unionization or wage bargaining.
The wage gap in this case is smaller because care workers work fewer hours than other workers, making this measure a better reflection of the differences between the two groups.
Once the characteristics of the workers have been adjusted for, the wage differences in Mexico, Paraguay, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia are no longer significant and the wage premium for care workers in El Salvador remains.
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. b The lighter-coloured bars show where the results were not statistically significant.
The second step in this study of wage gaps involved distinguishing between domestic workers and other care workers.
These coefficients indicate the percentage gaps for each subgroup with respect to similar workers from outside the care sector, as control variables have been taken into account in the calculations.
In 9 of the 14 countries in the study there is a monthly wage penalty for domestic workers, except in El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
There is an hourly penalty as well, though it is considerably smaller and, in Mexico and Paraguay, no longer statistically significant.
In short, there is an hourly wage penalty for domestic workers in 8 of the 14 countries examined.
The scale of the differences in hourly income ranges from a penalty of 5% in Ecuador to nearly 46% in Panama.
No clear pattern emerges in relation to other care workers: while the hourly wage gap is significant in 8 out of the 14 countries in the study, in two countries (Brazil and El Salvador) there is a wage premium for these workers.
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. b The coefficient is significant at 5%. c The coefficient is significant at 1%. d The coefficient is significant at 10%.
In the above analysis, the subgroup of care workers who are not domestic workers (referred to as “other care workers”) includes health and education workers, as well as domestic workers employed outside households (a very small subgroup).
The aggregate analysis detects no clear pattern for this subgroup as a whole, but some interesting features can be noted when the subgroup is further broken down into care workers in the education sector and in the health sector.
In 10 of the 14 countries in the study there is a monthly wage penalty for care workers in education compared with similar workers outside the care sector (see table III.9).
However, this penalty disappears in most countries (except Chile, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Peru) when it refers to hourly wages.
In 10 of the 14 countries in the study, there is a monthly wage premium for care workers in the health sector that holds in almost all of those countries for hourly wages (except Chile, where the coefficient was no longer significant).
This finding is probably linked to the fact that a larger proportion of these workers are employed in the public sector.
Data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. b The coefficient is significant at 1%. c The coefficient is significant at 10%. d The coefficient is significant at 5%.
Health sector Monthly income Hourly income a Data for Nicaragua refer to 2005, those for the Plurinational State of Bolivia to 2007, and those for Brazil and Chile to 2009. data for Ecuador and Uruguay correspond to urban areas. b The lighter-coloured bars show where the results were not statistically significant.
The above analysis shows that paid care workers as a group are highly heterogeneous and highlights the differences observed in the region’s labour markets.
The wage penalty for care workers in developed countries can also be seen in certain countries in the region for workers in a range of different circumstances.
In most countries there is a significant wage penalty for domestic workers, although it is smaller when considering hourly wages rather than monthly wages.
Education workers also suffer a monthly wage penalty that tends to disappear for hourly wages.
By contrast, health sector workers have a wage premium or advantage in most countries.
In order to better understand these gaps and the differences between countries, further analysis should be conducted in the light of the specific characteristics of the labour markets of the region and how they are regulated.
Domestic work in Latin America: vulnerability and discrimination in times of crisis Domestic employment combines a specific population profile —a very high proportion of women and international migrants— lack of basic assets and more precarious working conditions.
The significant socioeconomic differences between domestic workers and other care workers reflect the existence of a dual model of labour regulation and protection in the region.
The low profile of domestic employment on the policy agenda and in labour regulations in Latin America is an indicator of entrenched patterns of discrimination against women and the undervaluation of what is traditionally regarded as women’s work and caring for others.
The flows of female migrants performing care work heighten the lack of protection and discrimination in the sector.
The previous sections have shown that there are many different kinds of care workers and that domestic work is associated with a specific population profile, shortfalls in basic assets and precarious working conditions.
The evidence provided confirmed the findings of previous research: domestic work is more highly feminized than other care occupations, and domestic workers tend to have a lower education level, higher poverty and indigence rates and a higher percentage of indigenous persons than other workers in the sector.
As stated in ECLAC (2007), “domestic work... enjoys social legitimacy because it does not entail transgression of any cultural norm.
Caring is a task for women, and serving one for poor women”.
The domestic subsector is also the category with the highest proportion of female heads of household and female workers living in households with children and adolescents.
There is a strong correlation between domestic employment and single-parent households headed by women, reflecting a core inequality grounded in vulnerability, a high degree of income dependency and the difficulties associated with reconciling paid and unpaid work (ECLAC, 2007).
The significant socioeconomic differences between domestic workers and other care workers reflect the existence in the region of a dual model of labour regulation and protection (Esquivel, 2010; Lund, 2010; Palriwala and Neetha, 2010).
It is also, ultimately, a reflection of the high levels of gender and social inequality that still persist in the societies of the region.
In most countries of the region, general labour regulations do not apply to domestic work or, if they do, are not enforced.
These differences can be seen, for example, in legislation setting maximum working hours per week.
Traditionally in Latin America there has been a huge gap in the working hours established by law in each country for workers in general and for domestic workers.
This situation reflects explicit patterns of discrimination “on the grounds that this work possesses certain peculiarities associated with the demand for care and social reproduction in households and families” (ECLAC, 2007).
It also shows how the undervaluation of housework and caregiving in the region’s societies is transposed onto the employment sector that is expected to take on some of these tasks (ECLAC, 2007; In spite of these trends, some countries in the region have recently taken significant steps to change some of the regulations that were explicitly discriminatory against domestic workers.
In 2003, the Plurinational State of Bolivia brought most of the rights of domestic workers into line with those of other workers.
The Convention set out labour standards to protect domestic workers, establishing their rights and the need for regulation of reasonable working hours, weekly rest, limits on payments in kind, clear information about the terms and conditions of employment and the respect for fundamental principles and rights at work, in particular freedom of association and collective bargaining.
Velasquez, “Aspectos juridicos y economicos del trabajo domestico remunerado en America Latina”, Trabajo doméstico: un largo camino hacia el trabajo decente, M.E.
Rodgers, “Cambios en el servicio domestico en América Latina”, Trabajo doméstico: un largo camino hacia el trabajo decente, M.E.
Female migrants and domestic work Domestic work and, specifically, care activities are among the issues addressed in the literature on gender and migration (Sassen, 2000; Pessar and Mahler, 2001; Morokvásic, 1984; Chant, 2003; Boyd and Grieco, 2003; Arriagada and Todaro, 2012).
Previous ECLAC studies have addressed the link between this topic and internal and, especially, international migration in the region (Martínez Pizarro, 2003; Tokman, 2008).
There is no room for doubt: in many countries in the region and the rest of the world, migrant women account for a significant proportion of workers in occupations involving domestic and care activities.
Migrants tend to be overrepresented in the care economy workforce because the needs of this growing and labour-intensive sector are met particularly well by migrants, especially international migrants.
However, the data from the 2010 census round in some countries suggest that the proportion of internal migrants in the sector is falling and starting to match the share of the non-migrant population (see table III.10).
The association between international migrants and domestic work is far more marked.
One of the defining features of female migration between the countries of Latin America is that it is employment-related.
Female migrants increasingly identify economic reasons for their decision to migrate, with many entering domestic service in the destination country because that is where they find real opportunities for economic integration (Cortés, 2005; Martínez Pizarro, 2006).
In the region, a large proportion of female migrants are employed as household-based domestic workers; at the intraregional level, 27% of the female migrant labour force was employed in domestic work in the early 2000s.
In some subregions and countries that percentage was even larger: in Argentina and Costa Rica, countries with high immigration rates, the concentration of female migrants employed as domestic workers was close to 29% and 36% respectively, while in Chile that proportion was as much as 43% (Martinez Pizarro, 2006).
These migrants do not take jobs from native-born workers; they are, instead, responding to a changing labour market where the supply of rural, internal migrants has been exhausted and the type of service offered has gone from full-time, live-in work to live-out work (Tokman, 2008).
It is increasingly common to find migrants from the same country carrying out the same type of work in their destination countries.
Caribbean nurses and teachers are one example; however, one of the clearest cases is the specialization of Peruvian migrant women in domestic services: almost 50% of them work in this sector.
Peruvian women employed as domestic workers are more highly qualified than other migrant groups, and this comparative advantage may be one of the reasons why they are more frequently hired to fill these positions.
However, Pacecca and Courtis (2008) have noted that overqualified domestic workers do not necessarily receive higher pay, at least not in Argentina.
In the main receiving countries, the majority of migrant female domestic workers are mothers.
In Argentina, 66% of all Peruvian women who are employed as domestic workers have children; in Costa Rica, 72% of Nicaraguan female domestic workers have children.
In Chile the figure is 85% for Peruvian women, and it is as high as 87% for Colombian women working in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
This is significant, first, because it means that these women are financially responsible for their children and, second, because it is palpable evidence of the relative nature of the autonomy that leads women to decide to migrate alone, leaving their children behind in their country of origin (Martínez Pizarro, 2006).
Economic vulnerability and disempowerment, coupled with their responsibilities as mothers, drive women to accept jobs with less prestige and lower pay than those taken by men with similar qualifications, leading to occupational segregation and segmentation in precarious and high-risk jobs, such as domestic work (Cortés, 2005; Staab, 2003; Szas and Lerner, 2003 cited in Martínez Pizarro, 2008).
The problem lies in the lack of protection and the discrimination that these women face at work –making them even more vulnerable, especially if they are undocumented.
In most cases there is a combination of factors, including residency status (documented or undocumented), country of origin, ethnicity, length of residence in the destination country, language proficiency and education level.
The vulnerability of women migrants is closely related (in addition to frequent travel back and forth between countries) to their employment status less prestigious and lower-paid occupations that lack protection in the broadest sense.
As they seek work in developed countries, female migrants are vulnerable to exploitation and run the risk of ending up on the wrong side of the law or being targeted by migrant smugglers or human traffickers (figures on these last two are very difficult to obtain).
Lim (1998) posited that population ageing and the increasing integration of native-born women into the labour market in many developing countries were driving the employment of migrant women as domestic workers.
The authors refer to “complex reproduction systems”, characteristic of societies in which immigration is no longer a driver of population growth but a structural, endogenous factor in demographic change.
The authors note the significant proportion of immigrant women employed in domestic and care work, as well as in the service industry, in those countries.
Segregation is even more marked among women because they are concentrated in two types of jobs: elementary occupations, which are by far the most common among female migrants in these countries, and jobs in services, commerce and sales.
Crisis and migration The current global recession, which has hit Western European countries the hardest, cannot be ignored when addressing the interplay between international migration and care services.
The influx of migrants to Europe was spurred by the demand created as the education levels of native-born women in the countries of southern Europe rose.
And the presence, arrival and return of women performing care and domestic work raises several issues.
As noted by Vono and Domingo (2011), the relative weakness of the welfare state in these countries (compared with their northern and central European Union neighbours) and rising life expectancy help explain the increasing demand for unskilled workers in a highly globalized labour market.
This is evident in specific sectors, such as domestic service, which have been internationalized as a result.
There is general agreement that this situation is the reason for the increased presence of women in international migration flows.
On the other hand, it has been well documented that women have been less affected by the crisis than men in the labour market (levelling down).
In Spain, the crisis is hitting men harder than women because the demand for household labor has not dropped as much as it has for male-dominated occupations (Vono and Domingo, 2011).
Concluding remarks This chapter has shown that paid care work represents a significant portion of employment in Latin America and involves a very heterogeneous group of workers.
Paid domestic work accounts for a sizeable share of the care sector, which also includes occupations related to education and health.
Over the past decade, the size of the care sector has remained fairly unchanged; however, it is expected to grow in the light of the sociodemographic shifts taking place in the region’s countries and, particularly, the changes that are freeing women from their traditional roles.
Women account for a high percentage (93%) of workers in care-related occupations, and their age profile differs from that of the rest of the employed population.
The proportion of young persons and older adults is smaller, though the ageing trend has been more pronounced among care workers than the rest of the employed population in the past decade.
In terms of education level, the differences are also significant: female domestic workers have a lower level of schooling than other workers, while care workers in the health and education subsectors have higher levels of education.
Regarding working conditions, less than 24% of female domestic workers make social security contributions.
The levels of coverage are considerably higher among education and health workers, where the public sector plays a greater role.
In terms of working hours, domestic and education workers, on average, put in fewer hours per week than non-care workers and are much more likely to work on a part-time basis.
The proportion of care workers with more than one job is smaller than for workers outside the sector, which can be explained by the fact that very few domestic workers hold more than one job.
A look at the wage gaps adjusted for the characteristics of workers illustrates the disparities between the different subgroups within the care sector.
Health workers, by contrast, tend to have a wage premium compared with similar workers outside the sector, which is probably linked to the influence of the public sector.
As a result, workers in this subsector are more vulnerable, have less access to social protection and are more likely to suffer the consequences of non-compliance with regulations, discrimination and relations of domination.
Bibliography Aguirre, J. (2011), “If you build it they will come: evidence of the impact of a large expansion of childcare centers over attendance and labor supply”, Master’s thesis in Economics, Institute of Economics, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile.
Espino (2008), “Situación del servicio doméstico en Uruguay”, Uruguay: ampliando las oportunidades laborales para las mujeres, National Women’s Institute/World Bank.
Todaro (2012), Cadenas globales de cuidados: el papel de las migrantes peruanas en la provisión de cuidados en Chile, Santiago, Chile, UN-Women.
Milligan (2008), “Universal childcare, maternal labor supply and family well being”, Journal of Political Economy, No. 116.
Galiani (2007), “The effect of a large expansion of pre-primary school facilities on preschool attendance and maternal employment”, Labour Economics, vol. 14, No. 3.
Misra (2010), “How care-work employment shapes earnings in cross-national perspective”, International Labour Review, vol. 149, No. 4.
A. (2012), “La contratación del trabajo sustitutivo en los hogares”, El trabajo no remunerado de la economía global, M.A.
Martínez (2009), “Efecto de una mayor cobertura de salas cuna en la participación laboral femenina: evidencia de Chile”,Documentos de Trabajo series, No. 303, Department of Economics, University of Chile.
European Commission (2004), Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, Modernising social protection for the development of high quality, sustainable healthcare and long-term care (COM (2004) 304 Final), Brussels.
Folbre, N. (2006a), “Measuring care: Gender, empowerment, and the care economy”, Journal of Human Development, (2006b), “Demanding quality: Worker/consumer coalitions and ‘high road’ strategies in the care sector”, Politics and Society, vol. 34, No. 1.
Nelson (2000), “For love or money—or both?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 14, Gelbach, J. (2002), “Public schooling for young children and maternal labor supply”, American Economic Review, No. 92.
Endogeneity in labor market participation of informal carers in England”, Journal of Health Economics, vol. 26.
Thoresen (2007), “A discrete choice model for labor supply and child care”, Journal of Population Economics, vol. 20, No. 4.
Merrigan (2008), “Childcare policy and the labor supply of mothers with young children: a natural experiment from Canada”, Journal of Labor Economics, vol. 23, No. 3.
Liang, X. (2003), “Remuneración de los docentes en 12 países latinoamericanos: quiénes son los docentes, factores que determinan su remuneración y comparación con otras profesiones”, Documentos de Trabajo, Santiago, Chile, PREAL.
Lokshin, M. (2004), “Household childcare choices and women’s work behavior in Russia”, Journal of Human Resources, vol. 39, No. 4.
Neetha (2010), “Care arrangements and bargains: Anganwadi and paid domestic workers in India”, International Labour Review, vol. 149, No. 4.
La sinergia entre calidad del empleo y calidad de la atención”, Mujer y empleo.
Razavi, S. (2007), “The political and social economy of care in a development context.
Staab (2010), “Underpaid and overworked: A cross-national perspective on care workers”, International Labour Review, vol. 149, No. 4.
La configuración del empleo en el sector de atención a las personas en España”, Alternativas, No. 17.
Rodgers, J. (2009), “Cambios en el servicio doméstico en América Latina”, Trabajo doméstico: un largo camino hacia el trabajo decente, M.E.
Lerner (2003), “Aportes teóricos y desafíos metodológicos de la perspectiva de género para el análisis de los fenómenos demográficos”, Desafíos teóricometodológicos en los estudios de población en el inicio del milenio, Alejandro Canales and Lerner Sigal (coords.), Mexico City, El Colegio de México, Universidad de Guadalajara and Mexican Demographic Society (SOMEDE).
Rossel (2006), “Los rasgos de la profesión en siete países latinoamericanos”, Maestros en Latinoamérica: hacia una radiografía de la profesión, D.
Soldo (1994), “Married women’s allocation of time to employment and care of elderly parents”, The Journal of Human Resources, vol. 29, No. 4.
Chapter IV Recent trends in social spending and a profile of private spending on care in the region This chapter looks at traditional measures of the priority given to social spending in terms of the percentage it represents of total spending within the framework of the business cycle and the way it is distributed among the different sectors.
In view of the emphasis given in this 2012 edition of the Social Panorama, the profile of spending on care by households across Latin America is also reviewed.
Social spending in Latin America Social spending started to trend downward in 2011, in relative terms, as less priority was attached to it in the budget: although in real terms the absolute amount assigned to social services was no less than in 2010, as a percentage of GDP, it showed a 0.8 percentage point decline.
This followed two years of concerted efforts to raise both social and non-social spending in response to the international financial crisis and its repercussions.
The higher spending in those years was used to reinforce anti-poverty programmes, design emergency employment programmes, introduce or expand unemployment insurance and productive development programmes for creating new jobs.
These measures had a positive impact on domestic demand across the region.
In 2011, the trend in social spending in both absolute and relative terms was seen to weaken somewhat.
In addition to the steps taken to shore up some of the major social programmes (to combat poverty and strengthen social protection mainly through the solidarity-based or non-contributory pillar), budgetary resources (and tax receipts) were re-appropriated, particularly in 2007 and 2008, to avoid the regressive effects of rising commodity prices.
Subsequently, once the financial crisis had started, governments adopted different measures to stabilize domestic demand, increasing nonsocial public spending (especially through investment in infrastructure) and, above all, social spending, by setting up employment programmes, promoting production (loans to microenterprises) and launching housing programmes.
In some countries, setbacks in the formulation and enactment of legislation on investment projects and a series of problems led to delays in the implementation of investments, while more rapid responses were seen in the area of social spending.
At the same time, the fiscal priority accorded to social spending increased, as a percentage of total public and 62.6% in 2009-2010.
Some fluctuations and increases in the fiscal priority given to social spending are due, however, to contractions in non-social public spending and therefore to relative reductions in total public spending, mainly between 1999 and 2004 (see figure IV.2).
In the latter half of the decade, however, several countries launched systematic efforts to strengthen their social programmes in particular those designed to combat poverty.
The figures for total public spending are official figures using a functional classification of public spending and may not coincide with those obtained from an economic classification of spending.
Starting in 2010, various countries initiated fiscal reforms relating to both the income and expenditure sides in order to consolidate their public finances, since, after generating primary surpluses and reducing public debt over a period of approximately five years (2003-2008), budget authorities adopted measures to raise public expenditure and these generated a deficit in the public accounts.
Although 2010 figures show that the countercyclical trend toward an expansion in expenditure was maintained in that year, but the expansion in social public spending was greater and in several cases non-social public spending actually fell.
Partial data for 2011 point to a relative contraction in social spending (lower economic priority as a percentage of GDP: 0.8 percentage points below the 2010 figure as a simple average of eight countries), but which would not have necessarily meant an absolute reduction in the funds allocated to the social sectors.
Of the countries for which information is available, absolute reductions in social public spending seem to have occurred in Colombia, Cuba and, above all, Honduras (see table IV.1).
However, in all countries except Mexico, the macroeconomic priority given to this type of spending was lowered.
The figures quoted for Brazil for 2010 are preliminary estimates of consolidated expenditure in the three spheres of government, based on official information relating to federal government expenditure. b Estimates.
Downward adjustments in non-social public spending have reportedly been made in some countries, including Colombia (-3.3% compared with 2010) and Costa Rica (-9,3%, at a time when social expenditure was expanding).
However, the reduction in the macroeconomic priority of non-social spending in most countries (except Ecuador, Honduras and Uruguay, which increased it) would not have meant any real decrease in the volume of resources allocated to non-social sectors.
Of course, the capacity to assign a greater macroeconomic priority to social spending depends on a host of economic, political and social variables.
One of the determining variables is fiscal revenue, which places a limit on the overall budget.
Notwithstanding the rise in the regional level of expenditure as a in 2009-2010, the initial and current levels of social spending as a percentage of GDP vary considerably.
Except for specific periods, all countries have made efforts both to expand social public spending as a percentage of total spending (fiscal priority of social spending) and as a macroeconomic priority, often boosting social spending as a percentage of GDP.
At the end of the period under review, the macroeconomic priority of social spending had increased significantly in almost all countries.
Despite the persistent differences in terms of the macroeconomic priority of social spending, countries made proportionately greater efforts to augment this expenditure.
By contrast, the increase in the macroeconomic effort of spending in Chile, Panama and especially Trinidad and Tobago has been unsubstantial for the past 20 years.
Per capita GDP Social spending expressed as a percentage of GDP also masks the even greater variation in terms of the amount of resources actually made available for the social sectors, depending to a great extent on each country’s level of economic development (see figure IV.5).
The linear regression line may be used as a reference for identifying those countries that have As indicated in the figure, some countries in the region mobilize resources making a greater effort than the average and than what would be expected given their level of economic development.
This does not mean that they mobilize an excessive amount of resources, since the analysis is limited to the region, tax revenues have tended to be low in recent decades and the pattern of social investment has been associated with the liberal economic models applied.
However, even in the context of the region, some countries mobilize a disproportionately low level of resources compared with their per capita GDP.
Such countries would do well to forge new social covenants in order to increase in a responsible manner their fiscal revenue as well as their provisions for economic and social expenditure.
There are obvious synergies to be generated between social development, the improvement in the economic capacity of households, the more robust domestic demand, the more skilled work force and the increase in competitiveness of countries.
In the medium term, the virtuous interaction of these factors generates sustainable foundations for steady economic development and makes countries less vulnerable to fluctuations in the world economy Linear regression is not normative as it varies depending on the countries themselves.
Social spending becomes less procyclical As a result of the measures adopted to cope with rising food and other commodity prices, and those designed to attenuate the current and long-term impacts of the international financial crisis, in recent years social spending has to some extent varied independently of the business cycle.
When social spending follows a procyclical pattern, this is because rises, stagnation and falls in total public spending in the region reflect variations in the business cycle; even when efforts are made to accord a higher fiscal priority to social spending, the tendency is for the latter to follow the pattern of total public spending.
In the early 1990s, total public spending tended to be lower than at present, but social spending was very limited (see figures IV.1 and IV.2).
Thus, expansions in public spending, with a few exceptions, were fairly moderate and were in keeping with the business cycle, and absolute falls were recorded at a time when GDP growth was slowing, although there were no episodes of a fall in regional GDP.
Thus, up to around 2005, total public spending was highly procyclical, sometimes with a certain lag in relation to the period of economic growth or contraction (see figure IV.6A).
This “overreaction” in public spending in relation to the business cycle is associated with the various adjustments experienced in spending on non-social functions (mainly economic sectors and general State administrative functions).
The fluctuations in this case were very sharp in particular between 1991 and 2005, following the swings of the business cycle.
At least at eight points during the period, non-social public spending decreased in absolute terms in reaction to declines in the level of economic growth.
Although slighter variations have been recorded since 2005, invariably leading to rises in non-social functions, this component of expenditure maintained its procyclical behaviour (see figure IV.6B).
Since the early 1990s, governments have made significant efforts to increase or sustain social public spending, although fiscal responsibility led them to moderate their expansion whenever the pace of growth has slowed.
This meant that social spending was also highly procyclical in line with higher GDP growth (elasticities of more than 1), but somewhat less procyclical in the face of slowdowns in the growth rate (elasticities below or equal to 1) (ECLAC, 2012a).
Since 2005, however, it has sometimes behaved countercyclically, in order to maintain or strengthen the resources allocated to the social sectors, for the reasons already discussed.
This trend is clearly shown in figure IV.6C, especially in the period that is encircled, since throughout the period 2005-2010, social spending expanded even when there was an outright contraction in GDP (in the year 2008), when growth in social spending also picked up significantly.
However, with uncertainty concerning the performance of the developed economies since the financial crisis of 2008-2009, more recent data point to a reversal in the effort to maintain or even increase social spending; moreover, the persistent balance-of-payment current account deficits could lead to a decline in fiscal revenue and to a widening of the fiscal deficit.
In all likelihood, social spending will return to its procyclical pattern in 2012 and beyond (for further details, see Expenditure by sector As shown at the beginning of this section, social spending has risen systematically at the regional level, as a percentage of GDP, in all the periods under review.
It is important, however, to look at the breakdown of expenditure by social sector (education, health, social security and social welfare, housing and others).
Growth has not been uniform in all sectors, as might have been expected at first glance.
Generally speaking, the 7.4 percentage-point increase in GDP is due mainly to the increase in social security (and welfare).
The progressive ageing of the population has meant that resources used to pay social security benefits have increased gradually.
Although a significant proportion of these resources comes from revenues based on contributory social security schemes (in this case, public or mixed), in most countries, in addition to the normal solidarity-based redistribution mechanisms that already existed within these systems, solidarity mechanisms for financing social-security payments have gradually been introduced.
Although no disaggregated information is available for social welfare and social security, indications are that different welfare programmes were launched, mainly in the first decade of the twenty-first century.
Notwithstanding this expansion, it should be borne in mind that public spending on social welfare in these and other countries for which this type of information is available ranged from 0.9% to 2.7% of GDP (Colombia) in 2007, and represented between 10% and 35% of the overall aggregate for social security and welfare.
Based on the international financial crisis, various emergency programmes and other measures were implemented to avoid the contraction in the real economy (see ECLAC, 2010).
The other noteworthy increase in the past 20 years was in the education sector (2.1 percentage points of GDP.
This is associated with the expansion in coverage and access in the case of primary education in the poorest countries, and in the case of secondary education in the rest (both infrastructure, and above all, current expenditure, associated mainly with the increase in teacher staffing).
The higher allocations to education came at the expense of the health sector, which saw its macroeconomic priority expand by just 1.2 percentage points of GDP.
Budgetary constraints in this sector usually mean that investments or reinvestments in infrastructure, renewal of equipment and replacement of medical supplies are sacrificed, which causes problems in the public health sector, with a negative impact on coverage and, above all, on the quality of benefits, and it is difficult to get back to normal from these situations.
Lastly, the housing sector (which includes drinking water and sanitation, and more recently the environment) is the one that has been given the least attention, despite the fact that practically all countries, and especially major cities, have pockets where marginal living conditions prevail.
This makes it difficult to develop programmes (for the most part sanitation programmes) for settling or eradicating marginal populations and it affects both the low-income population and, indirectly, the health sector, owing to considerable difficulties in controlling vectors of infectious or contagious diseases that spread easily in the absence of proper drinking-water, sewerage and waste treatment systems.
The scant investment in this area has also hampered or slowed environmental conservation initiatives based on the generation of areas for biodiversity conservation and on necessary measures for regulating human activity, in particular productive ventures, so as to prevent environmental degradation and pollution.
Information was obtained for 8 of the 21 countries under consideration and the decision to publish these figures was based on the realization that it is important to have recent data, even if they are only provisional, approximate or partial.
The figures were updated during the third quarter of 2012 and the exercise was closed in mid-September.
In most cases, it was possible to collect data on central government budget execution, and in a number of countries figures for actual spending were obtained from agencies with budgetary autonomy, local governments and non-financial public enterprises.
Although differences in institutional coverage make comparisons between countries difficult, it was decided to publish the most comprehensive data available for each country except when they involved significant constraints for constructing a series for 1990-2011.
This is because the Commission’s primary interest is to establish the amount of public social spending in each country as accurately as possible, in order to convey the effort being made by States in this area.
Considering that a number of countries only very recently adopted the classification system presented in the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (which is harmonized with the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA)), the 1990-2011 series is not always compatible at the subfunction or subgroup level, or both.
Most of the countries publish the functional classification in aggregated form and use classifications of their own.
Data continuity problems brought about by the switch include a lack of information for the full series or for certain years or functions (or both) in particular cases.
For example, there are no data for the Plurinational State of Bolivia between 1990 and 1994, and up-to-date figures on NFPS are missing after 2008.
In the case of El Salvador, there are no data for 1990-1992 and there is a change of methodology and coverage as of 2004, which means that data after that year are not strictly comparable with those from previous years.
The series for Ecuador refers to central government until 2006 and to the general State budget from 2007.
In Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago it was not possible to construct the full series from 1997 to 1999 as data on intermediate periods were lacking.
For Colombia, a methodological change and a switch in the basis for calculating GDP mean that the series is not comparable Peru, whereas the 1990-1999 series covers budgetary central government, the series for 2000 onward is for general government.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has series for agreed social public spending (budget act and amendments as of 31 December each year) and for disbursed public spending, the latter beginning in 1999.
The institutional coverage of the country’s figures is the budgetary central government.
Because it is a federal country, the published figures may underestimate total social spending more significantly than in other countries reporting this coverage.
Like previous editions, Social Panorama of Latin America 2012 uses biennial averages to present social spending data.
The indicators published are for total public social spending and its component functions and sectors (education, health, social security and welfare, and housing, sanitation and other functions not included in the above categories) as a percentage of GDP, in dollars per capita, and as a percentage of total public spending.
In the case of this last indicator, official information from the countries is used, but these figures may differ from those based on other classification systems (such as economic or administrative classification of spending) because some include interest payments on the public debt and others do not, and because different methodologies are used to classify disbursements.
In contrast with the practice in previous years, this edition includes the change made by ECLAC in the base year for GDP in constant dollars.
Starting with the 2011 edition of this publication, all social spending calculations in constant dollars are expressed in dollars at constant 2005 prices.
The figures used to calculate the percentages are in current prices for each year and each country.
These proportions are then applied to the GDP series in dollars at 2005 prices to obtain per capita social spending, expressed in dollars.
This may result in certain variations in relation to the data in constant currency reported by the countries, which depend on the degree of appreciation or depreciation implicit in the official parity of each country’s currency in relation to 2005, and also on the demographic data on which the per capita calculations are based.
Figures at current prices on total and social public spending (and the sectoral breakdown of the latter) are official data provided by the corresponding government bodies.
Depending on the country, these may be directorates, departments, sections or units for planning, the budget or social policy within the ministries of the treasury, finance or the economy.
In addition, information on budgetary execution was obtained from the countries’ general accounting offices or treasury departments, and occasionally from central banks, national statistical institutes, and national social and economic information systems.
The figures for GDP in dollars at constant 2005 prices are official ECLAC statistics; the population figures come from projections by the Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre (CELADE)-Population Division of ECLAC.
Household spending on care: socioeconomic and demographic profile From a rights and financing perspective, different options exist for ensuring well-being, in particular for meeting care needs.
The State may assume responsibility for guaranteeing rights irrespective of the individual’s status in the labour market; this process is referred to as demercantilization, since it dissociates well-being from the monetary income of households and individuals.
On the other hand, the mercantilization of care implies a withdrawal by the State and a reliance on the market as the leading supplier and provider of services.
For its part, “familism” places the burden of providing well-being primarily on care and protection systems developed by the family.
As pointed out throughout the earlier chapters, traditionally and even now, gender asymmetries have meant that universal care needs have been met for the most part by women within the private sphere of the family.
As will be illustrated below, this generally goes hand in hand with weak care policies and fragmentary, under-funded programmes with scant coverage.
Thus, the right to give or receive care depends basically on the time and effort that women can devote within the household, and on the intergenerational solidarity that exists within families.2 This, in turn, implies a variety of coordination tasks and monetary links of well-being, which depend on how much each person can afford to pay for services.
Women are not free to enter the job market because they are saddled with care tasks in the home, and as shown in chapter I suffer from time poverty.
Direct and indirect This intergenerational solidarity in caregiving cannot be captured in household surveys, income and expenditure surveys or even, with any degree of accuracy, in time-use surveys in the region, since these surveys are carried out for different purposes and the unit of analysis is the household and not the family.
Chapter III examines the labour market of care in the region, which has enabled it to trace the conditions of those who work in paid employment within the care market.
This chapter considers the situation from the user’s perspective, since it deals with the monetary aspects of well-being, delving into how the care needs of households are translated into expenditure on hired care, which may be direct, indirect or a combination of the two.
In the case of households that do spend money on care, the effective market demand thus expressed clearly depends on the total income at their disposal and on the range of requirements that they must, can and wish to cover.
As already indicated, the category relating to direct care highlights personal and emotional aspects of care giving while indirect care highlights activities that offer support for that purpose, for example, the broad range of domestic tasks.
The relevant definitions and the importance of this distinction are presented in this edition of the Social Panorama.
Rep. of) 2010 Dominican Rep. 2010 El Salvador 2010 Guatemala 2006 basis of special tabulations of data derived from household surveys conducted in the relevant countries.
Various countries in the region use income and expenditure surveys for this purpose, with the last round dating back to the year 2000, (see box IV.2 and table IV.2).
Although the data are limited, the inequality that is a hallmark of the region is considered in the light of households’ capacity to hire care giving services.4 Their respective disbursements in local currency are used to work out the relative purchasing power in 14 countries in order to obtain relatively comparable levels of expenditure.
The main objective of these surveys is to obtain information on household consumption, disaggregated into items such as food and clothing in order to calculate the cost of the baskets of expenditure used by countries to work out price indices.
These data are also used to construct the basic basket for poverty measurement and to draw up the household income and expenditure account in the System of National Accounts.
They are designed to obtain information on, and to analyse the structure of, household expenditure, savings or debt, to establish or update basic food baskets and the costs of other basic needs, and to update and modify baskets and bases for consumer price indices.
The System of National Accounts (SNA) defines the expenses realized by households on goods and services for individual consumption such as the final consumption expenditure of households.
Households also receive goods and services for individual consumption from non-profit institutions serving households (NPISH) or from government units.
The SNA treats final consumption expenditure plus the goods and services produced by non-profit institutions serving households plus the individual goods and services produced or purchased by the government but delivered to households (State subsidies or royalties) as effective consumer spending of households.
Households can therefore purchase the goods and services for individual consumption directly from the producers of those items (enterprises, government entities, non-profit institutions, households, rest of world), and can also produce a portion thereof on an own-account basis for their own consumption or obtain it from other households.
For information on health care interest payments; social security contributions; income tax; other rates and taxes; and other current transfers.
The surveys used are listed below together with an indication of the period when the different monthly subsample surveys were taken.
The PPP dollar conversion factors published in World Development Indicators of the World Bank were used to calculate expenses in dollars at constant 2005 prices; the rate of exchange used was the 2005 rf series.
The range of services and products covered by the national surveys has been expanded with highly varied ranges of disaggregation.
Relatively speaking, only a few questions can be related to care and most of the surveys are limited in scope (see table IV.3 below).
Despite these limitations, these surveys are the only instrument that allows for a detailed study of household expenditure: investigating household expenditure on care is useful for giving an insight into some of the socioeconomic and demographic characteristics of households that do pay for care.
The analysis of those households that do not will be brief as in this case the point is to highlight the size of this group, the focus then shifting to a description of those that do contract paid care services.
It should be borne in mind that surveys are a snapshot in time: both income and expenditure reflect strictly the values of the month in which the survey is applied to subsamples of households, throughout the reference period.
Contrary to other surveys, such as those relating to employment, the information thus collected does not allow for the seasonal, monthly or annualized adjustment of the expenses.
Thus, the permanent or average burden is not reflected nor is it possible to determine whether the expenses are due to more recurrent needs or to fortuitous or temporary events, as would be the case, for example, if the needs arose from treatment of acute or chronic illnesses that call for specialized care in the home.
The information for the different countries listed on this table is not comparable, as the different patterns of expenditure are not attributable to different national preferences and capacities for resource allocation, but rather to the type and number of items covered by the survey questions.
Therefore, the structure is revealed only in order to specify what is covered by each survey and nor for purposes of comparing the situation in the various countries.
Thus, the analysis contained in this chapter is confined to the differences that may be observed within the countries and to that end, the expenses have been grouped under different activities relating to domestic service and which can be allocated to the family as a whole and/or to family members of different ages.
Expenses for health care provided within and outside the home are included; the inference is that they are directed mainly to older persons in the household, sick persons or persons with disabilities.
Lastly, expenditure relating to education was consolidated and included expenses for childcare from birth to pre-school education.
In fact, the surveys reveal only data that cannot be broken down here, including costs ranging from domestic services to nursing; given the nature of these services, costs are incurred in a continuous or discontinuous manner within households.
No information is provided that makes it possible to infer costs based on the number of hours or days paid.
Domestic service costs are private expenses incurred for a service that is also distinctly private; moreover, it is not clear whether expenditure on health care is partly covered by some type of public or private insurance.
In terms of those linked to childcare, they may well reflect payments made for private education services, with or without public subsidies, co-payments for public education services or others.
The amount may vary depending on the price of these services, but also on the age of the children and the type of public coverage; the more comprehensive the coverage, the lower the disbursement households will have to make: for example, pre-school coverage in the region is much greater than coverage for infants.
As already indicated, it is not possible to make comparisons between countries since the information collected in the national surveys differs from one country to the next.
These include the country’s stage of demographic transition, its level of wealth based on per capita GDP; the level of mercantilization of non-home care services and the development of more formal labour markets within the category of home services.
Wages for domestic services have a direct impact on household expenditure levels; the analysis presented in chapter III on the duality of the paid care labour market indicates that domestic workers are paid low wages and have limited social protection coverage.
Selected characteristics of Latin American households with respect to expenditure on care As already discussed, the burden of care responsibilities is borne predominantly by families and within those families by the women.
Time-use surveys show how the distribution of these tasks is skewed within homes.
As was to be expected, only a small percentage of families in the countries under consideration are able to outsource these responsibilities by paying for the services.
These surveys give an idea of the percentage of families in this situation and show that the proportion varies significantly from one country to the next.
In terms of the distribution by extreme quintile, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay are the countries where the differences between the richest and poorest households are the most striking (table IV.3).
In other words, the sex of the head of household is not always the determining factor as regards expenditure on care.
Two parent families in which both spouses work are the most likely to pay for care services.
Households with children under five years of age are those that spend the most on average on care services.
However, the percentage of households with children in this age bracket that do not spend money on care is extremely high, which shows how crucial the role of women is in providing unpaid care work.
The high proportion of household that do not incur expenditure may denote repressed demand, which may be attributed to poverty, vulnerability and inequality.
In other words, there are care needs that may be indispensable but that the family cannot afford to pay for and so there is no monetary exchange.6 The fact that families do not incur expenditure may be due to the existence of public care services that are free or require low co-payments.
These can also have a positive impact by reducing the expenditure of households under this heading.
Other problems that may be analysed through surveys, such as the suppression of “out-of-pocket” expenses on health care in relation to inequality, are explored in ECLAC (2008), pp. 97-99.
In any event, it appears that the burden of this work is falling on women unpaid care work.
The following analysis focuses on the households that resort to paid care services.
These countries are taken into account because their income and expenditure surveys include poverty estimates.
As was to be expected, and this point will be analysed in greater depth later on, these levels of expenditure vary considerably depending on household income.
However, there is one very important finding: over and above the various levels of income, the proportion of resources allocated for care does not vary significantly between poor and non-poor households.
This clearly is an indication of how difficult it is to compromise with respect to care, given the fact that all households, including poor ones, work out strategies that combine unpaid care work provided within the home or by family members with access to public services and formal or informal arrangements for paid care services.
Another significant finding shown in the same figure refers to the inequalities suffered by female-headed households in our societies.
Notwithstanding their lower income and greater vulnerability, poor, female-headed households spend a similar proportion of resources on care to that spent by poor, male-headed households; in the case of non-poor households, those headed by women spend a proportion that exceeds that of non-poor, male-headed households.
This proves that hiring paid support to cope with care responsibilities is indispensable.
Given the difference in purchasing power in this sphere between poor and non-poor households, a number of different factors should be taken into account: the unequal access in terms of the quantity of care that can be bought; the monetary variable as a barrier to access to services; and the unequal quality of services that can be bought.
The duality of employment of caregivers analysed in the previous chapter is linked, in terms of wages and social protection coverage, to the purchasing power of the households being served.
That is, the spending capacity has implications not only for the quality of the care but also for the employment conditions of those who provide this direct and indirect paid care.
The cases of Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru and Plurinational State of Bolivia were analysed as information on poverty lines was available to perform the calculation.
The unequal socioeconomic distribution of household care expenditure If the region is viewed as a whole, it is clear that inequality in terms of the capacity to pay for care is correlated to the overall income inequality of households.
As disposable income increases, expenditure on care services rises sharply in absolute terms (figure IV.10). consideration, as a simple average, the wealthiest households spend four times as much as the lowest-income households.
However, in Chile, El Salvador, Mexico, Panama and Plurinational State of Bolivia, the differences in the amounts spent between Quintile V and Quintile I are much greater: the simple average for this subset is 17 times higher; with the sharpest inequalities recorded in Chile.
At the other extreme, countries with less pronounced inequalities between the two extreme quintiles are Dominican Republic, Peru and Uruguay; in this subset, the richest quintile spends 50% more than the poorest.
Other inequalities are directly related to gender, in terms of both income and capacity and the need to hire paid care services.
The households headed by women spend proportionately more on care than those headed by men (as a percentage of their total income); this is especially evident in Peru, Uruguay, Panama and Costa Rica, in that order (see table IV.4B).
In absolute terms, male-headed households, which, for the most part, have both parents, spend on average 16% more than those headed by women, which for the most part are single-parent households (see table IV.4B).
In other words, the amount spent on care by female-headed households is equivalent to 86% of that spent by male-headed households.
A comparison of spending on care by country reveals sharp contrasts (see table I.4A).
Care in households with small children In terms of gender asymmetries, expressed as disequilibria of care responsibilities, it is also relevant to analyse the expenditure of households with and without children under the age of 5.
When the expenditure levels presented in table IV.5 are analysed, households with children in this age group in 11 out of the 14 countries spend even less on care than those without.
This is a clear indication that the needs of children in this age group are covered largely by unpaid care, whether by their mother, by other relatives, for the most part grandmothers, or by neighbours in some cases.
Includes only those households that incurred spending on care. b Female head of household or spouse of male head of household. c Includes single-parent households (without the presence of the woman).
Care giving emerges as one of the elements that have an impact on the entry of women into the labour market (see figure IV.8), which corroborates the findings of this study.
By the same token, when the presence of children in the household is combined with the variable of female employment (see table IV.4), the amount spent on care increases in absolute terms (levels of expenditure), but also in relative terms, when the woman is employed.
The proportion increases by 25% to make up for the unpaid care work that the mother would have done.
While in Peru the trend is the opposite, it should be borne in mind that when small samples are analysed, the robustness of the statistical behaviour may be impaired.
Expenditure on care of households with older persons Given the specific needs of older persons, it is important to consider the care provided for frail and dependent older persons.
For the different countries, it is sufficient to recall the breakdown of the expenditure, which identifies the surveys that record these expenditures most accurately (see table IV.3).
Expenditure on care of households with adults aged 75 years or over has been used as a proxy in the analysis (see figure IV.11).
Clearly, the expenditure on care is higher in households with older persons; this is evident in terms of levels as well as in terms of the percentage allocated to this care.
The surveys do not make it possible to capture these intra-family transfers or to investigate whether there are persons with disabilities in the household.
Nevertheless, in this context, there is probably a high association between the disability and the presence of older persons aged 75 years or over.
If total household spending (a matter not presented here, but which has been analysed) is taken into account, in most countries, average expenditure is lower in households with older persons: overall, they spend 25% less than other households.
Moreover, in terms of levels of expenditure, households with older persons spend 34% more on average, except in the case of Ecuador: the simple average is US$ 160 versus US$ 119 for other households.
The difference is greater (in excess of 70%) in the case of Costa Rica, Nicaragua and Panama.
These findings should be analysed within the framework of the rapid demographic transition that is occurring in the region.
In fact, to the extent that countries are transitioning towards the end of the period during which they have benefited from the demographic dividend and the proportion of the population is arriving at an advanced age and thus requiring care, undoubtedly care requirements will be greater.
If family or paid arrangements continue to predominate, the situation will be complicated further by the fact that elderly persons will be living in households whose heads will already be in their late fifties and thus will be preoccupied with the need to provide for their own future as retirees or pensioners.
The State must therefore face the challenge of expanding public care networks and their redistributive financing.
Care to those in need is provided through four social institutions: the family, the State, the market, and charitable organizations.
In this exercise, a simple demographic calculation is used to show how the burden of care would change over time if it were borne exclusively by families with adults caring for young children as well as older persons.
Estimates of the average number of persons in these two groups are given at two points in time: 2012 and 2042.
While there is tremendous heterogeneity in the demography of the countries in the region, all countries will eventually experience the population ageing that is so clearly evident in Brazil today.
Therefore, the example presented here is instructive for all countries in the region.
In demographic terms, two age groups with high needs for care have been identified, one at each end of the age spectrum: in early life, young children under 5 years of age and, in later life, adults aged 80 and older.
By contrast, the care needs at the end of life are very much more uncertain.
The care needs of older persons are greatly influenced by events earlier in their lives.
We know, for example, that up to half of all cancers are preventable by changes in lifestyle to confront tobacco-use, obesity, and physical inactivity (Colditz, Wolin and Gehlert, 2012).
It is difficult to accurately forecast future care needs for older persons because the health of tomorrow’s older persons depends so much on the outcome of efforts currently being implemented which are aimed at the promotion of healthy lifestyles.
From 1980 through 2000, the population of children under 5 fluctuated around 17 million, but has since been steadily declining and is projected to fall below 11 million by 2045.
In contrast, the population of adults aged 80 and over has been increasing exponentially: rising from less than half a million in 1980 to more than 3 million by 2012 and expected to continue its rapid growth reaching beyond 13 million by 2045.
The year 2042 will mark a turning point in the demographic history of Brazil when the number of older persons aged 80 and older will exceed the number of young children under the age of 5.
According to this demographic trend, for the first time in Brazil’s history the care needs of older persons may exceed those of children.
To answer this question, we turn to examine the life cycle burden of care at two points in time: 2012 and a generation later in 2042.
To measure the care burden within families, we develop a simple stylized model of family care in which care for young children and older adults is provided by adults.
In reality, care provided through the family reflects the rich and varied relationships present within the extended family —as is reflected for example in grandparents caring for grandchildren.
But this stylized model has the advantage of being easy to calculate and further will reflect much of the burden of care within families, which falls for the most part on women.
To assess this burden, we need to estimate the age difference between children and their caregivers.
To answer this question we use historical estimates of the age of women at birth (age-specific fertility rates).b As an example, to estimate the ages of caregivers for 4 year-olds in 2012 we look back to 4 years ago to when these children were born and find the age distribution of women who gave birth in 2008.
In this way, we are able to assign four-year-olds to their parents in 2012.
Proceeding in a similar fashion we are able to link children of all ages with their parents.
Once we have made this linkage, we can then calculate for each age group of adults the average number of young children (under age 5) and the average number of older persons (80 and older).
We see a distinct double peak pattern to the life cycle burden of familial support in Brazil in 2012.
The peak in familial care for young children under age 5 occurs at age 24 with an average number of 0.25 young children per adult.
The peak in familial care for older persons (aged 80+) occurs at age 58 with an average number of 0.08 older persons per adult.
This familial burden in 2012 is mainly comprised of young-children rather than older adults —as is clearly evident in the figure: the first peak is much larger than the second.
The figure shows the burden at each age, but we can also summarize these results by summing up these burdens at each age to calculate the total burden throughout the life cycle.
As noted, the figure shows that at age 24 the average adult is caring for 0.25 children or in other words the average adult devotes 0.25 years to child-care at age 24.
At age 25, they devote 0.24 years to child-care and so on.
When we sum these years devoted to care of young children we find that in Brazil in 2012 the child-care burden summed to 4.4 years of care to young children under the age of 5.
A similar summation of care devoted to older persons (aged 80 and older) yields 1.7 years of care devoted to older persons.
In 2012, the potential burden of care for family members amounted to an average of 6.1 years of care per adult, the majority of which was devoted to child-care.
But now the life cycle burden of care is equally divided between caring for young children and caring for older adults —with 4 years of potential familial care devoted to each group.
The dramatic increase in the potential years of care for the elderly is not only due to the increasing likelihood of survival to these older ages.
It is also a reflection of the decline in fertility —which means the We project life cycle burden of familial care in Brazil 30 years in the future, in the year 2042, using forecasts of population and age-specific fertility rates (see figure 3).
In 2042, we find that the potential family care burden borne by adults will have increased by one-third, from 6.1 years of care provided in 2012 to 8.0 years in 2042.
As in 2012, there are two distinct periods of high care demands placed on families potential burden of caring for the elderly is shared amongst fewer adults.
Around the age of 60, adults find themselves faced with an increasing demand to provide family care for older members of the family, but these adults will already be facing urgent demands to prepare for their own retirement and at the same time now must confront the additional burden of providing care to their own ageing parents.
Gehlert, “Applying what we know to accelerate cancer prevention”, Science Transnational Medicine, vol. 4, a To test the sensitivity of our estimates, we have also run an alternative scenario using children under 10 (rather than children under 5) and adults aged 75 or over (rather than adults aged 80 and over).
This change in the definition of those in need of care increases the estimated burdens as the size of the age groups needing care is approximately double.
However, it does not alter our central conclusions of a large shift in care toward older persons and the emergence of a new period of care giving late in life. b For this calculation, we use female age-specific fertility rates as they are available.
This means we are measuring the age difference between children and their mothers —which tends to be smaller than the age difference between children and their fathers.
Bibliography Batthyany Karina, Natalia Genta and Valentina Perrotta (2012), “La población uruguaya y el cuidado, persistencias de un mandato de género.
Gehlert (2012), “Applying what we know to accelerate cancer prevention”, Science Translational Medicine, vol. 4, No. 127.
Valenzuela, María Elena (2010), “Trabajo y responsabilidades familiares en el contexto del envejecimiento: ¿quién se encarga del cuidado?, Envejecimiento en América Latina.
Introduction Assistance and care requirements for persons with disabilities are rising in the region and in the rest of the world for a number of reasons.
These include the demographic transition, with its rising incidence of chronic and degenerative diseases, medical advances that are boosting catastrophic injury survival rates and unhealthy lifestyles that increase the need for care and medical treatment in old age.
Poverty, armed conflict, urban violence and gender violence are also important causes of disability.
Add to that the lack of policies for prevention and timely assistance that could lower the disability rate.
Furthermore, social inequalities are heightened by a lack of appropriate services, because care and rehabilitation are often complex, costly, and, when provided privately, available only for the small proportion of the population that can afford them.
Following the adoption of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2006, the issue of disability was swiftly incorporated into social and political agendas the world over.
Most Caribbean countries have signed it but only Belize, Dominica, practice requires setting up a proper network of home and personal care, other support services and technical aids that can be external enablers for the disabled.
In other words, a package of care activities tailored to each individual’s reality is the only way to effectively promote “their participation in the civil, political, economic, social and cultural spheres with equal opportunities, in both developing and developed countries” (United Nations, Jamaica and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have ratified it.
Persons living with disabilities have different experiences depending on a myriad of factors including age, gender, social and economic status, ethnicity and marital status.
More fundamentally, they experience different levels of needs, which are linked to their type of disability.
These differences and difficulties are often reinforced not by the disability itself, but by the way society reacts to and interprets it.
For persons with disabilities, their degree of functional autonomy and, therefore, their care requirements are a product of the interplay between personal characteristics, type of impairment, living arrangements, education level, and disposable income that can be used for assistance and support services.
How these needs are met is also determined by the bonds of care, assistance and transfer of capacities built with the family and the community.
Caring for persons with disabilities is thus important not only to contribute to their survival and well-being but also to support and encourage their autonomy and independence.
This applies to their physical, sensory and mental impairments and limitations and to the physical, technological, financial, cultural and political constraints stemming from their family and social environment.
For the same reasons, disability, although an individual condition, impacts the whole community.
The United Kingdom’s Department for International Development states that “The cost of excluding people with disabilities from taking an active part in community life is high and has to be borne by society, particularly those who take on the burden of care” (DFID, 2000).
Family members, particularly mothers and other female relatives, usually bear most of the burden of care for persons with disabilities.
Caring for a disabled child increases women’s workload, even more severely so in female-headed households in which the mother is the sole breadwinner.
Girl children are also more likely to be burdened with the care of siblings with severe disabilities and are often taken out of school to care for relatives with a disability.
This chapter takes an opening look at the issue, by means of an exhaustive statistical comparative analysis of the situation of persons with disabilities in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The available data do not lend themselves to comparisons between countries, since estimates depend on the severity of the impairments covered by questions in the different measurement instruments, which include censuses, household surveys and specialized surveys.
The chapter also offers a regional overview of the needs arising from the growth of this population group, which everyone could come to belong to (or be involved in through the care of another person) at some point in the life cycle.
To that end, the chapter first reviews how the concept of disability has evolved and the specificities of care in these circumstances.
Third, this information is used to show that type of disability is a major determinant of living conditions and opportunities for social integration via education and economic activity.
Lastly, attention is turned to the care needs of persons with disabilities and the relationship with the caregivers who assist them in very challenging circumstances, who may themselves need State support.
An overview of the care services available to persons with disabilities details the programmes run in the countries in the region in terms of residential and living arrangements, and support and assistance for independent living.
The study concludes with a look at the policies in place in the region that support access to education, employment and social security coverage for persons with disabilities as part of the State’s duty to uphold their right to autonomy and independence.
This chapter was prepared using data processed from the 2010 census round and information received from national statistical institutes and offices in 33 Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Care for independent living: the conceptual approach The concept of disability has evolved considerably over the past three decades.
No longer a medical model that primarily viewed disability as a health issue, it has come to take into account the interplay between physical, mental or sensory limitations a person may face and the difficulties or support found in the physical, social and family environment.
Likewise, forms of care have moved on from being based on rehabilitation and meeting day-to-day needs to capacity-building, assistance and support so as to ensure that persons with disabilities can, as is their right, live an independent life and participate in society on an equal basis.
The approach to caring for persons with disabilities has evolved, along with the concept of disability itself, and this has in turn been reflected in a continuum of models and measurement proposals.
In 1997, WHO drafted a new document that redefined disability, in response to the debate surrounding the competing “medical” and “social” models.
According to the medical model, disability is the result of a disease, disorder, accident or other health condition.
In other words, it is a personal matter requiring individualized medical and rehabilitation treatment for specific mental or physical impairments.
Management of the disability is thus aimed at helping the person adapt to his or her new situation.
The social model, meanwhile, focuses on the social integration of individuals living with the consequences of a disease.
It does not see disability as an attribute of the person but rather as a set of changes in how an individual interacts with his or her surroundings, depending on the social environment.
Drawing on these ideas, a new biosocial model building on the characteristics of the two older models was developed.
Disability is to be seen as a social and personal problem requiring not only medical and rehabilitative care but also support for social integration.
It calls for individual treatment and social action, as well as changes at the personal level and in the environment.
Disability is considered to be the product of a complex interplay between a health condition and environmental factors, meaning that intervention regarding one component may spur changes in other, related ones.
For example, someone with sufficient economic means can afford to pay for early neurocognitive rehabilitation treatment.
Conversely, the lack of free, accessible transport can mean no access to education for severely mobility-impaired children who would otherwise have no learning difficulties.
In line with these conceptual changes, in 2001 WHO adopted the International Classification of Functioning, Disability and Health (ICF), which is based on the integration of the medical and social aspects of disability and offers a more coherent understanding of its dimensions, namely the biological, individual and social.
The various components of disability are categorized as “activity limitations”, which are difficulties an individual may have in executing activities, and “participation restrictions” which are problems an individual may experience in involvement in any area of life, as a result of “impairments”.
The latter are problems in body function or structure which ICF divides into “domains” or groups of physiological and psychological functions, anatomical structures, tasks, activities and areas of life (WHO, 2001; Ayuso-Mateos and others, 2006; Schkolnik, 2010).
To understand the interrelationship between functioning and disability, the two terms must first be clearly defined.
It helps to grasp an individual’s interaction with a health condition and the environmental and personal contexts.
Disability is viewed as the result of the interaction between individual functioning and environment when linked to a health condition.
The level of difficulty is highly dependent on the degree of functional autonomy and independence of persons living with disabilities, be they sensory, physical or mental.
Accordingly, functionality is defined as the ability to perform those activities necessary to achieve well-being through interaction between the biological, the psychological (cognitive and affective) and the social spheres (Sanhueza Parra, 2005), and whose loss entails the risk of disability and dependence.
Care thus avoids what Morris (2001) terms the social construct of dependence, which negates the individual.
For people with disabilities, respecting their right to care gives them access to assistance from others and to essential technical aids, and a physical and social environment that is adapted to their particular impairment.
Following the environmental approach taken by WHO, functional autonomy may therefore be defined as the ability to perform functions related to daily life, such as those activities necessary to achieve well-being through appropriate interaction between the biological, the psychological (cognitive and affective) and the social (see box V.1).
This enables the individual to live in the community with little or no help from others, albeit with assistive technology.
Diagram V.1 Definition of disability Biomedical model Social model Impact of a disease is seen as a personal matter.
Managing the impact of the disease consists of helping the person adapt to his or her new situation.
Impact is not an attribute of the person but rather a set of alterations in the person’s interaction with his or her environment.
Rehabilitation and care of day-to-day needs Capacity-building in the interaction between functionality and disability Care approach to disability Functional autonomy model Impact of a disease is understood to be a complex interaction between the health condition and contextual factors.
Involves personalized treatment and social action, which requires change at the personal level and in the environment.
Action in respect of one element may lead to changes in other related elements.
In general terms, care is a response to different dependency situations that may arise due to age, disease or disability.
In the case of disability, this has to do with a loss of personal autonomy as a result of a sensory, physical or mental disability that limits the ability to perform the functions of daily life and to meet one’s personal needs, be they basic needs, instrumental needs, mobility needs, expression needs or cognitive needs.
These also have a bearing on an individual’s ability to meet his or her needs to participate in society and safeguard his or her rights.
Although the concept of care of persons with disabilities initially focused on helplessness and neglect, the growing attention given to an equality and human-rights-based approach has highlighted the need to foster a subjectification process in which they can make decisions in accordance with their wishes (FloresCastillo, 2012).
The terms “autonomy” and “independence” have tended to be used interchangeably in documents on disability produced in recent decades, regardless of the philosophical literature on the matter.
Disability rates in Latin America and the Caribbean The latest census data can provide a rough gauge of disability rates in the region, although comparisons are difficult because the criteria used vary so widely from country to country.
On the basis of the latest available data, over 12% of the population —5.4% in the Caribbean and 12.4% in Latin America— lives with some form of disability.
In over half the countries, disabilities are much more prevalent among women than among men, especially in the population aged 60 or over.
Not only women, but other more vulnerable population groups too, exhibit higher rates of disability: older adults, rural dwellers, indigenous peoples and Afro-descendants, and those with lower incomes.
These groups register both a higher incidence of disability and a greater degree of disability owing to a lack of timely care; households where there are more persons with disabilities also lack resources or access to services to help them cope.
Quantifying persons with disabilities poses numerous challenges having to do with the definition of disability according to the measurement instrument chosen, the aspects of disability that are being measured, and the nature of the available sources of information.
For example, in the Caribbean, various definitions of disabilities are used, often related to the policy or purpose for which disability is being defined.
In Jamaica, disability is defined for policy purposes as “any restriction or lack of ability to perform an activity in the manner or within the range considered normal for a human being.
Such restriction or lack of ability must be due to “impairment” (Statistical Institute, 1999 and 2009).
For programming purposes, however, Jamaica uses another definition, according to which a person with disability is “an individual whose prospects of securing and retaining suitable employment are substantially reduced by physical or mental impairment” (STATIN, 2001).
Undoubtedly, comparability is compromised by the multiplicity of the sources; indeed, efforts to standardize measurement criteria are under way at the international level.
Nevertheless, for the first time, a detailed comparison of the situation in the countries in the region is possible thanks to the breadth of the census information.
This previously unpublished data is presented in the pages that follow; however, it must be treated with caution when drawing comparisons since each country has its own definition of disability.
According to the latest available data, between 2000 and 2011 an estimated 66 million persons were living with some form of disability in Latin America and the Caribbean: 12.3% of the total regional population, 12.4% of the population of Latin America and 5.4% of the population of the Caribbean (see figure V.1 and table V.A-1 in the annex).
Given that these figures are based on 2000-2006 data in over half the countries for which information is available, the number of persons with disabilities could easily exceed the 85 million estimated by the World Bank (WHO, 2011).
This rising figure will exert mounting care-related pressure on households, on the networks available and on the limited State resources available to care for persons with disabilities.
Figures on disability vary widely across the region and may even differ between one census and another conducted by the same country.
Leaving aside national differences, this indicates that estimates may depend on the severity of the impairments covered by the measurement instruments.
For example, in those countries that have already completed the most recent census round, the prevalence of disability ranges from 5.1% in Mexico to 23.9% in Brazil.
In the Caribbean, the disparity is not so marked: the population living with some form of disability ranges from 2.9% in the Bahamas to 6.9% in Aruba.
Greater efforts are clearly needed to standardize measurement in the interests of building comparable regional information.
While only half of the countries of Latin America included questions on disability in their population and housing censuses during the 1990s, 19 of 20 countries did so in the 2000 round.
Of those 19 countries, 8 also added such questions to their multipurpose household surveys or demographic and health surveys; 7 countries conducted specialized surveys on the subject.
All surveys conducted in the Caribbean for the latest round contained questions on disability.
Nevertheless, owing to conceptual and operational differences, it is still difficult to determine the number of people with disabilities and, even more so, to identify trends.
During the 1990s, census questions focused on the concept of sensory, motor or mental “impairments”.
With regard to the possible impairments, respondents could only answer Yes/No for total blindness, total deafness, muteness, disability/paralysis and mental impairment.
By the 2000s, a shift had taken place in how the questions were designed and worded.
Some countries had taken on board international recommendations that disability be perceived in terms of limitations and restrictions on social participation owing to contextual, environmental and personal factors rather than individual impairments.
A number of Latin American countries made significant changes to their definitions: Brazil and Peru (2007) (although in the case of Peru the question was asked at a household level).
In the Caribbean, Belize (2000), Trinidad and Tobago (2000), Antigua and Barbuda also placed greater emphasis on limitations to participation in activities.
W ith a view to enhancing the m e a s u re m e n t o f d i s a b i l i t y a t t h e international level, the United Nations set up the Washington Group on Disability Statistics, which has been responsible for these matters since 2002.
Its proposal was assessed by the MERCOSUR countries in a joint pilot test in 2006 and by Uruguay in a pilot test on disability in 2008.
For each question, there are four possible responses depending on the degree of severity, namely: 1.
In Latin America —with the exception of Ecuador (2010), which continues to apply an impairments-based approach— all the countries that have already conducted their census for this decade used the new approach, based on difficulties or limitations in activities, and incorporated at minimum the four domains recommended by CELADE.
Some countries added other domains, such as difficulty using arms or legs (Costa Rica and Panama) or difficulty getting dressed, bathing or eating (Mexico).
In the Caribbean, 12 of the 21 countries that have completed the 2010 round used the questions suggested by the Washington Group, albeit with a few changes in some cases.
These methodological differences have a direct impact on the figures, and caution must be exercised when making comparisons.
All the same, this new census decade will undoubtedly go some way to addressing the chronic lack of information on persons with disability.
Based on estimates from the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA), the over-60 population currently makes up 10% of the total population of Latin America and the Caribbean and is expected to reach 20% shortly (ECLAC, 2012).
In addition to physical and social barriers, the functional autonomy of anyone living with a physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment may be affected by social exclusion due to factors such as gender inequality and ethnic discrimination, which are compounded by a situation of dependence and disempowerment.
In fact, as in other regions in the world (WHO, 2011), the most at-risk population groups experience the highest prevalence of disability: women, older adults, the rural population, indigenous and Afro-descendent peoples and those on a lower income.
These are the main groups, like persons with disabilities, face more constraints in access to resources and opportunities and in participation in society.
An analysis of the information available in the region shows that these patterns are also firmly entrenched in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Disability and the gender gap The needs of women with disabilities often differ significantly from those of men with similar disabilities, owing to gender discrimination associated with social, economic and cultural disadvantages (DFID, 2000).
Women and girls of all ages and with varying types of disability form one of the most marginalized groups and, as such, are more likely than men with disabilities to experience discrimination.
They are also more likely to be subjected to all forms of abuse and sexual violence, often by their caregivers.
It is also possible for women and girls to become disabled as a result of domestic and other forms of gender-specific abuse (WomenWatch, 2012).
Notably, the disability rate is higher among men in several Latin American countries with a recent history of armed conflict (Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico), suggesting that these figures could be the direct result of violence.
Specifically, in most countries with a higher prevalence among men, the gender gap is small (1 to 4 per 1,000 people), with the exception of Montserrat, Honduras, El Salvador and Ecuador, where it is 7 to 10 per 1,000 people.
Conversely, in countries with a higher prevalence of women with disabilities, the gender gap is much larger: ranging from 13 to 16 per 1,000 people to as many as 40 to 53 per 1,000 people in countries such as Antigua and Barbuda, Aruba, Peru, Chile, Uruguay and Brazil, respectively (see figure V.3 and table V.1).
With the exception of Peru, older women tend to be overrepresented among persons with disabilities in more developed countries, a situation that merits further examination to better understand its causes and identify preventive measures.
As a result of their longevity, women are likely to spend more years living with disabilities than men.
In fact, the gender gap increases steadily in the age groups from 0 to 39 years.
It widens considerably in the 40-to-59 age group, although prevalence rates increase in both sexes; in the 60-and-over age group, most countries report a higher prevalence among women than among men (see table V.1).
In the vast majority of countries, disability rates among men are higher than among women from birth to age 40, but this pattern begins to reverse in the next age group.
For those aged 60 or over, disability is more prevalent among women in all Caribbean countries and in 12 of the 17 countries in Latin America for which data are available.
The reason for this pattern shift may be that women’s higher life expectancy increases their chances of acquiring a disability as a result of an accident or chronic illness.
And during those additional years women are more economically vulnerable, which further increases the risk of a health impairment becoming a disability for those who cannot afford the support services and technical aids needed to lessen the impact of age-related limitations.
Information from the latest census round in seven Latin American countries (Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Panama and Uruguay) demonstrates that men and women residing in rural areas are more likely to be living with a disability than those residing in urban areas, particularly the over-60 age group (see figure V.4).
Even though disaggregated information on areas of residence is more difficult to obtain in the Caribbean, in Jamaica for example, it is estimated that two thirds of the disabled population reside in rural areas (Gayle and Palmer, 2005).
The only significant exception is Uruguay, where the situation in every age group for both sexes is quite the reverse, with the exception of men aged 19 to 59, for whom the prevalence is similar in rural areas (107) and urban ones (106).
Disability and ethnicity Data from the 2010 census round concerning disability rates by ethnicity show that disability is more prevalent among people of African descent in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Panama and Uruguay, across all age groups.
This is particularly striking in the 0-18 age group, where the prevalence for males is far higher than for females in all countries except Brazil (see figure V.5).
The differences between men and women are less significant, but the gap has reversed and women now post higher rates than men, as in the population as a whole —except in Ecuador and El Salvador and among indigenous men in Panama (see figure V.6).
According to the 2010 census, the indigenous population represents approximately 0.47% of the total population of Brazil.
Disability and household income Both the World Report on Disability (WHO, 2011) and the Latin American Network of Non-Governmental Organizations of Persons with Disabilities and their Families (RIADIS) note that persons with disabilities are overrepresented among those living in poverty and extreme poverty.
First, poverty and vulnerability exacerbate disability, because of a lack of timely care and attention.
Second, when no care services are available for the person who is disabled, a family member often has to stop working, thus reducing family unit income even further.
Several poverty assessments undertaken by the Caribbean Development Bank also suggest a clear link between poverty and disability.
For example, the Barbados Country Assessment of Living Conditions 2010 reported that “among persons with disabilities, there was a clear connection between poverty and social exclusion, especially among those whose disability had rendered them physically immobile”.
The report found that poverty and social exclusion within this vulnerable group related primarily to a number of factors, including the lack of suitable employment opportunities and low financial resources, lack of support and protection within families and communities, and inadequate transportation and other services.
In Latin America, recent household surveys conducted in three countries– Chile, Costa Rica and Mexico–show a higher prevalence of disability in the lower income quintiles as people grow older (see figure V.7).
This makes it all the more important to craft policies to counter these income-driven differences in life trajectories.
The lack of household resources, the cost of technical aids and care services and the obstacles to income generation faced by persons with disabilities and their caregivers heighten the negative impact of impairments on quality of life for all concerned and can push them into poverty.
Census data for 21 countries of the region show that vision and mobility impairments were the most common in Latin America and the Caribbean overall.
These were followed by hearing and speech impairments in Latin America and by mental or intellectual impairments and reduced manual dexterity in the Caribbean.
Vision and motor disabilities have the least negative impact on access to education and employment; persons with cognitive and mental disabilities and those with limited capacity for self-care face the greatest difficulties in terms of integration into economic and social activity.
Difficulties in meeting the care needs of persons living with disabilities depend on their degree of functional autonomy and independence, which have to do with the nature of their disabilities, be they sensory, cognitive, communicational or related to mobility, self-care or mental function.
In a recent study in Barbados, respondents indicated that the quality of life of persons with disabilities was highly correlated to distinctions between different types and levels of disability (Caribbean Development Bank, 2011).
The general observation was that persons who were physically immobile were at a significant disadvantage because, usually being unable to leave home without assistance, they suffered more.
Similarly, a 2005 study on disability in Guyana found that the type of impairment played a major role in determining access to services.
For example, persons with physical and visual impairments were more likely to access services than persons with hearing, speech and learning disabilities (National Commission on Disability, 2005).
These and other reports highlight differences in type and level of disability as a significant factor in determining both the care needs and the social and economic outcomes of persons living with disabilities (WHO, 2011).
In Panama, the First National Survey of Disability (PENDIS), conducted in 2006, gathered important data on the need for support based on type of disability.
According to the responses, dependence on another person rose by type of disability: reduced mobility (63.1%), multiple disabilities (72.1%), organic problems (73.1%) and mental problems (78.6%).
Types of disability: prevalence in Latin America and the Caribbean The same types of disability are prevalent throughout the 21 Latin American and Caribbean countries for which census data could be processed.
Looking at the total population (both sexes) and the population aged 60 or over (which has the highest disability rate in all of the countries), visual impairments and trouble walking, going up stairs or moving the lower extremities are the most common disabilities (see figures V.8 and V.9).
They are followed by speech and hearing impairments in Latin America, and, in the Caribbean, by mental impairments that have an impact on behaviour and reduced dexterity for lifting, carrying, moving and using objects, which in some countries comes under self-care.
While the prevalence rates for all types of disability tend to increase with age, for some types of disability the rise in prevalence among older age groups is much sharper while for other types the rates edge up only slightly.
Among older persons, the prevalence of difficulties associated with sight, mobility, hearing, upper-limb functions and self-care is much higher.
Indeed, prevalence rates for persons aged 60 and over can be four or five times the rates for the population as a whole.
Although prevalence rates for speech, behaviour and learning impairments also increase with age, the difference is less marked, with prevalence rates for persons aged 60 and over commonly around twice the rate for the population as a whole.
Among children aged 0 to 18 years, cognitive difficulties and sensory limitations (especially visual) are the most common disabilities in both regions, further hindering their educational attainment and damaging their prospects of functional autonomy.
Although several censuses in the region gather statistics on multiple disabilities, the findings are seldom published.
The data on the percentage of people with more than one disability in Argentina (ENDI, Paraguay (Census, 2002) (15.2%) and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (Census, 2001) (1.9%) show that more people report more than one disability as they age.
The marked disparity in the findings by these two countries is once again due to key differences in the measurement instruments.
Nevertheless, the data do confirm that the rising incidence of multiple disability over time creates additional care problems, both because different kinds of support are needed and because of the likelihood that these people will become more dependent, increasing the burden on their caregivers.
Access to education by type of disability According to the information on school attendance for persons with disabilities aged between 13 and 18 from the 17 Latin American and Caribbean countries for which census data could be processed, access varies widely by country and by type of disability (see table V.2).
Access ranges from 17% for persons with mental disabilities in El Salvador to 100% for persons with auditory disabilities in Bermuda and those with speech impairments in the Cayman Islands.
Between these two extremes, access rates are higher in the Caribbean countries, especially in the Cayman Islands, where type of disability has little bearing; the lowest rate of attendance is 83% for persons with reduced upper-limb dexterity.
The only Latin American country in the same position is Costa Rica, where levels of attendance are slightly lower, but access rates are fairly similar across all types of disability and range from 88% for persons with visual disabilities to 76% for persons with difficulties lifting, carrying, moving and using objects.
This type of impairment —which also limits an individual’s ability to carry out self-care activities that require the use of his or her arms— is in fact the main obstacle to school attendance, together with mental and cognitive difficulties.
While school attendance among persons with difficulties associated with speech and learning is rising, visual and hearing impairments, followed in some instances by mobility impairments, are the least likely to affect school attendance in the 17 countries.
It thus appears that school systems and families in the region do not view the incorporation of tools such as Braille and sign language as a major hurdle, while problems relating to dexterity, behaviour and learning constitute very real obstacles that can only be overcome by challenging the pedagogical assumptions that govern how education systems are run.
According to the same census data, the level of education achieved by persons with disabilities in 7 Latin American countries and 10 Caribbean countries follows a curve that is consistent with each country’s educational attainment.
In other words, the higher a country’s average educational attainment, the higher the average attainment of persons with disabilities will be.
In Latin America, the average educational attainment of persons with disabilities rarely exceeds three years of schooling.
Uruguay, Costa Rica and Panama report the highest rates of completion of seven years of school (equivalent to primary education) (see figure V.10).
Among the countries and territories of the Caribbean for which data are available, with the exception of Belize, a much larger share of the population finishes primary and secondary school (see figure V.11).
However, the proportion of persons with disabilities completing secondary education still varies considerably from one country to the next and depends on the type of disability.
For example, in the Cayman Islands, Barbados and Bermuda, most people with disabilities complete secondary education —and some also complete higher education— while in Belize, Grenada, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Trinidad and Tobago only a small minority finish secondary school.
Some countries, such as Ecuador, Panama, Uruguay and Aruba, report a significant variation in educational attainment according to the type of disability.
But it is only in Trinidad and Tobago that disability leads to completely different outcomes: while 60% of those with no disability acquire a secondary education, persons with disabilities barely finish primary school.
The figures for persons without disability are similar in Barbados (63%) and Antigua and Barbuda (67%), with the crucial difference that a similar trend is seen among persons with disabilities, except for those with cognitive difficulties.
These data illustrate the importance of both a high-quality national education system and training for special education teachers.
As in the case of access to education, visual and hearing impairments and mobility problems are the least likely to affect educational attainment in the 17 countries (see figures V.10 and V.11).
Difficulties in speaking, learning, interacting with others (mental disability) and capacity for self-care, meanwhile, once again present the greatest obstacles to school completion.
Economic activity by type of disability The census data available for 18 Latin American and Caribbean countries show that type of disability has a considerable impact on the economic activity undertaken by persons with disabilities.
In 15 countries, persons with visual impairments find it easier to find employment; their rate of economic participation exceeds that of persons with disabilities as a whole in all countries except for Barbados and Saint Lucia (see table V.3).
They are followed by persons with hearing impairments, persons with upper-limb impairments or who are mobility-impaired, then by persons with speech impairments.
Although these individuals may require support in terms of accessibility and technical aids, the data show that they have more opportunities than persons with cognitive and mental impairments or difficulties with self-care.
In all cases, the percentage of persons aged 15 and over with one or more forms of disability who are economically active is much lower than the percentage for persons without any disabilities.
With regard to formal employment, research conducted by the ECLAC subregional headquarters on disability in the Caribbean has found that, based on the available data, people who report a disability or disabilities also tend to experience considerably lower rates of employment than those without disabilities.
Furthermore, these already lower employment rates are more sharply so for women with disabilities (ECLAC, 2011) (see table V.4).
Data from the 2000 round of censuses in eight Caribbean countries show that persons with disabilities represented 4.2% of the total working-age population; however, employment rates 8 in this group were significantly lower.
A comparison with the overall employment rate revealed that only 34% of working-age persons with disabilities were employed versus 59% of those without disabilities.
Antigua and Barbuda and Belize showed less stark disparities in employment rates between persons with and without disabilities than the other six countries.
The employment rate is calculated as the ratio of the number of employed persons to the total working-age population.
In all cases, the working-age population was restricted to persons aged 15-64.
The nationally accepted minimum working age was set Data from the 2000 census round also showed that the nature of a person’s disability affected the likelihood of employment, with higher employment rates recorded for persons with sensory (hearing or vision) or speech disabilities than for persons with physical, mental or intellectual disabilities.
Notably, persons with mental or intellectual disabilities appear to fare the worst, with only a small minority gaining employment.
This type of disability also had a greater employment impact on women than on men.
Employment rates by sex among persons with and without disabilities showed that the effects of disability on employment were more pronounced for women than men (see table V.4).
On average, men with disabilities were 1.5 times more likely to be employed than women with disabilities.
Similar employment patterns across the sexes were observed for persons with no disability.
Thus, irrespective of disability status, women remain disadvantaged in the labour market relative to men. at 15 years for all countries except Belize, for which the minimum working age was 14 years.
To facilitate comparison across the eight countries, a standard minimum working age of 15 was applied in the analysis.
Caring for persons with disabilities Although the percentage of persons with disabilities who live alone instead of in other family arrangements is particularly high, the majority receive care and support from immediate family members through varied shared living arrangements.
This situation takes heavy toll on the family’s emotional and financial well-being, and it highlights the shortfall in the supply of care services provided by the State, the market and civil society organizations.
Nevertheless, awareness of this issue is growing, leading the countries of the region to start rolling out government programmes that provide support for family caregivers, home-care services and support for independent living, as well as programmes to promote the realization of economic and social rights through access to inclusive education, employment and social security coverage for persons with disabilities.
Living arrangements of persons with disabilities The majority of persons with disabilities, like those without disabilities, live in private households with their immediate or extended families.
While many persons with disabilities live in nuclear households, in the Caribbean countries they are slightly less likely to live in this type of household than persons without disabilities in the same age group and somewhat more likely to live in extended, composite, single-person or collective households.
A significant minority of persons with disabilities live alone: in Antigua and Barbuda 17% of those living in private households.
Aruba, more men than women with disabilities live alone, because women are more likely than men to live with their children or other family members.
A small proportion of persons with disabilities do not live in private households, but in institutions such as homes for the elderly, infirmaries, hospitals, and rehabilitation centres.
In Aruba, 5% of persons with disabilities live in “collective households” (compared to less than 1% of persons without disabilities), many of which are likely to be care homes or institutions of some kind.
The survey of persons with disabilities carried out by Guyana’s National Commission on Disability (2005) found that somewhere between 3% and 5% of the population sample were living in an institution.
Although no comparable data are available for the countries of Latin America, special processing of household surveys that included questions on disability (Chile, 2009; Costa Rica, 2010; Mexico, 2010) shows similar trends.
On comparing the circumstances of persons with and without disabilities, persons with disabilities are overrepresented in one-person households, nuclear households without children and non-nuclear households (see figure V.12).
If this scenario is representative of the types of family arrangements of persons with disabilities in the region, it highlights a major shortfall in the supply of family care that needs to be covered by a range of services delivered by other care providers: the State, the market and civil society organizations.
Men with some form of disability tend to live in nuclear households with or without children and in extended twoparent households with a traditional family care structure, generally provided by a woman.
In contrast, women with some form of disability for the most part live in one-person households, non-nuclear households, and sole-parent households headed by a woman, where care within the family is less likely to be available (see figure V.13).
Care needs, caregivers and care arrangements According to the World Report on Disability 2011 (WHO, 2011), many persons with disabilities require assistance and support in order to achieve a good quality of life and to participate in economic and social aspects of life on an equal basis with others.
The primary caregiver for most persons with disabilities is a parent or other family member, including siblings and extended family members, most commonly the mother or another female relative.
However, where this is not possible, and under certain conditions, care can be provided in the home or in a formal setting outside the home by the State or a private institution.
Not all persons with a physical or mental limitation necessarily need specific help or care.
The National Survey of Persons with Disabilities (ENDISC), conducted in Uruguay in 2004, notes that 40% of the requests for assistance or help were for support in getting around outside the home, while another 15.5% were related to moving around inside the home.
As to other needs, 21% of respondents reported that they needed the help of another person for self-care, 20.7% for participating in a learning activity and 15.6% for interacting with others (these categories are not mutually exclusive).
In the last two categories, more people state that they do not receive the help they require (15.1% and 9.6%, respectively) (INE, Uruguay, 2004).
In Aruba, 6.9% of the population reported having a disability, but only 2% needed care or assistance because of it.10 In Trinidad and Tobago, around 4% of the population reported having a disability,11 of whom at least half required care (Kairi Consultants, 2007).
Most of those who do need care are cared for by their family.
Of those persons needing help in Aruba, assistance was provided by family members within the household (53%), by family members, friends or neighbours who are not part of the household (14%), by other (mainly private) care providers (20%), or within an institution (18%); 7% received no help at all although they reported needing it.
In Trinidad and Tobago, based on data from the Survey of Living Conditions, 40% of persons received care from other family unit members, and 4% from other relatives.
Just 3% received care from non-family members, 3% were cared for at an institutional facility and 34% stated they did not need care.
The information gathered by ENDISC (2004) in Chile shows that 31% of persons with disabilities do not have or require any support from others.
Of the remainder, almost all are cared for by relatives while less than 1% receive Aruba Central Bureau of Statistics, Census 2010.
Census 2001, Trinidad and Tobago. support from female caregivers (0.24%) or neighbours Support and assistance are seen not as ends in themselves but, more fundamentally, as a means for ensuring dignity and enabling individual autonomy and social inclusion.
This support may consist of a period of rehabilitative care involving the provision of equipment, the adaption of the home, or the learning of new skills to enable independent living.
For persons with more severe activity limitations, long-term care may be necessary to meet their basic needs and to enable them to fully realize their rights.
However, the United Kingdom Disabilities Rights Commission (DRC) defines it as “all disabled people having the same choice, control and freedom as any citizen – at home, at work and as members of the community”.
To enable persons with disabilities to live an independent life, these requirements have to be met and support and services must be provided as a means to achieve them, not as ends in themselves.
The promotion of respect for fundamental human rights, equality and dignity, family life and privacy is at the core of independent living (DRC, 2006). (a) Care provided by family members: cases in the Caribbean In Guyana, the 2005 survey of 1,500 persons with disabilities showed several distinct impacts on households caring for a family member with a disability.
Responsibility tends to fall largely (in 63% of households) upon one member of the family, and often this means that the main caregiver is not employed: 50% of survey respondent caregivers were not employed and 11% had been forced to give up work in order to provide care.
Consequently, households which include persons with disabilities are more likely to experience financial difficulties, with 79% of respondent families reporting having been in this position.
Reduced family income then makes it harder to meet additional costs of disability, including medical treatment and medicines, transportation, specialist equipment and dietary products.
Thus the impact of caregiving can perpetuate the vicious cycle of poverty and disability.
Surveys of living conditions, too, sometimes collect data on persons with disabilities.
The results of these need to be treated with caution, however, owing to the small number of disabled persons included in the samples.
Surveys carried out in the British Virgin Islands12 and Anguilla13 showed that households with at least one person with disabilities were more likely to be poor or in the lower range of the income distribution.
In Trinidad and Tobago, however, persons with disabilities appeared to be distributed more evenly across the income distribution.
Focus group discussions in Guyana explored the emotional impact of caring for a person with a disability.
An extended support network, often of family members and close friends, was vital to assist the main caregiver; those without such networks are likely to be particularly prone to stress and anxiety.
Families needed support and assistance to identify and access treatment, education, information and support for their family member with a disability.
The services provided include help with shopping, cleaning and cooking, and companionship.
The organization, coverage and quality of these schemes vary from country to country.
The Government of Guyana has run a pilot scheme in one region, but there is no similar scheme in Saint Lucia or Suriname.
All three countries have some private providers of home-care services, although for reasons of cost, they are not likely to be accessible to everyone who needs them.
The Government of Barbados provides services to assist persons with disabilities, persons suffering from chronic illnesses and elderly persons who live alone and receive little or no assistance from relatives or friends.
In Jamaica, the home-care programme operates on a very limited basis and is available only in four of the fourteen parishes, with fewer than 200 beneficiaries each year (fewer than in some much smaller Caribbean countries).
Since each parish has only one homecare-giver, the service is necessarily limited to persons with extreme needs.
In Grenada, a number of improvements were made to the Geriatric Caregiver scheme in 2011, including staff training programmes, although the service still suffers from some problems, in part owing to caregivers’ low pay.
There is general satisfaction with the Home Care Program in Saint Kitts, but in Nevis the scheme’s coverage needs to be extended.
In the British Virgin Islands, services for persons with disabilities include assistance for independent living and residential care.
However, demand for these services outstrips supply, particularly regarding assistance for housing to enable independent living.
The National Disability Service (SENADIS) in Chile has launched a home-care pilot project in three communes of Greater Santiago for persons with disabilities who have high dependency needs.
This will make it possible to coordinate services and social and community action.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, a direct, comprehensive home-care service delivered by multidisciplinary teams is available to persons with disabilities, thanks to the National Council for Persons with Disabilities (CONAPDIS). (c) Home nursing services Some countries now offer a basic level of medical care in the home as part of their home-care service provision.
In Chile, through the Ministry of Health, persons with high dependency needs receive home care from staff from the local health centre.
In Colombia, home care under the umbrella of primary health care forms part of the Compulsory Health Programme for individuals aged under 18 who have disabilities.
Rehabilitation and home care in Cuba are part of the Ministry of Labour’s Programme for Jobs for Persons with Disabilities (PROEMDIS), aimed at all persons with disabilities who wish to work and feel able to do so.
In Barbados the Community Nursing Project provides services such as wound dressing, blood pressure readings and blood sugar tests, in addition to advice on nutrition, sanitary standards and other health-care issues.
Since 2009, home-care officers in Saint Kitts and Nevis have been equipped with glucometers, test strips, thermometers, blood pressure cuffs and a stethoscope.
There are some privately provided services of this kind in Saint Lucia and Suriname, among other countries.
In Bermuda, 16% of the population with a disability reported receiving hired nursing care and, of this group, 46% received public care, 41% Respite services aim to provide family members and other caregivers looking after persons with disabilities with a short break for the benefit of their own health.
In recent years, Caribbean countries such as Barbados, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago have begun to implement these kinds of programmes, drawing heavily on the United Kingdom’s Buddies scheme, which cares for young people with disabilities for short periods after school or at weekends.
In Anguilla, just 7% of those with disabilities received some form of assistance in kind (as opposed to financial assistance). (d) Disability equipment and home adaptation In Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica and Panama, the public authorities guarantee the provision of technical aids, such as orthoses and prostheses, either directly or by partly or fully funding their purchase.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia’s Ministry of Health and Sports runs a programme for access to decent housing; the National Council for Rehabilitation and Special Education in Costa Rica offers funding to cover housing expenses for persons with disabilities aged over 18 in a state of abandonment.
The Ministry of Public Health of Cuba finances housing repairs, while the Ministry of Urban Development and Housing of Ecuador builds and repairs housing for persons with disabilities or provides them with housing subsidies, according to the criteria established by the Manuela Espejo programme.
The censuses conducted for Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines provides statistics on the use of assistive aids by persons with disabilities.
Typically, around 15% of those who identify themselves as having difficulties with mobility are users of wheelchairs, around 10% use walkers or walking frames, and between 20% and 35% use canes.
Close to 1% of persons with disabilities use prostheses (artificial body parts).
No information was available on the use of mobility scooters or hearing aids.
In Saint Kitts and Nevis, care and support is provided for persons with disabilities and mental conditions through the Ministry of Health.
The country’s strategic health plan pledges to pay increased attention to geriatric care and care for the physically disabled, chronic disease management and mental health.
For example, since 2006, the Ministry of Health of the Government of Chile has been running an initiative to provide care for completely bedridden patients.
Among other measures, this comprises home-care services, technical and material aids, and a “caring for the caregiver” plan.
The Office of the Vice-President of the Republic of Ecuador awards an allowance equivalent to a living wage to around 3,000 persons with a serious intellectual or physical disability.
It is paid to the family member or person responsible for their care, so that he or she won’t need to work.
Also provided are free medication, equipment and training in matters such as health, hygiene, rehabilitation, nutrition and self-esteem.
One non-governmental initiative that could be replicated in the public domain is the caring for caregivers programme run by the nursing faculty at the National University of Colombia.
It was organized for 280 participants in Bogota and aimed to further develop the skills of family members caring for persons with a chronic illness.
In the Caribbean, a small proportion of persons with disabilities are cared for in government-run or government-funded residential institutions.
Placing in an institution usually occurs when family is no longer willing or able to provide care for those unable to live independently.
Institutions typically provide long-term and short-term care, and sometimes day care, for persons with disabilities.
In Jamaica, infirmaries provide long- and short-term care for indigent or homeless adults with disabilities (PIOJ, 2009a), who are typically admitted in situations of extreme vulnerability.
Individuals have the right to refuse treatment and, in cases where they are deemed unable to decide for themselves, medical officers are responsible for deciding upon the length of stay and appropriate type of institution for treatment.
Some children with disabilities live in children’s residential homes managed by the Ministry of Health’s Child Development Agency.
These are very short-staffed, and most officers lack training in caring for persons with disabilities.
The Dominica Infirmary17 is a government-assisted home for the elderly which provides institutional care for destitute and infirm citizens.
The Infirmary caters for approximately 100 residents, who, due to age or disability and lack of income, are unable to live independently.
In addition to government funding, the home receives support from the Roman Catholic Church and donor agencies overseas.
Antigua and Barbuda provides residential care for children with disabilities but can cater for only a limited number owing to lack of funding and trained caregivers.
Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Grenada have public and private residential homes for older persons, some of which admit persons with disabilities.
In Saint Kitts and Nevis, the State-run facilities are full or nearly full and, since not everyone can afford the privately-run facilities, some of those requiring care cannot access it.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines has six privately-run residential homes; notably, however, there is no requirement for any training or a licence to open a home and most caregivers are untrained.
The Desk of the Elderly in Grenada produced a detailed report on the 11 long-stay residential institutions in the country, which found that some homes were in a state of severe disrepair and lacked basic but important equipment such as ramps, handrails, emergency call buttons, and night lights.
Autonomy and protection of social rights Underpinning independent living is the principle of inclusion, which is linked to independence, freedom and the choice to participate in all aspects of community life.
However, this independence and freedom is curtailed by sensory, physical and intellectual barriers for people living with disabilities.
The foundation of inclusion is the removal of barriers which leave people with little or no choice or opportunity to express their abilities (Massiah, 2004).
Persons with disabilities require different types of assistance and support to facilitate independent living, which includes —but is not limited to— family and community support, residential support services, respite services and See chapter VI, which details the benefits offered by the Governments of Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Honduras, Panama and Uruguay.
The need for support services is determined by a number of factors, including the level of individual functioning, health conditions, stage of the life cycle and environmental factors.
According to the World Report on Disability, “key factors determining the need for support services are the availability of appropriate assistive devices, the presence and willingness of family members to provide assistance, and the degree to which the environment facilitates the participation of people with disabilities” (WHO, 2011, p. 139).
Persons with disabilities may not need help from someone else if they can physically move around and perform everyday tasks such as personal hygiene and care, or if they have access to a wheelchair that allows them to negotiate their local environment without assistance.
On the other hand, a person who suffers from hearing impairment or is totally deaf may need either an interpreter or some form of communication support, while others with mental health or learning challenges may simply need an advocate, which are all vital components of the promotion of independent living.
Furthermore, where services to promote daily living are accessible, the need for support from others is often much lessened.
A number of Caribbean countries provide formal assistance through government and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to improve the quality of life of persons with disabilities and thereby enhance their independence, self-esteem and ability to become self-supporting.
These services have the additional goal of promoting a better quality of life for caregivers, by de-stressing the situations in which they provide daily assistance to family members.
Fire alarms are also installed for persons with disabilities (Barbados National Disabilities Unit, 2011).
Education, employment and social security coverage for persons with disabilities should be viewed within the framework of social care governance, in which governments are held accountable for the provision of quality services to persons with disabilities and must take responsibility for their performance in this regard.
Good governance in the context of care must embrace concepts not only of accountability but also of high standards of care provision.
It must also include evidence-based practices to allow for continuous improvements and ensure the best possible outcomes and results for persons with disabilities (Somerset County Council, 2011).
Successful integration into the school system and the labour market entails a certain level of autonomy and a shift in the needs for assistance and support as the person becomes more independent.
Depending on the level of education achieved, school attendance helps develop will and common sense and a capacity to express oneself and make decisions about one’s life.
When people with disabilities have greater functional autonomy and independence, it follows that they have a greater capacity for self-care and defending their human rights. (a) Access to education Access to education for persons with disabilities is a substantive issue that cannot be covered in full in this brief section.
Instead, the goal here is to outline how education can contribute to the care of persons with disabilities and briefly review the educational services on offer in the region.
According to an exhaustive study of these services in Latin America conducted in 2009 by Pilar Samaniego de García for the Spanish Committee of Representatives of Persons with Disabilities (CERMI), a similar model is being implemented in all Latin American countries.
With little coordination between them, highly regulated special education centres operate alongside mainstreaming programmes while a “timid standardization of educational inclusion is undertaken” (García, 2009).
Despite this lack of clarity, a review of the legislation shows that the right to education and educational services for persons with disabilities is sufficiently recognized and guaranteed in normative terms in all Latin American countries (García, 2009).
The challenge going forward is to launch a process of inclusive education aimed at developing a common curriculum for all, so everyone can participate and learn on an equal basis.
The diagram below by Samaniego de García clearly illustrates the differences between educational integration and inclusion.
Persons with disabilities must adapt to the needs of society’s existing systems, which only make adjustments.
Society looks for ways it can adapt to meet everyone’s needs, whether or not they have disabilities.
While the Governments of Argentina, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Honduras and Mexico report that they are committed to developing both inclusive education and special education, the authorities in Chile, Guatemala and Uruguay are putting considerable efforts into special education.
In Chile, the Ministry of Education supplies a variety of material aids and training to special schools for children and young people with visual, auditory, mental and motor impairments, autism and specific language disorders.
This support is delivered in three ways: via regular educational establishments, in special schools and in hospital schools and classrooms.
Special assistance is also available, such as transportation, as well as speech, psychomotor and psychological therapy to help young people remain longer in the education system.
Many Caribbean States have taken special measures to embrace the concept of the Education for All movement coordinated by the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) and have adopted policies to transform their education systems to ensure that all children, including those with disabilities and other special education needs, have access to education.
One of greatest is that the process is often flawed because necessary changes to school curricula and teaching and learning methodologies are not made, leaving persons with disabilities at a disadvantage in the school system.
This lack of structural change has proven to be one of the main obstacles to the implementation of inclusive educational policies.
UNESCO International Bureau of Education, Kingston, Jamaica, Mainstream schools often expect disabled or special needs students to adapt to rigid teaching methods and maladapted curricula.
In Saint Lucia, for example, fear was identified as a major obstacle, inasmuch as school principals were cited as being apprehensive of enrolling children with disabilities in the general education system owing to a perceived inability to manage them.
In the few cases where children with disabilities are enrolled, the environment does not cater to their needs.
Therefore, the physical presence of children with disabilities in the school setting is not enough to be correctly termed “inclusion”.
The Government of Barbados, conversely, has implemented a system of full inclusion in which the curriculum for special needs students is adapted or modified so they can participate in the classroom environment at all times, or special needs students both participate in general education and receive special education at a resource centre in small groups focused on their particular needs.
The Government of Jamaica adopted a policy by which all children, regardless of differences in abilities or capacities or sociocultural background, should have equal access to educational opportunities.
Even with a policy of full inclusion, however, segregated specialized services and programmes are still needed for a select group of students, including facilities for the deaf, the blind and those with moderate to severe mental challenges.
The provision of these specialized services is deemed necessary in order to avoid compromising the students, who would need additional and targeted support to facilitate their participation in a mainstream environment.
As a result of these challenges, the situation as it stands is that children with disabilities have to adjust to the learning environment, rather than the learning environment adjusting to meet their needs as advocated by the inclusion concept.
Many challenges remain in terms of inclusion of persons living with disabilities into mainstream society.
These include persistent stigma and discrimination against people with disabilities, which contributes to the exclusion of some children with disabilities from the school system.
Such training shall incorporate disability awareness and the use of appropriate augmentative and alternative modes, means and formats of communication, educational techniques and materials to support persons with disabilities” (Art. 24.4).
Country responses to the surveys on disabilities in the region conducted by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) in 2010 and 2011 highlighted the need for more teacher training, accessible learning materials and physical environments, and assistive computer technologies.
A number of organizations indicated that they provided assistance to primary and secondary school students with vision disabilities to facilitate their attendance at mainstream schools through a variety of initiatives, including providing itinerant teachers, materials in Braille and large print as well as training and sensitization programmes.
Although the actual number of students with disabilities is relatively small in each Caribbean State, a broad range of disabilities exists within these cohorts.
This presents a major challenge for teaching professionals who lack the skills to assess and address these students’ learning needs.
Many Caribbean States have therefore initiated capacity-building programmes to increase the corpus of teachers with the specialist skills needed to deliver teaching to students with disabilities.
However there is still a shortage of specialists such as audiologists, speech pathologists and physical therapists.
In addition to these measures, policies have also been introduced to train teachers in special education and to reform the curriculum to embrace inclusion and to take account of the changing technological environment.
In Jamaica, a policy was implemented in 1998 which requires that all teachers in training undertake a module in special education.
The Government of Barbados has made substantial financial investment in training teachers in special needs education both through the national teacher training college and within a collaborative programme with Mount St.
These courses are designed to sensitize all teachers to the inclusion process and to the approaches that can be used with students even before a formal assessment is conducted.
In order to adequately respond to the specific needs of students, teachers are also exposed to other special areas of training.
Despite efforts to provide an all-inclusive education for all children regardless of abilities, there remain small pockets of exclusion where groups of children with severe to profound mental and physical disabilities and children with permanent emotional and behavioural difficulties remain outside the education process.
It recognizes the right of persons with disabilities to work, on an equal basis with others, including the opportunity to gain a living by work freely chosen or accepted in a labour market and a work environment that is open, inclusive and accessible to persons with disabilities.
Furthermore, the Convention prohibits all forms of employment discrimination, promotes access to vocational training and opportunities for selfemployment, and calls for reasonable accommodation to be provided to persons with disabilities in the workplace (United Nations, 2006, Article 27).
Work is regarded as being fundamental to the wellbeing of persons with disabilities.
However, the reality in the region is that persons with disabilities face numerous obstacles in finding and holding jobs and these obstacles may be directly linked to their disability, be it intellectual or physical, sensory, a mental health difficulty, or a combination of all these.
Obstacles may also be related to the environment in the community and neighbourhood, sometimes encompassing social, economic, cultural and political issues.
In response to this state of affairs, a number of Latin American countries have begun implementing programmes that support the employment of persons with disabilities.
In Cuba, the Ministry of Labour’s Programme for Jobs for Persons with Disabilities (PROEMDIS) is aimed at all persons with disabilities who wish to work and feel able to do so.
Since 2010, the Ministry of Social Care, Constituency Empowerment and Community Development and the National Disabilities Unit in Barbados have been providing training opportunities for young people with disabilities with the aim of developing their entrepreneurial skills in order to be better positioned for gainful employment.
In 2008 and 2009, the Government of Jamaica allocated 20 million Jamaican dollars to a project to provide small loans to persons with disabilities who wished to start their own businesses.
The project also reserved 5% of all public sector jobs for qualified persons with disabilities.
The Government also revised its policy of obliging persons who became disabled to take early retirement, and instead started a scheme to retrain those in this situation to keep them in employment.
The National Vocational Rehabilitation Service, which is administered by the Ministry of Labour and Social Security, provides vocational and other productive opportunities to persons with disabilities.
It also holds annual employment fairs and brokers meetings with private sector representatives to encourage businesses in the private sector to employ persons with disabilities.
In Argentina, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Peru, a disability pension is paid to children with disabilities following the death of the person making contributions.
Beneficiaries in Chile and Costa Rica include both persons declared disabled who have paid into a pension system and those with no pension entitlement.
In Brazil, a targeted benefit is available to persons who have disabilities or who are aged over 65, as long as per capita family income does not exceed 25% of the legal minimum wage.
In all cases, the amounts paid are very small, close to the minimum wage or to the basic old-age pension; the aim is to ensure minimum subsistence levels (see table V-A-2 in the annex).
All the English-speaking Caribbean countries have national insurance or social security schemes modelled on the United Kingdom’s national insurance scheme.
This makes for much commonality among the benefits that they provide to persons who are unable to work due to disability, at least in terms of the principles upon which the schemes operate.
Among the nation States of the Caribbean, only Suriname does not have a national insurance scheme.
There are, however, significant differences in the extent to which the schemes actually cover national populations, owing in large part to differences in the level of formal versus informal employment across the Caribbean.
This is evident in figure V.14, which indicates the variation in the coverage of national insurance schemes.
Therefore, while the schemes themselves may share a lot of similarities, some provide a wider safety net than others.
In all the Caribbean States except Suriname, insured persons of working age who acquire a disability are eligible for an earnings-related invalidity benefit pension for as long as they are deemed unable to work.
To be eligible for this pension, workers must have contributed to the scheme for a minimum period (usually three years); the amount of the benefit depends heavily on the length of time the beneficiary has contributed.
Typically, 10 years of contributions would entitle an insured person who acquired a disability to a pension of 30% of insured earnings (40% in Barbados and Saint Lucia, 35% in Guyana, 25% in Antigua and Barbuda).
In many cases, the maximum pension payable is 60% of insured earnings (50% in Antigua and Barbuda, 31% in Belize).
However, workers would typically need to have contributed for almost 40 years to be entitled to the ceiling rate of insured earnings, so in reality many invalidity pensions are paid at a lower rate.
In all countries except Antigua and Barbuda and Suriname, insured persons who acquire a disability due to an accident at work or through a work-related illness are also entitled to a permanent disablement benefit, which is not dependent on an individual’s contribution record, but on an assessment of their degree of disablement.
For a person with disabilities who has been assessed to be 100% incapacitated, the disablement benefit is at least as high as the maximum invalidity benefit pension and often provides a higher percentage of the worker’s insured earnings (90% in Barbados, 75% in Saint Kitts and Nevis, and 70% in Grenada, Guyana, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines).
Apart from in Saint Kitts and Nevis and Jamaica, persons receiving a disablement benefit who also require constant care receive an additional attendance allowance, ranging from an additional 50% of the disablement pension (Barbados, Dominica, Grenada, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines) to approximately 20% (the Bahamas, Belize and Trinidad and Tobago).
In Saint Kitts and Nevis, reasonable expenses for care may be reimbursed.
Recipients of invalidity benefits or disablement benefits can continue to receive these benefits up until State retirement age, when they would start to receive a State pension.
In some countries, means-tested disability assistance is available for uninsured persons with disabilities (in the Bahamas, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Trinidad and Tobago and, for some disabilities, in Barbados).
In other countries, persons with disabilities have to rely on general public assistance programmes if they exist.
In some countries (Antigua and Barbuda, Bahamas, Barbados, Belize, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, and Trinidad and Tobago) older persons with disabilities and no independent means of support would be entitled to a non-contributory old-age pension.
Summing up These pages have sought to provide an overview of the status of persons with disabilities in Latin America and the Caribbean, systematizing the latest census information in order to furnish, for the first time, a detailed assessment of the current situation across much of the region.
However, comparing this heretofore unavailable information between countries remains difficult because census questions use different criteria to define the extent and nature of disabilities.
In addition to limiting comparability, this also highlights the need for more coordination and agreement on standardizing criteria, allowing for exhaustive studies and a more unified regional approach that would, moreover, track the changing situation over time.
This chapter has sought to present the information on assessments and policy proposals from a perspective in which caring for persons with disabilities is governed by the principle of autonomy and independence as an ethical value.
This is not to disregard the fact that disabilities introduce a degree of dependence in people’s lives.
The idea is to seek, within that reality, a care relationship in which persons with disabilities have the greatest possible capacity to make decisions on their life plans, to lead their lives with as much freedom and dignity as possible, and be able to express their views on their situation and their demands for proper treatment.
The information gathered by the countries regarding different care modalities is still fragmentary because there are no comprehensive, integrated sources of information.
This initial systematization has been based on data provided directly by government officials and information available in the literature and in the media that have promoted these programmes.
A great deal of information remains to be incorporated and systematized, but this represents an important step forward in terms of detailing what is and is not being done in the region where persons with disabilities are concerned, and the prevailing modalities of care.
The next chapter, together with the annexes to both this chapter and the next, provides further information.
Lastly, the information presented here highlights the need for greater awareness of the situation of persons with disabilities and related issues.
There is such a wide range of disabilities involving such a large proportion of the population that how to promote equality while ensuring the right to and respect for difference becomes a key issue.
Moreover, from a social inclusion standpoint the challenge is huge: persons with disabilities are overrepresented in the figures on poverty, unemployment, low educational achievement and discrimination.
Life always involves exogenous and endogenous risks that may lead to or exacerbate functional limitations or require taking on the care of a family member who is disabled or becomes disabled (or more disabled) during the life cycle.
Solidarity with persons with disabilities, and putting care at the centre in order to provide them with the best possible assistance and enable them to enjoy greater respect and autonomy, are therefore both an ethical imperative and a practical one.
Gayle, Annicia and Derrick Palmer (2005), “The activism of persons with disabilities in Jamaica: an evaluation of the impact, in social and economic studies”, SALISES, vol. 54, No. 4, University of the West Indies (UWI), December.
Marco, Flavia (2012), “La utilización de las encuestas de uso del tiempo en las políticas públicas”, Mujer y Desarrollo series, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), forthcoming.
Morris, Jenny (2001), “Impairment and disability: constructing an ethics of care that promotes human rights”, Hypatia, vol. 16, No. 4.
Parminder, Raina and others (2004), “Caregiving process and caregiver burden: conceptual models to guide research and practice”, BMC Pediatrics, vol. 4, No. 1.
Trani, Jean-François and others (2011), “Disabilities through the capability approach lens: implications for public policies”, ALTER, European Journal of Disability Research, vol. 5.
Benefits Persons declared disabled by the Disability Classification Commission, who have made the requisite number of contributions for their age, as established in law.
Persons declared disabled – who have lost 66% or more of their income-generating ability – by the Disability Classification Directorate, Office of the Manager of the Pension Division.
Persons declared disabled who have contributed for a minimum of 26 weeks at the time of developing the disability, or, if no longer making contributions, at least during the year immediately preceding.
Working mother whose child has a physical or mental disability, which has been duly classified as such, and for as long as he or she remains in that condition and continues to be a dependant of the mother.
Based on Constitutional Court Decision C-989 (2006), this entitlement was extended to fathers who are heads of household in families and have financially dependent children with disabilities.
This means that they can receive a special old-age pension at any age, provided that they have paid into the General Pension System for the minimum number of weeks required by the average premium plan to access the old-age pension.
If the mother is deceased and the father has custody of the child with disabilities, he will be eligible for the benefit in accordance with the requirements and terms established by law.
All persons classified as disabled but who, having contributed to a pension system, are funding a pension that is lower than the Basic Solidarity Old-age Pension.
Persons declared disabled who are not entitled to a pension under any pension scheme.
Persons declared disabled who have paid into the AFP system for a specific period of time, as determined by the Social Security Institute.
Per capita family income must be 25% or less of the legal minimum wage.
Universal benefit that allows the beneficiary to aspire to a standard of living in line with minimum subsistence indicators.
Targeted benefit: 95% of the total contribution for up to 480 weeks without transition regime or 800 weeks with transition regime.
Universal benefit available to people who have not saved enough capital to match the minimum pension, set at a monthly amount equivalent to 100% of the current minimum monthly wage.
A child with disabilities will receive his or her parents’ pension if dependent and provided contributions have been made for the requisite number of weeks.
It represents the difference between the basic solidarity disability benefit and the basic pension of the person with disabilities.
Benefit is paid until the last day of the month in which the beneficiary turns 65.
The beneficiary then becomes eligible for the Basic Solidarity Old-age Pension, which pays the same amounts and adjustments.
As the beneficiary is already receiving a pension, the total amount must not exceed two times the amount of the corresponding minimum pension.
Persons aged 70 and over and persons with disabilities who Targeted benefit of US$ 164 paid following a family income study. cannot support themselves or be supported by their families.
Disabled children of contributors Persons with disabilities living in poverty Persons declared disabled by the Social Security Fund who have made the minimum number of contributions and are unable to obtain a wage of at least a third of what they used to earn.
The insured worker can also request family allowances for his wife or partner and for each child under 18, unless the amount he receives from the Social Security Fund is greater than the average minimum wage.
Disabled children of contributors Persons declared disabled by the Disability Classification Commission who have made a minimum number of contributions and whose income, including the pension, is not equal to or greater than the current minimum wage.
Children of a deceased pensioner who meet the following conditions: children aged under 18; children aged under 21 who are still in school; and children with disabilities aged over 18.
The maximum amount payable is 20% of the disability or old-age pension the worker was receiving or would have received.
A subsidy of 50 Panamanian balboas a month is paid for a set period.
For an insured person who has been declared disabled and who has made 36 payments into the Social Security Fund (60% of the base salary), the benefit is calculated in the same way as the old-age pension.
An insured person who has been declared disabled by the Medical Classification Committee but who has not made the requisite 36 payments can claim disability compensation.
The minimum monthly benefit is 175 Panamanian balboas, and the maximum is 1,000 Panamanian balboas.
Each child aged under 15 or any child with a disability of whatever age is entitled to an orphan’s pension on the death of an insured parent, equivalent to 25% of the pension he or she would have received for total disability had the parent made the required number of contributions, not including family allowances.
Minimum pension as established annually by the Ministry of Finance in the national budget act.
Lifelong orphan’s pension provided to children of contributors with disabilities, as defined by law.
Insured persons with a disability who are under 60 (women) and under 65 (men) and unable to work.
Insured persons who have been disabled due to work-related accidents or illnesses.
Persons with difficulty seeing, hearing or speaking who have little or no income.
Invalidity assistance Insured persons who have been disabled due to work-related accidents or illnesses.
Disablement benefit, attendance allowance National Insurance Scheme under 65 and unable to work.
The Caribbean per month depending on the degree of disablement. 5,200-10,400 Jamaica dollars (approx.
Disablement benefit: Up to 70% of earnings dependent on the degree of disablement. 30%-60% of earnings subject to contributions and a minimum of 40% of the existing minimum wage.
Disablement benefit: Up to 70% of earnings dependent on the degree of disablement.
Attendance allowance: An additional 50% of the disablement benefit. 30%-60% of earnings subject to contributions.
Disablement benefit: Up to 60% of earnings dependent on the degree of disablement.
Attendance allowance: An additional 50% of the Disablement benefit. 30%-60% of earnings subject to contributions.
Attendance allowance: An additional 25% of the disablement benefit. 31% of insurable earnings subject to contributions and a minimum pension of 204 Belize dollars (US$ 102) per month. 598 Barbados dollars (US$ 300) per month.
Disablement benefit: Up to 90% of earnings dependent on the degree of disablement.
Attendance allowance: An additional 50% of the disablement benefit. 40%-60% of earnings subject to contributions and a minimum pension of 737 Barbados dollars (US$ 368) per month. 200 Bahamian dollars (US$ 200) per month.
Disablement benefit: Up to 66.6% of earnings dependent on the degree of disablement.
Attendance allowance: An additional 20% of the disablement benefit. 30%-60% of earnings subject to contributions (15%30% for less than 10 years of contributions). 25%-50% of earnings subject to contributions.
Attendance allowance: An additional 1520% of the disablement pension. 30%-48% of earnings is paid according to 16 wage classes, plus 0.56% to 0.71% of average earnings for each 25week period of contributions exceeding 750 weeks.
Attendance allowance: An additional 50% of the disablement benefit. 30%-60% of earnings subject to contributions and a minimum of 303 East Caribbean dollars (US$ 112) per month. 65% of earnings for disablement to a degree of at least 30%. 35%-60% of earnings subject to contributions. 250 East Caribbean dollars (approx.
Disablement benefit: Up to 75% of earnings dependent on the degree of disablement.
Reasonable expenses may be reimbursed for care costs incurred as a result of the injury/disease. 16%-60% of earnings subject to a minimum of 400 East Caribbean dollars (US$ 148) per month.
Persons with disabilities who have no other means of support Social Welfare Disability assistance National Insurance Board Insured persons who have been disabled due to work-related accidents or illnesses.
Insured persons who have been disabled due to work-related accidents or illnesses. under state retirement age (currently rising to 65 in 2015) and unable to work.
Trinidad and Tobago National Insurance Services National Insurance Corporation Disablement benefit, attendance allowance Not applicable – Suriname does not have a national insurance system Disablement benefit, attendance allowance Suriname Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Persons who are under 62 and who are unable to work, and have no other means of support. under 62 and unable to work.
Invalidity assistance Social Security Board Beneficiaries Insured persons who have been disabled due to work-related accidents or illnesses.
It also looks at the challenges that remain for building integrated, more egalitarian care systems and links these challenges with the broader social protection and social security systems.
The issue of care permeates public debate in Latin America and the Caribbean today.
A recent survey of opinion leaders found that it is families —and, within families, mainly women— who bear most of the responsibility for dependent persons, yet these responsibilities should be shared and the State should play a more active role in discharging them.
In this regard, they pledged to carry forward initiatives to recognize and attribute value to unpaid care work, broaden the coverage of services, undertake legal and social security reforms and produce official data on time use.
It has also been enshrined in the political constitutions of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador has expanding service coverage and taking steps to The dialogue between the various stakeholders and organize careState of Bolivia (Pautassi and Rico, considering systems.
A review Care services tend to provide poor coverage and, above all, operate in a weak institutional framework.
It has often part of programmes aimed at reducing poverty or also been enshrined in the political constitutions of the Bolivarian providing social assistance to poor and vulnerable people Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador and Plurinational State of Bolivia (Pautassi and Rico, 2011).
On the negative impact of lack of coordination and inconsistencies in care, see the case study for the Republic of Korea in Peng (2012).
In Chile draft legislation was presented to substitute article 203 of the Labour Code, which provides that any firm with 20 or more female workers must pay for nursery care.
The draft law on nursery care provides for a special fund financed by employers, with the employer contributing for every worker employed, with or without children, men and women alike.
The expansion of this benefit —which today applies only to women working in firms with 20 or more female workers— would cover all employed workers and independent workers from the point at which they start paying social security contributions.
It would also cover non-working women and those within the poorest 60% of the population who are enrolled in the Chile Crece Contigo (“Chile grows with you”) scheme.
The current legislation does not provide for equality of opportunities between men and women, and most women receive a lower wage than men for the same job.
Firms tend to hire more men than women and, when they do hire women, they pay them less.
In keeping with the tendency in Chilean public policy of recent decades, which places many social policy functions and resources in the hands of private administrators, it is proposed that the central management of this new benefit be tendered out to a private agency.
There have been some interesting developments in this regard, including paternity leave.
Thirteen Latin American countries have established paternity leave for newborn children and often for adopted children as well.
Leave entitlements range from 2 days in Argentina and Paraguay and 3 in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, to 14 days in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and 15 in Costa Rica.
In Chile, under the new postnatal leave legislation, the mother can transfer up to a month and a half of leave to the father.
In several countries, the leave may be extended for multiple births or in the case of illness, and often varies from the public to the private sector (Pautassi and Rico, 2011).
See Sojo (2011) for an analysis of the conflicts and tensions that can arise between potential objectives, based on the international literature.
Tronto (2012) and Williams (2012) examine interesting aspects of these contemporary tensions.
They often take the form of conditional transfers that encourage families to ensure that their children, and sometimes older persons, participate in health schemes (food programmes, vaccinations and regular check-ups, among others) and education (and thus school meals).
Other schemes touch upon care issues by providing meals for children or older persons;7 many of these have health-care components.
Systemic approaches are beginning to be taken to care policies, with a view to meeting the needs for women’s integration into the labour market and for investment in people through care in early childhood, old age and disability, which are all enshrined in international agreements on the rights of women and the subject of care.
The system is intended to orient and encourage processes of change in the population (birth rates and ageing), in families (sexual division of labour, the care deficit) and in the job market (raising women’s employment rates, reducing their unemployment rates and promoting equitable conditions for men and women).
The aim is to create a system of care framed within social reform policies, with a universal, rights-based perspective.
A combination is also being sought between creating services and supporting families so that they can hire care services within or outside the home.
Territorial decentralization will be a key part of generating flexible services within people’s reach, taking into account the specific needs of each community.
Community participation, in its existing forms and in new ones, will be a cornerstone of this process.
Lastly, care will be strengthened and made more professional by training family and formal caregivers, with due consideration for the perspectives of gender, age, and ethnic and racial identity.
In Costa Rica, a national care network is being planned for children and older persons.
This is part of the expansion of existing services but will also include new services and modalities of care; for childcare, the focus is on expanding coverage of children aged 0 to 6 years through its network of education and nutrition centres (CEN) and comprehensive care centres (CINAI), for half-days and full days, respectively.
The aim is to involve the municipalities and other actors more deeply in care provision and to broaden those services, such as childcare and development centres (CECUDI), which are provided by municipalities and private actors.
These efforts are in response to the need for a national strategy to create a nationwide network of care and development for children and older persons.
The network should bring together public, private and civil society resources and organizations to provide services within an agreed framework of shared values, goals and principles and common rules, in order to ensure the relevance, comprehensiveness and quality of benefits.
This involves clearly defining forms of intervention, network components and operating modalities, rules of operation, regulation and oversight capabilities, coordination, hierarchies and functions, service quality standards and inspection, and monitoring and regulation by the State.
If progress is to be made in child care and development and in dovetailing policies on gender equality, work-life balance and children’s and older persons’ rights, the components of the network must be integrated and mutually supporting.
The network must be able to adjust to the specificities of the local environment and have the capacity to enhance and coordinate care provision at the territorial and community levels.
In general, the family is the main unit of intervention for poverty reduction or social welfare programmes that include care-related objectives.
Moreover, many conditional transfer schemes actually reinforce traditional caregiving roles within the family.
Care-related benefits usually include their beneficiaries in networks of social and sectoral programmes that bring together education, nutritional and health services.
By their very nature, they the Cuna Más or Wawa Wasi national programmes in Peru; the Adolescent Mothers Programme in Trinidad and Tobago; and a number of schemes under the national strategy for children and adolescents in Uruguay.
Available records show that the vast majority have low budgets and provide little coverage: in no case does the budget exceed 1% of GDP, and only a few have budgets of more than US$ 100 million.9 The great majority of programmes are for children, followed by older persons and then persons with disabilities.
Some public programmes provide homecare services;10 at the few offering both kinds, homecare is An example of this sort of coordination is the Colombian programme Unidos para la superación de la pobreza extrema (“Overcoming extreme poverty together”), which is the second phase of the Red Juntos (“Together network”) scheme.
This includes preferential access to identity registers, employment opportunities or transfers of income or in kind, education and training schemes, preventive and curative benefits (health and nutrition), housing improvements (to avoid overcrowding and provide sanitation), psycho-social care for strengthening the family, access to justice and information on rights, and other possible benefits.
Programmes with budget of over US$ 100 million are Argentina’s comprehensive medical care programme (PAMI), Chile’s homecare scheme for severely dependent persons, Colombia’s De Cero a Siempre (“From One to Forever”) nutrition and health scheme (which has the largest budget of all), and Mexico’s scheme of camps for children to support working mothers.
For example, the homecare programme for vulnerable population in Mexico City is aimed at persons who have difficulties in carrying out basic physical, mental, social and occupational tasks without help as a result of somatic, psychological or social problems, as well as their primary caregivers, whether they are family members or not.
Several countries11 have developed combined public-private arrangements for home-based assistance for older adults, the chronically ill and persons with disabilities.
In a number of countries the State provides varying amounts of financial assistance to pay for care services and rehabilitation for persons with disabilities.12 Charitable and civil society institutions are also involved in caregiving.
A small percentage of older persons and persons with disabilities of all ages are cared for in public or private institutions run by religious or non-governmental organizations which offer short- or long-term day care.
These sorts of organizations tend to cater to the homeless or the extremely vulnerable, and offer food, shelter and companionship, but rarely rehabilitation or stimulation.13 With respect to childcare programmes, several countries in the region have schemes based on “mother childminders” or “community mothers”, who provide publicly or privately funded care services in their homes.
By their nature, these services depend on the low value attached to the care work which these mothers provide and are used mainly by low-income groups (Vásconez, 2012).
They are usually unregulated and unsupervised and do not necessarily follow any pedagogical objectives for proper early childhood stimulation.
In Ecuador the Misión Joaquín Gallegos Lara, created in 2010, provides a monthly benefit of US$ 240 for the family member or other person responsible for the care of persons with severe physical or mental disabilities.
The scheme also provides medicines and training in areas such as health, hygiene, nutrition, rehabilitation, rights and self-esteem.
On the role of the third sector in the care of older persons in Costa Rica, see Sauma (2011).
The principle of solidarity refers to access to care and how it is funded.
Solidarity takes the form of taxes and social security contributions that fund progressive benefits and transfers (ECLAC, 2006 and 2007a, pp. 131-139).
And the principle of co-responsibility calls for a new gender contract based on the understanding that a more equitable distribution of roles and resources between men and women (both within families and in society as a whole) is essential for achieving a fair solution for the region’s care needs Individual needs and resources change over the life cycle.
Care policies impact the balance of responsibilities among the family, the community, the State and the market (Esping-Andersen, 2009) and should seek to balance the resources allocated to each age group.
Public policy impacts monetary and non-monetary transfers between generations (OECD, 2011b, p. 5); this is a complex aspect of the social contract for care.
Here we have analysed the objectives of care seen from a rights-based perspective, which is an essential aspect of a convent on care.
The objectives must also be considered from the perspective of the subjects of care.
In early childhood the bases of human learning are laid down, and the learning experiences, competencies, knowledge and skills acquired at this stage are crucial all life long.
Public policies must aim to reduce the dispersion or polarization of people’s cognitive abilities and balance broad development goals with specific cognitive goals.
A key part of this is the establishment of quality childcare centres and preschool services (Sojo, 2011).
Another consideration must be the different degrees of dependence caused by fortuitous events that cause disability (which may be genetic or the result of an accident or act of violence, among others) or by the ageing process.
Degrees of dependence are also affected by unequal socioeconomic conditions, since deficits in nutrition, health and many other areas throughout life translate sooner or later into heavier dependency.
Policies must also take into account the consequences of informal care provision for its providers, in terms of its demands on them and its impacts on their health and well-being (Fernández and Forder, 2012, pp. 347-348).
Accordingly, efforts are needed, too, to broaden the life options open to caregivers within the family; this has some significant externalities.
For example, women’s entry into paid employment impacts positively on family well-being and reduces their exposure to poverty; in the region, for example, women’s contribution to the expansion of the middle class ranges from 3% to 9% depending on the country, with a larger impact on the lower and middle strata of the middle-income sectors (Arriagada and Sojo, 2012).
Public policies for the advancement of care On the basis of this review and in order to foster a consensus as to social responsibility for care, action is needed in several spheres if steady progress is to be made.
The possible areas and mechanisms form a broad range of possible options: Expand the coverage and supply of care by creating new services and extending existing coverage in the three subsectors (public, private and communitybased).
The State should play a growing role in structuring the supply of care for children, older persons and persons with disabilities. (ii) Guarantee quality services for all, allocating sufficient funding for the different types of care and taking measures to expand coverage and improve the quality of care by setting standards.
This calls for action to facilitate time management; strategies for reconciling paid and unpaid work; and time policies that are not limited to maternity and paternity leave but also include child-rearing breaks and work schedules and modalities that allow for workers’ family responsibilities.
This must be complemented by rethinking the opening hours of public and private services. (iv) Expand care options for families and increase freedom of choice of care strategies.
This also requires expanding and developing the social infrastructure (drinking water, sanitation, electricity and public transport) to lighten the burden of unpaid domestic and care work in households. (v) Use the supply of public care services and labour market regulations to promote quality jobs for persons working in the sector, which, as has been seen, is highly heterogeneous.
Care workers are “needed but often undervalued” (OECD, 2011a); as a result, the goal of expanding care and, ultimately, of creating national care systems, must include the key challenge of resolving this issue and providing incentives to employers to create good jobs for women and men in order to professionalize care.
Studies conducted at the national and international levels show that this type of work has historically been underrated, as it has long been regarded as a task that women do “naturally”, without the need for any particular skills.
Gender-based occupational segregation is the most obvious sign of the inequality and undervaluation surrounding caregiving as a remunerated activity.
Policies need to be developed to combat this form of segregation, along with systems for ensuring that women seeking to enter other occupations are not discriminated against.
At the same time, new groups of persons should be encouraged to seek employment in the care sector (European Commission, 2004; European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions, 2006), and recognition in the form of decent wages should be given for their key contribution to social well-being and to the economy.
Generally speaking, a distinction is drawn between childcare and long-term care, which refers mainly to older persons but also includes chronic or terminal illnesses and persons with disabilities.
Both sectors have a segmented workforce, with a professionalized group (in the respective areas of education and health) and a sector that is unskilled or low-skilled but —especially in the case of women— often has competences acquired during the gender or class socialization process.
This segmentation by skill or training determines where caregivers work and the kind of tasks they perform.
Skilled staff are found mainly in care-related institutions (kindergartens, homes for the elderly), whereas unskilled workers are found mainly in household care work.
Home-based care tends to be much more unregulated, and it is an area in which no qualifications are required and training is more difficult.
Unskilled workers employed in an institutional setting are supervised by professional staff and carry out more routine, less specialized tasks.
In this sector basic education requirements tend to be higher, in some countries as high as a post-secondary technical qualification.
In childhood care, the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) distinguish between preschool care (from ages 3 to 6) and early care (ages 0 to 3).
The preschool stage is more integrated with school education, in terms of both curriculum and workforce qualification requirements.
But the discussion is more complex and more highly differentiated from one country to another for the early childhood stage.
Each country approaches the training of care workers depending on its understanding of care quality.
Some countries construe this care as being aligned with the education system and therefore seek curricular integration, requiring caregivers to have pedagogical training.
Other countries see this stage of care framed in a more familyoriented or social development setting, with accordingly different requirements in terms of worker training.
Consensus exists, in any case, that the more trained workers are, the more sure the guarantee of service quality.
In countries of the region for which data are available, it is evident that the level of staff training in this area is very mixed and in many cases most staff are not trained (see figure below).
As in previous editions, chapter I sets out updated figures on poverty and indigence in Latin America.
The 2012 data reaffirm the downtrend observed over the past 10 years, although the rate of poverty reduction, especially extreme poverty, has gradually slowed.
The data also confirmed the tendency of income distribution to narrow over several years, even though income concentration edged upward in some countries in 2012.
Chapter I also examines other approaches with a view to a multidimensional measurement of poverty.
In light of growing interest from the region’s countries in respect of these measurements and their potential for public policy analysis, different dimensions, thresholds and forms of aggregation are analysed conceptually and empirically, in order to move forward, still in an exploratory manner, in constructing a multidimensional poverty index that is relevant and feasibly applicable in the region.
The analysis is based on a core set of non-monetary deprivation indicators, such as are traditionally used to measure unmet basic needs, and the results are shown for different multidimensional poverty indicators, along with their performance over time.
The chapter then looks at the link between deprivation- and income-based poverty measurements, and sets out the results obtained from adding a measurement of monetary deprivation to the core set of indicators.
It then discusses the empirical implementation of a broader definition of poverty, which includes dimensions related to the lacks in the area of social protection and institutional affiliation.
In chapter II, a method for measuring multiple deprivations through a right-based approach is used to examine trends in child poverty.
This technique, used in the framework of an agreement between ECLAC and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), has shed lights on some specific features of poverty and extreme poverty in childhood.
The findings call for the analysis of different levels of material deprivation and deprivation of access to public goods and services, which affect children’s basic rights and add up to a situation of poverty.1 The above method is linked to more traditional, monetary measurements of indigence and poverty.
The extent of child poverty is measured in Latin America and a group of Caribbean countries in terms of both income and deprivation, while distinguishing between the level of each deprivation and thus differentiating poverty from extreme poverty among children and adolescents.
An analysis of deprivations reveals changes in their intensity, reductions in several dimensions, and their relative contributions to current poverty levels.
Geographic information systems can be used to locate child poverty and deprivations, and to facilitate public policy formulation at both national and local level.
Because this is a joint study by ECLAC and UNICEF, the UNICEF definition of childhood is used here, i.e. referring to the population aged 0 to 17 years.
Introduction Chapter III considers the constituent dimensions of well-being, which yield an integrated and multidimensional perspective, and examines three dimensions —space, time and coexistence— which have been somewhat overlooked in the debate on well-being in Latin America.
For example, in the dimension of space, a healthy environment is a prerequisite for the well-being of individuals.
In recent decades, the environment in Latin America has suffered impacts of various types and intensities.
Air quality deterioration is one of the main changes to have occurred in urban settings, and is a factor in rising discontent.
Exposure to urban air pollution, especially particulate matter (PM10), also poses a serious health risk and causes an increase in the mortality rate.
Regarding the time dimension, a balance between paid work, unpaid domestic labour and free time is another prerequisite of well-being.
The average working day in Latin America and the Caribbean is still far longer than in most European Union countries, and most employed women continue to bear the bulk of the care burden within households as well, which limits their free time to a much greater extent.
Another dimension of well-being is coexistence, which requires that people live together in a positive, democratic and non-violent setting.
In this respect, the region’s high homicide rate is undoubtedly a critical indicator, since it denotes a high level of violence in society.
Chapter IV offers an up-to-date overview of health and pension coverage in Latin America, both in work and in retirement and a review of the landmarks in the discourse on social protection in Latin America.
Taking into account the positive developments in the labour market, wage employees’ enrolment in healthcare insurance and pensions increased in the region, albeit differing considerably in points of departure and magnitudes in different countries.
Nevertheless, in some countries enrolment remains very low and is relatively stagnant, while lower enrolment reflects a higher concentration of income.
Although there are wide gaps in access to social protection depending on income, education level and type of occupation, gender divides have narrowed among wage employees with better labour market integration.
In the labour market as a whole, enrolment is higher in the public sector than in private enterprises, while in the countries with the lowest levels of participation, the situation of workers in microenterprises is unfavourable and worsening.
Non-wage earners are also at a significant disadvantage in terms of enrolment.
Pensioners enjoyed high levels of health-care coverage in the 14 countries for which measurements were available, including countries that are some way behind in terms of the overall coverage of the population.
Nevertheless, most of the 16 countries reviewed had a contingent of persons aged 65 and over whose actual pensions were relatively low.
Uneven income distribution is more acute in the countries with low pension coverage.
The real value of pensions fluctuated according to income levels and depending on the country, with women having lower pensions owing to their employment histories and pension system provisions.
Chapter V examines recent trends in public social spending and public health spending, and looks at the effects of out-of-pocket health spending and demographic ageing on health expenditure.
Until 2011, public social spending trended upward, both in absolute amounts and as a proportion of total public expenditure and gross domestic product, albeit with different tendencies in different countries.
However, new data on budget execution in the social sphere points to slower growth in social expenditure from 2012.
Although unstable in the 1990s, public social spending on health strengthened along with overall public social spending during the 2000s.
The financial crisis and its effects on the region’s economies do not appear to have significantly impacted the sector, although growth was somewhat slower towards the end of the 2000s and at the beginning of this decade.
The chapter also evaluates out-of-pocket health spending, the burden shouldered in this regard by poor and non-poor population groups, and its impact on well-being.
Introduction Consideration is likewise given to the impact of the demographic transition and its future projection in relation to health costs.
Rapid population ageing, expected in many of the region’s countries over the next few decades, is likely to prompt a major increase in total health spending, affecting its relative share of total social spending and as a proportion of GDP.
Social protection in Latin America: an up-to-date review of membership of health and pension systems V.
Recent trends in social spending and economic, social and demographic considerations for health spending I.
Poverty from different perspectives Social Panorama of Latin America 2013 addresses poverty from different angles, and in particular from a multidimensional perspective.
This approach enables detailed analysis not only of the magnitude of poverty, but also of its intensity and its distinctive features in different groups, while also guiding the formulation of poverty reduction policies that dovetail better with comprehensive policies in support of well-being.
Analysis of income poverty Per capita GDP in Latin America and the Caribbean grew by 4.5% in 2010, 3.2% in 2011 and just 1.9% in 2012, a year in which the world economy experienced a downturn.
Despite modest economic growth, employment rose on the back of job creation, absorbing the slight rise in the labour force participation rate and allowing unemployment to edge down from 6.7% to 6.4%, its lowest level in recent decades (ECLAC/ILO, 2013).
The purchasing power of average wages held steady or rose in most countries with available information, in keeping with low inflation, the simple average of which fell from 7.1% in 2011 to 5.4% in 2012.
In this context, 28.2% of the population of Latin America and the Caribbean were living in poverty in 2012, with 11.3% in extreme poverty or indigence.
In absolute numbers, 164 million people were poor, of which 66 million were extremely poor (see figure 1).
These figures represent a fall of about 1.4 percentage points in the poverty rate with respect to 2011 (29.6%).
The number of poor fell by approximately 6 million in 2012, while the number of indigents remained practically unchanged.
Poverty has fallen by 15.7 percentage points since 2002, having declined virtually across the board since 2002.
Extreme poverty has also fallen significantly, by 8.0 percentage points, albeit the pace of reduction has slowed in recent years.
Six of the 11 countries with information available in 2012 recorded falling poverty levels (see table 1).
The largest drop was in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where poverty fell by 5.6 percentage points (from 29.5% to 23.9%) and extreme poverty by 2.0 percentage points (from 11.7% to 9.7%).
Peru’s poverty rate dropped by 2.0 points (from 27.8% to 25.8%), while in Argentina and Colombia the rate fell by just over 1 point.
These three countries did not report significant changes in extreme poverty in comparison with 2011.
The figures above the bars are the percentages and total numbers of poor (indigent plus non-indigent poor).
Neither were there any major variations in extreme poverty in these countries, with the exception of El Salvador, where the figure decreased by 3.2 percentage points.
Mexico was the only country with information available for 2012 in which poverty indicators rose, albeit marginally (poverty from 36.3% to 37.1% and indigence from 13.3% to 14.2%).
While the regional poverty rate is the result of the trends observed in each country, the changes reported in countries with larger populations weigh heavily.
Poverty reductions in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Brazil significantly influenced the 2012 results, as they represented 6 million fewer poor.
This poverty rise in Mexico also carried significant weight, adding about 1 million additional individuals to the numbers of poor.
No appreciable changes are expected in the Latin America’s poverty and indigence levels in 2013, since growth in per capita GDP will remain similar to 2012 and no significant variations are foreseen in either employment or inflation.
Multidimensional analysis of poverty In this section, poverty measurement in Latin America is approached from a multidimensional perspective.
This approach is exploratory by nature and is intended not to present a definitive multidimensional measurement of poverty for the region, but to complement conventional measurements.
Although no consensus has yet been reached on a methodology for multidimensional poverty measurement in the region or indeed elsewhere in the world, it is useful to explore different dimensions, thresholds and forms of aggregation, in order to move towards constructing indicators that are relevant and feasible to apply in the region.
The empirical analysis is based on a core set of indicators that have traditionally formed part of the measurement of unmet basic needs (see table 2).
A measurement of deprivation, based on income and certain dimensions that are not habitually included in poverty analysis, is then added.
The poor are understood as those individuals suffering deprivations under at least two of the indicators considered.
The aggregation of results in a synthetic index is based on the methodology proposed by Alkire and Foster (2009).
For example, if the intensity is about 55% in Nicaragua, it means that on average, the country’s poor are affected by 4.4 of the 8 deprivations included in the analysis.
It may be noted that the headcount figures are dispersed over a wide range, from 2% in Chile, 10% in Uruguay and 11% in Argentina, to 71% in Nicaragua, 69% in Guatemala and 63% in Honduras.
Rural areas: unprotected wells, bottled water, mobile water sources, rivers, streams, rain and others.
Urban areas: no sanitation, or toilet not connected to a sewer system or septic tank.
Lack of toilet facility Energy a Lack of electricity Cooking fuel hazardous to health Households with no electricity.
Dwelling b Makeshift housing materials Crowding Non-attendance at school Non-achievement of a minimum level of education Dwellings with dirt floors, in rural and urban areas, or roof and walls made of makeshift materials.
Household has at least one child of school age (6 to 17 years old) that does not attend school.
Given that fuel deprivation is usually more prevalent than that of electricity, it is likely that overall energy deprivation is underestimated in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile. b In Brazil, information is only available on housing materials.
The countries with the highest headcount ratios also usually have the highest poverty intensity.
In other words, countries with the highest numbers of poor also tend to experience the most intense forms of poverty, with the poor suffering a greater number of deprivations simultaneously.
For example, the poverty intensity figures are extremely similar for Honduras and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and for Colombia and Paraguay, yet the headcount ratios of the respective countries are markedly different.
It is also necessary to evaluate the outcome when income poverty is included as a further dimension in the measurement of deprivations, on the understanding that monetary and multidimensional measurements cannot fully determine well-being when they are used individually and that combining them reduces possible errors of exclusion.
The results show that multidimensional and monetary measurements of poverty are more complementary in countries where poverty measured through non-monetary deprivations is less prevalent.
This type of measurement therefore has great potential to fill information gaps and lessen errors of omission in these countries.
Furthermore, in a number of Latin American countries, and particularly those which have seen a major improvement in living standards, poverty rates are low and are decreasing over time.
Traditional indicators of unmet basic needs may not, therefore, be sufficient to identify the poor, and information on deprivation in other spheres may be needed to develop a poverty assessment that is more relevant to the situation in these countries (ECLAC, 2010).
In this connection, some complementary yet previously overlooked aspects of well-being are assessed in Social Panorama of Latin America 2013 for a group of countries in the region.
These aspects include the effect of air pollution on health, the length of paid and unpaid working days, and levels of domestic and non-domestic violence (see chapter 3).
In order to include the social structure as an explicit component of this approach to poverty measurement, the study addresses two further areas of deprivation: lack of access to social protection, and institutional exclusion among young people (those not in education or paid work).
The results of this “broadened” measurement of poverty indicate that housing (crowding and makeshift materials) and energy issues (lack of electricity and cooking fuel) account for a greater share of deprivations in countries with higher rates of overall poverty.
On the other hand, deprivation in relation to education (non-attendance at school and low educational achievement among adults) makes a greater contribution to poverty in countries with overall poverty rates of under 50% (see figure 3).
The social protection dimension encompasses affiliation to health-care and pension systems, and/or receipt of a pension.
Lack of social protection carries greater weight in countries with higher rates of deprivation-measured poverty, which may be attributable to the nature of the indicators used in the analysis, which basically measure enrolment in social protection systems.
This deprivation could thus be measured more effectively by including indicators to measure the quality of accessible services in countries where social security enrolment is already high.
At the same time, the fact that young people not in education or employment are increasingly contributing to overall poverty in the countries with the lowest poverty rates raises the question of whether this indicator measures actual poverty or merely vulnerability to poverty.
In short, the results show not only that the countries differ in terms of the magnitude and intensity of multidimensional poverty, but that the dimensions with the greatest impact on poverty vary as well.
The shaping of policy and institutional architectures and responsibilities must therefore differ accordingly.
In sum, the renewed interest in examining poverty through a multidimensional approach offers an opportunity for debate on what is understood by poverty and which dimensions of well-being are relevant to this understanding.
Although this edition of the Social Panorama considers only some of the basic aspects of this type of poverty measurement, these suffice to illustrate the potentials and challenges presented by multidimensional measurements.
Even in their most traditional application, limited to unmet basic needs, it can be confirmed that deprivations such as lack of access to drinking water or sanitation continue to affect considerable numbers in the region.
It must be asked, then, whether public policies on poverty reduction are placing enough emphasis on achieving minimum standards in core dimensions aside from income.
First, the study highlights the major challenge in developing the region’s information sources to enable poverty to be measured and characterized from a multidimensional perspective, in a more comprehensive and relevant way.
Data on income poverty are based on a long-established methodology whose results are solidly enshrined in monetary income thresholds that unequivocally delineate the poor population and, within it, the indigent population.
By comparison, the multidimensional, deprivation-based approach to poverty measurement still lacks the methodological consensus enjoyed by income-based measurements, and does not support such a clear-cut interpretation of the results.
Nevertheless, it complements the income approach and captures both population groups that both parameters signal as poor, and groups whose income places above the poverty line, but that suffer deprivation in relation to basic needs.
Income distribution Highly uneven income distribution is one of Latin America’s hallmarks.
The most recent available data indicated that the poorest income quintile (i.e. the 20% of households with the lowest income) on average accounted for of 5% of total income, with the figure varying between 4% (in the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Paraguay) and 10% (in Uruguay).
Meanwhile, the wealthiest income quintile accounted for an average of 47% of total income, ranging from 35% (in Uruguay) to 55% (in Brazil) (see table 3).
As described in several editions of the Social Panorama of Latin America and numerous studies on the subject in the region, income distribution has tended to improve slowly over the past 10 years.
These changes have occurred gradually and are barely noticeable from one year to the next; however they are evident in comparisons over longer periods.
Taking data from around 2002 as a benchmark, the most recent figures indicate that the poorest income quintile’s share of total income rose by at least one percentage point in eight countries.
Conversely, in nine countries the relative share of the wealthiest income quintile fell by five percentage points or more.
This quintile continued to capture over 50% of income in six countries, compared with 11 countries in 2002.
The changes noted in the top and bottom quintiles’ share of total income are also reflected in variations in the inequality indexes.
Of the 13 countries with information available in 2011 or 2012, 12 reported a fall in their Gini coefficient, the simple average of which fell by 1% per year.
Inequality eased slightly more quickly in the last four years of the period reviewed, as figure 4 shows.
In eight countries, inequality fell more during the second subperiod than the first.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay posted the largest reductions, of more than 3% per year.
On the other hand, inequality increased in Costa Rica, Panama and Paraguay in the second subperiod, although only Costa Rica recorded an overall increase for the entire period.
Countries are ordered by variation in the second subperiod (2008-2012). b Urban areas.
Child poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean: a multidimensional, rights-based approach One aspect of concern relating to monetary poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean is that it has a greater impact on households with high dependency rates, which worsens the situation of children and adolescents.
The mid-1990s marked the beginning of debate in the region on the juvenilization of poverty; an increasingly relevant concept given that children and adolescents are overrepresented among the poor, compared with other age groups.
A high proportion of children and adolescents face adversities that impact them directly, are detrimental to the rest of their lives and are passed on to subsequent generations.
Those worst affected are usually caught in situations where insufficient household income combines with deprivation of the right to survival, shelter, education, health and nutrition, among others.
In other words, they are denied the assets and opportunities to which all human beings are entitled.
Analysing the nature of the poverty faced by children and adolescents, and fully understanding the phenomenon of child poverty, requires a comprehensive perspective.
It is therefore important to develop a multidimensional measurement that identifies deprivations that directly affect these groups in relation to the provision and quality of public goods and services, as well as in monetary terms, with a view to meeting the needs of all household members.
Rights-based approach and multidimensional measurement of child poverty1 In a joint study undertaken by ECLAC and the UNICEF Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, child poverty is understood as deprivations in specific dimensions in which children and adolescents hold rights, and which are broadly recognized as constituting poverty.
These dimensions are: education, nutrition, housing, drinking water, sanitation and information (ECLAC/UNICEF, 2012).
In terms of methodology, the criteria adopted in this study were determined by the rights-based approach.
As such, the universality of rights implies that rights, and the deprivation thereof, must be assessed in the same way for all population groups of children and adolescents, without setting different thresholds for urban and rural populations.
Since human rights are indivisible and interdependent, each moderate deprivation is considered an indicator of poverty since it represents a violation or breach of at least one right, with each severe deprivation being regarded as an indicator of extreme poverty in childhood.
If poverty is measured in these terms, 40.5% of children and adolescents in Latin America are poor.
This means that overall child poverty in the region affects 70.5 million individuals under the age of 18.
Of this total, 16.3%, or one in six children and adolescents, is living in extreme poverty, understood as at least one severe deprivation.
The scourge of extreme poverty thus affects more than 28.3 million individuals.
In the countries with the highest overall child poverty (El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia), on average 72% of children were living in poverty.
In the countries with the lowest overall child poverty (Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Uruguay) only 19.5% of children were poor (see figure 5).
Income poverty of households Children in indigent households Children in poor households a Uses the UNICEF definition, which encompasses the population aged 0 to 17 years.
Figures for poor children include extremely poor children, and figures for children in poor households include children in indigent households.
The figures shown may differ from those in the text, which examine trends between 2000 and 2011 and only refer to 14 countries. b Urban areas.
These measurements are encouraging, with all countries reporting a decrease in the percentage of children under 18 who are deprived of some basic rights (overall poverty).
In the region as a whole (14 countries, comparable over time at national level), overall child poverty fell by over 14 percentage points over the period, from 55.3% of children in around 2000 to Extreme poverty tends to be more intense (i.e. to involve multiple severe deprivations) where a greater percentage of children are living in extreme poverty.
While the existence of a single severe deprivation is already serious for a child’s development, a “syndrome” of multiple deprivations signals a sure loss of opportunities for developing a child’s potentials and is at the root of the intergenerational reproduction of poverty.
One in four extremely poor children suffers from a serious violation of more than one fundamental right, and one in three poor children suffers moderate deprivation of more than one need, though this deprivation may be moderate.
Policy formulation must consider the interaction between deprivations, since deprivation in one dimension usually has consequences for the child’s opportunity and capacity to exercise rights in one or more of the other dimensions (Gordon and others, 2003; Minujin, Delarmónica and Davidziuk, 2006; Kaztman, 2011).
In all the countries, the reduction in overall and extreme child poverty was accompanied by a reduction in its intensity (the percentage of children suffering multiple deprivations).
In 2000, about 41% of extremely poor children suffered two or more severe deprivations; by 2011 this percentage was down to 28%.
In this analysis, the intensity of poverty is represented by the number of deprivations affecting poor (and extremely poor) children, and does not necessarily reflect their severity.
Cumulative distribution of the number of severe deprivations among extremely poor children At least 1 At least 2 At least 3 At least 4 At least 5 At least 1 At least 2 At least 3 At least 4 At least 5 B.
For example, the percentage of children suffering at least three deprivations includes those with four or five deprivations.
Initial values are equivalent to 100% (children suffering at least one deprivation), since the distributions are calculated from samples of poor or extremely poor children, respectively. b Total number of deprivations refers to moderate and severe deprivations, including those of children living in extreme poverty.
Levels of deprivation in the different dimensions of poverty in Latin America and some Caribbean countries In Latin America, levels of both severe and moderate deprivation fell sharply in all dimensions of child poverty, especially sanitation, housing and access to information, between 2000 and 2011.
The smallest decreases were in education and nutrition, given that deprivation levels among the region’s children were already low in these areas in the early 2000s.
The general fall in deprivation across all dimensions explains the significant advances made towards easing overall and extreme child poverty, as well as in reducing its intensity (see figure 7).
The three dimensions that accounted for most deprivations were sanitation facilities, housing quality and access to drinking water.
The proportional contribution of these dimensions did not vary between 2000 and 2011, and in fact gained in relative terms as extreme poverty declined.
This suggests that advances in education, information and nutrition had a greater bearing on reducing extreme poverty.
Uses the UNICEF definition, which encompasses the population aged 0 to 17 years. b Includes moderate and severe deprivations.
Prepared using the same methodology as was applied for Latin America, the estimates allow multidimensional child poverty in Caribbean countries to be compared with the rest of the region.
This had not been possible hitherto using monetary poverty statistics, which are constructed under different methods.
The estimates revealed overall child poverty levels of between 10% and 70% in the seven Caribbean countries, and extreme child poverty levels of between 1% and 46% (see table 4).
Belize, Guyana and Suriname posted overall poverty rates of over 60%, and extreme poverty rates of over 35%, while in the Caribbean island countries overall poverty averaged 24% and extreme poverty, 6%.
The difference is partly a reflection of high levels of rural poverty in Belize, Guyana and Suriname.
In these three countries, unlike the small islands, urban and rural areas differ sharply.
The dimensions of the multidimensional child poverty estimation included are drinking water, sanitation, housing, education, information and nutrition. b Does not include the dimension of nutrition. c The survey contained a significant omission in the dimension of information, as a result of which deprivations relating to this dimension are underestimated. d Does not include the dimension of information.
The various deprivations call for initiatives that are sectoral, but which must be coordinated under a comprehensive approach to poverty.
In this regard, it should be recalled that efforts designed to improve children’s quality of life often involve improving the quality of life of all family members.
It should also be recalled that while initiatives in individual sectors can reduce deprivation in one dimension of child poverty, they do not necessarily safeguard children’s other fundamental rights; and that in a culture of poverty, children often experience rights infringements that are not included in poverty measurements, such as child exploitation or physical and psychological violence.
Comprehensive action to combat child poverty therefore involves not only coordinated efforts by States in different sectoral policies and programmes, but also psychosocial aspects and the promotion of a culture of recognition of and respect for children’s rights within households.
Commonly overlooked aspects of well-being —space, time and coexistence The multidimensional view of poverty set out in the preceding chapters is ultimately a reflection of the idea that well-being itself needs to be considered in a multidimensional manner.
Commonly used indicators do not fully capture the complexity of poverty and well-being.
GDP, for example, captures the production of goods and services, but disregards aspects such as income distribution, justice and freedom, as well as people’s chances of leading a meaningful and satisfying life and the sustainability of economic progress.
In recent years various initiatives have been launched to establish a set of spheres that can be assessed to provide a more comprehensive view of well-being.
One such initiative is the global project “Measuring the Progress of Societies”, led by the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
This project was set up to develop key economic, social and environmental indicators that could facilitate understanding of what is meant by societal well-being.
It also encourages the use of indicators to promote better-informed decision-making in the public and private sectors and civil society.
Against that backdrop, chapter III proposes a group of constituent elements of well-being that, taken together, help form a comprehensive, multidimensional overview.
Three main aspects —space, time and coexistence— have been overlooked in discussions on well-being in Latin America, and go beyond basic “first-generation” needs as regards health, education, working conditions, housing, or economic situation.
Space: environmental problems in cities Space is a fundamental material element for human life.
It encompasses the environment we inhabit, including water, earth, air, objects, living beings, gender relations and intangible factors such as cultural values.
A healthy space (or environment) to live in is an essential prerequisite for a decent standard of well-being.
In the past few decades the environment in Latin America has been affected in various ways, and to varying extents, by the development model.
The deterioration in air quality is a one of the most serious issues affecting the well-being of the region’s urban populations.
The countries of the region have made great strides in implementing air-quality management programmes.
Yet many cities still have worrisome levels of air pollution: vast swathes of the Latin American population are still exposed to air-pollution levels exceeding the limits recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO).
Exposure to urban air pollution, especially PM10, poses a serious risk to human health and leads to higher rates of morbidity and mortality.
At least 100 million people in Latin America and the Caribbean are said to be exposed to air pollution at levels that exceed WHO-recommended limits (Cifuentes and others, 2005).
The groups most vulnerable to the effects of air pollution are children, the elderly, people with certain pre-existing health conditions and those in poverty.
Exposure to particulate matter increases the risk of contracting cardiovascular and respiratory diseases and lung cancer.
In a period of around four years from 2004 to 2008, less than a third of the countries (seven of 24) were able to reduce the number of deaths from causes related to air pollution.
This is starkly inconsistent with the urgency of action in response to deaths that public health and environmental strategies could have helped to avoid, especially since a reduction in PM10 from 70 to 20 microgrammes per cubic metre would reduce air-quality-related deaths by approximately 15%, according to WHO.
Exposure to air pollution must be acknowledged as a major cause of mortality, on which effective public policy action is desperately needed.
Time: available time and paid and unpaid work Time is another fundamental element for human life.
Our well-being is greatly dependent on what we do and what we are able to do and, therefore, on the time that we can devote to our various activities.
However, people’s daily lives are subject to numerous restrictions on this freedom.
Time spent in gainful employment, whose purpose is to generate monetary resources to provide for a wide range of needs, is an essential part of most people’s lives.
The more time people spend at work, the less they have for other activities, such as family responsibilities and rest.
Reductions in working hours —one of the most common demands from workers’ movements for much of the twentieth century— have been made with a view to safeguarding workers’ physical and mental health.
The length of the working day varies greatly according to such factors as workers’ age and gender as well as the type of employment.
Unlike in most European countries, where workers spend an average of 37 hours per week at work, weekly working hours in Latin American remain well above 40, and show no signs of shortening.
Remuneration is not, however, forthcoming for all the value generated by work.
Much of what is produced in society is not valued in monetary terms.
All forms of work carried out in the home —chiefly by women— such as cooking, cleaning and caring for others are performed without pay and with no contract to govern aspects such as wages, responsibilities and the benefits derived from the work.
Women’s increasing incorporation into the labour force has not been offset by greater participation by men in household work.
Thus, in Latin America the sexual division of labour has remained partial and uneven.
The overall workload is the sum of hours spent in both paid employment and unpaid household work, including caring for children and elderly or sick family members.
The data show that women in employment shoulder a greater total work burden than men.
This excess burden seriously affects the well-being of employed women, particularly those living with a partner and who have preschool-aged children.
All such women can be said to be “time-poor”, which means that they have scant time for rest, leisure, recreation, family life and socializing.
What is more, there is no standardized indicator for comparisons between surveys.
Time-use surveys from Mexico, Panama and Peru have been selected as they encompass a similar range of activities, including working hours, free time, and time spent in unpaid household work, socializing, covering personal needs and volunteering.
Coexistence: high levels of violence in Latin America Coexistence is another basic dimension of human life.
People’s well-being is contingent upon their continuing to build a life shared with loved ones that imparts a sense of belonging and security and motivates them to make life plans.
Well-being therefore necessarily entails forms of positive and peaceful social coexistence that enable everyone to feel part of society.
However, the rapid processes of modernization and urbanization in Latin America in the past two decades have led to numerous problems involving coexistence.
One of the most serious is violence, both in public spaces and the home.
The murder rate is one of the most important indicators of insecurity and violence in public spaces.
According to the United Nations’ 2011 Global Study on Homicide, in 2010, 31% of the world’s murders were committed in the Americas, a figure second only to Africa (36%) (UNODOC, 2012).
Latin America’s high average murder rate masks considerable differences from country to country.
Homicide rates in the region have diverged markedly in recent years, with sharp increases in certain countries —such as Honduras, El Salvador, Peru and Mexico— and decreases in others, such as Nicaragua, Jamaica and Colombia (see figure 11).
Another prevalent form of violence is violence within the home (or in a family environment).
The available statistics show that a very high percentage of women aged 15-49 suffer or have suffered at some time physical violence at the hands of an intimate partner, ranging from 33% in Colombia to 14% in Haiti.
Lastly, the phenomenon of domestic violence against children in Latin America and the Caribbean warrants special attention.
The most common forms of punishment used by both parents with their children include verbal reprimands, but physical punishments, including smacking, are used against a high percentage of children, showing that physical violence towards children is an everyday reality in the region.
The figures include all cases of homicide known to the authorities occurring anywhere in the country, as well as femicides.
There is no information on Brazil as it is in the process of joining RIC.
A final reflection is the synergy between the various aspects of well-being described here.
Good use of space in the framework of urban policies that address broad coexistence in spatial planning can help to reduce violence.
Conversely, with lower levels of violence, citizens become more inclined to use the city in constructive and sustainable ways.
A direct link is evident, as well, between spatial decongestion and decompression of time use, precisely because urban congestion leads to longer travel times, among other things.
It is important, therefore, that policies be designed to build on the synergies that could be achieved by managing the various dimensions of well-being.
Social protection in Latin America: an up-to-date review of membership of health and pension systems The present and future well-being of all individuals is influenced by risks such as illness, the need to care for children and the frail or those with disabilities, periods of unemployment and underemployment, and the radical decline in (or loss of) income during old age.
These factors have an impact for varying lengths of time and with varying degrees of intensity.
Although asymmetrical socioeconomic circumstances are a crucial determining factor, they are, to differing degrees, beyond individuals’ control.
Thus, the range of risks against which persons should be protected is very wide and changes as societies evolve.
Whether social protection policies are financed using tax revenues or contributions, a crucial part of their evaluation is to determine how they respond to the dynamics of risk and its social distribution.
It is vital to identify how services are provided, against which risks they offer protection, and how the benefits are specified.
This section will look closely at two fundamental dimensions of social protection: health and pension system affiliation.
As proposed by ECLAC, social protection should be governed by the following principles:2 • The principle of universality dictates that all citizens, as members of society, are entitled to certain types of protection or benefits, which must have certain characteristics in terms of quantity and quality, and which are necessary for their full participation in society.
In terms of insurance, this principle seeks to ensure that all members of society are guaranteed a certain level and quality of well-being, which must be the maximum permitted by economic development at any given time.
It also assumes that, given the externalities of individual well-being, there is a close interrelationship between individual and social well-being. • Selectivity criteria are understood to ensure that social services reach the poorest.
In order to address the multidimensional and heterogeneous nature of poverty, universal and comprehensive policies must interact beneficially with selective and differentiated policies.
This principle should not be understood solely in terms of its macro and microeconomic impact; ultimately, it concerns the ability to achieve the social objectives set.
An overview of population coverage Affiliation to health and pension systems as reported in household surveys is a valid criterion for gauging the course of social protection, although it is not indicative of the quality or range of health services to which people have access.
Surveys are, however, able to measure pensioners’ income, which provides clues as to employment histories and current pension systems.
Between 2002 and 2011, wage-earner health care and pension coverage expanded, although to differing degrees and from very different starting points.
In affiliation terms, this reflects positive labour market trends, in particular considering that it occurred during the most severe global financial and economic crisis since the Great Depression, which affected the region in a number of domains.
Except in Honduras, wage earners are more likely to be affiliated to health systems than pension funds (see figures 12 and 13).
Given that the two forms of coverage are highly correlated, countries reporting low levels of coverage in one area tend to do so in the other, as well.
Countries with the highest levels of pension scheme participation (on average, 76%) record health-care affiliation of around 90%, and in several cases their health systems are making progress towards universal provision through contributory and non-contributory mechanisms.
In countries with intermediate pension coverage, levels of health-care affiliation vary widely: although the average is nearly 65%, it ranges from 49% to 75%.
The great exception in this group is Colombia, where health coverage expanded from 53% in 2002 to 92% in 2011, while pension coverage underwent a significant but lesser increase (16 percentage points).
In terms of gender, coverage was more extensive among female than male wage earners at both points in time (2002 and 2011) in 16 countries in the region, and they have gained more, proportionally speaking, where access has expanded for both indicators.
However, some countries buck this trend: in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Peru and Uruguay —a group that includes some of the countries with the broadest coverage— levels of affiliation to pension schemes (but not health care, apart from in the Dominican Republic) are lower among female wage earners.
Men, meanwhile, gained more in proportional terms from improvements in the two indicators in Chile, Colombia, Guatemala and Honduras.
There are striking disparities by income quintile in access to both pension and health systems.
Educational level is also a source of significant gaps, but these are narrowing, especially with regard to health care.
Between the two extremes (employees with a university education versus employees who did not complete primary education), the difference in affiliation to pension and health systems is 55 and 40 percentage points, respectively.
In terms of access trends by age group, although affiliation to both pension and health care systems increased in all age groups, access for both indicators can be described as an inverted U-curve, because affiliation levels are lower both at the beginning and at the end of people’s working lives.
This is problematic because it means that young people are deferring saving for their pensions, and older persons do not have access to the full range of health services.
The distribution of the region’s coverage shortfalls constitutes grounds for strengthening universal policies with supportive financing since, although clearly to a differing degree and depth, social sectors across the income spectrum lack social protection.
There is a need to safeguard the efficiency and quality of social security systems and forge proper links between benefits and their funding, so as to make the benefits more attractive and therefore more highly valued.
Aspects of health-care affiliation in the countries On average, affiliation to health-care systems increased by around 12 percentage points in the Latin American countries between 2002 and 2011.
The exceptions are El Salvador, which registered a minor setback, and Uruguay (urban areas), where affiliation was already very high in 2002 (over 98%), and only marginal improvement was recorded.
The most significant progress was made in Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador (urban areas) and Peru, where affiliation increased by between 21 and 39 percentage points.
Health-care coverage was most extensive at both points in time in Argentina (urban areas), Chile, Costa Rica, Panama and Uruguay (urban areas).
Over a 10-year period, Colombia was able to expand coverage considerably, and its health-care affiliation rates are now among the region’s highest.
Considerable efforts were made to extend coverage in the Dominican Republic, Ecuador (urban areas), Mexico and Peru, where affiliation is at an intermediate level compared with the rest of the countries in the group; there were major increases in Argentina (urban areas) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and more moderate rises in the other countries.
Affiliation was trending downwards in El Salvador prior to the health-care reform now under way, and has remained low and virtually unchanged in Honduras.
Unfortunately, levels of health-care affiliation in Brazil could not be detected from the surveys consulted, as the country has a universal system.
On grouping the countries by high, average or low wage-earner affiliation, it is clear that as the overall affiliation among these workers falls, the relative position of those working in microenterprises or in domestic service worsens.
By employment sector, affiliation is higher in the public sector than in the private, owing to evasion issues and a lack of labour-market oversight, among other factors.
Affiliation to health systems among professionals and technicians in microenterprises declined (along with pension scheme affiliation) in four of the countries with the lowest levels of affiliation.
Health-care affiliation among domestic workers is greater than pension scheme affiliation but remains poor; it did, however, rise significantly in Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico and Peru, and more modestly in five other countries.
In the 15 countries in which health-care affiliation among non-wage-earners could be analysed, it is clear that this group lags far behind wage earners.
But even though there is an obvious gap in general terms, with the exception of the countries that are furthest behind, non-wage-earner affiliation has risen in recent years, in particular in Colombia and Peru.
Women are at a greater disadvantage with respect to pensions systems than health care.
The existing inequality with regard to non-wage-earners and social protection is illustrated by the socioeconomic distribution of affiliation.
There are huge differences between the first and the fifth income quintile in terms of affiliation to both pension and health systems.
But even among wage earners, whenever affiliation is below average, it is more concentrated by income.
Gaps by income level are smaller for health-care affiliation than for pension scheme participation and are, in general, narrowing: in 2011 the difference in access between the fifth and the first quintiles was a little under 36 percentage points, while in 2002 it had been almost 44 points.
Although the gradients of non-affiliation become smaller as incomes rise, even the top income quintile contains a group that is not affiliated to any health system, just as in the other quintiles.
This occurs to a somewhat lesser degree than in the case of pensions and varies considerably between the countries; it may be due to certain types of employment contracts or could reflect self-selection among those who decide not to join because they are privately insured or because they make out-of-pocket payments.
If the social security system has no barriers to entry and acts as reinsurance from the private market, some people may try to transfer over when they require essential health treatment that is not covered by their insurance policies or their out-of-pocket expenses become too high.
The high rate of health-care affiliation among pensioners, meanwhile, is notable in the 14 countries that were compared, even where total population coverage is lagging far behind.
With just one exception, health-care affiliation among pensioners also rose between 2002 and 2011.
Aspects of pension-system affiliation in the countries Based on current levels of wage-earner affiliation to pension systems, the countries may be divided into three groups.
The first group, in which coverage is the most extensive, includes Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay (urban areas), where affiliation ranges from 68% to 85%.
Lastly, the lowest levels of coverage are seen in Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, where affiliation ranges from 30% to 40%.
In Latin America, there was a relatively moderate increase of a little over nine percentage points in wage-earner access to pension systems between 2002 and 2011, when the figure stood at 55.4% of all employees (simple average of 16 countries).
Increases were especially significant in urban areas of Argentina, in Colombia, in the Dominican Republic, in urban areas of Ecuador and in Peru, ranging from between 14 and 23 percentage points.
El Salvador was the only country to record a decline (2 percentage points) and the variations were not statistically significant in Honduras, Mexico or Nicaragua (see figure 13).
Excludes countries that have no data for the two years under consideration.
The marked variation in affiliation levels depending on the labour-market position of wage earners reflects differences in employment quality.
Affiliation is widespread among public-sector employees: averaging almost 88% for pension systems and a little over 90% for health systems, and these figures are relatively similar to those recorded in 2002 (albeit seven percentage points higher in both cases).
Among wage earners employed in the private sector by small, medium-sized or large enterprises, affiliation falls to 66% in the case of pension systems and 73% in the case of health systems, although with some improvement between 2002 and 2011.
Even lower levels were recorded among wage earners employed by microenterprises (20% and 39%, respectively), with no significant improvement between 2002 and 2011.
The gap widens further for domestic workers, most of whom are women.
In contrast to health-care affiliation, no significant progress has been made in pension scheme affiliation in the least secure employment categories.
In the group of countries in which the situation of non-wage-earners could be measured, there is clear evidence that women suffer exclusion and are in a worse position; nevertheless, some progress in this area was detected.
The highest levels of affiliation within this segment of the population were found in Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay.
As may be expected, there are glaring disparities in access to both pension and health systems by income quintile.
In 2011, the gap in wage earner pension affiliation between the fifth and first income quintiles, as an average for the Latin American countries, was almost 49 percentage points, having widened slightly since 2002.
However, the changes reveal that the socioeconomic distribution of pension scheme affiliation has become a little less regressive in several countries, including El Salvador and Mexico.
Costa Rica, with Uruguay some way behind, reports the highest percentage of low-income workers affiliated to a pension system.
Other countries have also experienced a significant relative expansion in coverage within low-income sectors: this is true of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Peru.
In Ecuador, the increases were spread more evenly across the quintiles, while in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the first quintile’s share also increased relative to that of the wealthiest quintile.
Albeit with great variations among countries, the top quintile shows individuals not affiliated with any pension system.
There is also evidence of some limitations on access in the second, third and fourth quintiles, but while protection shortfalls vary considerably by socioeconomic status, in no case are they comparable to those of the first income quintile.
Pension system affiliation has become less regressive in Argentina, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Mexico, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia; in Costa Rica and Ecuador it has risen fairly evenly across the income quintiles, as it has in the Dominican Republic, where the top and bottom quintiles show most progression.
In Colombia, Ecuador, Paraguay, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia there have been significant increases in the access enjoyed by the intermediate sectors.
Guatemala and Uruguay saw a drop in participation in the bottom income quintile.
Determinants of employee pension affiliation: a multivariate analysis Both as a subject for research and as a reference for public policy, it is important to identify the determinants of pension system affiliation.
An exercise was thus carried out to identify the effect of a range of explanatory variables on the affiliation of workers aged between 15 and 64 years, considered together using estimates from selection bias-corrected probit models.
Analysis of the determinants of worker affiliation to pension systems shows common patterns among countries, but also disparities.
The informal sector, part-time work, own-account employment and domestic service all show a lower probability of affiliation than employment in the formal sector.
Clear patterns also emerge in relation to different branches of activity: in most countries, workers in construction, commerce and agriculture show a significantly lower probability of affiliation than industrial workers (which was used as the omitted category).
In several Central American countries, employment in the services sector also shows a negative effect.
As to the personal characteristics of workers, no clear pattern of differences between men and women was found (after controlling for other personal characteristics and for type of job).
The likelihood of affiliation is considerably lower in the youngest age group (aged 15 to 29 years) than in workers aged 45 years and over in almost every country.
Lastly, there is a clearly positive association between likelihood of affiliation and educational attainment (the higher the level of schooling, the greater the probability of affiliation) in most countries, but the magnitude and significance of the effect varies.
Actual access to pensions and pension levels In most of the 16 countries analysed, the proportion of people aged 65 years and older who receive a pension is relatively low, and varies from country to country.
Honduras is at the lower end of the spectrum, whereas this population enjoys the most protection in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay, with Panama in an intermediate position.
Distribution is also unequal by income quintile, and this is much sharper in the countries where pensioners are least likely to be covered.
As for the pension received, measured in 2005 dollars, in the poorest quintile this rose most in Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Uruguay, but fell in six other countries.
The declines seen in the wealthiest quintile in Chile and the Dominican Republic were particularly striking, and were perhaps attributable to the exposure to financial risk of individual capitalization schemes; in Chile pensions were also adversely impacted in the second, third and fourth quintiles, a systematic trend not observed in any other country.
Women receive lower pensions than men, because they are disadvantaged both by their labour trajectories and by the way pension systems are designed.
For example, actuarial calculations based on women’s longer life expectancies reduce the replacement rate of their pensions.
Recent trends in social spending and economic, social and demographic considerations for health spending A.
Public social spending in Latin America and the Caribbean Until the mid-2000s, public social spending was strongly procyclical.
In the second half of the decade, several countries undertook systematic efforts to strengthen social programmes, particularly those aimed at combating poverty, which marked a first turning point in the evolution of social spending.
This trend began to take root to some extent in the mid-1990s, when certain countries departed from the prevailing orthodoxy on measures to reduce fiscal spending promoted by the Washington Consensus (mainly Brazil and Mexico).
These three moments in time shaped fiscal and social policy to varying degrees.
In addition to strengthening some major social programmes (to combat poverty and strengthen the social safety net, primarily its noncontributory pillar), measures were adopted to redirect spending (and taxes) to offset the regressive effects of rising commodity prices, mainly in 2007 and 2008.
When the financial crisis hit, the governments took various steps to stabilize internal demand, by increasing public non-social spending (investment in infrastructure) and especially social spending.
Since the early 1990s, the fiscal priority of social spending as a share of total public spending has been climbing, in the fiscal priority of social spending have had more to do with contractions in non-social public spending and thus relative declines in total public spending, primarily between 1999 and 2004.
Since 2010, several countries have embarked on fiscal reforms, on both the revenue and spending sides, to consolidate their public finances, because after approximately five years (2003-2008) of primary surpluses and shrinking public debt, measures involving public spending increases were taken that led to deficits in the public accounts.
Although the 2010 figures show that the countercyclical trend of increased spending continued that year, there was a larger increase in social public spending and in several cases declines in non-social public spending.
The figures for 2011 and the very limited data for 2012 (mostly budget, not execution, data) already suggest a relative declining trend in social spending, but this would not necessarily translate into an absolute decrease in the funds allocated to the social sectors.
Trends in public spending on health During the 1990s, public spending on health, as with most components of social public spending —with the sole exception of spending on social security— was affected by large fluctuations associated with the highly volatile growth that characterized much of the decade.
A good part of these fluctuations, which meant that for a group of 21 countries in the region one third of budgets came in below the previous year’s (45 episodes of spending decreases and 90 of absolute spending increases between 1993 and 2000), were associated with swings in the countries’ economic cycles.
Although not every case involved a decline in gross domestic product, but rather slower growth, it is clear that public spending on health was closely tied to the economic cycle in the 1990s.
Thus, in cases where public spending on health declined or stagnated, it was because the sector was used to tighten the budget.
The cuts did not affect current spending (such as payroll or supplies) so much as the investment component (construction and maintenance of hospitals and clinics, purchases of new technology, etc.).
These regional declines occurred even as total public spending held steady or grew, with health spending shrinking as a share of total spending on several occasions (that is, its fiscal priority diminishing).
These declines were not fundamentally associated with reductions in social public spending, which means that health spending as a share of social spending lost significant ground even, in some cases, as other types of social spending, such as education and social security, rose (see figure 16).
Since the mid-2000s, coincident with a widespread push to increase social spending as well as protect it from cyclical swings, public spending on health has been gaining stability (becoming less procyclical) and becoming more fixed, mainly in countries with larger tax yields, higher total spending, and by extension, higher social spending.
This increase has made it possible, to a certain extent, to stabilize health spending as a share of both total spending and social spending.
Against the backdrop of the financial crisis and its impact on the real economies of the region, the public health sector was not heavily cut (only 10 instances of budget cuts out of a total of 53 in the 21 countries between 2008 and most recent data available).
Although it did not benefit from an injection of resources as part of an explicit countercyclical policy (for example, job creation through increased investment spending in the sector), it was protected to the extent that it even increased its share of both GDP and public spending.
However, despite that increase, spending levels vary greatly from one country to another.
Annual average health spending was around US$ 226 per capita in 2011 for the region as a whole, but in countries that spend large amounts on health (over US$ 300 per capita), such as Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Panama, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay, the figure was US$ 413.
While the group of countries with the lowest levels of per capita spending on health increased their spending in this area by 4.1% annually between 2000 and 2011 and the intermediate group saw theirs go up by 4% annually, per capita health spending in the countries with the highest levels of spending jumped up by 7.4% annually.
This resulted in a wider gap between the countries in terms of per capita public spending on health (see figure 17).
Out-of-pocket health expenses and the effects on well-being According to the definition used by the Pan American Health Organization, household spending on health services encompasses two types of expenditure.
Direct expenditures are known as out-of-pocket health expenses and include household outlays on health-related items such as hospitalizations, out-patient procedures and medications, and are net payments, that is, separate from any reimbursements that might be received from the health-care system or insurance.
Indirect expenses are outlays for prepaid medical care plans, private medical insurance or contributions to public insurance.
Households make these direct payments as the need arises, generally to the service provider, which means they depend on each individual’s ability to pay and are thus antithetical to the notion of shared responsibility or risk diversification.
Therefore, they are one of the least fair ways to finance health care.
The population is vulnerable to varying degrees to incurring out-of-pocket health expenses that adversely affect their socioeconomic position.
This vulnerability is a function of both the magnitude of the outof-pocket expense in question and household spending capacity.
A look at out-of-pocket health spending as a percentage of the household budget and its relative composition, as well as the comparisons between income groups, offers important information on the spending options of households and sheds light on this phenomenon in countries with very different health systems.
The analysis of how these spending patterns are related to the various forms of financing is still relatively unexplored terrain.
Surveys give an idea of the uneven capacity of households to meet expenses not covered by insurance in cases of acute or chronic morbidity.
At any given moment, out-of-pocket health spending can plunge families into poverty; this reality is measured in the chapter.
Another useful indicator for elucidating the relationship between socioeconomic conditions and out-of-pocket health spending has to do with the inability to make out-of-pocket payments in poor households.
There are many different reasons—positive and negative—why households might not spend on health: good health coverage through public or private systems; no cases of morbidity recorded during the period in question; or insufficient income and lack of access to credit, which prevent households from spending during episodes of morbidity even when they do not have adequate coverage.
If a household has limited spending options owing to insufficient funds, the value that would indicate their actual need for health spending cannot be observed.
It is noteworthy, then, that the incidence of poverty (measured against the subsistence line) is higher among households without out-of-pocket spending, especially in countries with low health insurance coverage.
Since the adverse socioeconomic conditions of these households mean that they are not typically part of a particularly healthy population, this would seem to suggest that a contingent of the poor has limited capacity to incur out-ofpocket expenses.
Population ageing and the future of health spending In Latin America, the population ageing process began later than in Europe but has proceeded at a faster pace.
At the same time, the region’s countries are experiencing a comparatively high rate of growth, which means that health spending can be increased for everyone, but especially for the older population.
The national transfer accounts are a disaggregation of the national accounts by age, sex and socioeconomic status, which help to measure flows between population groups and to determine the role that the market, State and families play in these economic relationships.
Using this methodology, a look at the amounts being spent and that will be spent by age group shows that the ageing of the population will clearly put upward pressure on health spending, which in turn will increase the share of health spending.
In countries which are fairly well advanced in the demographic transition, such as Brazil, Chile and Mexico, the proportion of the population aged over 60 will be larger in 2060 than it is today in Germany and Spain, which are considered to be on the ageing “frontier” (see figure 19).
The implications of this for potential spending on health in these three Latin American countries by 2060 are significant: virtually double the percentage of GDP projected in 2015 (see figure 20).
Income poverty Economic context Recent poverty trends Characteristics of changes in poverty Poverty in different population groups B.
Multidimensional poverty analysis Preliminary concepts Multidimensional poverty measurement based on a core set of traditional indicators of unmet basic needs Multidimensional poverty measurement with inclusion of the monetary index Poverty measurement with addition of indicators of exclusion or vulnerability Final remarks C.
Income poverty Continuing with the trend observed in the region for a decade, the year 2012 saw a decline in the poverty rate across the region.
The change in the indigence rate has been slower, so that there has been practically no variation in recent years in the number of persons living in extreme poverty. 1.
Economic context The year 2012 was marked by deterioration in the world economy, caused by the recession in Europe, particularly in the eurozone, a slowdown in the Chinese economy and moderate growth in the United States.
Against this backdrop, growth in output stood at 3,0% in Latin America, admittedly a lower figure than in the two previous years but still higher than the world average, which was 2.2%.
This performance was due to robust domestic demand, which helped to offset the decline in exports (ECLAC, 2012b).
This performance was due mainly to the slowdown in Argentina and Brazil, where per capita growth fell from 7.9% and 1.9%, respectively, in 2011 to 1.0% and 0.1% in 2012.
Indeed, if these two countries are not included, regional per capita GDP growth would have been barely 0.3 of a percentage point lower than the 2011 rate without those two countries (ECLAC, 2012b).
Thirteen countries recorded higher per capita GDP rates than the regional average, the most notable being Panama (8.8%), Peru (5.1%), Chile (4.6%) and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (4.0%).
The only country that experienced a decline in its per capita output was Paraguay (-2.8%), while less than 1% was recorded in Brazil (0.1%) and Guatemala (0.5%).
Job creation resulted in an increase in the employment rate (from 55.4% to 55.8%), which absorbed the slight increase in participation in economic activity (0.2 of a percentage point), bringing the unemployment rate down from 6.7% to 6.4%, its lowest level for decades (ECLAC/ILO, 2013).
Nine countries showed variations of 0.5 of a percentage point or more, downward variations in the case of Brazil, Chile, Honduras, Panama and Peru, and upward variations in Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guatemala and Paraguay.
According to the information available, the purchasing power of average wages remained constant or increased in most countries.
Only in El Salvador was there a fall in the real average wage.
These results are consistent with the low levels of inflation, which in most countries of the region were below those of 2011.
The reduction was particularly marked in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (from 29.0% to 19.5%), despite the fact that this country recorded the highest inflation in the region.
The rise in food prices slowed although not as sharply as in the case of other products.
As a result, food price inflation was higher than headline inflation in 15 countries, notably Chile, Dominican Republic and Mexico.
In keeping with the variation in indicators up to the first half of the year, no significant variations in employment are expected and inflation may rise slightly (ECLAC, 2013b).
Unemployment data for Peru relate to the city of Lima. c Generally speaking, the coverage of this index is very limited.
In most countries, it refers only to formal industrial-sector workers. d Year-on-year variations taking December as the reference month.
The regional aggregate corresponds to the simple average of the variations. 2.
Recent poverty trends In 2012, the poverty rate in Latin America stood at 28.2%, while the indigence or extreme poverty rate was 11.3%.
In terms of numbers of persons, these percentages represent 164 million poor people, including 66 million living in extreme poverty (see figure I.1).
The figures appearing above the bars are percentages (in the graph on the left) and total numbers of poor people (indigents plus non-indigent poor) (in the graph on the right).
These values indicate a 1.4 percentage-point decrease (approximately) in the poverty rate compared with 2011.
No appreciable change has been observed in extreme poverty, since the figure recorded for 2012 is scarcely 0.3 of a percentage point below the 2011 rate.
This implies that the number of poor persons fell by approximately 6 million in 2012, while the number of indigents remained practically constant.
Thus, in cumulative terms, poverty has diminished by 15.7 percentage points since 2002, owing almost without exception to reductions in the past 10 years.
Extreme poverty also fell appreciably (by 8.0 percentage points) since 2002, although in this case, the rate of reduction has slowed in recent years, owing mainly to a steeper rise in food costs than in headline inflation.
The first, between 2002 and 2007, began with high poverty levels, which fell rapidly; the number of poor persons decreased at a rate of 3.8% per year and the number of indigent persons at a rate of 7.1% per year.
The second subperiod, which started in 2007, shows a slowdown in the rate of reduction of the number of income-poor persons, which fell to 2.5% per year in the case of poverty and to 0.9% per year in the case of indigence.
Even though growth was slower in the second subperiod, the fall in poverty per percentage point of growth was slightly steeper.
Between 2002 and 2007, cumulative per capita GDP growth stood at 17.6% and the number of poor persons in the region decreased by 17.4%, which implies that each percentage point of growth lifted 1% of the population out of poverty.
Between 2007 and 2012, cumulative per capita GDP growth amounted to 9.6% and the number of poor persons decreased by 12.0%, meaning that the growth elasticity of poverty was 1.3.
Unlike the situation with poverty, the ratio of growth to the variation in indigence shows an obvious deterioration in the second subperiod.
Growth-elasticity, which in the first subperiod was 1.7, even higher than in the case of total poverty, diminished to 0.4 in the subperiod 2007-2012.
As shown on previous occasions, the difficulty in obtaining a further reduction in indigence is due largely to the difference between the increase in food prices and that of prices of other goods and services.
While sharper differences were recorded in 2007 and 2008, when prices for food rose 2.3 times as fast as those of non food items, since then, there has normally been a gap between food inflation and non-food inflation.
In 2012, the difference was 1.5 times (considering the simple average of variations in each country’s price indices).
As regards forecasts for 2013, the fact that per capita GDP growth will be similar to that of 2012 and that no significant variations in employment or in inflation are expected, no appreciable changes are anticipated in the levels of poverty and indigence at the regional level.
Six of the eleven countries for which information relating to 2012 is available are seen to have recorded decreases in poverty levels.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela showed the sharpest poverty reduction: by 5.6 percentage points (from 29.5% to 23.9%) in the case of poverty and by 2.0 percentage points (from 11.7% to 9.7%) in the case of extreme poverty.
In Brazil, poverty diminished by 2.3 percentage points (from 20.9% to 18.6%), while extreme poverty declined by 0.7 of a percentage point (from 6.1% to 5.4%).
Peru recorded a 2.0 percentage-point decrease in its poverty rate, while in Argentina and Colombia, the reduction was slightly above 1 percentage point.
In these three countries, extreme poverty did not show any appreciable variation compared with the 2011 levels (see figure I.3).
In most of these countries, extreme poverty did not show significant variations either, except in the case of El Salvador, where this indicator diminished by 1.6 percentage points per year (since 2010).
Mexico is the only country with information available for 2012; poverty indicators increased in this country, but the variations are minor (from 36.3% to 37.1% in the case of poverty and from 13.3% to 14.2% in the case of extreme poverty).
While the poverty rate at the regional level is the result of the trend observed in each of the countries, the changes registered in countries with larger populations have a significant impact.
The poverty gap index is calculated by taking into account the difference between the mean income of the poor sector of the population and the poverty line (weighted by the percentage of poor people), while the poverty gap squared index also takes into consideration the way income is distributed among the poor (see box I.2 and annex table I.A-1).
The movements in the three poverty indices (expressed as a percentage variation) have tended to be similar in each country.
In Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Costa Rica and Uruguay, the complementary indices diminished slightly less than the poverty rate, bearing in mind that the average gap between the income of the poor and the poverty line tended to increase; while in Brazil, El Salvador and Mexico, the opposite occurred (see figure I.4).
If the variations for a longer period (2008-2011) are considered, in general, the poverty gap and gap-squared indices are observed to have reduced slightly more than the headcount index, particularly in those countries with greater poverty reductions.
This indicates that the poverty reduction has occurred following an improvement in the relative situation of all the persons that are below the poverty line, rather than as a result of an increase in income only of persons situated closer to this threshold.
Since no data are available for Mexico for 2011, the regional estimate applies a linear projections between the data of 2010 and 2012 for this country, so that impact of the variation observed is distributed over two years.
Poverty lines, expressed in each country’s currency, are calculated from the cost of a basket of goods and services using the cost of basic needs method.
In order to carry out this calculation, the indigence line is multiplied by a factor that differs for urban and rural areas.
For poverty estimates up until 2006, a factor of 2 was used for urban zones and a factor of 1.75 was used for rural areas.a The factors applied since 2007 vary depending on the differentials between trends in the prices for foodstuffs and for other goods and services.
Indigence lines and poverty lines are updated each year to reflect cumulative changes in the consumer price index (CPI).
Household income data have been taken from household surveys conducted in the respective countries in the years corresponding to the poverty estimates presented in this edition.
In line with standard ECLAC practice, the data have been corrected to account for the non-response rate for some income-related questions from wage earners, the self-employed and retirees and to mitigate probable underreporting biases.
This latter operation is carried out by comparing the responses to income-related questions in the survey with estimates based on the household income and expenditure accounts included in each country’s application of the System of National Accounts.
The income figures used for this purpose refer to total current income, i.e. income from wage labour (in both money and kind), self-employment (including self-supply and the consumption value of products generated by the household), property income, retirement and other pensions, and other transfers received by households.
In most countries, household income also includes an imputed rental value for owner-occupied dwellings.
ECLAC is currently in the process of updating the poverty estimates, the results of which will appear in Social Panorama of Latin America 2014. a The sole exceptions to this general rule are the calculations for Brazil, Colombia and Peru.
Characteristics of changes in poverty In order to determine which factors impacted on poverty in 2012, the variations in the different sources of household income for the subset of the population that was living in poverty a year earlier are analysed.
Labour income (that is, salaries or wages or income earned through independent work) is the main source of income for households.
In the countries for which information is available for 2012, this source accounted for between 58% (in México) and 84% (in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) of the income of households living in poverty.
In keeping with its high share of total income, labour income tends to account for a significant share of poverty variations.
This fact is corroborated in 2012, in accordance with the information presented in figure I.5.
In practically all the countries where poor households have recorded the most substantial increases in income, 75% or more of the increase in total income came from labour income and of this the greater part corresponded to wages and salaries.
The labour income received by households may be obtained as the product of the income per employed member and the number of employed household members.
During the period 2011-2012, the greatest increases in labour income stemmed mainly from a rise in labour income per employed person, since the percentage of occupied persons did not vary significantly except in El Salvador.
This variable increased more sharply in Mexico, although the fall in labour income per employed person caused a contraction in per capita labour income.
In this case the transfers both of pensions and benefits such as the Human Development Bonus played a significant role, accounting for 2.5 of the 6.0 percentage points of the increase in the income of poor households.
From a different perspective, variations in poverty rates may be analysed in terms of the contribution of two elements: growth in the mean income of persons (growth effect) and changes in the way in which this income is distributed (distribution effect).
As regards poverty rate variations that occurred in 2012, the growth effect was dominant.
In three of the six countries that recorded reductions of at least one percentage point in their poverty rates, the growth effect accounts for practically the entire poverty reduction, particularly in those with the most notable reductions; in turn, the distribution effect predominated only in the country with the lowest poverty reduction.
The relative weight of the growth and distribution effects is a bit different when one looks at the period 2008-2012 as a whole.
While the growth effect predominated in practically all the countries which recorded an appreciable decline in poverty, the contribution of the distribution effect was over 50% in two countries and over 25% in six others.
Dominicana c Total variation Growth effect Argentina c Distribution effect a Corresponds to the countries with statistically significant variations in poverty rates in the periods under consideration. b Relates to the period 2008-2012, except in Argentina (2009-2012) and Panama, Paraguay and Plurinational State of Bolivia (2008-2011). c Urban areas. 4.
Poverty in different population groups As indicated on various occasions, poverty affects people differently depending on their personal characteristics (see ECLAC, 2013a, for an analysis of probabilities of poverty by personal characteristics).
In order to supplement the characterization of income poverty in Latin America, updated results are presented for some population groups that are relevant to the poverty analysis.
One of the most obvious regular empirical features in the countries of the region is that the poverty rate among children is considerably higher than for the rest of the population.
Poverty rates among children under the age of 15 may be between 1.1 and 2.0 times higher than for the total population,4 with the most notable differences recorded in countries with lower poverty levels.
While there are several exceptions, in many countries the poverty rate tends to be inversely proportionate to the age of the person.
Thus, in most countries, poverty among the 55 and over age group tends to be lower than the average (see figure I.8).
By sex (persons 25-49 years of age) Unemployed Employed-Wage earners 7-9 years 4-6 years 13 years or over D.
Another feature that has been examined in detail is the higher incidence of poverty among women.
Even though poverty rates do not differ significantly between men and women when the comparison is made for the total population, the result is different when the comparison is made for adults with the highest probability of participating in the labour market.
In practically all the countries of the region, the poverty rate is higher for women than for men.
There is also a close link between low levels of education and poverty.
The poverty incidence is highest for persons who have had no more than three years of schooling and it diminishes gradually as the number of years of schooling of the population increases.
Persons with between seven and nine years of schooling have a poverty rate similar to the average.
Lastly, the employment status of working age persons also has an impact on the poverty incidence.
Predictably, the percentage of poor persons is higher among the unemployed than among the employed and the economically inactive.
Moreover, among the employed, the poverty rate is lower for wage earners than for own-account workers, who in several countries have a similar poverty rate to that of the economically inactive population.
Multidimensional poverty analysis A multidimensional measurement of poverty limited to unmet basic needs shows that deprivations such as lack of access to drinking water or to a proper sanitation system still affects a substantial number of people in the region.
This raises the question of whether the public policies for poverty alleviation are placing sufficient emphasis on the achievement of minimum standards.
A broader look at poverty, including deficiencies in spheres such as social protection and income, explores the relationship between different dimensions of deprivation.
This section discusses a multidimensional approach to poverty measurement in Latin America.
In particular, it explores conceptually and empirically different dimensions, thresholds and ways of adding dimensions in order to advance towards the construction of a relevant multidimensional poverty index that can be applied throughout the region.
An effort is also made to identify difficulties in availability and quality of information, for contributing to the generation of better data for the multidimensional measurement of poverty.
Therefore, the indices presented here in this section are basically exploratory in nature and are not presented as a definitive multidimensional measurement of poverty in the region.
The section is organized as follows: first, arguments are presented that justify moving towards a multidimensional poverty measurement.
Next, different dimensions and thresholds are considered, bearing in mind the selection of those that are most relevant and feasible for measurement in the regional context.
Then, an empirical analysis is presented using part of the methodology proposed by Alkire and Foster (2007 and 2011).
The analysis begins with an index based on a core set of indicators of critical deficiencies or unmet basic needs (UBN), continues by adding to this core a measurement of deprivation due to income insufficiency, and is supplemented with the addition of some dimensions not usually included in the poverty analysis. 1.
Preliminary concepts In recent years, the States in the region have manifested a growing interest in multidimensional poverty measurements as instruments for public policy analysis.
This interest was prompted by the dissemination of new conceptual frameworks on development and well-being, such as the rights-based approach and the capabilities approach.
These approaches have been fully assumed by ECLAC, which has declared that “living in poverty does not involve just not having the income necessary to cover basic needs; being poor also means suffering social exclusion”, which prevents one from participating fully in society.
The use of multidimensional poverty indicators may also be justified by the fact that measurements based on income insufficiency provide an incomplete assessment of the standard of living.
Indeed, income insufficiency is a proxy for individuals’ consumption capacity through the market and does not properly reflect access to goods not acquired through income, which results in an erosion of the correlation between income and well-being.
Thus, poverty measurement is fundamental for monitoring public policies and, since these initiatives do not just provide monetary transfers but also educational, health, labour and social protection services, the monetary indicators provide insufficient information for capturing the impact of policies.
A widely debated issue relating to multidimensional measurement methodologies is whether it is appropriate to incorporate information provided by the different poverty indicators in a synthetic index.
For example, it has been pointed out that procedures for adding information may result in information losses and that the choice of an aggregation mechanism for handling information in a system of indicators may be arbitrary (Maurizio, 2010).
However, a system of indicators does not solve the problem of identification, that is, of selecting those that may be classified as poor and those that may not.
Moreover, a synthetic index facilitates the joint analysis of shortcomings, allowing for a comprehensive system (Santos, 2013), fosters communication by summing up a high number of dimensions and, consequently, facilitates decision-making (Maurizio, 2010; Santos, 2013).
International agencies and States have stepped up efforts to propose new multidimensional poverty indices,5 based on the implementation of these new methodologies (for further details see box I.3).
The conduct of a multidimensional poverty measurement exercise calls for an evaluation of whether individuals attain minimum thresholds of well-being in each of the dimensions considered.
This means that the dimensions and indicators must be selected, minimum thresholds set for each dimension and lastly the results obtained in the different dimensions must be combined in a synthetic indicator.
Thus, a set of arguments must be formulated and spelled out to justify the selection of dimensions and indicators for identifying poor people.
This does not imply reaching a concept of poverty that is set in stone but of adopting criteria that guide decision-making in the different phases of measurement.
These processes have led to a gradual increase in the number of dimensions under consideration, moving from the meeting of basic needs to a broader approach that is generally related to functionings and capabilities.
The renewed interest in producing synthetic measures, which address the challenges of aggregating dimensions into a single indicator in the best way possible, has given rise to various types of indices and methodologies.
The proposals that have gained the widest acceptance are those that link the axiomatic tradition with deprivation counting approaches, and include those by Bourguignon and Chakravarty (2003) and Alkire and Foster (2008 and 2011).
Based on these approaches, practical applications for the multidimensional measurement of poverty have been developed at both regional and international level.
The unit of analysis is the household, with individuals identified as poor when they reside in households subject to three or more deprivations.
While the MPI gives estimates of acute poverty that are generally low for the region (Latin America appears as the second least-poor region, after Central and Eastern Europe), Roche and Santos (2013) explore alternative ways of making the MPI more relevant to the region, by capturing a ‘second layer’ of poverty (beyond the acute one).
For a review of the regional experience with multidimensional poverty measurement, see Santos (2013).
Child school attendance At least one school-aged child (up to eighth grade) is not attending school.
Health Standard of living Relative weight (percentages) Water The household does not have access to drinking water.
Cooking fuel The household uses a polluting fuel (dung, wood or charcoal) for cooking.
Assets The household does not have a car, truck or other motorized vehicle, and only has one of: bicycle, motorcycle, radio, refrigerator, telephone or television.
Another example is the multidimensional poverty index for Colombia (IPM-Colombia), developed in 2011 by the National Planning Department (DNP).
The IMP-Colombia includes 5 dimensions and 15 variables, related to the household’s educational conditions, childhood and youth, health, work, access to basic services and living conditions.
As with the global MPI, the unit of analysis is the household.
Five or more deprivations are required for a household to be considered poor.
Dimensions are aggregated through equal weighting, a mechanism that is also used in the aggregation of indicators within each dimension.
On the other hand, the multidimensional poverty index used by Mexico since 2010 adopts a perspective similar to that of the traditional two-dimensional method, using unmet basic needs (UBN) and monetary poverty indicators in tandem.
Rights are measured through six indicators: the education gap, access to health care, access to social security, quality of living spaces, basic services at home and access to food.
Premised on the indivisibility of social rights, a person is deemed to be deprived in this dimension if he or she registers at least one of the six social deprivations.
The first question refers to what should be measured and responses differ depending on the approach used.
From a rights perspective, the poor are not persons who are deprived or needy but rather citizens and rights-holders (chapter II, which discusses the multidimensional measurement of child poverty, expands on this perspective).
From the perspective of capabilities, poverty measurement based solely on resources is inadequate, since it does not provide information on the things that people can do or actually do with these abilities.
From this perspective, the capabilities that individuals have for achieving certain functionings should be measured, for example, their capability to be well nourished or to live without humiliation or shame (Sen, 1985, 1997).
The option chosen here is to incorporate elements from the rights approach, the capabilities approach and the unmet basic needs approach.
This integration is based on the idea that these traditions should be seen as complementary (rather than opposing) approaches, which cover different aspects of deprivation.
The rights-based approach describes the institutional means or guarantees for achieving well-being, while needs are a way of conceptualizing the ends (or the content) of well-being.6 In other words, the exercise of rights enables people to satisfy their basic needs and achieve basic functionings.
If unable to satisfy their basic needs or to enjoy the freedom to function, people will not be in a position to demand their rights, and this will deepen and reproduce poverty.
Consideration should be given not only to the legal aspects of rights but also to the institutional mechanisms that come into play in order to make them a reality.
While the notions of rights, capabilities and basic needs may be viewed as different ways of conceptualizing well-being, given the instruments available, it is not usually possible to make quantitative distinctions.
The available information on the surveys of households make reference mainly to lack of resources or deprivation, many of which may be interpreted simultaneously as proxies for infringements of rights, constraints on meeting needs or obstacles to the achievement of functionings.
A direct measurement of these concepts would require information which often cannot be adequately obtained through surveys or which, when they can be, are generally not available (for example, the nutritional status of the population or actual food consumption) (Santos and others, 2010).
In the regional context, the starting point that appears most advisable is the set of core indicators of critical deficiencies in living conditions (see box I.4), whether because these indicators are available in the surveys or because they constitute relatively well-established poverty measures.
This subset of indicators can be used to explore other deprivations that can help to identify the poor, such as those relating to insufficient monetary resources and those that point to deficiencies in social participation or in linkages with institutions.
The aim of this approach was to directly evaluate whether households could meet a set of basic needs.
The types of need that could be studied were limited according to the information available in censuses, meaning that some important aspects of well-being had to be excluded.
Under the UBN method, poor people were identified according to their deprivation count.
The rationale behind this process, described in literature as the union approach, is that needs must be met in all dimensions as a prerequisite for overcoming poverty.
Subsequently, the UBN method began to be used as a means of complementing monetary poverty measurements.
Just as the poverty line method does not account for access to free public services or other needs that are not met through spending, the UBN approach does not recognize the possibility of meeting needs through the private consumption of goods and services.
It was therefore considered that the poverty line method was better suited to identifying recent or situational poverty, while the UBN method was more appropriate for gauging structural or long-term poverty.
Following these arguments, some researchers proposed twodimensional methods based on combining the results generated by the UBN and poverty line methods (Beccaria and Minujin, 1985; Kaztman and Gerstenfeld, 1988).
This cross-tabulation identifies four possible situations (set forth in the table below).
Under this proposal, UBN indicators would be able to account for access to goods provided through public investment, while income indicators would measure private consumption.
This method attempted to determine the extent of deprivation in each dimension in order to establish gaps, as is the case with the poverty line.
The UBN score would be added to the income poverty score to obtain an aggregate poverty score, which would be compared with the overall poverty threshold in order to determine who should be classified as poor.
The unit of analysis that will be used is the household, this being the basic entity where the most important decisions are taken for satisfaction of needs and the achievement of functionings.
Nevertheless, for the time being, the significance of asymmetries within households (not all household members are affected in the same way by lack of resources or are able to function with the same degree of freedom) will not be taken into account owing to methodological difficulties and problems with data. 2.
Multidimensional poverty measurement based on a core set of traditional indicators of unmet basic needs The indicators most frequently used in multidimensional poverty measurements in Latin America are those that determine deficiencies in living conditions (overcrowding and material deprivation), in basic services (water and sanitation) and in education.
This is the case not only because of the importance of these indicators for identifying the poor, but also because they are the most readily available indicators in surveys conducted in the region.
Admittedly, a more comprehensive multidimensional poverty measurement requires data on other aspects, such as nutritional status, state of health and employment status of persons (for a proposal on the aspects of well-being that should be captured in a multidimensional poverty measurement, see Santos, 2013), but this information is not available for a sufficient number of countries in the region.
As regards the housing dimension, deprivation occurs when the dwelling does not provide its occupants with a minimum level of habitability.
This means, on the one hand, that the dwelling does not provide protection against various environmental factors (for example, rain, humidity, etc.) and on the other, that it does not provide privacy and convenience for the basic biological and social activities.
Thus, a dwelling is observed to be deficient when it does not guarantee sufficient insulation against natural and social elements.
The housing unit’s ability to insulate individuals against the natural elements usually is assessed by looking at the construction materials used in the roof, walls and floor.
Information on the materials used in the construction of housing units is usually obtained differently in different country surveys, partly because of the features peculiar to those contexts (Feres and Mancero, 2001).
The capacity of the housing unit to provide social insulation is established through the indicator of overcrowding, the usual standard being three or more persons per room for rural and urban areas.
Generally speaking, any area other than bathrooms, the kitchen, passages, garages, and business areas count as rooms, although in some country surveys, the kitchen and/or bathrooms are not excluded.
The importance of water and sanitation to well-being has been amply recognized.
In 2010, the United Nations General Assembly affirmed the human right to water and sanitation, since both are essential for preventing mortality, undernutrition and gastrointestinal diseases (Taccari and Stockins, 2013).
Under international standards, unimproved water is that obtained from vendors, water trucks, unprotected wells or watersheds, and bottled water; rainwater is classified as an improved source (UNICEF/WHO, 2012), which means a modification in the standards used in earlier measurements applied in the region (see for example ECLAC, 2011).
These recommendations may be adopted except in the case of rainwater, since the availability of this source cannot be guaranteed throughout the year.8 Another information problem concerns identification of types of wells, since in most surveys, no information is obtained as to whether a well is protected or not.
In any event, several surveys ascertain whether or not the well has a pump, which makes it feasible to consider as an evaluation criterion the effort made to obtain water in accordance with international standards.9 An improved sanitation installation is one which allows for the hygienic separation of faeces from human contact (Taccari and Stockins, 2013).
The lack of such systems results in a higher incidence of child mortality, among other health problems (Kaztman and Gerstenfeld, 1988).
As in the case of water sources, a usual practice in the evaluation of improved sanitation is consideration of the features of the surroundings.
For example, in some rural settings, households, irrespective of their poverty status, would not have access to a sewerage system or to mains water.
The lack of appropriate systems for the elimination of garbage should also be included in a multidimensional evaluation of poverty, not only because of its sanitary and environmental implications, but also because of its harmful effects in terms of the dignity of persons.
However, there are not enough countries with data and there are difficulties in determining thresholds.
For example, it is not clear whether the burning or burial of rubbish in rural areas should be considered as a lack.
Burning can produce emissions containing dioxins and metals, but this depends on the type of waste, and the effectiveness of burial depends on the depth, the lining and the sealing of the excavation (World Education is essential in order to build the competencies and skills that people need in order to participate properly in productive and social life.
Lack of education is also a huge obstacle to escaping from poverty and can contribute to reproduction of poverty.
The indicator of school attendance has been used traditionally in multidimensional poverty measurements in the region.
It is usually calculated for the population aged 6 to 14 years, but given the high rates of school attendance in most countries in the region, the age bracket has been expanded on this occasion to 6 to 17 years.
As regards data problems, in some countries, the population under 7 years of age is excluded and also in some surveys, enrolment is used as the criterion instead of actual attendance.
In line with the usual practice in the research used in the multidimensional approach (see boxes I.3 and I.5), the same weighting is assigned for the dimensions used in this exercise, since no agreement was reached on whether to assign them more or less importance.
Thus, these indicators have a weighting of ¼ in the relevant countries.
Given that lack of fuel is usually more widespread than lack of electric power in the countries in the region, the total lack under the energy dimension may be underestimated for Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile. b For Brazil, no information is available on the floor of the housing.
In this approach, two types of threshold are used: (i) thresholds by dimension, which makes it possible to determine whether the households/individuals are lacking in each of the dimensions assessed and (ii) a multidimensional threshold (denoted by the letter k), which expresses the proportion of deprivations that a household has to have in order to be identified as poor.
Before selecting the multidimensional threshold and proceeding to identify the poor population, it must be determined whether the estimates provided by the poverty index are sufficiently robust.
One way of determining the robustness of the index is to verify whether the ordering of the countries tends to be similar for different values of k (multidimensional poverty threshold).
Generally speaking, the positions of the countries do not change substantially when the value of k varies, and non-parametric tests show acceptable levels of consistency and correlation between positions obtained by the countries.12 Thus, irrespective of the value of k, Nicaragua, Guatemala and Honduras show the highest adjusted poverty ratio level (M0) and Chile the lowest.
In any event, some overlaps are seen in the order of countries such as those existing between Guatemala and Honduras (k=70%) and between Peru and Paraguay (k=20%).
When values of M0 are analysed in relation to different values of k, Kendall’s Tau fluctuates between 0.786 and 0.967, while Spearman’s Rho fluctuates between 0.88 and 0.997.
When this procedure is replicated for H (the gross headcount ratio), Kendall’s Tau can be seen to vary between 0.723 and 0.982, while Spearman’s Rho ranges between 0.849 and 0.997.
The Alkire-Foster approach proposes: (i) an identification method ρk, which links and extends traditional intersection and union approaches, and (ii) a class of poverty measures Mα, which are extensions of the traditional measures proposed by Foster, Greer and Thorbecke (the FGT index), but adjusted for multidimensionality and which satisfy a variety of axioms.
This method of identification and aggregation, and the basic measures that result from both steps (the headcount ratio, intensity and the adjusted headcount ratio), are highly suited to ordinal data.
The identification function ρk classifies an individual i as poor when the number of dimensions j in which he experiences deprivation is at least k.
Since ρk is dependent on both the withindimension cut-off line zj and the across-dimension cut-off line k, therefore ρk is a dual cut-off method of identification.
Even where the method does not require a specific value for k, the authors propose an intermediate cut-off level, which would be somewhere between the union (k = 1) and intersection methods (k = the sum of all analysed deprivations).
The basic input for the Alkire-Foster methodology is a deprivations matrix, g0 = [gij0], where each individual or dimension is assigned the value of zero when there is no deprivation in that dimension, and the value of one when there is (yij < zj).
The matrix is then censored (g0k), which means that the deprivations of the non-poor are excluded (they are assigned a value equal to zero).
Individuals’ deprivation counts are then constructed based on the (weighted) sum of deprivations suffered in the different dimensions.
The basic indicators calculated using the Alkire-Foster method are the poverty headcount ratio (H), poverty intensity (A) and the adjusted headcount ratio (M0).
These indicators are defined below: The headcount ratio (H) refers the proportion of individuals identified as poor. (H=q/n) where q is the number of poor people and n is the total population.
Poverty intensity (A): is the (weighted) average of the deprivations suffered by people identified as poor (A=∑ Ci (k)/dq).
To estimate A, it is necessary to calculate the proportion of deprivations experienced by individuals, taking the censored vector of deprivation counts (Ci(k)/d, discounting deprivations among the non-poor) as a benchmark.
This value is then divided by the total number of poor people (q).
The adjusted headcount ratio (M0) is the result of multiplying H by A.
The measures H, A and M0 satisfy the axiom of dimensional monotonicity, meaning that if a poor person suffers an additional deprivation, then the poverty measure rises.
They also satisfy the deprivation focus axiom (an adaptation of the poverty focus axiom), meaning that the poverty measure does not vary if deprivations increase or decrease in the non-poor population, and the property of “decomposability” which requires that overall poverty be the weighted average of subgroup poverty levels.
However, H, A and M0 are not sensitive to the depth of deprivation and therefore do not satisfy the monotonicity axiom, which dictates that if the deprivations suffered by an individual become more severe, then the poverty measure must increase.
To satisfy this axiom, we must consider a censored matrix of normalized gaps g1(k) and estimate an average poverty gap G.
Nevertheless, the increase in a deprivation has the same impact no matter whether the person is very slightly deprived or acutely deprived in that dimension, meaning that the transfer axiom is not satisfied.
To resolve this problem, the average severity of deprivations (S) is calculated.
Where this is not available, suggested alternatives include a hybrid deprivation matrix, and reweighting.
The selection of the proportion or number of deprivations used to determine multidimensional poverty (threshold k) is particularly important.
Under the UBN approach (see box I.4), the aggregation methodology used is the union methodology, which classifies as poor even persons who suffer a single deprivation.
However, this increases the probability of an error of inclusion, since a household may suffer deprivations in a particular dimension for reasons unrelated to poverty.
On the other hand, the method of intersection, which requires persons/households to be deprived in all dimensions, raises sharply the probability of an error of exclusion.
In terms of opting to diminish (or reduce to a greater extent) one type of error (inclusion or exclusion) as opposed to the other, the latter was preferred bearing in mind how significant it is in the current context of public policies (for a discussion, see Ocampo, 2008).
With respect to M0, the countries with the highest and lowest values are the same as for the poverty incidence.
In general, the countries with the highest non-adjusted incidences have the highest poverty intensity index (see figure I.10).
However, there are exceptions: for example, the Plurinational State of Bolivia has a much lower headcount ratio (H) than Honduras (48.1% versus 63.4%), but the two countries have a very similar reading of intensity of poverty (46.7% and 46.4%, respectively).
Meanwhile, Paraguay has a much higher headcount index (46.6%) than Colombia (23.9%), but in terms of the intensity of poverty, these two countries are very similar.
In addition, the López Calva and Ortíz Juárez (2009) observed a wide variability in the magnitude of the error of exclusion depending on the criterion selected for identifying households as poor (union versus intersection).
For its part, Chile has a lower poverty incidence but a very similar level of poverty intensity to that observed in Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica and Uruguay.
Multidimensional poverty tends to be greater among those who reside in rural areas and among persons classified as indigenous or Afro-descendants, but not much difference in terms of gender is noted (see figure I.11).
As regards the area of residence, the values of M0 are higher in rural areas of Guatemala, Nicaragua and Peru, while in terms of ethnicity, the highest values for M0 are found among the indigenous population of Guatemala, Paraguay and Peru.
The least disparity in the incidence of poverty depending on whether or not one is of indigenous or Afro-descendent background can be seen in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, where the adjusted headcount ratio is 1.3 times as high in the indigenous population as in the non-indigenous population.
The widest disparities occur in Chile (4.3 times), Ecuador (3.4 times) and Paraguay (2,6 times).
The countries that saw the most substantial improvements were Paraguay, Peru, Plurinational State of Bolivia and Brazil, in that order, with absolute declines in the multidimensional poverty incidence of between 26 and 18 percentage points.
Lastly, a third group of countries recorded declines of less than 5% (Chile, Dominican Republic and Honduras).14 3.
Multidimensional poverty measurement with inclusion of the monetary index The usual practice in Latin America has been to construct separate indices for monetary and non-monetary deprivations.
Currently, different countries in the region have a measurement based on the UBN (see for example Calvo and others, 2013), which on occasions is crossed with the monetary index in a contingency table, as used to be done with the traditional bidimensional method.
The justification for measuring monetary and non-monetary poverty separately dates back several decades.
The initial empirical evidence for the region, based on the bidimensional method, showed that the income measure and the UBN index identified different segments of the population as poor (see box I.4).
Thus, the poverty measure based on UBN and the income-based poverty measure were viewed as two different but complementary types of poverty measure.
In recent years, some authors have affirmed the need to integrate the two types of measure into a multidimensional index.
This is because the two measures are thought to be incomplete proxies for well-being and also have low correlations with each other, which could give rise to errors of exclusion when only one of them is used to identify the poor (Santos and others, 2010; Battistón and others, 2013).
This argument appears to be especially valid for countries that exhibit the lowest incidences of poverty by both methods since in these countries, the discrepancies between the population identified as poor through the monetary measurement and that identified as poor using the UBN measurement are very high15 (see figure I.13).
The time comparison of the indicators presents constraints due to the way the survey questionnaires have evolved.
Uruguay, for example, had to reweight the aggregate indicator of deprivations in 2002, since the questionnaire did not include the dimension “housing materials”.
Other countries where differences in categories had been observed at one time or another had to modify their definitions in an attempt to make them more comparable. 15 Reference is made to the weight or relative incidence of discrepancies.
In the countries with the highest poverty incidences, although the relative incidence of the discrepancies is lower, these can cover a significant segment of the population.
Following this line of argument, Santos and others (2010) analysed multidimensional poverty in six countries of Latin America using a hybrid methodology, which added the World Bank measurement of US$ 2.15 per capita to a set of UBN indicators.
In this section, the hybrid methodology is applied to analyse the incidence of multidimensional poverty in 16 Latin American countries.
The indicator of income below the indigence line is added to the core set of UBN indicators in order to determine how much this monetary measure contributes to the identification of poor people in different countries.
This is done (i) by comparing the differences in the multidimensional estimates of poverty that result from adding a monetary dimension and an index based on traditional UBN indicators; and (ii) through a redundancy analysis of the monetary dimension and the non-monetary dimensions in the different countries.
This is why the indicators have a weighting of 1/5 in the relevant countries.
Given that in general, deprivation of fuel is more widespread than deprivation of energy, total deprivation in the energy dimension may be underestimated for Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile. b Brazil does not have information on the types of floor used in housing units. c In Peru the official government estimate is used.
In order to make an accurate assessment of the impact of the inclusion on the dimension of income insufficiency, the value of the multidimensional threshold (k) was maintained at 20%.
With this threshold, a person living in a household with two or more deprivations will still be identified as poor.
In relative terms, the regional mean increase in the headcount ratio amounts to 24.3%, while the intensity of poverty falls by as much as 8.7%.
The adjusted headcount ratio (M0) increases by 12.7%, which seems to be due to the greater relative variation in the non-adjusted headcount ratio (H) than in the intensity of poverty (A).
The impact of the aggregation of income tends to be less in countries that have a higher incidence and intensity of poverty in the measurement that includes only UBN indicators, and is greater in countries in the opposite situation.
Thus, in countries with headcount ratios (H) that take into account only UBN indicators above 30%, the impact of introducing income never exceeds 12% (percentage variation), while in countries where this ratio is below 30%, the mean increase is 40%, although Argentina and Uruguay should be treated as exceptions (percentage variations below 12%).
Thus, the degree of similarity (P) is calculated for income and the different non-monetary dimensions considered in the index based only on UBN indicators.
On average, the most redundant non-monetary dimension is the educational attainment of adults (66%), and the least consistent dimensions are attendance at school (27%), water (32%) and sanitation (36%).
For further details on the similarity index, see Alkire, Ballón and Vaz (2013).
This potential is greater in the countries where poverty measured using a multidimensional index based on traditional UBN indicators is less prevalent. 4.
Poverty measurement with addition of indicators of exclusion or vulnerability In the previous sections of this chapter, it has been shown that some countries in the region have multidimensional incidences of poverty that are low and decrease over time.
This may indicate that the traditional UBN indicators, treated separately or together with a monetary measure of extreme deprivation are losing the capacity to identify the poor, especially in countries where the living conditions of the population have improved significantly.
Thus, it has been proposed that information on deprivations should be incorporated in other areas in order to have a poverty measurement more appropriate to the reality in these countries (ECLAC, 2011).
Expanding on the idea put forward by Kaztman (2001), this approach would make it possible to integrate social structure as an explicit element of poverty measurement.
The outcome of the segmentation of the production structure is that the poor obtain informal jobs and do not have access to social protection (ECLAC, 2012a).
Even though measures of social security membership and access (health insurance, membership in a social security system and receipt of a pension) have not been used by ECLAC in its poverty measurements, they have been taken into account in the multidimensional exercises conducted by Mexico and Colombia.
The greater the delinkage from institutions that provide structure in the transition from youth to adulthood, the greater the risk of poverty and exclusion (ECLAC, 2011).
An alternative measure to institutional non-membership is long-term unemployment, but this indicator could be inappropriate for the region, given the way the labour market functions in Latin America.18 An empirical study of this indicator resulted in very low incidences.
In any event, aspects of social structure should also be gauged in relative terms.
The receipt of poor quality education and social protection and the fact of living in segregated areas may be interpreted as indicators of poverty, especially in a society dominated by mercantilism where the quality of services received by people or the neighbourhood of the city where they reside is measured by their capacity to pay (Kaztman, 2010).
However, the available information is too scant to allow measurements of this type for a sufficient number of countries in the region.
Including deprivations relating to institutional coverage goes beyond the conventional notion of poverty and it may be assumed that the addition of such indicators would increase the number of errors of inclusion.
This risk decreases, however, when using an aggregation scheme in which the presence of one deprivation is not sufficient for identifying a person as poor.
Furthermore, some of the indicators included here serve as a proxy, albeit an imperfect one, for health and employment dimensions, which were not measured in the two indices analysed in the foregoing sections and which are relevant aspects of well-being.
There are some difficulties in measuring young people who are neither in paid employment nor in education or training and the lack of affiliation to social protection.
In the first case, the presence of at least one young person in the household who was neither in education or paid employment was taken as a threshold of deprivation because, with the alternative options (half or all), the more young people in the household, the less feasible it would be to classify a household as deprived.
In addition, the indicators of membership in a social protection scheme is not measured in the same way in the different countries, thus the comparability is impaired.
Risk groups: children under the age of five, women aged 15- 49 and older persons aged 60 or over ii) No employed person in the household has membership in a pension fund iii) No older person in the household has a pension or retirement benefit.
Older persons: men aged 65 or over; women aged 60 or over a For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile, information is provided for electrical power only, while for Argentina, the information is for fuel only.
This is why these indicators have a weighting of 1/5 in these countries.
Given that in general, deprivation of fuel is more widespread than deprivation of energy, total deprivation in the energy dimension may be underestimated for Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile.
Argentina is a special case since deprivation of fuel is very low in that country. b In Brazil information is available only for housing materials. c In the case of Peru, the estimate for indigence is the national estimate.
The remainder are ECLAC estimates. d In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, information was available for two of the indicators.
In Brazil, no enquiry is made as to health insurance, but since there is universal health coverage, the entire at-risk population is assumed to be covered.
As in the previous cases, an equal weighting is assigned to all the different dimensions, which means providing a lower weight to indicators of vulnerability or exclusion in comparison with the added weighting of the remaining dimensions.
Hereinafter, the new index, which includes the traditional UBN indicators, the indigence measure and the two additional indicators will be referred to as the “broad poverty index”. (poverty in the broad sense of the term).
As regards the robustness of the new index, in general the order of countries tends to be maintained even when the values of k vary.
Unlike the earlier indices, in this case, a threshold k equal to 10% is used, since the value of 20% does not guarantee that subjects suffering deprivation in two or more areas will be classified as poor.
While this new threshold ensures comparability with the earlier exercises in relation to the minimum number of deprivations that a subject must experience in order to be identified as poor, the increase in the number of dimensions and indicators raises the probability of a member of the population being classified as poor.
Tables I.8 and I.9 reveal the impact of the inclusion of additional dimensions, considering the poverty incidence (H) and the adjusted headcount ratio (M0).
The difference between the incidence of broad poverty and the incidence based on the index including UBN indicators and the indigence measure is 12 percentage points.
However, the latter country is the one that shows the highest relative change (419%).
There tends to be a greater relative increase in the countries with very low poverty rates based solely on UBN indicators.
This situation also occurs when the incidence of broad poverty is compared with the rates obtained using critical deprivations, coupled with insufficient income.
Some cases warrant special attention: for example Peru, where M0 for the broad poverty measure is lower than that obtained for the measure limited to UBN indicators.
This is partly because of the sharp fall in poverty intensity in this country (relative variation of -26%), when the results of the broad poverty measure are compared with those based on UBN alone.
This fall is due mainly to the low contribution of the monetary dimension to the increase in the total poverty incidence, since in Peru, almost the entire difference between the headcount ratio (H) of broad poverty and the index based on UBN alone is estimated to be attributable to dimensions of social exclusion.
As regards policy design, one of the most important applications of the methodology of Alkire y Foster (2007, 2011) is a breakdown that reveals the contribution (in relative and absolute terms) of each dimension to the adjusted headcount ratio (M0).
This breakdown was used for the broad poverty index because this index is more comprehensive in terms of policies and sectors involved than the indices discussed in the previous sections.
As shown in table I.10 and figure I.15, the added contribution of the dimensions of housing (overcrowding and materials used), energy (electricity and cooking fuel) and water and sanitation tends to be greater in countries with the highest incidences of broad poverty.
For example, the simple average of the relative contribution of housing dimensions, energy and water and sanitation in countries with headcount ratios above 60% amounts to 39.8% of total broad poverty, while in the countries with broad poverty ratios below 30%, the simple average of the contribution of these dimensions is 26.6%.
These differences by groups of countries are basically attributable to the dimensions of housing and energy.
Nevertheless, caution must be exercised in interpreting the differences in energy, since in three of the five countries included in the group with a low poverty rate, only one of the two indicators included in the energy dimension was covered, which may imply an under-estimation of the deprivation associated with that dimension.
Education: includes attendance at school by children and adolescents and educational attainment of adults.
Protection: membership in a health insurance system and in a pension fund and receipt of some retirement benefit or pension.
When the added contribution of the dimensions of housing, energy and water and sanitation are broken down, these dimensions are shown to have a greater weight in total poverty in Peru (59.3%), Plurinational State of Bolivia (46.7%) and El Salvador (41.1%), and much less impact in Chile (14.9%), Costa Rica (23.3%) and Uruguay (24.6%).
The contribution of education (school attendance by children and educational attainment of adults) to total broad poverty tends to be greater in countries where the poverty rate is below 30%.
The education factor is seen to represent a greater contribution to total poverty in Uruguay (49.9%) and in Costa Rica (37.6%).
The greater part of the weight of education is attributable to non-attainment of the threshold of educational achievement among adults.
The contribution of school attendance among children and adolescents is much lower.
The income factor has a greater impact on total poverty in Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (25.2%) and Chile (23.1%), but less in Argentina (5.6%), Uruguay (5.6%) and Peru (6.2%).
There do not appear to be substantial differences in the contribution of income to total poverty based on the poverty rate of the countries.
Membership in or access to social protection systems has a greater impact on total poverty in countries with broad poverty rates above 60% (simple average of 15.9%) and less in countries with headcount ratios below 30% (simple average of 6.4%).
The opposite occurs with young people neither in paid employment nor in education or training whose impact on total poverty is much greater in countries with poverty rates below 30% (18.1%) than in countries with poverty rates above 60% (6.3%).
Thus, the social protection dimension carries greater weight in countries with the highest broad poverty rates, which may be attributed to the nature of the indicators included in the analysis, which measure basically membership in social protection systems.
This highlights the need to include indicators that reflect the quality of the services to which the population has access in countries that already have high levels of affiliation.
The fact that young people neither in paid employment nor in education or training account increasingly for overall poverty in countries with lower rates raises the question of whether poverty or vulnerability to fall into poverty is being effectively measured by this indicator.
In short, the results of the analysis indicate that not only are there differences in the extent and intensity of multidimensional poverty between countries, but also the dimensions that have the greatest impact on overall poverty are different.
The latter means that the policy configurations and the architectures and institutional responsibilities should be different. 5.
Final remarks In conclusion, given the renewed interest in using a multidimensional approach to poverty, it is an opportune moment to redefine what is understood by poverty and to decide which dimensions of well-being are essential for identifying the poor.
Even though the studies presented in this edition of the Social Panorama of Latin America consider only some of the basic elements for a measurement of this type, these elements are sufficient for illustrating the potential and the challenges posed by multidimensional measures.
The results of the study carried out support the idea that the traditional UBN indicators provide a basis for advancing towards the preparation of a broader multidimensional index for identifying the poor based on a more comprehensive and all-embracing notion of well-being.
The aggregation of a monetary measure of deprivation to a multidimensional index based on UBNs can be useful for filling information gaps especially in countries that have lower income-based and UBN-based headcount ratios.
Since traditional UBN indicators and monetary measures of extreme deprivation seem to be progressively less able to identify the poor in countries with better standards of living in the region, the answer may be to research new dimensions and indicators.
A different approach (one not used in this study) may be to test more demanding thresholds for the indicators already available.
As stated previously, all this calls for discussions and agreements on the definition of poverty and its dimensions, in the light of a more comprehensive notion of well-being.
The region clearly faces a major challenge in terms of developing its information sources in order to obtain a more thorough measurement and characterization of poverty from a multidimensional perspective.
Whatever the conceptual and methodological approach used, one basic condition for a more thorough multidimensional measure is to increase the availability of data and to improve their quality.
Income distribution The gap in income distribution continued to narrow, prolonging a trend first observed a decade ago.
Indeed, in several countries the reductions noted between 2008 and 2012 have been sharper than those observed The sharp inequality in income distribution is one of the features of Latin America in the international context.
As shown in various editions of the Social Panorama of Latin America and illustrated in numerous studies on income distribution in the region, this indicator has shown improved over the past 10 years.
These changes have occurred gradually and are scarcely perceptible in year-on-year variations, but they are evident in a comparison over longer periods.
If 2002 information is used as a reference, the most recent figures show that in eight countries the poorest quintile saw its share of total income increase by at least one percentage point.
Meanwhile in nine countries, the relative share of the richest quintile declined by 5 or more percentage points.
This group’s share continues to be more than 50% in five countries, compared with 2002, when this applied to 10 countries.
The changes observed in the extreme quintiles’ share of total income were also reflected in the variations in the inequality indices.
Of the 13 countries for which information was available for 2011 or 2012, 12 recorded a simple average reduction in the Gini coefficient of 1% per year.
The rate of reduction of inequality was more than 1% per year in Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Peru, and Uruguay, and was at least 0.5% per year in Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Panama.
As illustrated in figure I.17, the trend towards a reduction in inequality has been a little more pronounced in the last four years of the period under review.
This shows the percentage variation in the Gini, Theil and Atkinson indices (with an inequality aversion parameter equal to 1.5) for the subperiods 2002-2008 and 2008-2012, considering as the mid-point the year 2008, when the international financial crisis unfolded.
Indeed, eight countries showed sharper declines in the inequality indices in the second subperiod than in the first.
Of these, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay had the most significant reductions, of around 4% per year in the case of the Gini coefficient.
This group also included Brazil, Ecuador and Mexico, which along with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela saw a slight increase in their inequality coefficients in 2012 (see annex table I-A3).
Costa Rica, Panama and Paraguay also experienced an increase in their inequality index in the second subperiod, although only in Costa Rica does the final figure show an increase.
It should be noted that the three inequality indices show a high degree of consistency in the trends described with just a few exceptions.
If the countries are ranked by order of magnitude of the reduction in inequality during the second subperiod, Mexico is placed in a better position on the Theil and Atkinson index than on the Gini index, while the opposite occurs with Brazil.
Lastly, movements in the distribution of labour income should be examined since this is the primary source of household funds and, as such, has a significant impact on overall income distribution.
The Gini coefficient of total household income and the labour income of employed persons (aged 15 years or over) are seen to follow a similar pattern.
Atkinson index (ε=1.5) relevant countries. a Includes only countries with information available up to 2011 or 2012.
The countries are ranked according to the variation in the second subperiod (2008-2012). b Urban areas.
Calvo, Juan and others (2013), Atlas sociodemográfico y de la desigualdad del Uruguay.
Taccari, Daniel and Pauline Stockins (2013), “Tipologías de discrepancias y medidas de conciliación estadística de los indicadores ODM.
Figures not comparable with those of previous years. j Estimate for 18 countries in the region plus Haiti.
Rights-based approach and child1 poverty In the 1990s, studies began to reflect concerns about the “infantilization” of poverty in Latin America.
The United Nations General Assembly defines children living in poverty as deprived of nutrition, water, access to basic health-care services, shelter, education, participation and protection.
Child poverty means that children and adolescents are unable to enjoy their rights, which limits their ability to achieve their goals and play an active role in society.
A multidimensional measurement perspective is required to understand the nature of child poverty.
Introduction In this second decade of the twenty-first century, poverty still poses a huge challenge for Latin America and the Caribbean.
A very worrying aspect of the trend in monetary poverty is that its impact is heaviest on households with a high dependency ratio, which is particularly detrimental to children and adolescents.
Studies conducted more than 20 years ago, in the 1990s, began to reflect the overrepresentation of children and adolescents in income-poor households in Latin America, showing, in turn the close link existing between monetary poverty and the presence of children in households (ECLAC, 1994, 1997, 1998).
While economic achievements in the first half of the 1990s decreased the number of poor by the year 2000, the benefits were not shared equally, with a much lower reduction in the poverty rate among households with children and adolescents (ECLAC, 2000).
This triggered a debate in the region concerning the “infantilization” of poverty, a concept still relevant today, which recognizes the overrepresentation of children and adolescents among the poor compared with other age groups, and the greater likelihood that children and adolescents will live in poor households (a likelihood that increases the younger the children are).
Evidence showed that not only was poverty among children and adolescents more rigid during business cycle upswings, it was also more elastic during downswings.
Most striking was that children and adolescents proved to be worst hit by crises, despite representing a shrinking share of the total population as a result of the deep-seated demographic changes occurring in the region.
In short, child poverty decreased less than poverty in the total population and much less than that of older adults (Rossel, 2013; ECLAC, 2010), indicating that children and adolescents are seeing fewer benefits from the overall reduction in monetary poverty as has occurred recently.
A large proportion of children and adolescent face deprivations that harm them directly at this stage of their lives, continue to have a negative impact on the rest of their lives and are passed on to future generations.
Children are often trapped in situations of household income poverty that deny them such rights as survival, shelter, education, health and nutrition.
In other words, they are deprived of assets and opportunities to which all human beings are entitled.
Moreover, poverty is closely linked with other social phenomena, such as exclusion and inequality, which are created and perpetuated to a large extent by unfair and inequitable resource distribution.
This study uses the definition of a child —every human being below the age of eighteen years— set forth in article 1 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
As in other studies by ECLAC and UNICEF, therefore, childhood is understood to refer to the population aged 0 to 17 years.
Addressing and understanding the specific kind of poverty children face requires a multidimensional method of measurement that identifies the deprivations associated with the provision and quality of public goods and services affecting children directly, as well as the income shortfall as regards the needs of all household members.
The particular concern for children and adolescents comes in response not only to their overrepresentation among the poor but also to their greater dependency and lack of autonomy within families and to their particular vulnerability to the consequences of poverty and inequality.
Any measurement of poverty among children should recognize their specific characteristics and adopt households and individuals as the unit of analysis.
While there is no single approach to defining and measuring child poverty, most of the studies and organizations dealing with this issue consider it to be a multidimensional phenomenon.
According to The State of the World’s Children 2005, “children living in poverty experience deprivation of the material, spiritual and emotional resources needed to survive, develop and thrive, leaving them unable to enjoy their rights, achieve their full potential or participate as full and equal members of society” (UNICEF, 2005, p. 18). 2.
Rights-based approach and multidimensional measurement of child poverty A view of child poverty that goes beyond the strictly monetary perspective should consider such factors as access to services and the psychosocial development of children and adolescents (e.g. discrimination and exclusion).
It should also underscore the explicit link between these factors and the violation of human rights as universally accepted principles enshrined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, the Millennium Declaration and other international instruments.
In this framework, the United Nations General Assembly defines children living in poverty as deprived of nutrition, water, access to basic health-care services, shelter, education, participation and protection (UNICEF, 2007).
When children and adolescents are denied these rights, it limits their ability to achieve their goals, play an active role in society and enjoy opportunities.
The choice of conceptual approach influences the definition of indicators for poverty measurement and the identification of poor children and adolescents and their needs.
The measures proposed by Bourguignon and Chakravarty (2003) and Alkire and Foster (2009) have resulted in diverse applications for different countries.
Despite criticism of the methodology for aggregating the different dimensions (see Ravallion, 2011), there is growing consensus that poverty is a multidimensional phenomenon.
The use of this multidimensional approach to poverty analysis has become consolidated in a number of spheres.
In 2003, UNICEF, jointly with researchers from the University of Bristol and the London School of Economics, launched a major large-scale initiative to measure child poverty with a focus on rights and multiple deprivations.
This is considered the first scientific estimate of child poverty in the developing world (Expert Group on Poverty Statistics (Rio Group), 2007).
The Bristol study lists a basket of goods and services considered essential for child well-being and defines different thresholds of deprivation (Gordon and others, 2003).
This set of indicators is based on the principle of child rights with regard to adequate nutrition, clean water, acceptable sanitation facilities, health, housing, education and information (Minujin, Delamónica and Davidziuk, 2006).
The study conceptualizes deprivation as a continuum extending from no deprivation to extreme deprivation at the end of the scale, and provides operational definitions for each level.
The analysis was designed to highlight policy measures needed to generate a specific impact. 3.
These dimensions are an integral part of the indicators and methodology for estimating child poverty directly, using a human-rights-based approach developed jointly by UNICEF, the University of Bristol and the London School of Economics.
The dimensions were replicated and adapted to the reality of Latin America and the Caribbean and the availability of information for the region (ECLAC/UNICEF, 2010; Espíndola and Rico, 2010).
The study showed that, around 2008, approximately 45% of children under the age of 18 were living in poverty in 18 countries in the region, meaning that nearly 81 million children and adolescents were suffering deprivation because some of their rights were not being fulfilled.
Although new surveys have recently become available, coverage in Latin America is low and patchy.
For this reason and in order to incorporate income measures at the same time, the current study was based on household surveys, which are available for all countries in the region and include satisfactory data for implementing both methodologies.
To make these estimates, the indicators were adapted to the data available in household surveys.
For Latin America, it was decided to follow the above criterion but to also define thresholds to identify situations of moderate deprivation, as they too reflect needs that, when unmet, affect children’s well-being and development.
For example, the universal nature of rights calls for each right (or deprivation of that right) and its levels to be assessed in the same way for all groups of children and adolescents.
This led to the construction of national thresholds without the usual differentiation between urban and rural areas and making no allowances for the fact that the deprivation or violation of a right might stem from the high investment costs involved in providing access to basic services in rural areas, as rights should apply in all circumstances.
Accordingly, the standard threshold was set in accordance with the traditional metrics of deprivation in rural areas, while taking care to avoid distorting the degree of rights enforceability (overly strict).
The Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and the Multiple Indicator Cluster Surveys (MICS) were used as a reference for estimating child undernutrition levels by means of logistic models to estimate the probability of undernutrition, applicable to household surveys, and so incorporate this essential dimension into estimated child poverty levels in the region.
Children and adolescents aged 0 to 17 years 27 (1)… recognize the right of every child to a standard of living adequate for the child’s […] development. 27 (3) shall… provide material assistance and support programmes, particularly with regard to nutrition, clothing and housing.
Children who, having attended school, dropped out before completing secondary education Children and adolescents who Individual.
Similarly, based on the child-rights approach and the indivisibility and interdependence of human rights, rights were considered to be absolutely equivalent, with the result that no rights were prioritized either substantively or technically, as no single right carries greater weight than any other.
This means that each deprivation is regarded as an indicator of poverty because it violates or infringes at least one right.
By ratifying the Convention on the Rights of the Child, States undertake to devote the maximum available resources to comply with all child rights —which includes defraying health-care and other costs that households find difficult to pay— and to ensure that no discrimination exists.
As with the multiple deprivation method, three situations were defined according to the potential ability of households with children to meet their basic needs through market mechanisms.
This was done by comparing per capita income with poverty and extreme poverty lines, in order to identify households with inadequate levels of well-being: indigent households, poor (but not indigent) households and non-poor households.
In the late 1980s, several attempts were made in Latin America to integrate monetary and non-monetary methodologies (ECLAC/ DGEC, 1988).
Measurement of well-being and poverty by the income method alone is not enough to account for all the deprivations that might undermine children’s development.
However, income measurement provides valuable data for characterizing the situation of children, as well as for public policy decision-making.
Despite the high correlation, at aggregate level, between income poverty and child poverty according to deprivation —with an even greater correlation in the case of total poverty than extreme poverty— the correlation is less clear at the level of individuals (and households).
This makes it necessary to examine the situation of children using the two methodologies.
Child poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean Around 2011, a total of 40.5% of children and adolescents in Latin America were living in poverty.
Total child poverty affected 70.5 million children under 18, with 16.3% of children and adolescents living in extreme poverty (28.3 million).
Between 2000 and 2011, all the Latin American countries studied saw a decrease in the percentage of poor children under age 18.
The reduction in total poverty was just over 14 percentage points, while that of extreme poverty was 10.5 percentage points.
The intensity of poverty also diminished, in particular extreme child poverty (in 2011, one in four children suffered more than one severe deprivation).
In five Caribbean countries, child poverty ranged from 31% to 71%, and extreme poverty, from 10% to 38%.
Child poverty in a country in a given year refers to children under the age of 18 with at least moderate deprivation of one or more of the rights constituting child poverty: sanitation, access to drinking water, quality housing, enrolment in the education system, access to information or good nutrition.
If they experience at least one severe deprivation, children are considered to be living in extreme child poverty.
It is important to bear in mind that the following estimates of total child poverty also include children living in extreme poverty.
Under the general unmet basic needs method, this decision is called “co-realization criterion”: if the indicators were considered perfect substitutes, households or individuals with at least one deprivation are poor (Expert Group on Poverty Statistics (Rio Group), 2007).
Around 2011, a total of 40.5% of children and adolescents in 17 Latin American countries were living in either moderate or extreme poverty.
Total child poverty in the region affected 70.5 million children under 18 and 16.3% of children and adolescents were living in extreme poverty.
This means that one in six children is extremely poor and the scourge of poverty affects more than 28.3 million children and adolescents (see figure II.1 and table II.2).
However, diverse realities lead to marked differences from one country to another.
An average 72% of children in countries with the highest total child poverty levels (El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia) were extremely poor (20.2 million in these six countries).
Among the countries with the lowest total child poverty levels (Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Uruguay), a simple average of 19.5% of children were extremely poor (2.8 million).
For this reason, it is important to ascertain not only the percentage of deprived children but also how poor they are.
Even though the family of indices used in multidimensional child poverty calculation includes the depth index of poverty —based on calculating the gaps between levels of deprivation in each dimension and the respective thresholds— in this chapter the depth of poverty among the poor is represented by counting the number of deprivations.
While the existence of even one extreme deprivation is already damaging to a child’s development, the presence of a “syndrome” of multiple deprivation is a sure sign of lost opportunities for children to tap their full potential and ultimately perpetuates the intergenerational transmission of poverty.
One in four extremely poor children is severely deprived of more than one fundamental right and two in three poor children are deprived of one (see table II.4).
According to data for 17 countries around 2011, a total of 27.4% of the more than 28 million extremely poor children suffer more than one severe deprivation and just over 7% suffer three or more severe deprivations (see table II.3).
With regard to total child poverty, 58.8% of the more than 70 million children affected suffer a single These results are consistent with those in chapter I. moderate or severe deprivation (just over 41 million children) and only one in six poor children are deprived in three or more dimensions of well-being (see table II.4).
Notwithstanding the above, the diversity and varying intensity of child poverty situations among countries of the region should be borne in mind, as should their differing capacity to finance large-scale pro-child policies.
Indeed, countries with the highest levels of child poverty (total and extreme) tend to have the largest concentration of children with multiple deprivations but also the fewest resources to tackle the problem.
The use of national household surveys as the main source for measuring child poverty has one major limitation: lack of information on children’s nutritional status.
To remedy this, logistic models were constructed to estimate the probability of undernutrition (underweight and moderate-severe and severe stunting) based on Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) and Multiple Indicator Cluster surveys (MICS).
These models used predictor variables (and corresponding levels of measurement) capable of being replicated in household surveys.
They were subsequently rebuilt in the household surveys in order to make an individual assessment of the probability of undernutrition (for details of the models and predictor variables used, see After establishing the dimensions, the thresholds determining levels of deprivation were defined (see table II.1), with three situations for each dimension: severe deprivation; moderate deprivation; and no deprivation.
These thresholds were based on the “continuum of deprivation” concept put forward by Gordon (2006), which served as the basis for the global study on child poverty (UNICEF 2005).
Children and adolescents living in extreme poverty and total poverty were identified using the union approach: a child is extremely poor if he or she is severely deprived in at least one dimension; a child is poor if he or she has at least one moderate deprivation (see table II.1 for a definition of the thresholds).
This means that the process of identifying poor and extremely poor children is independent of the weight that may be assigned to the dimensions.
Therefore the weight of each dimension was defined operationally as the complement of the proportion of deprived children (divided by the sum of all the complements).
The same procedure was used for severe deprivations and for moderate or severe deprivations.
As the weight of the dimensions is irrelevant to the identification process, owing to use of the union approach, its relevance is confined to the aggregation process, reflecting greater intensity, depth and severity of poverty when a deprivation affects a small group of children.
Two of the possible mathematical options used to aggregate poverty and extreme child poverty are the Bourguignon and Chakravarty (2003) or Alkire and Foster (2009) equations (see box I.5 in chapter I).
Although the Alkire and Foster equation allows multidimensional poverty to be identified and aggregated for more than one dimension and the Bourguignon and Chakravarty equation allows only for the union approach, the main indicators of both are equivalent if the foregoing methodology is used.
K is the number of dimensions whose simultaneous deprivation identifies the poor.
The main difference between the indices calculated in the previous examples (using the methodological options mentioned) lies in the method of calculating the severity of poverty: while the Bourguignon and Chakravarty index squares the sum of the distances between deprivations and thresholds, the Alkire and Foster index determines each distance before adding them together.
The 2010 study on child poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC/UNICEF 2010) opted explicitly for the Bourguignon and Chakravarty equation because it is similar to the extended aggregate measure of monetary poverty known as the Foster-Greer-Thorbecke (FGT) index (1984) and is easiest to disseminate in-country through technical assistance activities and short training workshops.
ECLAC/UNICEF (2010) and (2012a) provide more details on the various steps in identifying and aggregating child poverty and the meaning and calculation of the various components of the Bourguignon and Chakravarty and Alkire and Foster equations, together with their similarities and differences.
Lastly, a complex methodological decision is required to define two deprivation thresholds by dimension: if two children have a deprivation (and are therefore poor) but the first child is experiencing moderate deprivation and the second is experiencing severe deprivation, they should have a different gap ratio in that dimension (distance from the threshold).
This means that, when calculating total poverty, different distances must be captured for moderate and severe deprivation.
This was done by assigning a score of 1 for severe deprivation, 2 for moderate deprivation and 3 for no deprivation (the value 0 was reserved for the situation of extreme deprivation, which is not amenable to measurement by conventional surveys).
However, the distances represented by these scores are metric, whereas the three situations (severe, moderate and no deprivation) relate to an ordinal system (where the actual distances cannot be established).
So, even though it is possible to differentiate between groups of poor children using depth and severity indices of total poverty, they should be considered merely illustrative of the severity of poverty in these groups.
Gordon, “Cómo monitorear el derecho a la salud” Exclusión y derecho a la salud.
Changes in child poverty in the period 2000-2011 Although several countries in the region have made great strides in recent years in analysing child poverty, together with its determinants and the different approaches for measuring it (Tuñón, 2012; CONEVAL/UNICEF, 2013), so far there has been little study of changes over time.
However, a temporal perspective is essential for assessing the progressive realization of rights and countries’ current efforts in that direction.
This has been facilitated by changes to countries’ data gathering instruments —particularly household surveys, the main source for estimating child poverty— and poses a dual challenge: to make comparisons over time to provide information for assessing changes in the various dimensions of child poverty and to promote better surveys.
This is crucial, for example, for survey questions on information access by households and individuals, in a world where access to information and communication technologies is so important.
During the period under consideration, the household surveys closest to the stipulated years (2000-2011) are encouraging insofar as they show a drop in the percentage of children under 18 deprived of any basic right (total poverty) in all the Latin American countries studied.
In the region (14 countries comparable nationally over time), the decrease in total child poverty was a little over 14 percentage points over the period, falling from 55.3% of children around 2000 to 41.2% around 2011.
The biggest decrease occurred in Peru, where the percentage of children living in poverty fell by nearly 25 percentage points between 1999 and 2011.
Also suffering severe deprivations were children in: El Salvador, with a poverty rate of nearly 79% in 2010; Nicaragua (2005), with 78.6%; and the Plurinational The fact that no information indicators are available for Argentina leads not only to lower child poverty levels but also to less significant progress in reducing it.
State of Bolivia (2009), with 71.4%.7 In contrast, countries with the lowest percentage of children and adolescents living in total poverty in 2011 were Chile, with 15.7%, and Uruguay, with 17.4% (see table II.2).
Furthermore, the percentage of poor children with several deprivations (three or more) fell from 33.5% to 17.8% and the percentage of children and adolescents with many deprivations (five) fell from 3.4% to 1.1%.
This attests not only to progress in reducing the percentage of children experiencing a deprivation but also to a decrease in the intensity of poverty among poor children.
Cumulative distribution of the number of severe deprivations among extremely poor children At least one At least two At least three At least four At least five At least one At least two At least three At least four At least five B.
Cumulative distribution of the total number of deprivations among poor children b At least one At least two At least three At least four At least five At least one At least two At least three At least four At least five a The figures present cumulative deprivations.
For example, the percentage of children with at least three deprivations includes those with four or five deprivations.
The baseline values equal 100% (children with at least one deprivation) because the universe for calculating distributions was poor or extremely poor children, as appropriate. b Includes extremely poor children and adolescents.
Like total child poverty, extreme poverty fell more than 10 percentage points in the space of a decade.
Proportionally, the decline in extreme poverty was even greater, representing a reduction of nearly 40% compared with a 25% decrease in total child poverty.
Several countries in the region are developing multidimensional measures of poverty, in particular child poverty.
Unlike national measures, which are more closely geared to States’ specific conditions and public policy objectives, international measures seek to make comparisons among countries over time, which is why they may diverge from national measures.
The biggest decrease in the number of children experiencing extreme child poverty was observed in Honduras, where it fell by 28 percentage points between 1999 and 2010 to 22% of children under 18.
Next was the Dominican Republic, with a reduction of 21 percentage points (7% in 2011), and El Salvador, with 28.1% of children extremely poor in 2010.
The smallest decreases occurred in Costa Rica (2.2%), Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (2.4%), Uruguay (3.5%) and Argentina (3.9%), in that order, partly because they already had low levels of extreme child poverty in 2000 (see table II.2).
The intensity of both extreme and total child poverty has also eased significantly.
Whereas in the first decade of the 2000s, 41.2% of all extremely poor children and adolescents had more than one severe deprivation in one basic right and 13.8% had deprivations in three or more rights, by around 2011 the situation had improved markedly.
This reflected not only a sharp reduction in extreme child poverty levels, but also a decrease in the proportion of extremely poor children with more than one severe deprivation (in 2011, only 27.9% of extremely poor children had two or more severe deprivations) (see figure II.2.A).
The intensity of total child poverty also fell sharply across the region during the period in question.
The biggest decreases were observed among children and adolescents with at least two deprivations and at least three deprivations in 2000 (more than a 15-percentage-point drop in both cases).
This also has policy implications insofar as interventions need to focus on a smaller number of dimensions. 2.
Children with moderate deprivations are those living in dwellings with walls of straw or palm, or mud flooring, or where three or more people are living per room.
Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic and Uruguay had less than 3% of children experiencing severe deprivations in this dimension in 2011 (see table II.5).
All countries show a decline in the percentage of children and adolescents with moderate or severe housing deprivation.
Honduras also saw a significant decrease in moderate or severe housing deprivation.
A point of note is that the housing deprivation level at the start of the new millennium was 30% or more in all these countries, and in most, it exceeded 50% (see table II.6).
Countries with consistently high levels of moderate or severe deprivation in the housing dimension are concentrated in Central America: El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua (all with a current incidence of 60%).
They are followed by the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Peru (with 51% and 53%, respectively).
Because the National Household Survey of Brazil (PNAD) does not record the flooring material of dwellings, Brazil’s child poverty may be underestimated in this regional comparison.
Most countries have achieved a decline in the number of children under 18 with severe housing deprivation, except Argentina (urban areas), the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Chile, which show a slight (but not statistically significant) increase.
Moderate deprivation in this area consists of access to a latrine or cesspit unconnected to the sewer system.
In 12 of the 16 countries with national data for 2011, more than 10% of children and adolescents had some level of deprivation in sanitation (see figure II.3).
Between 2000 and 2011, all countries showed a decline in the total number of sanitation-deprived children and adolescents (see table II.6).
The smallest decrease was in Nicaragua (only 2.9 percentage points between 2001 and 2005, to just over 50% of children with deprivation in sanitation).
While other countries experienced small percentage reductions, they are nevertheless significant because these countries had started with much lower levels of deprivation (e.g.
Rep. of) (2011) Colombia (2011) El Salvador (2010) Dominican Rep. (2011) Honduras (2010) Children with severe deprivation Children with moderate or severe deprivation b a Average of 17 countries (includes urban areas of Argentina).
Guatemala has the highest percentage of children and adolescents with moderate or severe deprivation in sanitation, with 56.3% of children under 18 deprived in 2006.
The countries with the lowest percentage of children and adolescents with moderate or severe deprivation in sanitation nationwide are Chile (3.5%) and Uruguay (2.6%).
At the regional level, the percentage of children and adolescents with severe deprivation in sanitation was 7.8% in 2011, a sharp drop of nearly 7 percentage points from the 14.5% recorded in 2000.
The right to water (articles 11 and 12 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights), General Comment, 10 In July 2010, the United Nations recognized the right to safe and clean drinking water and sanitation as a human right that is essential for the full enjoyment of life and all human rights (ECLAC/UNICEF, 2012b).
Children under 18 who lack access to drinking water and consume water from natural sources (stream, river, pond or rainwater), or who have to travel more than 15 minutes to a source of drinking water, are considered to suffer severe deprivation regarding access to drinking water.
Access to hauled water (outside the home) is considered to represent moderate deprivation.11 Access to drinking water is the dimension in which the third highest percentage of children and adolescents in Latin America has moderate or severe deprivation.
Around 2011, 10.8% of children across the region (17 countries) were moderately or severely deprived and 6.2% were severely deprived of access to drinking water.
The vast majority of countries showed an improvement in the total number of children and adolescents with moderate or severe deprivations in this dimension, with the exception of Colombia, Costa Rica and Nicaragua, which registered a slight increase (around 1%).
The largest reductions were observed in Paraguay, El Salvador, the Dominican Republic, Mexico and Peru, in that order (between 10 and 15 percentage points in 2000-2011).
The Plurinational State of Bolivia, Peru and Nicaragua showed the highest percentages of children with moderate or severe deprivations, with rates of over 15%.
By contrast, the lowest percentages of children and adolescents with some kind of deprivation in access to drinking water were found in Uruguay and Argentina, where less than 1% of children experienced deprivation (see figure II.3).
The percentage of children under 18 with no access to drinking water (severe deprivation) fell in all the countries except Nicaragua, where it rose from 12.9% in 2001 to 15.4% in 2005.
The sharpest falls were recorded in the Dominican Republic (24 percentage points) and in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Honduras (7 percentage points).
Those who were not attending school at the time of measurement and had not completed secondary education but had attended school at some time are considered to be moderately deprived.
Education is one of the child poverty dimensions with the lowest percentage of moderately or severely deprived children and adolescents.12 In 2011, 5.2% of the region’s under-18-year-olds suffered moderate or severe deprivation of their right to education (they had never attended school or had dropped out), although only 0.8% suffered severe deprivation.
From this it may be surmised that virtually all children have access to formal basic education (see table II.6).
Only two countries (Nicaragua and Guatemala) recorded levels of severe deprivation at or above 4% when last measured (see figure II.3).
The total number of children and adolescents with moderate or severe deprivation in education has declined in all countries in the region.
The biggest improvements were observed in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, where figures show education deprivation to have been slashed in a single decade from nearly 32% in 1999 to nearly 4% in 2009, mainly through a reduction in the school dropout rate.
Although the decline was no more than 4 percentage points in the remaining countries, their deprivation levels were already low around 2000.
Those with only one media good in the home (either radio or television, or some kind of telephone) are considered to be moderately deprived.
Many characteristics of this dimension vary from one country to another, and it is this dimension that has undergone the greatest changes in measurement owing to spectacular advances in communications markets and their fast-expanding coverage.
In many cases, differences from one year to another stem from the addition or removal of various household information or communication goods.
This is the case with Honduras and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, where the changes stem not from the scale of deprivation but from differences in the way the dimension is estimated, and Argentina, where there is no possibility of measuring this dimension.
Nevertheless, the level of information deprivation is clearly falling (see tables II.5 and II.6).
At the start of the new millennium, around 19% of the region’s children and adolescents suffered some sort of information deprivation.
This has changed dramatically, partly owing to fairly widespread access to telecommunications and related goods (especially mobile phones), with the result that, by around 2011, only 5% of children suffered limited access to information (moderate or severe deprivation) in the 14 countries that can be compared nationally over time.
Similarly, around 2000, only 6.2% children were severely deprived of their right to information (they had no access to information or communication goods or to a basic electricity supply).
While these figures attest to an overall reduction in deprivation of the right to information, in some countries the levels were still high in 2011: El Salvador (10.4%); Guatemala (22.7%); Honduras (12.9%), Nicaragua (38.4%) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (12.3%).
Severe breach of the right to information persists in Guatemala (16.5% of children) and Nicaragua (8.6%).
To sum up, both severe and moderate deprivation dropped sharply between 2000 and 2011, and the gaps with regard to sanitation, housing and access to information narrowed significantly.
Deprivation decreased less in the areas of education and nutrition because it was already low among the region’s children early in the last decade in these areas.
An overall reduction in deprivation across all the dimensions explains the significant decline in both total and extreme child poverty, as well as in their intensity (see figure II.4).
The activities children under 18 perform and how much time they spend on them provide important information for measuring their well-being and the realization of their economic, social and cultural rights (Rico, 2013).
Time-use surveys, the best statistical information tool for ascertaining this information, are designed to quantify the time spent on a range of activities throughout the day and provide a detailed picture of day-to-day life and its implications, which cannot be captured from other information sources.
Thus far, time-use surveys in Latin America have not been designed or geared to measure the activities of children and adolescents; indeed most do not include interviews with children under the age of 12.
However, when the under-12 age group is included, depending on the interview method used, detailed information can be obtained about the activities in which children engage and their sequence throughout the day, whether they are performed alone or with others in the family unit or household, and the place where the activities are carried out (school, home, street or elsewhere).
These activities and their context provide a full picture that can be used to identify a number of potential indicators of factors that protect —or risk— comprehensive child development in various areas, and to link the ways children spend their time with these areas.
For example, a recreational or leisure activity may be linked with health and education.
However, although a child may appear to spend an adequate amount of time on daily play and recreation, further investigation may reveal that this consists of watching television, playing video games or on the computer, which can make children more prone to obesity than engaging in non-sedentary recreational or sporting activities.
Child well-being depends on which activities are postponed or displaced by others.
Children forced to work are more likely to have higher absenteeism rates, drop out from school or have less time to study.
For example, when children have to stand in for adults in caring for young children, the sick or elderly, it severely limits their access to activities that promote their development.
Such problems occur more frequently among children and adolescents from households experiencing monetary poverty.
International studies have illustrated the potential of using time measurements to gauge child well-being.
For instance, a time-use survey in Japan identified a number of specific problems among children and their families, revealing that many families no longer eat lunch or dinner together, and that some children go to school without having eaten breakfast.
Extremely low levels of participation in physical activities were also observed, as most Japanese people use free time to watch television.
A study conducted in the United States (Hofferth and Sandberg, 2000) to analyse time-use differences among children of Asian, Hispanic and African descent demonstrated clear cultural influences.
The study found that Asian children spent the most time studying, while those of African descent spent the most time on church activities and those of Hispanic descent spent the most time with their families eating and performing unpaid activities.
In Latin America, time-use surveys in Ecuador (2011), Mexico (2009) and Peru (2011) showed that indigenous adolescents aged 15-19 of both sexes have a longer working day than non-indigenous adolescents (i.e. they spend more time on paid work and unpaid domestic work and less on rest, recreation and socializing).
This might suggest that indigenous adolescents have a poorer quality of life and a lower level of well-being than other adolescents of their age (see the figure below).
The behaviour and attitudes learned in childhood are carried forward into later life, where they reinforce gender roles and models with respect to adult duties and opportunities for a better quality of life (see the figure below).
Time-use surveys have also shown how significant differences that exist between girls and boys, even at an early age, can develop into gender inequalities because of their impact on current and future well-being.
Time-use surveys provide ample opportunity to identify factors associated with variations in the time spent on certain activities.
Factors such as family size, whether or not a child lives with both parents, the educational climate at home, ethnicity, geographical area, socioeconomic status, and gender, age, birth-order and other characteristics, provide a full picture of the children’s situation and of generally overlooked aspects of child poverty.
Discussion of these issues also leads to further reflection on how to make the shift from the rhetoric of rights to an operating definition of dimensions, variables and indicators reflecting that will and conviction.
The calculation of indicators for children’s economic, social and cultural rights helps to ensure full enjoyment of the rights set forth in the Convention on the Rights of the Child and other human rights instruments.
The challenge is to leverage the existing information and develop new child-centred methodologies.
Enfoque, indicadores y perspectivas”, Seminario Internacional Indicadores de Derechos Económicos, Sociales y Culturales (DESC) y seguimiento de las políticas sociales para la superación de la pobreza y el logro de la igualdad, Santiago, Chile, National Human Rights Institute (INDH), 2013. 3.
Contribution of different deprivations to child poverty As discussed earlier, the fall in child poverty is not only a matter of lower levels and severity of deprivation in each dimension.
The drop in total and extreme child poverty levels has also been associated with a lesser intensity of poverty (understood as the number of simultaneous deprivations or violations of basic rights), albeit to differing degrees from one country to another.
As children and adolescents living in poverty gradually come to be affected by one main deprivation and the proportion of those experiencing a syndrome of multiple deprivation narrows, it becomes more important to analyse which deprivations predominate in order to determine the scale of poverty and extreme child poverty.
Whereas an individual analysis of deprivations by dimension is useful for identifying which rights are most breached among children and adolescents in general, a look at those dimensions among the poor or extremely poor specifically helps identify priority areas for the action of social policy and its sectoral components.
As figure II.5 shows, the importance of the various factors (dimensions) in reducing extreme poverty and total child poverty has not changed much.
The three key dimensions are still access to sanitation, quality housing and drinking water, which even retained the same order of importance between 2000 and 2011.
However, as extreme poverty has declined, these three dimensions have become even more prominent, suggesting that greater strides have been made in education, information and nutrition than in sanitation, housing and drinking water.
Whereas around 2000 nearly 82% of extremely poor children in the region suffered some sort of deprivation in terms of quality housing, access to drinking water or adequate sanitation (alone or in combination with others), this figure had risen to 88.4% by 2011.
The fact that its relative contribution to extreme poverty has diminished indicates that more than proportional progress had been made in reducing the percentage of children with no access to schooling.
The fact that the same did not happen with total poverty means that progress in reducing the school dropout rate had been less significant than achievements in other areas.
Total poverty Circa 2000 Circa 2011 In 11 of the 14 countries with national data (with the exception of Brazil, Costa Rica and Nicaragua), the contribution of housing deprivation to total child poverty increased.
Its contribution to extreme poverty also increased in 10 countries in the region.
Special cases were Peru, where the housing dimension’s contribution to extreme An important point to bear in mind is that the indicator of the contribution of deprivations in the different dimensions does not incorporate the degree of deprivation (moderate or severe).
Although this has no bearing on the contribution of the dimensions to extreme poverty, it is relevant to their contribution to total poverty. poverty increased by 14 percentage points, and Costa Rica and Mexico where, on the contrary, it decreased by more than 10 percentage points.
The overall conclusion to be drawn from these data is that States in the region have failed to fully address the issue of access to quality housing without overcrowding, much less consider it in child policies (see tables II.7 and II.8).
By contrast, progress has been recorded in several countries in sanitation, another dimension that contributes heavily to poverty.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Costa Rica, Honduras and Mexico, its importance diminished steadily during the decade under consideration, reflecting improved provision of household waste treatment methods.
However, the contribution of the drinking water dimension to total child poverty was found to have increased in 11 countries.
In this country the drinking water dimension contributed even more to extreme poverty, rising from 42.8% in 2002 to 67.6% in 2011, as table II.7 shows.
In the case of Jamaica, it shows some of the deprivations for which data are available.
The estimates give an initial idea of the child poverty situation in the Caribbean from a multidimensional and rights-based perspective.
As the surveys were prepared using the same methodology as for Latin America, they allow child poverty in the Caribbean to be compared with that in the rest of the region, something that cannot be done using monetary poverty statistics, which are constructed using different methodologies.
The dimensions used in estimating multidimensional child poverty are: drinking water, sanitation, housing, education, information and nutrition. b Does not include the nutrition dimension. c Deprivations in the information dimension are underestimated because there is a high level of omission in the survey. d Does not include the information dimension.
Estimates reveal that a significant proportion of children and adolescents experience poverty in these seven Caribbean countries, as in Latin America: total child poverty levels in the Caribbean range from 10% to 74% and extreme child poverty levels, from 1% to 46% (see table II.9).
In the Caribbean countries with the highest child poverty levels (Guyana and Belize), the percentages of poor children (total and extreme) are in the same range as in Latin American countries with high child poverty, such as Nicaragua and Peru.
The Caribbean countries with low child poverty levels (Saint Lucia and Antigua and Barbuda) are in the same range as the Latin American countries with the lowest levels, i.e.
Poverty levels in the other Caribbean countries range from medium-high (Suriname) to medium-low (Grenada and Trinidad and Tobago).
These initial estimates suggest that the scale of child poverty in the subregion, at least in the seven countries studied, is similar to that in Latin America.
In Belize, Guyana and Suriname, total poverty averages over 60% and extreme poverty, over 35%.
By contrast, in island countries of the Caribbean, total child poverty averages 24% and extreme poverty, 6%.
The difference is explained in part by high levels of rural poverty in Belize, Guyana and Suriname.
Unlike in Caribbean small island States, the disparities between urban and rural areas in these three countries are very sharp.
With respect to the different dimensions of child poverty, in all eight countries (including Jamaica), there is a significant incidence of moderate or severe deprivation in access to drinking water, quality housing and information.
However, the percentage of children deprived of their rights to education, nutrition and access to sanitation tends to be lower (see table II.10).
As regards quality housing, countries with the highest percentage of (moderately or severely) deprived children and adolescents are Guyana (51%) and Belize (44%).
The lowest percentages are seen in Antigua and Barbuda (3%), followed by Trinidad and Tobago (8%).
In five of the eight countries (including Jamaica), at least 18% of children are moderately or severely deprived of access to drinking water.
At least 20% of children in Belize, Guyana and Suriname are severely deprived in this dimension, while the percentage in the other countries is lower: 15.2% in Jamaica; 8.6% in Trinidad and Tobago; and close to 0% in Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada and Saint Lucia.
Belize, Guyana and Suriname have not only the highest poverty levels, but also the largest percentage of children and adolescents suffering moderate or severe deprivation in two or more dimensions.
In these three countries, the percentage of children with multiple deprivations ranges from 21% to 42%, compared with 1% to 6% in the other countries (see figure II.6).
Between 9% and 16% of children are severely deprived in two or more dimensions in the continental countries (Belize, Guyana and Suriname), but very few children are in this situation in the other countries.
In general, child poverty is greatest in low-income countries and in countries with the highest monetary poverty.
Of the seven countries for which child poverty can be estimated, the World Bank classes Guyana as lower-middle income, Belize, Grenada, Jamaica, Saint Lucia and Suriname as upper-middle income, and Antigua and Barbuda and Trinidad and Tobago as high income.
Belize, Grenada, Guyana and Suriname are the countries with the highest levels of monetary poverty (between 36% and 51% of the total population), followed by Saint Lucia (29%) and by Antigua and Barbuda, Jamaica, and Trinidad and Tobago (between 17% and 18%).
However, neither national income nor monetary poverty fully explains the variability in child poverty levels.
For example, although Trinidad and Tobago has the highest per capita gross domestic product in the Caribbean, it does not have the lowest level of child poverty.
Unlike other indicators, estimates of multidimensional child poverty provide a unique and detailed picture of the situation of children and adolescents moderately or severely deprived of their rights.
They serve as a benchmark for focusing government efforts to reduce this scourge and provide a basis for measuring progress in poverty eradication in the coming years. 5.
Child poverty and children in households with income below the monetary poverty line A multidimensional methodology was adopted in this chapter to identify poor children, because the method of multiple deprivations, associated with the violation of a measurable set of child rights, was considered more appropriate to the specific characteristics and well-being gaps of children and adolescents.
As noted earlier, the multiple deprivation approach differs from monetary poverty measurement in both its conceptualization and empirical method.
The well-being gaps revealed by the indirect (monetary) method are usually correlated with directly observable deprivations that may be measured as child poverty.
It is useful to study child and adolescent well-being from both approaches, because this allows for the combination of different issues and the analysis of various public policy measures for childhood, and the adoption of a holistic policy perspective.
Poverty among children and adolescents, measured by household income, has declined sharply over the past two decades, albeit with ups and downs.
However, in both cases, by midway through the period (2000) the levels were still nearly the same as in 1990 and most of the reduction occurred after 2005 (Rossel, 2013).
Although both sets of figures evolved similarly, not all poor children live in income-poor households, nor do all children in income-poor households have their basic rights breached.
This makes it necessary to examine the combined evolution of child poverty and household monetary poverty (as measured in children).
While 39.3% of children in the region (a total of 63.6 million) experienced both child poverty and monetary poverty around 2000, the percentage had fallen to 25.1% (40.6 million children) by around 2011 (see table II.12).
This means that the number of children experiencing simultaneous child and monetary poverty had dropped by more than 20 million.
The question is whether the remaining 40 million children form a hard core of multidimensional poverty (including monetary poverty) as a result of geographical isolation, social exclusion or discrimination, or whether their living standards could be improved fairly rapidly, as has happened with the 23 million children who have escaped simultaneous child and monetary poverty.
At the same time, in the early 2000s, 16% of children (25.8 million) experienced child poverty but were not income-poor.
This category remained almost constant and the value was the same by around 2011, suggesting that the reduction in the number of poor (by both methods) stemmed, in part, from higher household income that had not necessarily improved objective living standards for children.
Similarly, the percentage of non-poor children experiencing household monetary poverty increased from 15.8% (25.7 million) to 18.0% (29 million).
This suggests that the reductions in child and monetary poverty recorded in the region were largely unconnected, that is to say, public policy action did not link up the two approaches to poverty.
Accordingly, more coordinated action is needed in tackling child poverty (see table II.12 and figure II.7).
Extreme poverty Extremely poor in terms of deprivation and household income Extremely poor in terms of household income Extremely poor in terms of deprivation Non-extremely poor B.
Territorial distribution of deprivation As discussed earlier, deprivation of the right to housing, education, information, health and nutrition is an integral part of child and adolescent poverty.
The under-18 age group is not only more vulnerable than other age groups in some dimensions, but is also exposed to poverty to differing extents, as structural factors make some more likely than others to be denied the exercise of rights fundamental to their development and well-being.
Contextual factors can also increase the incidence of child poverty, including the way poverty is distributed in a country.
The child poverty situation in the region calls for a study of inequalities broken down to lower geographical levels within countries, in order to target public policies and sectoral projects for improving the living standards of children and adolescents in different areas defined on a geopolitical or territorial basis.
As child poverty is unevenly distributed within countries, the aim is to deepen the information and analysis, which thus far has been confined chiefly to regional and national levels, and to break it down by urban and rural areas or political and administrative divisions.
When child poverty is analysed using a multidimensional approach that includes its territorial distribution, the reference unit is the municipality —one of the spaces or scenarios where child poverty is most apparent— while also recognizing local communities and authorities as crucial in triggering change and breaking the cycle of poverty and inequality affecting children and adolescents.
As part of the policy decentralization process, it is important to lower the geographical level of analysis to a subnational level —like the municipality— because, for one thing, spatial analysis of a specific poverty indicator facilitates the determination of clusters of municipalities.
This allows priority clusters to be identified for public policy implementation, as they have high concentrations of children and adolescents suffering deprivation and can even cross national and geographical boundaries, attesting to a reality that affects several subregions in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Such subnational measurements use geographical information systems (GIS) as a platform to map the spatial distribution of the social deprivation in which many children and adolescents live.
Geographic information systems are specialized computer programs for analysing spatial patterns in information.
Used by local governments and assuming the right information is accessed, they can be very useful tools for planning development schemes, public policies and social projects to optimize conditions in housing, education and basic and social services for the population at large and children and adolescents in particular.
Geographic information systems can show the spatial distribution of different socioeconomic and demographic variables through a simple analysis of digital mapping or spatial autocorrelation.
To implement this methodology, a further source of information is required to supplement household and demographic and health surveys, as these do not capture data representing smaller geographical areas.
This study used national population and housing censuses, which, because of their universality, provide information on every individual, household and dwelling in a country.
Nationwide censuses are conducted by national statistical offices approximately every 10 years and capture information on a number of characteristics, including education, migration, labour, demography, ethnicity, housing quality, availability of basic services, overcrowding and access to information and communication goods.
The census data can then be represented for smaller geographical areas (e.g. municipalities, districts or blocks).
In their adaptation of the University of Bristol’s child poverty measurement method, ECLAC and UNICEF (2010 and 2012a) used population censuses to calculate deprivation indicators and their thresholds for the dimensions of housing, sanitation, drinking water, education and access to information, each for smaller geographical areas.
These deprivation indicators can be mapped to identify municipalities with a higher percentage of children and adolescents living in poverty.
The selected deprivation indicators and countries are the percentage of children under 18 experiencing housing deprivation in Costa Rica and the percentage of children under 18 experiencing drinking-water-related deprivation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
At the same time, when only national data are available, it is very difficult to target policies for reducing existing social inequities because social programmes struggle to generate a positive impact on extremely poor children in localized areas.
The measurement of housing deprivation is presented for Costa Rica, based on a threshold of overcrowding (three or more people per room, excluding the bathroom and kitchen), mud flooring or unsafe construction materials, such as ceilings or exterior walls made from mud, waste materials or similar.
The burgundy-coloured cantons in map II.1 are those housing the highest concentration of children and adolescents experiencing housing deprivation.
These cantons are located on the borders with either Nicaragua or Panama, apart from Garabito (with 30% housing-deprived children), which is located on the Pacific Ocean.
This border area not only hosts a large mobile and migrant population, mainly from Nicaragua, but is also an international transit area for the movement of people and goods between northern and southern Central America.
The most salient feature of the border dynamic between Costa Rica and Nicaragua is migration.
In recent years, Costa Rica has been a net recipient of immigrants (7.8% of the country’s inhabitants were international migrants in 2000 and 97% of that group were Nicaraguans).
Nicaragua has experienced major population outflows to two main destinations: Costa Rica and the United States (Morales, Acuña and Wing-Ching, 2010).
Map II.2 and table II.16 show this deprivation to be concentrated in urban areas, as well as rural areas with large indigenous populations, such as the Amazon region (home to the Yanomami, Ye’kuana and Warakeno tribes); the State of Apure (home to the Guahibo, Yaruro, Inga and Kumba); and the State of Delta Amacuro (home to the Inga and Warao).
The resulting information is useful for policies on drinking water supply, as well as child policies targeted at indigenous peoples and poverty reduction policies.
Although the methodology establishes no causality regarding the concentration of specific deprivations in specific municipalities, it can be used to link deprivations with certain determinants, such as indigenous ethnicity, residence in an urban or rural area or proximity to a border with another country.
The two deprivation indicators analysed by smaller geographical areas are consistent with previous studies, inasmuch as that deprivations in both countries tend to be concentrated in and around border areas and areas historically settled by indigenous peoples.
Concluding remarks Child poverty is widespread in Latin America and the Caribbean and represents a priority challenge for governments and society at large.
The multiple facets of poverty among children and adolescents (deprivation in the areas of nutrition, housing, access to drinking water and sanitation, education, information and household income) cause permanent adverse effects that mark them throughout the rest of their lives.
To a large extent, these effects also lead to the intergenerational transmission of poverty and, in some cases, serve to deepen inequality.
Although child poverty by multiple deprivations has diminished over the past decade, the pace has been slow considering it was a period of economic growth in the region when income poverty decreased sharply.
At an average 10-percentagepoint reduction per decade, it would take a further half a century to eradicate child poverty from the region.
While there was also a reduction in combined child poverty and monetary poverty among children in incomepoor households, structurally the “mix” of the two measures of poverty has remained more or less the same.
As this reduction has not resolved the problem of the infantilization of poverty, the question is whether the remaining child poverty will become more entrenched and demand more drastic measures to eradicate.
The evidence set forth speaks to an improvement in living standards among children and adolescents.
However, current measurements of child poverty are confined to specific gaps quantifiable by household surveys.
To tap the full potential of the multidimensional and rights-based approach, the analysis should be complemented by studies of deprivations in other dimensions of well-being, such as time, as discussed in box II.2.
The measures being taken in specific areas to address the various deprivations should be coordinated under a comprehensive approach to tackling poverty.
In this regard, many of the steps taken to improve children’s quality of life will also improve that of other family members.
Furthermore, although measures in one area may ease deprivation in one dimension of child poverty, they do not necessarily ensure that other fundamental children’s rights are realized.
In a culture of poverty, rights which are not envisaged in poverty reduction measures per se tend to be infringed too, leading to such abuses as child exploitation or physical or psychological violence against children.
A comprehensive approach to combating child poverty takes not only coordinated action by the State across different sectoral policies and programmes, but also measures addressing psychosocial aspects, in particular to develop a culture of recognition and respect for child rights within the family.
Given the scale and seriousness of the problem, various areas of public policy, especially policy on poverty reduction, urgently need to be rethought.
To break the cycle of poverty and inequality reproduction, decisive and well-planned actions must be designed for target populations to produce a real, positive impact.
Accordingly, public policies should not only tackle existing poverty but also build advocacy and social protection systems to offset the effects of poverty (such as poor health, education and self-esteem, informal work and low income) and so mitigate the impact of factors contributing to the transmission or resurgence of poverty.
The human-rights approach in development policies, and principally in poverty reduction programmes, implicitly recognizes that child poverty violates human rights in two ways: it prevents the current exercise of human rights and limits opportunities and capacity-building for exercising them in the future.
The rights of most poor children and adolescents are violated, ignored or part or in full on a daily basis and their families are powerless to protect them because they are unable to enjoy their own rights.
Government policies and programmes targeting children and adolescents are part of the comprehensive child development framework.
As ECLAC has noted, perhaps the main shift needed to promote children’s rights is to cease relegating the conditions of access to and exercise of rights to the private sphere: households and families or the market.
The private sphere contributes to generating child well-being, but should not be the sole guarantor and architect of child rights.
If rights are to be genuinely comprehensive, they must be reflected in governance through coherent systems of cross-sector tools under which the institutions involved assume specific responsibilities, direct resource investment towards achieving goals and use results-based monitoring and control mechanisms.
A necessary first step in any policy for comprehensive child development and child rights protection is to overcome child poverty.
The combat of child poverty is a moral and political imperative, because its dire consequences affect not only children and adolescents but society as a whole, undermining the foundations of sustainable, long-term economic and social development.
Thus there is international recognition that the post-2015 development agenda and Latin American and Caribbean countries must strive to protect the rights of children and adolescents, broaden poverty reduction programmes and translate the political will to prioritize children and equality into action.
Colombia and Mexico have already adopted multidimensional poverty indices as official measures.
The ability of these multidimensional poverty measures to break down each dimension’s contribution to poverty and to disaggregate poverty by population groups, including children and adolescents, makes them very useful tools for monitoring and evaluating public policy.
First, the size of the population identified by the multidimensional method may (and indeed often does) differ significantly from that identified using the income method.
This should be taken into account when such measures are used to define public policy goals.
Similarly, setting poverty reduction targets based on a particular indicator involves redirecting public measures towards different policies.
Ideally, official poverty indicators should cover both multidimensional and income aspects, bearing in mind that they are support measures designed to illustrate the population’s situation.
The potential of multidimensional poverty measurement as a tool for targeting public policies has also been discussed.
Cash transfer programmes, which feature in the social protection systems of most countries in the region, typically ascertain eligibility using statistical or econometric targeting methods.
Most of these programmes use substitutes for means testing (usually based on discriminant analysis or probit models), in which households are scored by their characteristics (observed during a field visit or declared).
Although one of the most prized aspects of cash transfer programmes has been their relatively good targeting, the use of multidimensional poverty measures as identification and selection tools should reduce targeting errors and increase policy effectiveness.
The main argument in favour of using multidimensional deprivation indicators as targeting tools is that, although means testing alternatives include different dimensions, they are not truly multidimensional because they fail to capture deprivation in each of these dimensions.
Their aim is still to assess family income levels, albeit using multiple indicators to do so.
Another argument is that the targeting mechanisms they use have focused on income shortfall rather than on human-capital-related deprivations, despite the fact that tackling these deprivations, particularly among children and adolescents, is an explicit objective of poverty reduction policies.
Azevedo and Robles (2013) illustrate the potential of multidimensional poverty measures as a targeting instrument by means of an exercise involving Mexico’s Oportunidades programme.
The authors analyse the ability of targeting via multidimensional measurement to capture low-income households, as well as households where children do not attend school or engage in child labour, and compare it with alternative mechanisms (including the one the programme actually uses).
The authors found the multidimensional targeting method to be better at identifying households suffering deprivation in these three dimensions.
A similar exercise on Uruguay’s Family Allowances programme (Lavalleja, Mathieu and Messina, 2013), which considers both household characteristics and children’s individual attributes, stresses the advantage of using a flexible indicator to focus efforts on, for example, children deprived in a certain dimension, giving that dimension greater weight.
Robles, “Multidimensional targeting: Identifying beneficiaries of conditional cash transfer programs” Social Indicators .
Mathieu and P Messina, “Evaluación de los mecanismos de selección de beneficiarios de asignaciones familiares” research paper, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas y de Administración, Universidad de la República, 2013; M.
Ravallion, “On multidimensional indices of poverty” Journal of Economic Inequality, vol. 9, No. 2, 2011.
Robles (2013), “Multidimensional targeting: Identifying beneficiaries of conditional cash transfer programs”, Social Indicators Research, vol. 112, No. 2.
Messina (2013), “Evaluación de los mecanismos de selección de beneficiarios de asingaciones familiares”, research paper, Faculty of Economic Sciences, Universidad de la República.
Increase of the motor vehicle fleet and its impact on air pollution C.
Conceptual and methodological considerations Well-being is a wide-ranging concept that has been defined in many and varied ways.
It is a positive physical, social and mental state, rather than simply the absence of pain, discomfort and incapacity.
It requires that basic needs are met, that individuals have a sense of purpose, that they feel able to achieve important personal goals and participate in society.
It is enhanced by conditions that include supportive personal relationships, strong and inclusive communities, good health, financial and personal security, rewarding employment, and a healthy and attractive environment (British Government, 1999). 1.
Current state of the debate The many definitions of well-being reflect its multifaceted nature and can be seen as stepping stones towards conceptual, methodological and policy proposals.
In broad terms, “well-being” has been used to refer to the life situation of a given person or group in society (Gasper, 2007).
The most common approaches to conceptualizing well-being encompass quality of life, living standards and human development as well as notions such as social well-being, usefulness, satisfaction with life, prosperity, satisfaction of needs, fulfilling potential and happiness.
Although some of these terms have specific meanings, there are significant overlaps between them, and they are sometimes used interchangeably (McGillivray, 2005).
For much of the post-war period, development theory equated well-being with economic progress, expressed as the total of what a society could produce, in the belief that the spread of economic growth would bring about universal well-being.
It was as an expression of this view that gross domestic product (GDP) was established as an indicator of the economic development and progress of societies.
In both political theory and policy planning, GDP has been used as a proxy for well-being (Boarini, Johansson and D’Ercole, 2006).
Many different critics subsequently highlighted the limitations of GDP as a barometer of the well-being of a society.
From the 1970s onwards, proposals were put forward with a view to establishing an adjusted indicator able to take account of both the creation of wealth and well-being on a society and the production of goods and services that are not for sale on the market.
These initiatives sought to adjust conventional economic indicators (such as GDP) to reflect social and environmental costs and benefits that would not normally be covered in national accounts.1 Approaching the issue from another perspective, other efforts have concentrated on building composite indices in an attempt to gain a better grasp of the multifaceted nature of well-being.
One such attempt is the Human Development Index (HDI), which is based on three indicators (income, life expectancy and educational attainment) and whose theory is underpinned by Amartya Sen’s capability approach.
The HDI represents a departure from the view that well-being should be understood purely in terms of income and other material dimensions.
In essence it posits that progress and development take place, and poverty is reduced, when people are afforded greater freedom (or capabilities).
It therefore follows that a “good life” is, in part, a life in which people are genuinely free to choose what they do, rather than being obliged to seek new life experiences.
The intrinsic value of freedom is thus linked to empowering people so they can themselves act as the protagonists, or creative agents, of their own development.
Another approach entails introducing subjective aspects to assess well-being.2 A key aspect is the interplay between the economic (or material) development of society and subjective well-being, namely how people rate their well-being or quality of life.
The central idea is that when societies reach a given level of economic and material development, the law of diminishing returns begins to apply in terms of the relationship between economic growth and well-being.
In economics literature this is known as the “Easterlin Paradox”, namely that although people with higher incomes are happier than those with lower incomes, once individuals reach a certain level of prosperity, no further increases in income will cause levels of happiness to rise (Easterlin, 1974).
Despite the major contribution they have made to understanding of the phenomenon of well-being, these indicators have been much criticized.
Firstly, the weightings assigned to the various elements measured have proved highly controversial (Conceição and Bandura, 2008).
Secondly, criticism of the chosen methodology has focused on whether there is a collinear relationship between indicators, and therefore on the robustness of the variables used.
Thirdly, indicators based on a purely subjective vision of well-being betray significant methodological weaknesses that make it difficult to take account of the multifaceted nature of well-being.
Despite this criticism and the variety of methodological and conceptual problems that remain to be resolved, new debates have gone beyond academic spheres and come to the attention of various governments.
A crucial milestone was the establishment of the Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi Commission at the behest of the then President of France, Nicolas Sarkozy, with the support of the European Commission, to take stock of progress and well-being in the twenty-first century.
The Commission’s findings stressed that well-being was to be understood as a multidimensional phenomenon.
Although these findings drew on previous efforts, including discussions on happiness, in the selection and construction of indicators, they surpassed them in that they laid down —or at least began discussions with a view to laying down— a set of indicators that were comparable across countries.
Stiglitz, Sen and Fitoussi (2008) took an examination of the limits of GDP as the basis on which to make a series of recommendations for improving the indicators currently used to measure progress and well-being.
In economic terms, they proposed favouring net indicators over gross indicators, analysing the quality and quantity of services and changes and flows in them, improving the measurement of services provided by governments, and paying more attention to the consumption of households than total consumption within the economy.
The intention was, firstly, to measure income, wealth and consumption as a whole and not separately, and to quantify services provided and consumption generated in the home and any related inequalities.
Secondly, the commission sought to analyse the quality of life using both subjective well-being indicators and indicators accounting for people’s opportunities and conditions in terms of health, education, security, political representation, environmental conditions and other considerations.
Thirdly, it stressed the need to consider sustainable development, an issue around which there is little consensus, and to analyse economic and environmental dimensions separately, while paying special attention to rises and falls in reserves of key resources for human life. 2.
Ongoing initiatives Building on the work of this commission, in 2010 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) established a partnership between a number of international organizations to measure progress in societies.3 The partnership has thus far focused on defining indicators for periodic and future examination in isolation with a view to creating a composite index of well-being.
These indicators are built on three variables: economic resources, quality Approaches introducing subjective dimensions of well-being have given rise to several indices to measure happiness.
One such indicator is Bhutan’s Gross National Happiness Index, which is based on the view that genuine human development takes place when material and spiritual development are combined.
Proposals have also been made to analyse human environments in relation to ecosystems and to distinguish between individual and social well-being when examining links between indicators (Quiroga, 2007).
The need is also stressed to consider supplementary qualitative indicators to contextualize analysis of the various variables and for culture to play a key role in definitions of well-being, among other factors.
As the New Economics Foundation (NEF) has shown, successive governments have paid much attention to these discussions, and their impact has grown over time (NEF, 2008).
The United Kingdom has been a pioneer in this area, and in 1994 launched, as part of the Agenda 21 action plan, a sustainable development strategy entitled Sustainable Development: the UK Strategy (Government of the United Kingdom, 1994).
In 1997, the British Government announced that it would be drawing up a new strategy and therefore issued a consultation document —Opportunities for Change— as well as a series of publications on various aspects of sustainable development.
The new strategy took the achievements of the 1994 strategy as its basis, but followed a new approach that stressed the social dimension of sustainable development together with economic and environmental considerations.
In 1999 the government published the document A Better Quality of Life (1999), which set out a system of around 150 indicators providing a detailed overview of progress made and challenges to face in terms of sustainable development.
The system included a subset of headline indicators, of which three concern the economy (growth, investment and employment), five relate to social affairs (poverty, education, health, housing and crime) and seven refer to the environment (climate change, air quality, traffic, water quality in rivers, wildlife, land use and waste).
Two such initiatives are of particular importance, firstly the Mexican project launched in late 2009 for the multidimensional measurement of poverty.
This initiative is the first to take account of the different forms that household poverty can take, by considering both social factors (health, housing, education and access to food) and income at national, federal-state and municipal levels.
The main conclusions of the conference were as follows: (a) Understanding of people’s well-being and of its determinants is crucial, since it shapes the direction in which society should move in order to achieve progress and influences policy-makers. (b) Commonly used indicators only partially grasp the complexity of this phenomenon.
As stated above, such is the problem with GDP, which focuses exclusively on the economic production of goods and services to the detriment of issues such as income distribution, justice, freedoms, people’s capacity to achieve a meaningful life, their life satisfaction and the sustainability of economic progress.
In spite of significant economic growth, Latin America remains the most unequal region in the world.
Inequalities are manifest not only in income but also in education, health, access to quality services, security, the availability of free time and the exercise of citizenship.
In analysing well-being, emphasis should be placed on ethnic and gender gaps, and other vulnerable groups, and on intergenerational social mobility. (f) In respect of measuring well-being, the goal is not to build a synthetic well-being index, but to produce a limited number of indicators that are relevant and can inform policy design and decision-making.
There is a consensus on the need to improve official information sources and to establish other sources that capture aspects of wellbeing that have not yet been measured (Rojas, 2011).
In sum, a consensus has therefore emerged around the world, including in Latin America, on the need to rethink what constitutes progress in societies.
Narratives maintaining that economic growth is the only way to achieve well-being are, to say the least, inadequate.
Rethinking traditional ways of measuring well-being is also required, incorporating issues such as the environment —and the current and intergenerational costs of harming it— as well as subjective aspects of people’s lives. 3.
Well-being, inequality and social malaise Rethinking what well-being is and the way in which it is measured is of singular importance in Latin America, a context marked by three distinct factors: (a) major progress towards meeting overall development goals, (b) persistent inequality, and (c) the emergence of increasingly visible signs of social malaise.
As a recent report has shown (Alarcón, 2013), the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have made great strides towards meeting the Millennium Development Goals.
Deforestation is a serious threat to environmental sustainability, and the greatest loss of forest areas has occurred in South America.
More widespread access to reproductive health services is essential to prevent maternal mortality and to reduce the rate of adolescent pregnancies.
Urbanization continues to advance more quickly than slum upgrading, so the major challenge lies in how to improve housing and domestic water systems (Alarcón, 2013).
This does not, however, detract from the substantial progress that has been made in reducing poverty, but there remain very serious inequalities in income distribution that have only been slightly alleviated.
On the other hand, the fastest growth in social expenditure has been on those instruments that do the least for redistribution, such as social security.
Accordingly, the structure of the social safety net needs to be adjusted to move towards greater equality” (ECLAC, 2010a).
Quite aside from the aforementioned elements, the conviction that rethinking what constitutes well-being is necessary has emerged at a time of crisis and increasingly visible social unrest.
For several years now in Chile, and more recently in Brazil —to name but two countries that have made significant progress towards meeting the Millennium Development Goals— there has been a wide-ranging malaise that has become evident through large-scale protest movements.
At the root of it is dissatisfaction with issues such as education, public transport and environmental conflicts that has channelled wider feelings of frustration present in every society.
Young people have been the first group in society to react, both by demonstrating in the street and by voicing their displeasure using the many means at their disposal associated with the new technologies that form part of their cultural universe.
These movements may have formed in response to diverse issues (such as education, public transport or the contamination of food with agrochemicals or the poisoning of the environment with toxic chemicals), but are symptoms of a social unrest that threatens to define our age.
What defines these movements is that they lack a clear, unified set of demands and that are resistant to input from political parties for fear of losing the independence that they feel safeguards their ability to stand for what people really want.
It is thus paradoxical that interest in well-being has peaked at a time in which the countries of the region have made significant progress towards meeting the Millennium Development Goals, while a general malaise has become visible via the symptoms of very diverse protest movements.
Meanwhile, traditional indicators do not appear to take account of issues that are essential to the well-being of the protagonists of the development process. 4.
Firstly, a synthetic index would entail simplifying a very complex phenomenon, since the very fact of selecting the dimensions to be considered in the index is, by definition, arbitrary.
In addition, some of the dimensions selected, such as literacy and undernutrition, can see themselves downgraded in importance over time.
Although synthetic indices, such as the Human Development Index, are useful in drawing up rankings of countries, they are also difficult to interpret because thresholds (or cut-off lines) need to be drawn to ascertain which elements lie below expected levels for well-being.
It should also be noted that the requisite conditions for building an index are not yet in place, as some of the most significant factors remain insufficiently documented in the official statistics of the countries in question: there are significant areas where information is scarce or practically non-existent, so official sources therefore need to be developed and refined.
Efforts also need to be made to standardize (or harmonize) information produced by countries with a view to making it comparable.
Ultimately, a solution to both the problems associated with selecting indicators and other technical and methodological difficulties needs to be found before the creation of a multivariate measurement system can be considered, if that were the objective.
Nor can the objective be to move towards a comprehensive system of indicators, which would be a tempting choice as it has the advantage of not simplifying the complicated phenomenon of well-being, which is the problem with synthetic indices.
However, it is the all-encompassing nature of the information that makes it difficult to use for the purposes of analysing progress in well-being in countries, as part of an integrated and, ideally, comparative overview.
A case in point is the system developed in 1999 by the British Government, which involved some 150 indicators.
It was conceived as the culmination of a public consultation process as part of a strategy stressing the social dimension of sustainable development, alongside economic and environmental considerations (A Better Quality of Life, 1999, Quality of Life Counts, 2004).
This system did indeed provide a comprehensive overview of the progress and challenges on the road to achieving sustainable development, but proved so complex that a subset of headline indicators had to be defined to provide a more concise account of progress made and challenges encountered in achieving sustainable development policy objectives in the United Kingdom.
This was clearly a very useful exercise in terms of local and central government policy-making in that country but would be difficult to replicate in Latin America, given that many of the countries have no official statistics on many key issues to be addressed in the multidimensional measurement of well-being.
This proposal aims to find a middle way, like the aforementioned headline indicators, but has substituted indicators for a small selection of key dimensions.
It is a modest proposal that considers three dimensions that have been overlooked in discussions on well-being in Latin America but which can be seen as necessary preconditions for well-being: space, time and coexistence.
These dimensions go beyond basic “first-generation” needs, which are essential for human life and refer to areas such as health, education, working conditions, housing, or economic situation.
They can also be seen as “windows” which provide a comprehensive, multidimensional view of issues which have been discussed above in a cursory and fragmented manner.
The space in which we live is undoubtedly a fundamental dimension of well-being.
The central element is the quality of this space and, particularly, of the environment.
A healthy environment is fundamental for people’s well-being, but pollution, toxic substances and noise undermine this well-being.
The OECD has stated that environmental factors play a role in more than 80% of the major diseases, and around a quarter of diseases and overall deaths worldwide are due to poor environmental conditions.
Environmental factors of a more extreme nature, such as natural disasters (earthquakes, cyclones, floods, drought, volcanic eruptions and epidemic outbreaks) may also cause deaths, injury and disease in significant proportions.
Preserving environmental and natural resources is also one of the most important challenges for ensuring the sustainability of well-being over time (OECD, 2011, p. 212).
The ability to strike the right balance in allocating time for various activities —work, family life, relationships, or leisure time— is a second key dimension of well-being.
When people are unable to juggle these activities adequately, this balance is upset, which means insufficient time for family life, interpersonal relationships, leisure and other activities.
The total time people spend in paid and unpaid work is known as their overall workload, which determines the amount of leisure at their disposal and eats into their well-being.
The concept of coexistence encompasses the many ways in which people live side-by-side in the various spheres of everyday life: within the family, at work, and in public spaces.
Harmonious coexistence requires moral values such as respect for diversity, tolerance and the ability to place trust in others, as well as acceptance of (and compliance with) the rules governing social interaction.
People’s well-being suffers when their relations with others turn sour as a result of intolerance, mistrust and lack of acceptance of diversity.
It also suffers when the rules governing social interaction lack legitimacy (ECLAC, 2007).
From the perspective of this document, the various forms of violence present in different social spheres, both public and private, show both a breakdown in harmonious coexistence and are thus factors that greatly reduce well-being.
A final important point is that this proposal includes no subjective aspects of well-being.
This does not, however, mean that it affords little importance to them, but rather supports the view that a broader approach to understanding well-being is needed, one that goes beyond measuring objective variables, and incorporates aspects of well-being that cannot be “bought” by income.
ECLAC has made use of subjective indicators to assess well-being in previous studies, (ECLAC, 2007, 2010a and 2012), but it is precisely because subjective factors are not a separate dimension of well-being, but are rather cross-cutting factors affecting numerous sectors, that they require more thorough analysis.
In view of the dimensions encompassed by the proposal, this analysis should consider, among other things, how people view environmental pollution and the effect it has on their well-being, how satisfied they are with their amount of free time and the time they spend in paid and unpaid work as well as their concerns at issues of safety and violence.
It encompasses the environment we inhabit, including water, earth, air, objects, living beings, relationships between men and women and intangible factors such as cultural values.
A healthy space (or environment) to live in is a prerequisite for a decent standard of well-being.
In the past few decades, the environment in Latin America has been affected in various ways, and in varying degrees of severity, by the model of development.
These changes to the environment — the space we live in— all have an impact on human well-being.
To illustrate this, one of the aforementioned factors, the deterioration of air quality, particularly, urban air pollution, will now be examined.12 1.
Air pollution in Latin American cities The world Health Organization (WHO) defines air pollution as contamination of the indoor or outdoor environment by any chemical, physical or biological agent that modifies the natural characteristics of the atmosphere.
Household combustion devices, motor vehicles, industrial facilities and forest fires are common sources of air pollution.
Pollutants of major public health concern include particulate matter (PM), carbon monoxide, ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulphur dioxide.13 Air pollution is a problem experienced chiefly in urban areas and has reached critical levels in Latin America.
In the past three decades, Latin America’s urban population has grown by 240% —while its rural population has increased by just 6.1%— and has risen from 70.6% of the total population of the region in 1990 to 79.5% in 2010, making it one of the most urbanized areas of the planet.
Countries such as Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, This section will refer specifically to outdoor spaces in urban areas.
Chile and Uruguay have even higher urbanization rates, exceeding 86%.14 Furthermore, as far back as 1990, three of the world’s 10 largest “megacities” were located in Latin America: Buenos Aires, Mexico City and São Paulo.
It has been said that at least 100 million people in Latin America and the Caribbean are exposed to air pollution at levels above those recommended by WHO (Cifuentes and others, 2005).
Particulate matter is a major air pollutant,15 alongside ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and sulphur dioxide (SO2).
In 2007-2008, all these cities (located in 15 countries in the region) exceeded WHO maximum recommended PM10 levels, set (in the 2005 edition of the WHO Air Quality Guidelines) at 20 micrograms per cubic metre (µg/m3) on average over an entire year and 50 µg/m3 on average over a period of 24 hours (WHO, 2006).
In 2008-2009, the capitals in the region with the highest levels of PM10 were Lima, Bogota and Santiago, whose annual averages were over three times the minimum recommended by WHO.
Great strides have been made in Mexico City in reducing the historically high levels of air pollution and reducing the amount of lead and particulate matter emitted into the atmosphere by means of a raft of measures, including eliminating leaded petrol and implementing the “Hoy no circula” (“No-drive days”) programme to limit vehicle use.
Aside from capital cities, the level of PM10 pollution in medium-sized cities is also a cause for alarm.
Particulate matter is the sum of all solid and liquid particles in the air we breathe.
PM10 is particulate matter with a diameter of up to and including 10 micrometres (a micrometre is a one-thousandth of a millimetre).
Some PM10 is small enough to enter the human respiratory system, and the smaller particles are the more hazardous they tend to be. 16 For further information see SEMARNAT (2011). 17 Mexicali has an annual average of 137 µg/m3.
The city with the worst annual average air pollution in the world is Ulaanbaatar in Mongolia with 279 µg/m3 (2008 data). 2.
Exposure to air pollution as a cause of death Exposure to urban air pollution, especially PM10, poses a serious risk to human health and leads to higher rates of mortality and morbidity.
As WHO has stated “urban outdoor air pollution increases the risk of acute (e.g. pneumonia) and chronic (e.g. lung cancer) respiratory disease as well as cardiovascular disease.
Different groups of individuals are affected by air pollution in different ways.
The most severe health impacts are seen among those people who are already ill.
In addition, more vulnerable populations like children, the elderly and those households with lower incomes and limited access to health care are more susceptible to the adverse effects from exposure to air pollution” (WHO, 2011).
The countries with the most deaths attributable to this problem in 2008 were Cuba (26), Argentina (24), Chile (19) and Uruguay (19), the Dominican Republic (16), Mexico (13), Peru (13), Brazil (12) and Saint Kitts and Nevis (12).
WHO estimates that 400,000 people die each year in Latin America and the Caribbean as a result of exposure to particulate matter, a high proportion of them owing to exposure indoors to fumes from the burning of biomass or other matter (quoted in Korc, 2000, p. 17).
The Clean Air Institute has stated, in its study Air Quality in Latin America: An Overview, that high concentrations of air pollutants are impacting citizens and causing premature death and illness (Clean Air Institute, 2012).
This is despite the clear and urgent need for action in response to deaths that could have been avoided if preventive public health measures had been taken.
Indeed, as WHO has stressed, a reduction in PM10 from 70 to 20 micrograms per cubic metre would reduce deaths related to air quality by approximately 15%.
Over this period, it can also be seen that, in ten countries (including Brazil, Chile and Peru), no change has been registered in the number of deaths attributed to air pollution, so at least it can be said that these countries have put a brake on this alarming trend.
Conversely, the remaining seven countries have seen an increase in the number of such deaths, which is unsatisfactory to say the very least.
WHO has defined the disease burden as the impact of a health problem on a given area, as measured by mortality and morbidity.
It is often quantified in terms of disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), which estimate the number of years lost due to disease.
The overall disease burden can be thought of as a measure of the gap between current health status and the ideal health status, where the individual lives to old age free from disease and disability.
These measures allow for comparison of the disease burden in different regions, nations or localities and have also been used to forecast the possible impacts of health interventions.
The Global Health Observatory (GHO) of the WHO also provides data on other causes of mortality.
Comparisons between the death rate attributable to air pollution and other causes of death, such as suicides, traffic accidents and homicides, clearly show the magnitude of the problem and the need for urgent action to address its underlying causes.
GHO data show that in Argentina, Chile and Uruguay the death rate attributable to air pollution is higher than that relating to suicides, traffic accident deaths and homicides.
Over the last two decades, considerable efforts have been made to curb air pollution in several Latin American urban areas.
Actions implemented in Bogota, Mexico City, Sao Paulo, and Santiago, to name some of the most active and successful examples, have been extensively documented.
However, air pollution remains an issue in Latin America’s established urban centres and is becoming an issue in the region’s emerging cities (Clean Air Institute, 2012).
All these cities have rules on air quality, and some have emission limits for moving and stationary facilities, as well as vehicle-inspection and -maintenance programmes (roadworthiness tests).
However, despite this progress, several countries in the region have still to create the right conditions for their cities to grow in a sustainable manner with a view to safeguarding the present and future wellbeing of their inhabitants.
One of the principal causes of the rising levels of air pollution in large urban areas is the increasing number of motor vehicles.
The high rate of vehicle ownership would not necessarily cause serious pollution if cars were not used daily by their owners to travel to work along very congested roads.
Such behaviour is encouraged by deficient public transport and by the huge size and functional segregation of the cities.
These factors contribute to vehicle emissions, and thereby directly affect levels of air pollution” (Simioni, 2003).
It has been noted that in cities such as Santiago, the transport sector is responsible for approximately 50% of the fine particles in the air; Santiago can therefore serve as a benchmark for other Latin American cities with air pollution problems (Bull 2003, p. 164).
Other main sources of air pollution include industry, power stations and the use of fuel by households for heating, cooking and refrigeration.
Curbing the effects of the rising number of motor vehicles is thus an issue of critical importance in ensuring the sustainability of cities, both in respect of air pollution and traffic congestion.
In other countries, such as Colombia, Honduras and Peru, upward trends have also been seen in vehicle ownership, but the number of vehicles remains comparatively small.
Studies of the auto market in Latin America have stressed that demand for vehicles is conditioned by several factors: price reductions, expectations of improved economic growth and poor-quality public transport, particularly due to insufficient infrastructure for railways and other forms of transport.
Such studies have also spoken of the “large number of households whose rising incomes have lifted them into the middle classes, thus giving them greater access to credit and a family purchasing power that enables them to buy their first car” (BBVA, 2010).
What is broadly being referred to here are young families who are the first generation to have access to this type of consumer goods.
This remains, however, substantially below rates of vehicle ownership in developed countries.
For example, in 2008 the United States had the highest rate of automobile ownership in the world, with 815 vehicles per 1 000 inhabitants (approaching a rate of one vehicle per person), while countries such as Japan (592), France (598) and Sweden (521) are closer to a ratio one vehicle for every two people.
The Latin American average in 2008 was 182 vehicles per 1,000 people, which is still some way from the situation in developed countries.
Despite the increase in the motor vehicle fleet over recent years, Latin America’s automotive sector still has significant growth potential, as the stock of vehicles in several countries remains both small and old.
This is a major challenge which necessitates action above and beyond the measures included in several of the region’s air-quality-management programmes (such as setting emissions limits for mobile sources, banning vehicles from driving on certain days and running roadworthiness-testing and vehicle-maintenance programmes).
In addition to more stringent checks on vehicles already in circulation, sustainable urban transport programmes need to be drawn up and implemented, taking account of such schemes as Bogota’s TransMilenio mass-transit bus system and Mexico City’s Metrobús network.
Another key factor for the sustainable development of cities is public awareness.
As ECLAC stated some years ago, “citizen awareness is a key factor in environmental management geared to reducing air pollution.
It is written in the conviction that the systematic progress made to date can only be maintained if all citizens are committed to the cause.
This means, on the one hand, that the State should consider citizen participation as a central factor in policy-making.
On the other, it means that citizens should take charge of the problem since responsibility for it, in the end, is shared” (Simioni, 2003).
The problem is that “none of these cities has attained a degree of citizens’ awareness that goes beyond the most basic level, and that a proactive approach to environmental protection is still a very distant goal” (Simioni, 2003, p. 12).
Now, several years since this was written, it must be acknowledged that little has been done to raise the awareness of citizens with a view to increasing their involvement in air quality policy-making.
Our well-being at a given moment is greatly dependent on what we do and what we are able to do and, therefore, on the time that we can devote to our various activities.
The importance of time-use lies in the fact that people’s well-being is contingent not only on what they earn or consume but also on their substantive freedom to use their time (Gammage, 2009, p. 7).
In other words, the availability of free time is an indicator of the well-being of an individual or social group.
However, in their daily lives, people are subject to numerous restrictions that curtail this freedom.
There is no endless supply of time; preparing for the future and setting goals and deciding on the means by which to achieve them are always subject to time pressure (Lechner, 1990, p. 66).
Similarly it has also been suggested that time is a scarce resource that is consumed, spent and used up Time is a resource that is limited throughout a person’s life.
The more time an individual dedicates to paid and unpaid work, the less time is available for other activities, including rest and recreation.
A person who lacks adequate time to sleep and rest may be considered to live and work in a state of time poverty. (Gammage, 2009, p. 7).
Individuals in such a state cannot be said to enjoy much well-being.
This section will examine how the social organization of time affects people’s well-being.
The working day Time spent in paid employment, whose purpose is to generate monetary resources to provide for a wide range of needs, is an essential part of most people’s lives.
The more time people spend at work, the less they have for other activities, such as family responsibilities, leisure and rest.
For this reason, reductions in working hours were one of the most commonly made demands from workers’ movements for much of the twentieth century.
Campaigns by workers’ movements to reduce working hours were part of efforts to make the world of work a less harsh and more human environment.
Their goals included preserving the health of male and female workers (including their mental health) and ensuring adequate time for rest and family life.
The duration of the working day is currently seen as a key element of the quality of employment and is, therefore, an indicator of decent work, in the words of the International Labour Organization (ILO).
In the early days of industrialization, the working day lasted between 14 and 16 hours, but was gradually reduced to 12, 11 and then 10 hours.
On the eve of the First World War, a 10-hour working day was fairly widespread in Europe.
By the end of the war, pressure from workers’ organizations precipitated progress towards the eight-hour working day (Valticos and von Potobsky, 1995), a process that culminated just before the Second World War, when a working week of between 40 and 45 hours became standard in the United States, most of European countries and in much of Latin America.
Continual efforts were made to safeguard the 8-hour day over the final decades of the twentieth century, and a global shift took place towards a weekly limit of 40 hours, despite significant regional differences and disparities in the manner in which working hours were limited by law (Lee, McCann and Messenger, 2007).
In 2011, only four Latin American countries (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Honduras and Peru) had average working weeks of 40 hours, which was in sharp contrast with the situation in Europe, where most countries showed an average of between 35 and 39 hours per week.
Alarmingly, in two countries in the region (Colombia and Mexico), average weekly working hours even exceeded 45 hours per week.
It should be noted that men work longer hours than women in Latin America and the Caribbean.
This difference in working time ranges from two hours per week (in El Salvador) to ten hours per week in Argentina and Mexico (see figure III.5), and is between five and seven hours in most countries.
This is evidence of a clear gender gap in working hours in paid employment.
For women living in couples, especially those with young children, this is a reflection of the fact that the time at their disposal for paid work is curtailed by the work and responsibilities they have within the home.
The ILO has stated (2011) that “according to available information for 16 countries, 93 million people (half of the employed population) worked in informal employment at the end of the first decade of this century.
Of this total, 60 million worked in the informal sector, 23 million were employed in the formal sector but had no social protection and 10 million had informal employment in domestic service.
Moreover, 6 of every 10 employed youth could only find informal employment”.
ILO studies on job creation in the informal sector have shown that such work is very seriously deficient in areas such as wages, contracts, working hours, social protection and employee-employer negotiations.
To illustrate differences between formal and informal labour, for example, a study by Infante Martinez and Tokman (1999) estimated that informal workers work on average 6% longer hours than their counterparts in large and medium-sized businesses in the formal economy.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, low-paid, unskilled workers in the informal sector are also very likely to be obliged to work long hours, since they must struggle hard to get enough work to earn a decent living.
In sum, although there are significant differences in working hours according to occupational category and type of employment, the average working week in Latin America, unlike in most European countries, remains overly long: well over the weekly limit of 40 hours. 2.
Time in paid and unpaid work and free time As noted earlier, time spent in paid employment forms a major part of most people’s lives at present.
The previous section spoke of the gender gap in terms of hours spent in paid work, but this should be viewed in conjunction with one of the most important social changes to have taken place in the region in recent decades: the incorporation of women into the labour force.
The rise in educational credentials among women has also played a role.
In addition, a decline in wages, employability and job stability among men has created pressure for women to join the labour force, as a result of which women in many households have either become the main wage-earners or are earning as much as their male partners.
Changing family structures, rising divorce rates and growing prevalence of singleparent households headed by women are also prompting more women to enter the labour market and, increasingly, turning them into the sole income-earners in their households” (ECLAC, 2010c, p. 162).
This unprecedented rise in their participation in the world of work has enabled women to earn a living in their own right and become more personally and economically autonomous.
They have not, however, seen a comparable improvement in the quality of the work they carry out.
A gender-focused study on the quality of work in the countries of MERCOSUR and Chile (Valenzuela and Reinecke, 2001) has shown that, in the five countries of the Southern Cone, women of all age groups and levels of educational attainment earn less than men across virtually all sectors, types of work and occupational categories.
It also states that, although both men and women have been affected by the decline in stable employment, namely jobs on permanent contracts and protected by labour laws, women are more vulnerable to this phenomenon.
However, not all of the value generated by productive work has a price attached to it.
Indeed, a large proportion of what societies produce has no monetary value and no price.
Domestic work —such as cooking, cleaning and caring for others— is chiefly done by women without pay or any contract that sets a price for the services rendered or establishes the responsibilities and benefits associated with the work.
However, domestic work does create value, particularly for the individuals who benefit from it but also for society at large.
Moreover, time spent performing domestic and care work cannot be devoted to other activities such as self-care, leisure, political participation or paid work (ECLAC, 2010c, p.175; and ECLAC, 2012).
Feminist literature has made important contributions to the study of unpaid work, stressing gender issues and highlighting the fact that, despite its invisibility, unpaid work plays a key role in both social reproduction and the functioning of the economy.
Time-use surveys can be used to analyse the relationship between statistics on paid and unpaid work.
The social organization of time encompasses three principal, broad-based categories: working time (including time spent commuting), unpaid domestic work (including, among a great many other duties, cooking, cleaning and caring for others) and free time (including rest, leisure activities and time spent with family members and friends)20.
In all three countries, men’s working hours exceed 45 hours per week, and in two countries (Mexico and Panama) both men and women work more than 45 hours.
This overly long working week may be explained by the fact that commuting time is included in working hours and this pushes up the figures, particularly for workers in large cities, who spend a great deal of time travelling to and from work (as result of the long distances involved and traffic congestion).
Commuting time also eats away at time for other activities such as rest or leisure pursuits.21 Secondly, the surveys indicate that women spend many more hours a day than men in unpaid domestic work.
The increasing incorporation of women into the labour force has therefore not been offset by any greater involvement by men in household work.
Thus, in Latin America the sexual division of labour has only changed in a partial and uneven manner.22 The overall workload is the sum of hours spent in both paid employment (working hours) and unpaid household work, including caring for children and elderly and sick relatives.
Time-use surveys show that women in employment shoulder a greater overall workload than men (see figure III.6).
Indeed, their average overall weekly workload of between 73 and 83 hours per week is a sign that working women are very seriously overworked, to the detriment of their well-being.
Research has shown that the excessive burden of their workload is directly linked to women’s greater likelihood to succumb to medical conditions such as depression, stress and anxiety (Artázcoz, L. and others, 2001).
The working hours of employed women vary according to their marital status.
Women who live with a partner are more overworked and can suffer exhaustion as a result of having to juggle paid and unpaid work and caring for pre-school-age children (Milosavljevic, 2007).
While the average weekly workload of working women is excessive, working men have a lighter burden, ranging from 65 to 67 hours per week.
This difference is due in large part to the fact that the rising numbers of women in paid employment have not generally been offset by a greater involvement of men in household work.
Ensuring a more equal distribution of unpaid household work is thus an ongoing challenge that requires legislation and deep-rooted cultural change.
Leisure time is the free time people have after completing their mandatory duties —principally paid work and unpaid domestic work— to spend on the activities of their choice for purposes of pleasure, relaxation or personal fulfilment.
Leisure activities may also be active or passive in nature, depending on whether they entail being a participant or spectator.
The leisure activities measured in time-use surveys include socializing (family life and celebrations), attending (cultural, artistic or sporting) events, cultural and media content (TV, books, music and cinema) and sport.
These kinds of pastime are important for personal development, improving health and relieving stress.
An adequate amount of leisure time is thus a contributing factor towards well-being.
Time-use surveys show that women tend to have insufficient leisure time, and live in a state of “time poverty” which curtails their well-being.
Men, on the other hand, (especially in Panama and Peru) have more leisure time.
However, there is no definitive yardstick to determine how much leisure time is needed to have a decent level of well-being.
Coexistence Coexistence, like space and time, is a fundamental dimension of human life and entails social interaction in groups and institutions.
It is an ongoing constructive process in which, among other things, transactions are made, meaning is negotiated and solutions are found (Brunner, 1990).
The manner in which people interact gives rise to historically-constructed concepts that make certain ways of behaving feel natural and predictable, and familiarize people with “the way things are” and with “the way we do things”.
These patterns of behaviour go on to form part of the group identity of that community of individuals.
Thus, certain groups coexisting in the same space become imbued with a shared group identity, which is expressed in specific ways of relating with one another, a given logic underlying what they do and what they mean, and particular in-built values and beliefs.
A culture can be seen as such a historically-constructed concept of common meaning (Geertz, 1994).
The way in which we live is both a cultural and a human construct, but it feels so natural and predictable to people that it imparts a sensation of inevitability and security.
This does not, however, mean that there is uniformity of experience; differences and conflicts can and do emerge between people in the same social space.
People’s well-being is contingent on their participation in a process in which different people forge a sense of belonging to a shared existence.
What is therefore needed is a model for positive, democratic and peaceful social coexistence, in which everyone can feel part of society, in an atmosphere of tolerance, trust and mutual respect, with values and rules to encourage fairness and social integration, as well as mechanisms to resolve conflicts of interest that arise within society (ECLAC, 2006).
However, the rapid processes of modernization and urbanization that Latin America has gone through in the past two decades have given rise to numerous problems involving coexistence.
This section will examine how violence, one of the most serious social problems in Latin America today, affects people’s well-being.
To this end, it will analyse two of the most serious forms of violence in the region: homicide, an act of extreme violence that instils a deep-seated sense of insecurity among citizens, and domestic violence against women and children.23 1.
Violence The currently accepted definition of violence in the specialized literature is “the use or threat of use of physical force, with the intention of causing harm” (Buvinic, Morrison and Shifter, 1999).
This definition encompasses both the use and the threat of use of force, which plays a key role in perceptions of violence and safety in a given context.
The intentional nature of this behaviour excludes accidents from this definition but includes the use of aggression to resolve conflicts.
It should be noted that violence can be either physical or psychological in nature, and the use of force with the intention of harming includes sexual abuse.
Violence as defined here can occur between strangers or acquaintances, including among members of the same family (domestic or intra-familial violence).
Violence and crime —defined as any action deemed illegal under the judicial system— are closely related but not equivalent.
The definition of violence stresses the use or threat of use of force with the intent to harm, while the definition of crime is more concerned with the description and classification of cases of illegal behaviour.
This difference is illustrated by the existence of both non-violent crime (fraud, theft and prostitution without coercion) and non-criminal violence (certain cases of State-perpetrated violence and the fact that certain countries have not criminalized domestic violence) (Buvinic, Morrison and Shifter, 1999; Buvinic and Morrison 2000.).
Violence is a complex, multidimensional phenomenon which arises as a result of multiple factors (of a psychological, biological, economic, social and cultural nature).
Phenomena caused by violent behaviour frequently cross over boundaries between the individual, family, the community and society, with knock-on effects in various individual, social, family, and community spheres.
The multifaceted nature of violence means that it manifests itself in many different ways (Buvinic, Morrison and Shifter, 1999).
According to the Global Study on Homicide conducted by the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 31% of the world’s homicides in 2010 were committed in the Americas (including Canada and the United States), second only to Africa (36%).
Asia was third on the list with 27%, followed by Europe and Oceania, which together accounted for barely 6% (UNODC, 2012).
The homicide rate in the Americas was 15.6 persons per 100,000, more than twice the global average.
Latin America’s high average homicide rate masks considerable differences from country to country (see figure III.7).
Honduras, El Salvador and Nicaragua have the highest homicide rates in the region, and indeed are among the highest rates in the entire world.
Jamaica and Colombia have the next highest homicide rates, an upper-intermediate level in global terms.
They are followed by the Dominican Republic, Argentina and Ecuador, which can be said to have a lower intermediate level, and, finally, by Uruguay and Chile, which have relatively low homicide rates (fewer than Markedly different trends have been observed in the homicide rate in the region over recent years (see figure III.7).
Certain countries, such as El Salvador, Honduras, Peru and Mexico, have seen a marked increase, but rates in Colombia, Jamaica and Nicaragua have decreased, a major victory for the public security policies of these countries.
The fall in homicides in Colombia is noteworthy in view of its historically extremely high homicide rate.
This is good news in countries such as Chile and Uruguay, which have the lowest levels in the region, but less so in the Dominican Republic, which has seen no change to its relatively high homicide rate.
Violence is a highly complex issue, and there is insufficient space in this short section to cover other forms of violence (such as rape, kidnapping and, armed robbery) which may also have an impact on people’s well-being.
There is no information on Brazil as it is in the process of joining the RIC.
Central America, however, saw an alarming increase, with the rate almost doubling from 26.6 to 43.3 persons per 100,000.
These figures can also be used as an indicator of the ease with which people can acquire firearms in these countries.
Although homicide is only one of many causes of the phenomenon, it should be noted that many of the people of Latin America, especially in urban areas, live in a constant state of fear of crime.
These feelings are captured by public opinion polls such as Latinobarometer, where crime is ranked as one of the most serious problems affecting the countries of the region, alongside unemployment, inflation, poverty and corruption (Latinobarometer, 2004).
These fears have grown over the years as people have come to feel increasingly vulnerable to, and endangered by, high rates of crime or persecution.
Violent crime has a more serious effect on public opinion because violence is an attack not only on what the victims possess, but also a violation of their most fundamental rights to privacy and sovereignty over their body.
Violence may leave the victim or their loved ones suffering from post-traumatic stress, and cause them to be greatly afraid in certain situations.
It can also have a far more noticeable effect on third parties, a phenomenon known as vicarious traumatisation that occurs when people transfer trauma affecting others on to themselves (Lagos and Dammert, 2012).
In a survey on fear of violent crime, 76.7% of respondents stated they were worried “all the time”, “most of the time” or “sometimes”.
Violent crime is therefore a daily concern for the public, even those who have never been victims of it, despite the fact that the actual likelihood of them being attacked is small (their perceived fears grow as they are exposed to more and more images of violent crime).
Feelings of insecurity are prevalent both in countries with a high homicide rate, such as El Salvador, Guatemala or Honduras, and in countries where there are relatively few homicides, such as Chile or Uruguay.
Such feelings are the result of a great many factors, including, as research has shown, distrust of the police, the perception of government neglect, increasing crime rates and a lack of social cohesion (Lagos and Dammert, 2012). 2.
Domestic violence Another prevalent form of violence is violence within a family or a household.
Domestic violence against a woman by her partner is sometimes used as a ploy to gain control of household income or to exert dominance over her.
In either case there is often an emotional component —the wish to cause emotional distress— that aggravates the vicious circle of violence if it is successful.
There is both theoretical (behavioural learning models) and empirical evidence that children who suffer or observe domestic violence have a greater propensity to develop violent tendencies as adults (Berkowitz, 1996, quoted in Buvinic and Morrison (2000).
In respect of violence against women, account needs to be taken of the Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women (United Nations, 1993) and the Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women (OAS, 1994).
The Inter-American Convention on the Prevention, Punishment and Eradication of Violence against Women (Convention of Belém do Pará) states that “violence against women constitutes a violation of their human rights and fundamental freedoms, and impairs or nullifies the observance, enjoyment and exercise of such rights and freedoms”.
Only a fraction of cases of violence against women therefore actually show up in statistics, since they are based on records provided by the police, the judiciary, health services and NGOs, among others, thus obscuring the true magnitude of the problem of violence against women (Milosavljevic, 2007).
It is difficult to quantify the prevalence of violence by means of surveys, mainly owing to the fact that it is such a sensitive and emotive issue for abused women and the need to ensure that interviews take place in an appropriate, confidential setting.
Procedures for collecting information concerning this issue should follow special protocols and be overseen by highly qualified staff who have received specific training (WHO, 2001).
In Latin America, few studies have taken representative surveys as a basis to assess adequately the situations and contexts in which domestic violence or intimate partner violence occurs.
The studies most commonly used to gauge the magnitude of this phenomenon are surveys of population and health, designed primarily to assess the health of women of childbearing age (15-49 years), since they entail interviewing women in confidential, secure conditions in which the issue of violence can be broached alongside other confidential topics such as reproductive health.
The percentage of women aged between 15 and 49 years who suffer or have ever suffered physical violence at the hands of a partner ranges from 33% in Colombia to 14% in Haiti.
The statistics thus show that a high proportion of women in the region have been physically attacked by their partner.
Lastly, it is important to highlight the phenomenon of domestic violence against children in Latin America and the Caribbean, a hugely pervasive, everyday reality that is commonly overlooked (ECLAC/UNICEF, 2009).
Frequent forms of abuse against children can take the form of direct attacks, but can also come as a result of their witnessing violence between their parents or simply because they live in an environment in which violent relationships and abuses of power are frequent.
Children growing up in such settings see this culture of violence become part and parcel of their personal and emotional relationships.
They can be said to internalize a negative model of interpersonal relationships that harms their development if they witness the ill-treatment of their mother or have a parent that mistreats, rather than protects them (Orjuela, undated).
For a more in-depth examination of the issue, see Almeras and others (2002).
As space is limited, only physical violence against women will be considered (and not sexual abuse or psychological or economic violence).
A particularly severe form of violence against children is child abuse, a violation of the fundamental rights of children and adolescents that are enshrined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which stresses children’s right to physical and psychological integrity and to protection from all forms of violence.
Similarly, the United Nations International Committee on the Rights of the Child has emphasized the importance of member countries’ prohibiting all forms of physical punishment and degrading treatment of children.
The United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF) defines the victims of child abuse as children or adolescents of up to 18 years who suffer occasionally or habitually from physical, sexual or emotional violence within a family environment or in institutions within society.
Child abuse may constitute ignoring or violating the individual or collective rights of children and includes partial or total abandonment (UNICEF, 2006).
Data from Colombia and Peru come from national demographic and health surveys in which the respondents were mothers.
The punishments most commonly used in Colombia and Peru by both parents are verbal reprimands.
However, the very high proportion of children receiving corporal punishment, including smacking, shows that physical violence against children is an everyday reality in the region.
This is worrying as violence towards children represents a serious violation of their rights.
In the surveys in Chile and Paraguay it was the children themselves who were interviewed.
Child abuse is, without any doubt, “a painful reality behind closed doors” that has profound effects on the lives of children and adolescents, seriously harms their development and growth, causes their relationship with the parents to break down, affects their school performance, harms their mental health and causes problems with their classmates, among other problems (UNICEF, 2012).
The definitions used were as follows: acute physical violence includes kicks, bites, punches, burning (with a cigarette or scalding with hot water) hitting or attempting to hit with objects, beatings and threatening with a knife or weapon.
Mild physical violence includes throwing objects, pulling hair or ears, pushing, shaking, slapping and spanking.
Psychological violence includes yelling, telling the child it is not loved, using insults or swearwords, ridicule in front of a third party, ignoring the child for long periods, threatening to hit or throw objects and locking the child up.
In sum, parents often use physical, verbal and psychological violence to attempt to impose their will on their children.
It is paradoxical that the home, where children and adolescents should be the most secure, can become the scene of different forms of violation of their rights (physical or psychological abuse or neglect and abandonment) at the very hands of those who ought to give them the care and attention they need to thrive.
Final remarks Some interesting conclusions may be drawn from analysis of commonly overlooked aspects of well-being in Latin America.
Rethinking what is meant by progress in our societies means going beyond traditional ways of measuring well-being, since commonly used indicators only partially grasp the complexity of the phenomenon.
As stated above, considerable progress has been made in setting up information sources on environmental issues and the effect they have on health (the establishment of the WHO World Health Observatory is a significant development).
Great strides have also been made in the analysis of violence, particularly elements relating to public security.
The regional system of standardized indicators in peaceful coexistence and citizen security, a project in which 15 countries are working to establish 12 common indicators, is another initiative that deserves to be highlighted.
Although they remain at an embryonic stage, efforts are under way in Latin America to develop sources of information on violence against women using specialized protocols (demographic and health surveys are of particular use in this regard).
Time-use surveys in the countries of the region, meanwhile, despite their lack of a common, comparable methodological and technical basis, have clearly demonstrated the importance of time in people’s lives and shown how it conditions their well-being.
In short, progress has been made but much remains to be done to improve sources of information on key aspects of well-being and on why certain sectors of the region’s population are so lacking in well-being.
Public goods are defined as goods which are both non-excludable and non-rivalrous.
A good is non-excludable when its use cannot be monopolized, i.e. once it has been provided, on a public or private basis, it is available to all, and thus no longer subject to the laws of the market as it can no longer be priced, bought or sold.
A good is said to be non-rivalrous when it can be consumed by many people, without one person’s use reducing the amount available to others.
These commonly overlooked dimensions of well-being should be considered to be public goods, and policies should be enacted to ensure that they can be enjoyed by all in perpetuity.
It is non-excludable since it is not subject to the laws of the market and no price can be put on it, and is non-rivalrous in that one person’s breathing does not prevent others from doing likewise.
This is why the State intervenes to ensure the quality of the air we breathe.
Not all people enjoy the same quality of air and, although everyone theoretically has access to air as a good, the reality is that the quality differs greatly depending on where people live.
Certain studies have shown a greater prevalence of respiratory problems among people living in highly polluted areas, particularly children, older persons and low-income families, than among those less exposed to environmental pollution.
Public security —understood as the set of measures, governed by the principles of democracy and the law of a country, put in place to ensure peaceful coexistence and the security of citizens and their property— is also a public good.
Public security is not subject to the laws of the market (non-excludable) and is non-rivalrous (the fact of one person enjoying security does not impinge on anyone else’s security).
As a public good, ensuring security is primarily the responsibility of the State, but it also falls within the remit of local authorities and civil society.
At present, the main challenge lies in making the various policies implemented by States to ensure citizen security compatible with human rights.
For example, the Organization of American States (OAS) argues that when the State is unable to respond effectively to violence and crime, sometimes policies that have proved to be ineffective are blindly stepped up, thus making matters worse and laying the groundwork for the emergence of paramilitary or vigilante movements (OAS, 2009).
The right balance between time spent in paid employment, in unpaid domestic work and at leisure (free time) is another necessary precondition of well-being.
The amount of free time people have tended to be regulated by law, particularly labour legislation; in workers’ campaigns throughout the twentieth century rest time was seen as a right, and this right is enshrined in all current labour regulations.
Average working hours in the region remain overly long when compared with most European Union countries, for example.
Furthermore, the increasing incorporation of women into the labour force has not been offset by a greater involvement of men in household work, and women, having little free time, suffer from what is known as time poverty.
Legal recognition of unpaid domestic work and of the right to rest should be put near the top of the public policy agenda (including by drawing up robust care policies).
Finally, the interlinked nature of the dimensions making up well-being needs to be stressed.
By way of example, the growth in numbers of motor cars in recent years in all countries of the region, together with the highly inadequate public transport infrastructure, has seriously aggravated urban air pollution and grievously harmed human health.
The related traffic congestion has greatly increased journey times within cities, which become “dead time” for travellers that eats into their time for leisure and socializing and is a source of discomfort and stress.
Alméras, Diane and others (2002), “Violence against women in couples: Latin America and the Caribbean.
Otra expresión de la pobreza femenina”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), unpublished. (2007), “Estadísticas para la equidad de género.
Landmarks in the discourse on social protection in Latin America and overview of health and pension system coverage: a synopsis A.
Reductionism in social policy Universality as a set of benefits, and the controversy surrounding dichotomous views of contributory funding The evolution of the "social protection floor" approach and of proposals on universal health-care coverage ECLAC and social protection as a citizens' right B.
Insurance makes it possible to address what has been dubbed the “welfare economics of uncertainty”.
This is a reference to uncertainties surrounding access to the necessary protection, the length of time protection will be required, the costs involved, and the degree to which personal well-being and income will be affected.
By its nature, therefore, this is a demand for services that is often irregular and unpredictable.
Pricing systems have a limited application, since they are unable to deal properly with certain risks, with the result that market insurance is restricted in both coverage and amount.
For example, the limitations of private health insurance mean that large medical expenses —the very ones it would be most desirable to insure— go uncovered (Arrow, 1963 and Arrow, 2000).
Solidarity-based insurance enables individuals to diversify risk and narrow the gap between actual incomes and desired levels of protection, by reducing individual aggregate risk.
Such is the central objective of this insurance, regardless of the kind of resources that are used to fund it (tax revenues or contributions).
While this distinction may be relevant in a national or political context, it does not in and of itself constrain policy options, as it does not affect the way services are offered and purchased, risk diversification or benefit specification (Kutzin, 2008).
Insurance is also analogous with saving, which narrows the gap between income and consumption levels at different points in time (Ehrlich and Becker, 2000).
Many of the benefits people receive have been paid for by them at another time in their lives (Brittan, 2001).
This is known as redistribution across the life cycle (Falkingham and Hills, 2001), whereby the welfare State acts as a “savings bank”.
From a social equity point of view, in a region as unequal as Latin America and the Caribbean, individual ability to use informal or market instruments to manage risk should not be overestimated.1 Private insurance markets may not exist or may not be fully developed; in countries where income is particularly concentrated, the price/income ratio leads to underconsumption of insurance.
The principle of solidarity thus applies to several dimensions.2 A crucial part of evaluating social protection policies is to determine how they respond to the dynamics and social distribution of risk.
Social cohesion is undermined when there is the perception of a “ﬁrst class” and a “second class” of citizenship in risk protection, and the situation takes on the character of a ﬁxed social divide when this hierarchy is perpetuated across generations.
Conversely, when the State and society create insurance mechanisms to reduce the impact of events on individual well-being, the sense of belonging to society is heightened (ECLAC, 2007).
This is demonstrated by a broad economic literature dating back to Arrow, who fifty years ago carried out a fruitful microeconomic analysis of the health-care market (Arrow, 1963), postulating that it is fraught with failures since the risks are not fully insurable, and because of information asymmetries.
Health-care providers are described as adaptations to market inefficiencies, but they in turn lead to inefficiencies owing to limited competition in these markets.
A select but extensive bibliography of the economic theory of welfare and the welfare State (100 articles) was compiled in three volumes by Barr (2001), covering theoretical and empirical discussions on pensions, health, education and poverty reduction.
International experience demonstrates that, even in the case of individual pension accounts, risk can be diversified, which is one of the main goals of social security.
For example, in variants of a notional defined contribution system, pension system shares and their earnings are not held in accounts attributed to individual workers; each worker’s contributions accumulate according to a rate set by law, which reflects the benefits the system can pay.
This way, the system’s assets are managed centrally, they fund the system as a whole and they are not attributed to individual accounts (Barr and Diamond, 2010).
But this has not occurred in Latin America, where risk diversification within individual account systems does not exist.
On international experiences of notional accounts, see Holzmann, Palmer and Uthoff (2008).
It also corrects externalities, since the benefit from the insurance accrues not only to the person insured but also to society through externalities such as a healthy population and fewer social upheavals (Sojo, 2003).
Taking these considerations as the interpretative framework, this chapter is divided into two parts.
First, it looks at a number of discursive landmarks regarding the concept of social protection.
Second, with a view to reporting on progress, constraints and emerging inequalities, two dimensions of social protection coverage in the region are analysed: health care and pensions.
According to “discursive institutionalism”, discourse not only embodies the substantive content of ideas, it also represents interactive processes of coordination and communication in an institutional context.
When social and labour policies are developed and redesigned to address social risks, the ideas that prevail do not depend solely on their content, or on whether they are the product of consensus, are effective or can be defended regardless of their viability in terms of group interest, identity or solidarity.
It also has to do with power —both the coercive capacity of the parties influencing policy and their discursive powers— that is, their ability to convince the other participants in the debate to make concessions, or even to change the way they perceive their interests or what is appropriate for their values (Schmidt, 2013).
Regarding welfare policies elsewhere in the world, the interpretive patterns that have been proposed and debated have changed significantly in recent decades.
Policy themes, preferences, values, and symbols all affect the way policies are shaped and the solutions that are found (Bonoli and Natali, 2012).
This shift has also been important in Latin America and the Caribbean; it would therefore be useful to look at some of the landmarks in the way social protection has been conceptualized and discussed and which have been used to influence public policy. 1.
Reductionism in social policy The targeted approach that emerged in the 1980s had such an impact on public policy during the so-called “lost decade” and in the 1990s that it is useful to review the thinking behind it.
These proposals called into question and negatively evaluated the principle of universality in social policy and assumed —although this was not supported by research or hard data— that concentrating public social spending on the most vulnerable population groups and limiting the State’s action in social policy matters was efficient, effective and generally valid.
As a corollary, they proposed a relative and variable dismantling of universalist policies and advocated the privatization of social services.
They ignored the problems associated with the private provision of services arising from market failures, such as risk selection (Sojo, 1990 and 2007).
This approach to social policy began to lose ground the mid-1990s because of its negative impact and as it was challenged by alternative, more successful ones.
Very different conceptual considerations have also led to more nuanced insights on universality; these concern, for example, the health sector, with recognition of the positive impact of universal policies when the inequalities inherent to financing systems are removed (Sojo, 1990 and 2007).
The social risk management approach was put forward at the start of the new millennium.
In retrospect, it was the main conceptual remainder of reductionism, but given its relative impenetrability, was less influential than reductionist targeting.
Along with certain definitions of risk and insurance, its global approach to social policy was based on a functional public-private combination that confined the social welfare responsibilities of the State to the fight against poverty, viewed risk insurance as an individual responsibility and essentially ruled out solidarity in risk diversification.
These approaches and the associated policies were vigorously promoted by the World Bank (Sojo, 2003). 2.
Universality as a set of benefits, and the controversy surrounding dichotomous views of contributory funding At the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), the Inter-American Institute for Social Development (INDES) advocated some years ago the idea of basic universalism (Filgueira and others, 2006).
It criticized “false universalism” on the grounds that it concealed the segmented nature of supply of and access to goods that differed in quality and were of the greatest benefit to those who could best afford them.
It also criticized “ineffective universalism” that provided poor quality services with little concern as to their impact.
Basic universalism proposes measures of universal coverage and selected deliveries, which should constitute true protection floors that must be gradually strengthened.
The idea is to provide universal coverage for a limited set of essential services for defined population groups based on certain attributes, or a limited set of basic benefits that vary according to each country’s possibilities and definitions (Filgueira and others, 2006).
Specific failures of the insurance markets are not considered; it is merely stated that the market lacks the necessary strength (and sometimes the regulatory frameworks and instruments) to provide large sectors of the population with access to the goods and services they need for full social integration.
Labour markets receive greater attention because they stratify corporate labour based systems.
The State is assigned the role of guaranteeing access to and enjoyment of goods, rents and services of homogeneous quality (Filgueira and others, 2006).
A close look at references to the feasibility of establishing various benefits shows that they essentially refer to the use of non-contributory fiscal resources, and the term “non-contributory basic universalism” is even used (Rezk, 2006).
In response, warnings were sounded of a likely contraction in fiscal resources earmarked for such purposes and of the need to reframe social protection by improving the design of contributory systems, to ensure greater convergence among its different subsystems and to prevent any further intensification of existing segmentation (Tokman, 2006).
Another restrictive approach that takes issue with contributory financing has recently emerged in the region from a source close to the IDB.
Devised this time for Mexico, it places much of the blame for informality on contributory financing, in that informality is caused by distortions in the tax and social security regime (Levy, 2012).
Among other things, it proposes replacing payroll taxes with VAT increases, which represents a shift in social security terms from a tax on work to a tax on consumption (Levy, 2012).3 Certain employee benefits would still be funded using payroll taxes.
Compensation, channelled through the Opportunities programme, would be provided to mitigate the impact of consumer taxes (which benefit the system) on poorer families.
The Mexican social protection system is still one of the most stratified in Latin America.
In that context, the “universal social security” approach seeks the convergence of benefits for all workers, along with other benefits specifically for wage earners.
The current coverage offered by the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS) would form an important part of this set of benefits (Levy, 2012).
As will later be seen, levels of pension and health-care system affiliation (which are indicators of labour-market informality) do not appear to depend on the way systems are funded: there are contributory schemes with broad coverage and others where it is very restricted, depending on the specific path taken by the country.
Diametrically opposed to this line of thought is the argument that in order to develop labour markets and increase formality, insurance quality must be the focus, rather than the contributory or fiscal nature of its funding.
This can occur when the provision of pensions or medical benefits is very inefficient or the link between benefits and contributions is very weak, or if some member of the family who is already working in the formal sector provides coverage for the whole family.
Insufficient pension benefits and precarious health-care benefits are negative externalities that do not create an adequate incentive for deeper labour markets (Sojo, 2003).
The equity of funding derived from general taxation hinges on the overall equity of a country’s tax system, while the equity of a contributory system depends largely on the design of the system and the basis upon which the compulsory contribution is levied.
In evaluating financing reforms, the objectives of the system should not be forgotten: how reforms affect service quality, risk pooling and administrative costs (Gutiérrez, Acosta and Alfonso, 2012).
With regard to funding social investment with consumption taxes, the situation in Chile irrefutably demonstrates that progressive social spending is not enough to modify an unequal income structure: progressive taxation is key (Rivera, 2013).
Resorting to indirect taxation to fund social protection makes the tax structure more regressive; funding it out of net indirect tax revenue instead of employer contributions can lead to further declines in the business sector’s contribution to public and social spending.
Moreover, equity is not only an issue when it comes to sources of financing; it also plays a role in the way in which resources from different sources are combined, collection methods, central transfers to subnational entities that are adjusted for levels of social development, and sourcing of services from different public-private permutations.
None of these aspects are adequately accounted for in a dichotomous view of financing.
Meanwhile, an important process is under way as part of the comprehensive health-care reform that is currently being negotiated on a political level in Colombia.
In 2013 the employer’s share of contributions was revised, but through progressive taxation: the tax reform embodied in Act 1607 modified the structure of the sector’s financing by introducing an “income tax for equity” (CREE) to boost fiscal resources.
The goal is that, from 2014, over 60% of health-care funds will come from taxation.
Changing the balance between tax and contributory-based financing has also created a need for a body that will concentrate the sources.
The reform proposed by the executive branch includes substantial changes to the responsibilities of health-care providers and insurers, handing over to a single public financial entity (Salud-Mía) the duties of signing up participants and collecting, managing and transferring the funds to pay for health services (Ministry of Health of Colombia, 2013).
If these revenues are counted, the burden is slightly smaller than the regional average and has increased moderately since the 1980s.
In that instance, the bias towards indirect taxation, compared with the rest of the subregion, would be very marked in this country (Gomez-Sabaini and Morán, 2013). on these sources and describe the fiscal, legal and administrative constraints that would be faced in Latin America.
On the other hand, the existence of strong social security institutions in several countries that already offer health benefits, pensions, and, sometimes, unemployment benefits —that are sometimes even greater than these basic packages (Ribe, Robalino and Walker, 2012).
The position that the central goal should be to give all citizens or residents access to the same social insurance system, under the same rules and conditions, regardless of where they work (Ribe, Robalino and Walker, 2010) represents a fundamental shift in the thinking associated with the World Bank.
Contributory schemes in the formal sector may be insufficient, but parallel contributory and non-contributory systems are also inefficient, and therefore integrated systems are needed (Ribe, Robalino and Walker, 2012).
Concerns are also raised regarding the adequacy of the region’s non-contributory programmes, since the benefits are very small in many cases, especially in the health sector, and they are poorly integrated with contributory programmes.
Moreover, it is felt that social insurance suffers from institutional fragmentation, characterized by multiple, poorly coordinated plans, which is detrimental to labour mobility, creates horizontal inequality among workers and drives up administrative costs.
According to the long-term vision of social protection and labour-market policies, the same contributory social insurance should be available to everyone, regardless of where they work.
This would entail maintaining mandatory insurance in the formal sector and establishing financial and institutional incentives to promote the inclusion of informal workers (Rashid, 2012; Ribe, Robalino and Walker, 2010).
With a view to making progress on universal pension coverage, the Inter-American Development Bank has recently suggested that citizens should have pension insurance, meaning a universal pension for older persons that is sustainable in fiscal and institutional terms, and has highlighted an urgent need to strengthen contributory systems in order to guarantee pension levels in the long term.
To encourage the growth of formal employment, social security contributions would be subsidized, which would reduce the cost of formality and boost present and future contribution density for all workers, regardless of their job category.
Suggestions for financing the increase in coverage include cutting back on the multiple taxes on formal employment or, at least, not adding new ones, since this has a negative effect on labour formality, and exploring alternative forms of financing, such as consumption taxes and public revenues from commodities (Bosch, Melguizo and Pagés, 2013).
On using consumption taxes as a source of funding, see the problems described above in relation to another proposal that reflects IDB thinking on this issue.
There is a growing recognition in the region that contributory funding need not be solely associated with employment status, and that the poor can contribute through family schemes and at differential rates according to their income level.
Studies on various countries in the region have demonstrated that informal workers and even non-wage-earners who receive remittances are able to contribute through subsidized schemes (Gutiérrez, Acosta and Alfonso, 2012; Carrera, Castro and Sojo, 2010).
In countries with poorly developed schemes, it is crucial to expand coverage, improve the quality of insurance in the labour market and boost redistributive impact.
To that end, in addition to using tax revenues, contributory ceilings must be removed (Carrera, Castro and Sojo, 2010).
The health economics literature also warns of a clash of opposing views on contribution- or tax-based financing.
An interesting warning has been sounded in that regard: it is increasingly recognized that the source of the funds does not determine the organizational structure of the sector, the mechanisms through which these resources are allocated, or the precision with which benefits are specified.
Labels such as taxpayer-funded system or social security system do not adequately describe the current systems.
The traditional way of thinking about social security places unnecessary restrictions on the range of policy options available to countries (Kutzin, 2012).
In Latin America, discussions on social protection funding sometimes use technical arguments that conceal the strictly political determinants of the social protection architecture.
The vast contemporary literature on the welfare State, which looks at its history and the changes over time around the world, provides in-depth information on the historical and political factors underpinning the financing options.4 See Schmidt and Thatcher (2013); Palier (2010); Barr and Diamond (2008); Hemerijck (2013); Bonoli and Natali (2012); and Porter (1999).
Fragmentation and segmentation are ingrained within social protection systems and in their political and discursive action; that is, they are not exogenous (they do not result purely from labour-market dynamics, for example).
Therefore, any strategy for universalizing social protection in the region cannot focus exclusively on boosting resources; it must also act on the morphology of social protection and place institutional change at the heart of innovation efforts (Sojo, 2013). 3.
The evolution of the “social protection floor” approach and of proposals on universal health-care coverage The concept of the social protection floor, developed by the International Labour Organization (ILO) in collaboration with the World Health Organization (WHO), is another important landmark in the social protection debate.
The basic social protection floor was first put forward by the World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization (WCSDG) in 2002.
It was defined as a basic and modest set of social security guarantees, to be implemented through cash transfers and benefits (ILO, 2008).
It was later recast as the interplay between basic guarantees, plus a second level with guaranteed benefits as an entitlement, and an upper floor consisting of regulated voluntary insurance (Cichon, Behrendt and Wodsak, 2011).
The concept evolved over time thanks to these and subsequent modifications (Sojo, 2012).
Owing to trade union pressure in the tripartite discussions within ILO, the word “basic” was removed.
The “social protection floor” is distinct from a “safety net”, which was considered as residual to social policies and aimed to cushion the effects of structural adjustment through measures that were temporary, fragmented and targeted to the poor and the vulnerable, according to certain criteria (Social Protection Floor Advisory Group, 2011).
The floor should not be viewed as an alternative, but as a complement to existing social security institutions; that is, it is a component of a pluralistic and comprehensive social protection system (Social Protection Floor Advisory Group, 2011).
In countries with segmented but comprehensive social protection systems, the floor fills gaps in coverage and promotes consistent social policies (Social Protection Floor Advisory Group, 2011).
The horizontal dimension concerns basic, fundable services in health, education, sanitation, food security, housing, basic income security or basic (or very basic) measures established at the national level whose scope depends on the available fiscal and financial space (Ibid).
The recommendations on the subject made by the General Conference of the International Labour Organization in 2012 reflect what may be described as “inherent institutional pluralism”, inasmuch as they state that making the floor a reality may include universal benefits, social insurance, social assistance, tax and employment schemes.
Given the considerable challenge of ensuring that the interdependent horizontal and vertical steps do not result in further fragmentation of the existing social protection (Sojo, 2012 and 2013), the need to develop the two dimensions simultaneously is currently under discussion at ILO (Schwarzer, 2013).
The World Health Report 2010 (WHO, 2010) highlights certain trade-offs that are needed when benefits are designed in order to make headway on universal health care.
Three dimensions are considered: who benefits from resources, the services to which people have access, and how much they cost.
Progress towards universal coverage and its mechanisms is represented by a cube to be filled, depicting the population, the costs and the services.
Along the horizontal axis, starting with the poor and vulnerable, the idea is to try to extend coverage to the uninsured.
Services should be of good quality and based on distribution of the disease burden, prioritizing the needs of the most vulnerable and advancing towards the inclusion of other services.
Along the vertical axis, the aim is to reduce out-of-pocket health expenditure, considering the specific needs of the most disadvantaged groups and reducing co-payments and fees.
In conclusion, it is clear that the international debate on social protection has evolved towards more pluralistic approaches to expanding social protection.
These approaches are heterodox and are likely to have an impact in the region.
Progress towards these kinds of interpretations of social security is reflected in assertions that there is no single international model for providing social protection in health, or single pathway to greater coverage, given the differences between countries in terms of their governance structures, financing mechanisms and sources of funding, risk diversification, resource allocation and benefits.
Social protection is evolving —in the framework of financing systems that either cover separately or overlap to cover very diverse population groups— thanks, among other things, to economic development, cultural values, institutional factors and political commitment and leadership (Scheil-Adlung, 2013). 4.
ECLAC and social protection as a citizens’ right As proposed by ECLAC (2006), a social protection system is more than an institutional structure; it is a political agreement that enables society to lay the foundations for building and regulating coexistence.
This agreement is under permanent review, and it determines which rights apply to all, how they are protected and how they are rendered viable.
A certain level of cohesion is required to build consensus in this matter, which is reflected in institutions, standards, programmes and resources.
Social cohesion is also needed to make the transition from a set of social policies to a comprehensive social protection system.
This has to be promoted and involves addressing conflicts between rights, resources, distribution patterns and institutional designs.
So as to address the reductionist view of social policy analytically, ECLAC has formulated principles of social policy, and thus of social protection, from a rights-based perspective.
The principle of universality dictates that all citizens, as members of society, are entitled to certain types of protection or benefits, which must have certain characteristics in terms of quantity and quality, and which are necessary for their full participation in society.
It seeks to ensure that all members of society are guaranteed a certain level of well-being, which must be the maximum permitted by economic development at any given time.
The greatest obstacles to universal social policies and benefits are limited resources, a lack of social agreements that make universality a priority, and implementation difficulties.
Universality does not preclude the use of selectivity criteria when resources are scarce, to ensure that social services reach the poorest.
In order to address the multidimensional and heterogeneous nature of poverty, there must be a beneficial interaction between universal and comprehensive policies and selective and differentiated policies.
As barriers mainly affect the poorest, selectivity represents a tool or set of tools to be used for guiding action and in particular for allocating subsidies, so that the poor can access social services and guarantees.
Targeting is thus intended is to make the universalization of social policies more effective The principle of universality is closely tied to the principle of solidarity, which holds that everyone should participate in funding social policy in accordance with their means.
Thus solidarity helps ensure universality and equity of access to social security benefits, taking into account asymmetrical economic conditions and risk exposure, particularly with regard to health and employment.
This principle also assumes that, given the externalities of individual well-being, there is a close interrelationship between individual well-being and social well-being.
Individual lives and society’s development are accordingly both affected by the quality and extent of social services and protection (ECLAC, 2000 and 2006).
Efficiency in the use of public resources for social policy is also an intrinsic element of equity since it enhances, rather than counteracts, the principles of universality and solidarity.
This principle should not be understood solely in terms of its macro and microeconomic impact; ultimately, it concerns the ability to achieve the social objectives set with scarce resources (ECLAC, 2000 and 2006).
In addition, reforms that introduce subsystems in an integrated social protection system must also regulate the market and private options, establishing rules that ensure an appropriate mix of public and private so as to achieve the socially and publicly desired goals (ECLAC, 2007).
The labour market has not demonstrated sufficient capacity for inclusiveness either through the creation of good-quality jobs or in terms of contributory coverage.
It cannot therefore be expected to serve as the only mechanism for protecting the bulk of the population against the risks associated with a possible loss of income, health problems and aging, among other factors.
Social protection cannot be restricted to mechanisms offered by the world of work: the big challenge is thus to reformulate social protection within a framework of integral solidarity that combines contributory and non-contributory mechanisms (ECLAC, 2006).
To improve the coverage and quality of social protection in the subregion, action must be taken on various labour-market matters that have been put off and remain unaddressed, and the playing field must be levelled in the productive sphere, as this has exacerbated the considerable heterogeneity of the production structure for decades.
Unless these disparities are (at least partially) corrected, it will be difficult for social policies to contribute to building a more inclusive social model.
The underlying labour-market dynamics must be rethought, since historically the development of social protection has been associated with labour legislation, regulations governing working conditions and dismissals, collective bargaining, and training and education policies, and the capacity to monitor compliance with the regulations (ECLAC, 2010).
These discursive landmarks have characterized the social protection debate in recent decades, a period during which many reforms have also been carried out.
This chapter will now outline, in quantitative terms, recent trends in social protection in health care and pensions, which illustrate the magnitude and specificity of inequality, as well as the outstanding challenges.
Mapping health and pension coverage in Latin America during and after working life As stated at the beginning of this chapter, the range of risks against which people should be protected is very wide.
These risks change as societies evolve, and public policy is still severely myopic in certain areas.
Social Panorama of Latin America 2012 thus delved into the need to make care another pillar of social protection and a source of rights.
It analysed employment in this sector and private spending on care, described existing policies and programmes, and made policy proposals (ECLAC, 2012).
Health care and pensions (for which institutional coordination varies considerably across the region) have traditionally been allocated the lion’s share of the contributory and non-contributory resources available for social protection.
And not without justification, since these two spheres are crucial to the well-being of present and future generations and they have been central to the demands for social protection made all over the world since the nineteenth century.
The relative and absolute magnitude of the resources dedicated to these two spheres of social protection calls for a close study of their trajectories.
On this occasion, Social Panorama is presenting an overview of coverage in these two areas and reporting on the region’s heterogeneity and the asymmetries that emerge at the country level.
It is important to note the limitations of the information provided by the household surveys drawn on for this chapter.
Given that the surveys only record affiliation or contributory status, they tell us nothing about the quality or the range of health services to which people have access.
It may also be the case that workers report being affiliated when in fact their employers are not making the contributions on their behalf despite deducting the relevant amounts from their wages.
Furthermore, participation in a pension scheme does not per se mean that the participants are actually making contributions; if they are not, they will be generating contribution gaps that, depending on their size, could seriously compromise their future pensions.
Wage-earner participation in pension schemes only indicates that they expect to receive a pension at the age prescribed by law; it does not show how much it will be.
Surveys are, however, able to measure pensioners’ income, which provides clues as to their employment histories and the pension systems in their countries. 1.
A regional overview Although to differing degrees and from very different starting points, wage-earner health care and pension coverage5 has expanded; in just one country was a slight contraction observed.
What is more, although significant progress has been made in two of these countries, in three there has been virtually no improvement.
The most notable increases have occurred in countries where population coverage may be described as intermediate, while they are more modest in countries with extensive population coverage (see table IV.1).
In others, the trends differ, which could indicate that greater emphasis is placed on one area, or it may mean that one form of social protection (individual versus solidarity-based) is more effective than the other.7 Except in Honduras, wage earners are more likely to participate in health systems than in pension funds.
However, given that the two forms of coverage are highly correlated, countries reporting low levels of coverage in one area tend to do so in the other, as well.
The great exception in this group is Colombia, where health coverage expanded from 53% to 92% over 11 years, while pension coverage underwent a significant but lesser increase (16 percentage points).
In terms of gender, coverage was more extensive among female than male wage earners at both points in time (2002 and 2011) on average in 16 countries in the region, and they have gained more, proportionally speaking, where access has expanded for both indicators.
Men, meanwhile, gained more in proportional terms from improvements in the two indicators in Chile, Colombia, Guatemala and Honduras (see table IV.1).
There are disparities in access to both pension and health systems based on income quintile.
Education level is also a source of significant gaps (see table IV.3), but these are narrowing, especially with regard to health.
Between the two extremes (wage workers with a university education versus those who did not complete primary With respect to wage earners, at a certain level of abstraction a joint reference to health care and pensions is valid.
With only a few exceptions, levels of affiliation to health systems among wage earners are highly correlated with pension scheme affiliation (r = 0.89), largely because in many countries social security associated with wage employment involves simultaneous compulsory contributions to both systems, or because they form a joint system.
In the area of social protection, for example, financial volatility has had a direct, negative impact on saving levels in individual pension accounts, heightened by limited financial risk diversification and the deficiencies of, or liberalizing guidelines concerning, regulation of these funds’ investments.
For example, in Colombia the health system reform encompassed different solidarity-based components, while the pension reform led to pensions based on individual funding.
Affiliation has followed a very different course in each sphere. education), the difference in affiliation to pension and health systems is 55 percentage points and 40 percentage points, respectively.
In terms of trends by age group, although affiliation to both pension and health-care systems increased in all age groups, access for both indicators can be described as an inverted U-curve, because affiliation levels are lower both at the beginning and at the end of people’s working lives.
This is problematic because it means that young people are deferring saving for their pensions, and older persons do not have access to the full range of health services (see figure IV.1).
Excludes countries on which no data are available for the two points in time taken as a reference.
The concept of solidarity in financing social protection clearly has an altruistic basis in that it seeks to meet the needs of others as well as one’s own needs.
However, it also serves a purpose across time: the idea is to save while healthy and in secure employment, as insurance against the times when one is sick or has less job security, and for the future when one will need a pension.
The magnitude of the risks and their unpredictable nature means that everyone must share the risk, even high earners, by signing up to protection across various stages of the life cycle.
This is crucial if people are to be willing to pay taxes or make contributions to fund social protection, and cannot be emphasized enough.
As will be seen, the distribution of the lack of coverage in the region constitutes grounds for strengthening universal policies with supportive financing since, although clearly to a differing degree and depth, social sectors across the income spectrum lack social protection.
This goes back to a point that was made in the first part of this chapter: there is a need to safeguard the efficiency and quality of social security systems and forge proper links between benefits and contributions, in the case of contributory systems, so as to make the benefits more attractive and therefore more highly valued. 2.
Aspects of health-care affiliation at the country level On average, affiliation to health-care systems increased by around 12 percentage points between 2002 and 2011.
The exceptions are El Salvador, which registered a minor setback, and Uruguay, where affiliation was already very high in 2002 (over 98%) and only marginal improvement was recorded.
The most significant progress was made in Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador (urban areas) and Peru, where affiliation increased by between 24 percentage points and 39 percentage points.
Over a 12-year period, Colombia made substantial progress, and its health-care affiliation rates are now among the region’s highest.
Considerable efforts were made to extend coverage in the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Mexico and Peru, where affiliation is at an intermediate level compared with the rest of the countries in the group.
There were major increases in Argentina and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and more moderate rises in the other countries.
Affiliation was trending downwards in El Salvador prior to the health-care reform that is now under way, and has remained low and virtually unchanged in Honduras.
Levels of health-care affiliation in Brazil could not be detected from the surveys consulted, as the country has a universal system.
Wage-earner affiliation in the countries may be classified as high, average or low.
The lower the overall affiliation of these workers, the worse the relative position of those working in microenterprises or in domestic service.
By employment sector, affiliation is higher in the public sector than in the private sector, owing to evasion problems and a lack of labour-market oversight, among other factors.
The number of new health-system participants among professionals and technicians in microenterprises declined (as did pension scheme affiliation) in four of the countries with the lowest levels of affiliation.
More domestic workers signed up to health care than pension schemes but affiliation rates remain poor; they did, however, rise significantly in Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico and Peru, and more modestly in five other countries (see table IV.4).
Wage earners in private microenterprises are therefore combined with wage earners in companies employing five or more workers.
The “Professionals and technicians in microenterprises” category includes all professionals and technicians employed in the private sector. d Simple average for 15 countries.
In the 15 countries in which health-care system affiliation among non-wage-earners could be analysed, it is clear that this group lags far behind wage earners.
But even though there is an obvious gap in general terms, and with the exception of the countries that are furthest behind, non-wage-earner affiliation has risen in recent years, in particular in Colombia and Peru.
For women, the gap in health-care system participation is smaller than for pension systems.
A closer look at the socioeconomic distribution of affiliation highlights social protection inequality among non-wage-earners.
There are huge differences between the first income quintile and the fifth income quintile in terms of affiliation to both pension and health systems (see table IV.5).
But even among wage earners, whenever affiliation is lower, it is more concentrated by income level (see table IV.3).
Gaps by income level are smaller for health-care system affiliation than for pension scheme participation and are, in general, narrowing.
In 2011 the access gap between the fifth quintile and the first quintile was a little under 36 percentage points; in 2002 it had been almost 44 percentage points.
Although the proportion of non-affiliation declines as incomes rise, even the top income quintile contains a segment of the population that is not affiliated to any health system.
This occurs to a somewhat lesser degree than in the case of pensions and varies considerably between countries.
It may be due to certain types of employment contracts or could reflect self-selection among those who decide not to join because —at least at the moment— they are privately insured or because they make out-of-pocket payments.
If the social security system has no barriers to entry and acts as private market reinsurance, some people may try to transfer over when they require essential health treatment that is not covered by their insurance policies or their out-of-pocket expenses become too high.
The rate of health-care affiliation among pensioners is high in the 14 countries that were compared, even where total population coverage is lower.
With just one exception, health-care system affiliation among pensioners also rose during the period under review. 3.
The first group, in which coverage is the most extensive, comprises Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay (urban areas), where affiliation ranges from 68% to 85%.
In the second group, comprising Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador (urban areas), El Salvador, Mexico and Peru, between 41% and 65% of wage earners are covered.
The lowest levels of coverage are seen in Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, where affiliation ranges from 30% to 40% (see table IV.1).
There was a relatively moderate increase of a little over 10 percentage points in wage-earner access to pension systems, to stand at 56.5% of all wage earners (simple average for 16 countries).
Increases were especially significant in urban areas of Argentina, in Colombia, in the Dominican Republic, in urban areas of Ecuador and in Peru, ranging from between 14 percentage points and 23 percentage points.
El Salvador was the only country to record a decline (two percentage points); the variations were not statistically significant in Honduras, Mexico or Nicaragua.
It averages almost 88% for pension systems and a little over 90% for health systems, and these figures are relatively similar to those recorded in the early 2000s (albeit seven percentage points higher in both cases).
Even lower levels were recorded among wage earners employed by microenterprises (20% and 39%, respectively), with no significant improvement seen.
In contrast to healthcare coverage, no significant progress has been made in pension scheme affiliation in the least secure employment categories (see table IV.4).
In the group of countries in which the situation of non-wage-earners could be measured, there is clear evidence that women suffer exclusion and are in a worse position.
As may be expected, there are glaring disparities in access to both pension and health systems based on per capita income quintile.
In 2011, the gap in wage-earner pension affiliation between the fifth and first income quintiles, as an average for the Latin American countries, was almost 49 percentage points, having widened slightly since 2002 (see table IV.3).
Other countries have also experienced a significant relative expansion in coverage within low-income sectors; this is true of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Peru.
In Ecuador, the increases have been spread more evenly across the quintiles, while in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the first quintile’s share also increased relative to that of the wealthiest quintile.
Albeit with wide variations among countries, the top quintile contains individuals not affiliated with any pension system.
There is also something of a protection gap in the second, third and fourth quintiles, but it varies considerably by socioeconomic status and in no case is it comparable to the one in the first income quintile.
In Costa Rica and Ecuador it has risen fairly evenly across the income quintiles, as it has in the Dominican Republic, where the top and bottom quintiles show most progression.
Excludes countries on which no data are available for the two points in time taken as a reference. 4.
Access to pensions and pension levels Persons aged 65 years and over may remain active in the labour market for a number of reasons, such as a need to supplement their income or a quest for self-fulfilment.
This section discusses pension access within this age bracket and the amounts received.
Instead of looking at affiliation within the labour market at the two points in time, this analysis sheds light on the outcomes of this group’s prior affiliation.
This in turn provides clues as to the inclusive or exclusive nature of the pension systems that have been in place, the employment histories of this group as reflected in the income received during their working lives, whether contributions are compulsory or voluntary (where this option exists) and contribution density.
In most of the 16 countries analysed, the proportion of people aged 65 years and older who receive a pension is relatively small, although it varies considerably from country to country.
Honduras is at the lower end of the spectrum, whereas this population enjoys the most protection in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay.
The declines seen in the wealthiest quintile in Chile and the Dominican Republic were particularly striking and were perhaps attributable to the exposure to financial risk of individually-funded schemes.
Pensions in Chile were also adversely impacted in the second, third and fourth quintiles, a systematic trend not observed in any other country. 5.
Determinants of employee pension affiliation: a multivariate analysis Both as a subject for research and as a reference for public policy, it is useful to identify the determinants of pension system affiliation.
This section outlines the impact of a range of explanatory variables, considered together, on the affiliation of workers aged between 15 and 64 years.
As will be seen, there are both common patterns and disparities among the countries.9 The determinants of worker affiliation were analysed using probit model estimations.
The dependent variable indicates whether the worker is affiliated to the pension system or not.
Pension fund affiliation is identified10 in the same way as elsewhere in this chapter.
It was established which countries and which years around 2002 and 2011 could be included.
The explanatory variables include the worker’s personal characteristics (age, sex, educational attainment and civil status), his or her household (size and head) and job (category, branch of activity, full- or part-time work, formal or informal sector and labour income quintile).
Where the variables of race and place of residence (urban or rural) were available, they were included as controls.
Also taken into account were interactions between educational attainment and sex and between status as head of household and sex.
In addition, some countries, such as Chile, have only recently recognized care work in the home as a source of pension entitlement.
This type of analysis has previously been carried out for the region (ECLAC, 2006; Auberbach, Genoni and Pagés, 2007; Da Costa and others, 2011).
The estimates herein include more countries, which are analysed separately, and the most recent information is used.
The full results of the regression analyses, which are only illustrated here in the figures, are available from ECLAC on request. 10 The dependent variable is based on questions about pension-system affiliation in all countries, except for in Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Honduras, Mexico and Nicaragua, where the question relates to contributions rather than affiliation.
The variables omitted are those in relation to which the coefficients are interpreted.
The main results are presented via the marginal effects12 of each variable on the probability of affiliation.
In the figures, the lightest colour bars indicate that the coefficients are not statistically significant (that is, the significance level is 99%).
In table IV.9, the boxes with statistically significant values are highlighted in pale blue.
Excludes countries on which no data are available for the two points taken as a reference.
The Heckman correction for selection bias consists in estimating a second equation (called a selection equation) that measures the probability of being in the sample used to estimate the principal equation.
In this instance, this concerns the likelihood that an economically active individual will be employed (or a wage earner, in countries where the question on contributions was only addressed to wage earners). 12 Henceforth, the term “effects” will be used without further explanation, and they will be assumed to be marginal.
This reflects the change in the likelihood of pension affiliation stemming from the variable examined.
Quintile III Per capita income quintile a Simple average for 14 countries.
The coefficients that were statistically significant at the 99% confidence level (p<0.01) are marked in pale blue.
In general terms, the main determinants relate to the nature of the job, rather than personal or household characteristics.
The variables associated with the kind of job present a clear pattern across the region and carry greater weight than personal characteristics.
In all countries, working in the informal sector —understood to be a low-productivity sector13— has a negative and significant effect, which is greater in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the Dominican Republic and Guatemala (see figure IV.2).
Honduras (2002) is the exception to the rule, since the effect is positive and significant, although of very small magnitude.
In an effort to make it a proxy for the low-productivity sector, the informal sector in this instance includes domestic service, wage earners working in private microenterprises (who are neither professionals nor technicians, by job category), and non-professional own-account agricultural, industrial and construction workers.
A clear pattern also emerges with respect to working hours: in most countries, someone who works part time (defined as less than 30 hours a week) is less likely to be affiliated (see figure IV.3).
There are common patterns, too, relating to job category (see figure IV.4).
In every country, with the exception of Chile, public sector wage earners are more likely to be affiliated than private sector wage earners (the omitted category).
Being an employer, and above all an own-account worker, has negative effects, with particularly high coefficients in Chile and Brazil.
In Uruguay, following the enactment of specific regulations (Act 18065 of November 2006 and a regulatory decree of June 2007), domestic workers are entitled to all basic social security benefits.
This represents significant progress, historically speaking, for the country, and it is also noteworthy at the regional level (Amarante and Espino, 2008).
As was to be expected, as wages rise, so does the probability of affiliation.
The first quintile was used as the omitted category (see figure IV.5).
With the exception of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, income is significant in the intermediate income bands in El Salvador, in the upper income bands in Honduras and in the lower bands in Paraguay and Peru.
In Colombia, El Salvador and Honduras, the probability of affiliation is lower in the second income quintile.
The largest and most significant gaps between the highest and lowest income quintiles in terms of the probability of affiliation are found in Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Guatemala and Mexico.
Variables corresponding to employment in the construction, commerce and agriculture sectors present significant, negative effects in most countries and their coefficients are relatively high: these workers are significantly less likely to be affiliated than industrial workers.
In several Central American countries, employment in the services sector also shows negative effects.
The effects of working in the transport and the financial sectors are significant in some countries, but they are sometimes negative and sometimes positive; there is no common pattern across countries.
As to the personal characteristics of workers, no clear pattern of differences between men and women was found (see figure IV.6).
The probability that women would be affiliated was significant and positive in six countries in 2011 (Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Uruguay).
The coefficients not statistically significant at the 99% confidence level (p≥0.01) are shown in paler colours.
The exceptions are Chile, the Dominican Republic and Honduras, where age group is not significant.
The likelihood of affiliation is considerably lower in the youngest age group in almost every country, but particularly so in Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
In general, middle-aged workers (aged between 30 and 44 years) are also less likely to be affiliated than older workers.
This variable is not significant in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua and Paraguay, where the two oldest age groups present similar levels of affiliation.
Education level is clearly associated with the likelihood of affiliation in all the countries.
When education level is combined with the variable of sex, it has a negative and significant effect in Brazil in the three top tiers of educational attainment; that is, women at these education levels are at a disadvantage compared with men.
In Colombia, Peru and Uruguay, however, the opposite is true: the interaction has a negative effect regarding women in the top tiers of educational attainment.
The variables of race and place of residence (urban or rural) were included as regressors where they were available.
Workers in urban areas are, generally speaking, more likely to be affiliated to the pension system.
There is also a distinction between the married and the unmarried: when this variable is significant, it indicates a greater likelihood for married individuals to be affiliated.
In terms of the variables relating to the household, in many cases size is negatively and significantly associated with the likelihood of affiliation to a pension system.
In addition, being the head of the household corresponds, in most countries, to a greater likelihood of contribution (figure IV.9).
However, the interaction of head of household status with sex tends to show a significant negative effect for women.
Head of household. by sex b a The coefficients not statistically significant at the 99% confidence level (p≥0.01) are shown in paler colours. b Woman=1.
Espino (2008), “Situación del servicio doméstico en Uruguay”, Uruguay: ampliando las oportunidades laborales para las mujeres (60-83), Montevideo, National Women’s Institute (INAMU)/World Bank.
Schwarzer, Helmut (2013), “El piso de protección social”, presentation at the seminar “Formación e intercambio sobre la situación social, económica y de derechos de los trabajadores en la economía informal”, organized by the Bureau for Workers’ Activities (ACTRAV) of the International Labour International Labour Organization (ILO), Lima, August.
Recent trends in social spending as an element of public spending and household spending on health A.
A rapid and sustained increase in health spending: projections for Brazil, Chile and Mexico for 2010-2060 1.
A model for projecting health spending as a proportion of GDP 2.
Population ageing, speed of economic growth and sustained increase in health-care spending 3.
Final considerations The first section of this chapter looks at traditional measures of social spending that show how it ranks within total public spending in the framework of the economic cycle and the way it is distributed among the different sectors.
The other sections look in greater detail at the changes in public spending on health over time, patterns in out-of-pocket household expenditure on health and projections of the health expenditure needs arising from population ageing in the region.
Recent and long-term trends in social public spending Since 2010, several countries have embarked on fiscal reforms to consolidate their public finances on both the revenue and the spending side because public spending increases had triggered public account deficits in some of them.
In 2010, spending continued to expand, with a greater rise in social public spending and, in several cases, a decline in non-social public spending.
Since 2011, spending in the region has expanded more slowly than economic growth; the share of this increase going to non-social public spending has risen. 1.
Recent trends in social spending At the regional level the uptrend in social spending since the international financial crisis has continued.
In 2011 Latin America and the Caribbean (21 countries) allocated at least US$ 640 billion to social spending, and a further increase in those resources was estimated for 2012.
Despite that trend, the greatest rise in social spending was in 2009 (2008 had seen a greater increase in public spending in the economic sectors).
After that, it began losing relative share in GDP, which grew faster starting in 2010.
Since 2011 the fiscal priority of social spending (that is, its share in total public spending) has been falling as well, while non-social spending posted larger increases.
However, in the second half of the decade a number of countries launched systematic efforts to strengthen their social programmes, especially those designed to combat poverty.
Relatively widespread efforts were also made to achieve universal primary education and to significantly expand secondary education coverage, whether public or mixed-modality.
In some countries, there has also been a push for universal access to the public health-care system.
In addition to strengthening some major social programmes (to combat poverty and strengthen the social safety net, primarily its solidarity-based or non-contributory pillar), measures were adopted to redirect spending (and taxes) to offset the regressive effects of rising commodity prices, mainly in 2007 and 2008.
Subsequently, once the financial crisis had started, governments adopted different measures to stabilize domestic demand, increasing non-social public spending (especially through investment in infrastructure) and, above all, social spending, which included setting up employment programmes, promoting production (loans to microenterprises) and launching housing programmes.
In some countries, setbacks in drafting and enacting investment project legislation, along with implementation capacity issues, led to delays in the implementation of investments, while more rapid responses were seen in the area of social spending.
At the same time, the fiscal priority accorded to social spending, as a percentage of total public spending, has increases in the fiscal priority accorded to social spending are attributable, however, to contractions in non-social public spending and, therefore, to relative reductions in total public spending, mainly between 1999 and 2004 (see figure V.2).
The figures for total public spending are official figures generally based on a functional classification of public spending and may not coincide with those obtained using an economic classification.
Since 2010, several countries have embarked on fiscal reforms, on both the revenue side and the spending side, to consolidate their public finances, as several years (2003-2008) of primary surpluses and falling public debt were, in some of them, followed by public account deficits triggered by higher public spending.
Although the figures for 2010 show a continued countercyclical expansion of spending, this was due to faster growth of social public spending along with, in some cases, a decline in non-social public spending.
Starting in 2011, spending expanded at a slower pace than the regional economy and non-social public spending accounted for much of that increase.
Already in 2011 various countries had reined in their social spending in absolute terms: Chile, Colombia, Cuba, Honduras, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (by a simple average of 5.6% compared with the level recorded in 2010).
Only Guatemala recorded a fall in total public spending in 2012, with social public spending thus accorded a higher fiscal priority at the central government level, up from 61% to 63.5% of total public spending. 2.
Long-term trends in social spending The region’s countries differ a great deal in terms of the amount of resources they can channel towards the social sectors and in terms of the macroeconomic effort represented by the social public budget.
Of course, the capacity to assign greater macroeconomic priority to social spending depends on a host of economic, political and social variables.
Notwithstanding the rise in social expenditure as a percentage of GDP in the region from 12.5% in 1992-1993 to 19.2% in 2010-2011, the initial and current levels of this indicator vary considerably between the countries.
Except during certain periods, all the countries have made an effort to increase the fiscal and macroeconomic priority of social expenditure, often by boosting social spending as a percentage of GDP (the regional weighted average increase was nearly 6.8 percentage points of GDP between 1992-1993 and 2010-2011).
In 2010-2011, social spending accounted for less than 10% of GDP in only the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Guatemala.
By contrast, Chile and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joined the group of countries that had been allocating more than 15% of GDP to social spending since the early 1990s (see figure V.3).
Despite persistent differences in the macroeconomic priority of social spending, a few countries have made a notable effort to increase the percentage allocated to such spending.
It should be borne in mind that social spending expressed as a percentage of GDP masks the large variation in terms of the amount of resources actually allocated to the social sectors, which depends largely on each country’s level of economic development (see figure V.4).
Mexico is a federal country; the figures are for national (federal) government spending and do not include expenditure at the state or municipal level.
Expenditure by sector As shown above, at the regional level social spending as a percentage of GDP has risen systematically in all the periods under review.
However, a look at the breakdown of expenditure by social sector (such as education, health, social security and assistance, and housing) shows that the pattern has been relatively uneven.
Some social expenditure sectors have gained share, while others have seen their resources grow at a comparatively slower rate.
In order to interpret these patterns, not only should the different value attributed to sectoral social investment be taken into account, but also the fact that sectoral growth depends on the degree of institutional development and on the existing range of social services at the start of the evaluation period.
Other factors include the pressures that various social groups can bring to bear on the State to boost certain types of expenditure, economic contractions that require the mobilization of welfare resources and the level of population ageing.
In general, the increase in average social spending by 6.8 percentage points of regional GDP between 1992-1993 and 2010-2011 is largely attributable to higher spending on social security and social assistance (which went up by 3.2 percentage points between the two periods).
The gradual ageing of the population has meant that resources used to pay social security benefits have climbed steadily.
Although a significant proportion of these resources comes from revenues based on contributory social security schemes (public or mixed), a growing number of countries have phased in solidarity mechanisms for financing social-security payments in addition to the solidarity-based redistribution mechanisms that already existed in these systems.
Although no disaggregated information is available for social security and social assistance, the data indicate that various welfare programmes were expanded, mainly in the first decade of the twenty-first century.
These included anti-poverty programmes such as mechanisms for direct, conditional or non-conditional transfers to households.
The implementation or significant expansion of some of the assistance programmes was linked to measures to address the effects of the international financial crisis on real economies, including higher unemployment and falling wages.
Several of these were wrapped up or had their budgets cut once the crisis began to ease.
Overall, the social security and assistance sector upped its share in social public spending from 40.2% in almost 47% of the increase in total social spending (6.8 percentage points of GDP) (see figure V.5).
Another substantial jump over the past two decades, by 1.9 percentage points of regional GDP, was in social public spending in the education sector.
This is associated with the expansion in coverage and access in the case of primary education in the poorest countries, and in the case of secondary education in the other countries (both spending on infrastructure and, above all, current expenditure, mainly on hiring more teachers).
This trend came at the expense of social spending in the health sector, which saw its macroeconomic priority expand by less than the aforementioned sectors (1.2 percentage points of GDP between 1992-1993 and 2010-2011) and its share in social spending fall slightly, as examined in the following section.
Lastly, the sector that has been given the least priority in social public spending in the region is housing and others (which includes drinking water and sanitation, and more recently the environment), despite the fact that practically all countries, and especially major cities, still have pockets where marginal living conditions prevail.
Spending in this sector increased by only 0.5 percentage points of GDP in 18 years and accounted for 9.5% of total social public spending at the end of the period under consideration.
This makes it hard to develop programmes for upgrading slums (for the most part through sanitation programmes) or eradicating substandard dwellings, and it affects both the low-income population and, indirectly, the health sector, owing to considerable difficulties in controlling vectors of infectious and contagious diseases that spread easily in the absence of proper drinking-water, sewerage and wastetreatment systems.
Scanty investment in this area has also hampered or slowed environmental conservation initiatives based on the creation of biodiversity conservation areas and on necessary measures for regulating human activity, in particular productive ventures, so as to prevent environmental degradation and pollution.
There is a significant link between failing to implement such initiatives and poverty in some countries in the region, given the relative weight of these factors, as was discussed in relation to the multidimensional measurement of poverty in the first two chapters.
The decision to publish these figures was based on the fact that it is important to have recent data, even if they are only provisional, approximate or partial.
The figures were updated during the third quarter of 2013, and the exercise was finalized in early October.
Although differences in institutional coverage make comparisons between countries difficult, it was decided to publish the most comprehensive data available for each country, except when they posed significant constraints for constructing a series for 1990-2011.
This is because the primary interest of ECLAC is to cover as much information on social public spending as possible, in order to convey the effort being made by States in this area.
Considering that a number of countries only very recently adopted the classification system presented in the Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) (which is harmonized with the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA)), the 1990-2011 series is not always compatible at the subfunction or subgroup level.
Data continuity problems are shown in the lack of information for the full series or for certain years or functions in particular cases.
For example, there are no data for the Plurinational State of Bolivia between 1990 and 1994.
In the case of El Salvador, there are no data for 1990-1992 and the series for 2004-2009 are not strictly comparable with those for previous years owing to a change of methodology.
There are no social security figures for Nicaragua as the Nicaraguan Social Security Institute is an autonomous entity.
The series for Ecuador refers to the central government until 2006 and to the general State budget from 2007 For other countries it was not possible to construct the full series as the data on intermediate periods were lacking.
Such is the case with the data for Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago for 1997-1999.
The Dominican Republic has published two social public spending series, one for 1990-2002 and the other for 2003-2010, with methodological differences that mean that the two are not entirely consistent in regard to the social sectors, though they are in terms of general social public spending.
Like previous editions, Social Panorama of Latin America 2013 uses biennial averages to present social spending data.
The indicators published are for total social public spending and its component functions and sectors (education, health, social security and assistance, and housing, sanitation and other functions not included in the above categories) as a percentage of GDP in dollars per capita, and as a percentage of total public spending.
In the case of this last indicator, official information from the countries is used, but these figures may differ from those based on other classification systems (such as economic or administrative classifications of spending) because some include interest payments on the public debt and others do not, and because different methodologies are used to classify disbursements.
All social spending calculations in constant dollars are therefore expressed in dollars at constant The figures used to calculate percentages are in current prices for each year and each country.
Depending on the country, these may be directorates, departments, sections or units for planning, budgeting or social policy within the ministries of the treasury, finance or economic affairs.
In addition, information on budget execution was obtained from the countries’ general accounting offices or treasury departments, and occasionally from central banks, national statistical institutes, and national social and economic information systems.
Trends in public spending on health During the 1990s, public spending on health was affected by large fluctuations associated with highly volatile growth; however, subsequent increases in real terms offset those falls.
Since the mid-2000s, coincident with a widespread push to increase social spending, public spending on health has been relatively shielded from economic swings and as a result has been more stable and inertial.
Against the backdrop of the financial crisis, although social spending did not benefit from an injection of resources as part of an explicit countercyclical policy, it was protected to the extent that its share of both GDP and public spending increased.
This section examines both recent and long-term trends in public spending on health.
The limited availability of information for the past few years imposes restrictions on measurement.
The different degrees of data aggregation at the central government, general government and non-financial public sector level make it difficult to compare countries or groups of countries (see box V.1).
Indirect evidence of this can be seen in the next section, which analyses out-ofpocket spending on health, highlighting the existence of repressed demand for health care among the low-income population.
During the 1990s, public spending on health, as with most components of social public spending —with the sole exception of spending on social security— was affected by large fluctuations associated with the highly volatile growth that characterized much of the decade.
At the regional level, public expenditure on health swung widely during the 1990s, although the episodes of lower spending were followed by increases in real terms which broadly offset the downswings.
In general, these variations occurred in conjunction, or with a one-year delay, with the variations in regional GDP (see figure V.6).
During the 1990s, even where countries did not experience a drop in GDP, but rather a decrease in growth rate, health spending was nevertheless closely linked to the economic cycle.
In specific terms, spending went down or stagnated as the sector tended to be used as an adjustment tool when faced with the need to rein in public spending, or it held steady in the face of real or projected drops in tax revenue.
The cuts did not affect current spending (such as payroll or supplies) so much as the investment component (such as construction and maintenance of hospitals and clinics, and acquisition of new technology).
These declines occurred even as total public spending held steady or grew, with health spending shrinking as a share of total spending (that is, its fiscal priority) on several occasions.
These reductions in public health spending occurred even as other sectors saw higher social spending (education and pensions, for example), so health spending lost significant ground in terms of its share in social spending (see figure V.7).
Since the mid-2000s, coincident with a widespread push to increase social spending and protect it from economic swings, public spending on health has been gaining stability (becoming less procyclical) and becoming more inertial, mainly in countries with larger tax takes, higher total spending, and by extension, higher social spending.
The average figures for 21 countries in the region show that resources for this sector increased systematically, at least until 2009, and even outpaced GDP growth, and that there was a sharp countercyclical spike in 2008 when regional GDP fell by almost 2%.
The exception was a marked fall in 2002, which can be explained primarily by Argentina and Colombia reducing their health spending by over 20%3 (see figure V.6).
In 2003, other countries significantly tightened up the resources allocated to health (Panama, Paraguay and the Dominican Republic), but they account for only a small share of regional public expenditure earmarked for this sector.
To some extent that increase has boosted the share of health spending in the total budget (that is, its fiscal priority) and in the social budget.
Against the backdrop of the financial crisis and its impact on the real economies of the region, the public health sector was not particularly hit (only 14 instances of budget cuts out of a total of 57 in the 21 countries between 2008 and the most recent data available).
Although it did not benefit from an injection of resources as part of an explicit countercyclical policy (for example, job creation through increased investment spending), the sector was protected to the extent that it even increased its share of both GDP and public spending.
On other occasions, budget cuts were made irrespective of the GDP trajectory, but in general these were subsequently reversed.
According to the information available, only Guatemala and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela recorded systematic cuts in their health budgets in recent years: a drop of 16.2% between 2009 and 2012 in the former and 44% between 2007 and 2010 in the latter.
The 12% reduction in health spending in Cuba in 2011 is also worthy of note, since the subsequent 6.7% increase did not return it to the level seen in 2010 (see table V.1).
However, it is estimated that the public health budget for the region as a whole increased by more than 20% in the period between 2008 and 2012.
But the relatively broad and sustained increase in health spending in the 2000s should not mask the wide variation in spending levels from one country to another.
In around 2011, average annual health spending was in the area of US$ 226 per capita for the region as a whole, but in countries with a high level of spending (more than US$ 300 per capita), such as Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Panama, Trinidad and Tobago and Uruguay, it was as much as US$ 413.
For countries with intermediate levels of spending (between US$ 100 per capita and US$ 300 per capita), such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, El Salvador, Mexico and Peru, the per capita average was around US$ 175.
While the group of countries with the lowest levels of per capita health expenditure increased their spending in this area by 4.1% annually between 2000 and 2011 and the intermediate group saw theirs go up by 4% annually, per capita health spending in the countries with the highest levels of spending jumped up by 7.4% annually.
This resulted in a wider gap between the countries in terms of per capita public spending on health (see figure V.9).
Per capita health spending by country grouping, 1992-2011 Latin America and the Caribbean Countries with low levels of spending Countries with intermediate levels of spending Countries with high levels of spending B.
The countries which must make greater efforts to increase health spending are Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, whose annual expenditure is below US$ 55 dollars per person.
Although the macroeconomic priority of health spending is not low in Honduras, Nicaragua and Paraguay (3.5%, 4.1% and 2.3% of GDP, respectively), in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Guatemala there is scope for increasing the resources allocated to it, which are equivalent to only 1.3% and 1.1% of GDP, respectively.
The next section analyses private household spending on health, in particular direct or out-of-pocket expenses in this area, either in payment or co-payment for services received.
Some features of out-of-pocket health spending in the region Out-of-pocket health expenses are antithetical to the notion of shared responsibility or risk diversification.
In addition to their related negative effects on well-being, in some cases they can also be potentially inefficient; for example, when they are the result of high prices for medicines and overpriced services in certain markets or the provision of unnecessary services.
Therefore, reducing such costs represents a complex challenge to be tackled on the path towards achieving a more universal social safety net based on shared responsibility. 1.
Definition and scope of out-of-pocket spending Health-care goods and services have three main sources of financing whose weight varies from one country to another depending on the structure of each health system: general and specific taxes, social security contributions collected through payroll taxes, other taxes or contributions, and household outlays.
As defined by the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO, 2007), household spending on health services encompasses two types of expenditure.
Direct expenditures, known as out-of-pocket health expenses, include household outlays on health-related items such as hospitalizations, outpatient procedures and medicines, and are net payments, that is, after any reimbursements that might be received from the health-care system or insurance.
A look at out-of-pocket health spending as a percentage of the household budget and its relative composition, as well as the comparisons between income groups, yields important information on the spending options of households and sheds light on what happens in countries with very different health systems.
The analysis of how these spending patterns are related to the various forms of financing is still relatively unexplored terrain, and causal links cannot therefore be established.
Households make these direct payments as the need arises, generally to the service provider.
This spending depends on each household’s ability to pay and is thus antithetical to the notion of shared responsibility or risk diversification.
It is therefore one of the least fair ways to finance health care.
The degree of vulnerability is a function of both the magnitude of the out-of-pocket expense in question and household spending capacity (see table V.2).
In this type of analysis, spending capacity is defined as total household spending minus the value of the subsistence line allocated to food expenditure, which is the average amount spent on food by the group that allocates around 50% of its resources to this item (for more detail, see box V.2).
The burden of out-of-pocket health expenses shows the ratio of these costs to disposable household spending capacity; threshold values can be set to determine the level at which costs become catastrophic (approximately 30% to 40% of spending capacity)4 (see table V.3).
More recently, Knaul and others (2011) set it at 30%, thus expanding the universe of households whose spending falls into that category.
The present analysis uses the 30% threshold, which improves the sample quality of the universe that can be analysed using the surveys; the findings are therefore not comparable with ECLAC (2008).
Xu (2005) defines a line of relative subsistence, which is estimated as the average food expenditure per capita for a family whose food expenditure as a share of total household expenditure is located between the 45th and 55th percentiles of the food share distribution (number of household members raised to the power of 0.56).
Expenditure surveys or expenditure modules included in household surveys are used to measure current household expenditure.
In any given country, surveys of household income and expenditure are among the most important sources of information relating to the economic decisions of households and are usually part of integrated household survey systems and, more generally, national statistical systems.
They are designed to obtain information on, and to analyse the structure of, household budgets, savings and debt, to define or update basic food baskets and the costs of satisfying other basic necessities, and to update and modify baskets and bases for consumer price indices.
The System of National Accounts (SNA) defines household spending on goods and services for individual consumption as part of household final consumption expenditure.
Households also receive goods and services for individual consumption from non-profit institutions serving households (NPISH) or from government agencies.
Under SNA, actual final consumption of households is the sum of final consumption expenditure plus the goods and services transferred to households by NPISH and the individual goods and services produced or purchased by the government but delivered to households (State subsidies or royalties).
Health insurance was also included under the category of other goods and services.
Household spending on health services represents the health-care costs paid by families through direct payments (outof-pocket expenses) that cover all of the aforementioned items, except for the last.
Indirect expenses are outlays for prepaid medical care plans, private medical insurance or contributions to public insurance (PAHO, 2007).
The burden of out-of-pocket health expenses shows the magnitude of these costs with respect to household spending capacity, which in operational terms is calculated as total household spending minus subsistence expenditure.
The level of subsistence expenditure, that is, the amount needed by each household to adequately feed its members, should be estimated for each country.
For determining poverty, as well as for measuring household subsistence expenditure, a food-share-based relative poverty line is used, according to which the line of relative subsistence is estimated as the average food expenditure per capita of a family located between percentiles 45 and 55 of the ratio of food to total consumption (Xu, 2005).
The surveys used are listed below together with an indication of the period when the different monthly subsamples were taken.
As it was not possible to obtain the specific exchange rates for all of the subsamples throughout the reference period for all countries, the indexing and calculation of local currencies with respect to the dollar at constant 2005 prices was based on the averages of the consumer price indexes for the whole period of implementation of the corresponding survey.
Income and expenditure surveys measure the impact of these expenses exclusively in the month that the survey is carried out but not their more enduring effects, such as the medium- and long-term potential for impoverishment triggered by a catastrophic health event.
They do not capture the recurrence of expenses or the timing of their magnitude and intensity.
Despite these limitations, surveys give an idea of the uneven capacity of households to meet expenses not covered by insurance in cases of acute or chronic morbidity.
Expenditure by level of income, impoverishment and repressed spending As might be expected, the magnitude of out-of-pocket expenditure varies greatly depending on income distribution.
The lower out-of-pocket spending of the poorest sectors may indicate that they are insured (which cannot be measured very accurately owing to the sample sizes involved and the differences in the level of detail recorded by the surveys and the variety of ways in which they codify expenditure) or, if not, that they are unable to incur such expenses.
An analysis of out-of-pocket expenditure on health as a proportion of spending capacity disaggregated by income quintile does not reveal any clearly discernible patterns at the country level.
Looking at the structure of expenditure, households in the lower income quintiles spend proportionally more on medicines, while the proportion spent on specialist care rises as income increases (see figure V.10).
Among other information that this reveals about the costs borne by households, this could suggest that a lack of social protection pushes poorer groups to self-medicate during episodes of illness.
Simple average for 18 countries: household out-of-pocket expenditure on health Quintile III Quintile IV Household per capita income quintile B.
Simple average for 16 countries: spending on medicines as a percentage of out-of-pocket health expenditure Quintile III Quintile IV Household per capita income quintile C.
Conducting this exercise in 18 countries of the region revealed the dramatic extent to which the incidence of relative poverty is rising in several countries in the region (see table V.3 and figure V.11).
There are many different reasons —positive and negative— why households might not spend on health: good health coverage through public or private systems; no morbidity events during the period in question; and precarious income or lack of access to credit.
The last two prevent households from spending on health during episodes of morbidity when they do not have adequate coverage.
If a household has limited spending options for these last two reasons (and thus does not incur that expense), there is no observable value that would indicate their actual need for health spending.
As a complementary indicator of inequality, there is an observable difference in the incidence between poor and nonpoor households.
While catastrophic expenditure tends to be more closely associated with very high out-of-pocket expenses, those with a limited spending capacity are in fact unable to take on out-of-pocket health expenses, even when they are not insured (ECLAC, 2008).
That document served as a basis for proposing an integrated vision of development in keeping with the times, drawing on historical lessons learned and entailing far-reaching changes.
This vision is taking root in the region, and it has laid the groundwork for further discussion of policy content and proposals within ECLAC itself.
For Social Panorama of Latin America, the main challenge is to foster a more in-depth examination of social gaps and the mechanisms that reproduce or decrease them.
The previous edition of Social Panorama homed in on inequality gaps and their inter-generational reproduction and paid particular attention to the formative years of individuals, their transition to adult life and the role of social expenditure and transfers in meeting the needs of new generations during their early years.
It showed how the life cycle path is determined by differences in skill development and how inequality and poverty become entrenched as people move from one stage of life to the next.
The 2011 edition of Social Panorama of Latin America takes a more in-depth look at the chain that produces and reproduces social gaps; it addresses other spheres as well.
It focuses on how structural heterogeneity (productivity gaps in the national economies), labour segmentation and gaps in social protection are linked along the chain.
Demographic factors such as fertility differentiated by education and income level are discussed, as are more specific patterns of risk and exclusion like those impacting young people in the Caribbean.
These gaps make for an ambivalent scenario in the region, combining structural tendencies that reinforce them with recent, favourable developments that open new possibilities for advancing towards less unequal societies with broader access to well-being.
Poverty and inequality are decreasing in the region; the main reasons are, first, rising labour income and, second, increasing public transfers to the most vulnerable sectors.
But the productive gaps are still rigid, and there is still little mobility for specific groups in low-productivity sectors (especially women in lower-income socioeconomic groups) whose income has not increased.
Fertility is declining substantially and can mean greater possibilities for well-being among families with fewer dependents.
However, the fertility calendar is still stratified according to socioeconomic and education levels, with a higher adolescent motherhood rate among less-educated women.
It is plain to see that social expenditure is increasing, as is the response (in terms of social spending and protection) to mitigate the impacts of the 2008-2009 crisis on the most vulnerable sectors.
But the social protection systems are far from inclusive, and there are gaps in them that reproduce vulnerability and stratified access to social security.
Chapter I discusses recent trends in poverty and income distribution in Latin America.
It includes a subchapter on how the world of work is perceived by the actors in it.
In keeping with the overall recent trend, poverty and indigence declined in the region in 2010 as economic growth resumed.
Both indicators are at their lowest level in the past 20 years.
While the main reason for the decrease in poverty is the increase in mean household income, the decline in inequality was also a significant factor.
The poverty rate for the region in 2010 was 31.4%, including 12.3% living in extreme poverty or indigence.
In absolute terms, these figures translate into 177 million poor people, of whom 70 million were indigent.
The figures show that, in the wake of the 2009 crisis, economic recovery has been reflected (at least in part) in the poverty indicators.
Indeed, the poverty rate fell by 1.6 percentage points and the indigence rate by 0.8 percentage points compared with 2009.
Forecast GDP growth and inflation expectations for each country point to a slight drop in the poverty rate in 2011.
But the indigence rate could increase as higher food prices would cancel out the expected rise in household income.
Positive changes towards lower income concentration have been seen in recent years, thanks above all to better distribution of labour income and the redistributive role of the State via cash transfers.
While the decrease in inequality has been only slight, it does set a favourable scenario —especially given the prolonged absence of broad distributive improvements.
There are still issues regarding the way the labour market and labour institutions operate in Latin America.
Perception surveys show that these dysfunctions generate feelings of uncertainty and unease among the employed population.
These feelings are more prevalent among those who have precarious jobs or less human capital, those in a less favourable socioeconomic position and those who live in countries with larger productivity gaps.
These groups are more likely to fear job loss or perceive a lack of job opportunities, a failure to enforce labour laws or a lack of social security guarantees.
Worker-employer dialogue is hindered by low unionization rates (especially among less- skilled workers) and mistrust of labour unions (more so among business executives and managers).
Chapter II discusses the rapid decline in fertility in Latin America over the past five decades, as well as the factors contributing to this.
It is still invariably the case that the lower a woman’s education level, the higher her fertility.
While fertility has declined recently for all education levels, in many countries the rate of decline has varied from group to group and is, as a rule, slower for less-educated women.
Adolescent fertility has fallen at a much more moderate pace than total fertility.
In many of the countries of the region it even rose during the 1990s while the total fertility rate declined significantly.
The inequality in fertility between groups with different education levels is usually particularly marked in the case of adolescent mothers.
Evidence of the declining percentage of planned births among adolescent mothers is encouraging, and it is a powerful argument in favour of redoubling public sexual and reproductive health policies and programmes targeting this group.
The governments of the region are facing two main challenges concerning fertility.
On the one hand is the need to step up efforts to meet target 5.B of the Millennium Development Goals, to achieve, by 2015, universal access to reproductive health, thus narrowing the substantial gaps in fertility that remain among social groups —especially adolescent fertility.
On the other hand are the challenges posed by declining fertility, which call for re-thinking policies and institutions to deal with inexorable changes in the family, social and economic structure of the countries.
Chapter III shows how structural heterogeneity (caused by productivity gaps), stratification of the decline in fertility and gender inequality operate as true factories of inequality in the labour markets of Latin America.
The high structural heterogeneity that marks the region’s productive structures results in striking disparities between the contribution that each productive sector makes to GDP and employment.
There is still a close linkage between structural heterogeneity and income inequality as a rigid pattern that is stable over time.
While employment in low-productivity sectors has fallen over the past two decades, the distance between it and employment in medium- and high-productivity sectors has grown.
The stratified incorporation of Latin American women into the labour market means that, instead of narrowing, the gap between higher- and lower-income women has grown slightly over the past two decades.
Greater childcare pressure and the glaring lack of protection in this sphere for the most vulnerable sectors reflect a rigid circuit of inequality.
The care burden is also a factor in the relative increase of the female unemployment rate compared with the rate for men.
The youth unemployment rate is still far higher than the adult unemployment rate, and the distance between the lower and higher quintiles has not changed significantly over the past 20 years.
Against this backdrop of multiple labour market inequalities, robust State intervention is called for in the productive sphere, in labour regulations and institutions, in labour market policies and in the redistribution of childcare.
Chapter IV deals with gaps and challenges in the social protection systems of the countries of Latin America.
Limited social security registration coverage and its linkage to formal employment means that larger households, those headed by women, and rural households have less access to contributory protection.
Retirement and pension coverage is still quite limited, leaving women and the lower-income population more unprotected.
The non-contributory pillar of social protection covers approximately 12% of households and equates to 0.25% of GDP.
But these transfers do seem to target the risks of the population and make a big difference for the poorest households, thus confirming that their distribution is highly progressive.
A combined assessment of the contributory and non-contributory pillars in Latin American households shows that a large part of the population is excluded from the classic model of protection through employment and is also not being reached by public welfare transfers.
While this group does include a proportion of persons from higher-income households, just under half of the group is in the poorest 40% of the population.
Latin America’s weak social protection systems are facing tremendous redistributive challenges, with limited fiscal capacity and relatively rigid —if any— architectures of well-being.
Any systemic approach should also draw on the contributory pillar and on more or less targeted policies to interconnect rights and progress towards truly universal —and solidarity-based— protection systems.
Chapter V takes up the recent dynamics of social expenditure, its response to the crisis and the outlook for broadening retirement and pension coverage in the countries of the region over the medium and long term.
For the region as a whole, public expenditure (especially social expenditure) has burgeoned over the past two decades.
The largest increase has been in social security and welfare (an increase equal to 3% of GDP), followed by education.
But among the countries where per capita social expenditure is less than US$ 1000, the main item of expense is education.
It is only in the relatively more developed countries that social security and welfare account for more.
The countries reacted to the global financial crisis by temporarily expanding public expenditure instead of shrinking it as in the past.
But the expansion did not always have a social focus, although the social repercussions were considerable in that they helped prevent increases in unemployment and social vulnerability.
Otherwise, the long-term effect will be to make it ever more difficult to fund universal social protection in ageing societies with a proportionally smaller labour force.
Chapter VI addresses, for the first time in Social Panorama, an urgent social issue in the countries of the Caribbean: the status of youth in this subregion in terms of socio-demographic dynamics, risks, skill development and the dynamics of social exclusion and inclusion.
In the Caribbean, as in Latin America, these are times of major challenges in the sphere of youth inclusion.
New education and employment measures are needed in order to improve and balance education achievements with smooth passage to employment, reducing gaps in educational attainment among young people and employment gaps between young people and adults.
The demographic transition holds opportunities for young people, but it must be harnessed in the short term so as to expand capacities and productivity and make this generation less vulnerable.
Young people move from place to place more easily than children and older people do, especially in the Caribbean.
Young people in the Caribbean are very much exposed to exogenous risks, especially accidents and aggression.
And exposure to sexually transmitted diseases, especially HIV/AIDS, is a warning sign that needs to be forcefully addressed.
Public and policy awareness has grown over the past few decades; government institutions charged with developing youth plans and programmes have been created.
Strides need to be made on comprehensive approaches that can go beyond sector-based rationales, taking into account the very nature of the “young actor” and encompassing risks, capacities, opportunities and modalities of involvement.
Poverty, inequality and perceptions of the world of work in Latin America Progress in poverty reduction Economic activity and employment recovered quickly after the 2009 crisis.
Latin America’s per capita GDP grew by 4.8%, the employment rate rose by 0.6 percentage points and the labour force participation rate went up by 0.3 percentage points.
The urban unemployment rate fell from 8.1% to 7.3%, which is not only below the average for the period 2000-2008 but is also lower than yearly figures for the past two decades.
The inflation rate rose in all of the countries of the region, with a simple average that was 2.8 percentage points above the rate posted in 2009.
In this setting, the regional poverty rate was 31.4%, including 12.3% living in extreme poverty or indigence.
In absolute terms, this translates into 177 million poor people, of which 70 million were indigent.
Further strides in poverty reduction were made in 2010 as the poverty rate declined by 1.6 percentage points and the indigence rate fell by 0.8 percentage points compared with 2009 (see figure 1).
The figures above the bars represent the percentage and total number of poor persons (indigent plus non-indigent poor), respectively.
Compared with the late 1990s, the picture is still a favourable one.
Accumulated poverty reduction since 1999 stands at 12.4 percentage points while the indigence rate has come down by 6.3 percentage points.
The two indicators are down by a total of 17.0 percentage points and 10.3 percentage points, respectively, since 1990.
These outcomes mean further progress towards achievement of target 1.A of the Millennium Development Goals: to halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people living in extreme poverty.
Latin America’s progress towards this goal stands at 91%, calculated as the accumulated reduction of indigence between 1990 and 2010 (10.2 percentage points) divided by the decrease implicit in the target (11.3 percentage points).
This percentage is higher than the time elapsed (80%) to the deadline for meeting the target.
Projected GDP growth and inflation expectations in each country point to a slight decline in the poverty rate in 2011, to 30.4% (about one percentage point below the rate for 2010).
But the indigence rate could go up because any rise in food prices outstripping the other goods in the basket would cancel out the expected increase in household income (see figure 1).
As of 2010, the data available for 12 countries of the region show poverty trending in different directions and at different rates over the previous year.
Five countries posted significant declines in their poverty rates; they are Peru (-3.5 points), Ecuador (-3.0 points), Argentina (-2.7 points), Uruguay (-2.0 points) and Colombia (-1.4 points).
In these countries, the indigence rate trend reversed as well, with the decline ranging from 0.5 percentage points to 1.7 percentage points (see table 1).
Honduras and Mexico were the only countries that saw a significant increase in poverty and indigence rates: 1.7 percentage points and 1.0 percentage points for Honduras and 1.5 percentage points and 2.1 percentage points for Mexico.
Because the comparison for Mexico is against the measure for 2008, it reflects both the substantial expansion of the Mexican economy in 2010 and the marked contraction of per capita GDP in 2009 (-7.2%).
In Panama, the indigence rate rose by 1.5 percentage points; the other countries for which data are available (the Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Paraguay) posted no significant variations in their poverty or indigence rates.
State of) c It is widely known that income distribution in the countries of Latin America is among the most unequal in the world.
Moreover, during the 1990s and early 2000s, inequality in the region was marked by stubborn downward rigidity or a slight upward trend.
There was a turning point in 2002 and 2003 when inequality began to trend down in many countries.
While this decrease was slight and not enough to change Latin America’s ranking as the most unequal region, it was noteworthy in view of the prolonged absence of overall distributive improvements.
The trend towards distributive improvement in the region did not change in the wake of the economic crisis.
Before 2008, which basically reflects pre-crisis levels, the Gini coefficient was falling by 1% or more per year in 10 countries, with Guatemala posting the only appreciable increase (data to 2006).
The figures for 2010, which reflect, approximately, the immediate post-crisis scenario, show that inequality did not increase significantly in any of the 11 countries for which there is information.
The decline in inequality in the region over a period of several years provides a good opportunity to examine the factors behind it.
Studies of this issue have tended to agree on at least two points.
First, that most of the decline in inequality can be traced to the labour market, due above all to a more equitable distribution of labour income per person employed.
Second, public cash transfers have been a source of income that has helped to deconcentrate per capita income distribution.
This issue of Social Panorama assesses these factors in the light of available evidence for the countries of Latin America for the 2000s.
The periods under review are those in which income distribution improved most significantly in 15 countries of the region.
The examination focuses on comparing the gaps between the first and fifth quintiles for a group of variables, particularly the different income streams and labour market indicators.
The results indicate that while the demographic factor did help narrow the gaps between quintiles, especially in countries with the most distributive improvements, its impact was slight (see table 2).
This variable is the sum of labour income (per adult) and non-labour income (per adult) in the household.
In 10 countries, labour income was the prevailing factor in the reduction of inequality.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Costa Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua the variation in labour income accounted for 90% or more of the variation in total income per adult.
Changes in income are broken down in accordance with the structure described in Ricardo Barros and others, “Uma análise das principais causas de queda recente na desigualdade de renda brasileira”, Econômica, vol. 8, No. 1, June 2006.
The distributive change in non-labour income accounted for 50% or more of the decline in adult income inequality in the Dominican Republic, Chile, Ecuador, Paraguay and Uruguay; in Argentina and Brazil it accounted for more than 40%.
In countries where such income played a more notable redistributive role, it comes from public transfers, that is, targeted government action through social policy.
Labour income per adult can, in turn, be expressed as the result of multiplying compensation per person employed by the employment rate (ratio of the number of persons employed to the number of adults).
The observed decline in labour income inequality per adult is almost Perceptions of the operation of the labour market and labour institutions In Latin America the perception of unemployment as the country’s main problem between 1996 and 2009 changed more or less in line with the evolution of real unemployment.
In 2007, the perceived lack of job opportunities was greater among persons in a worse socioeconomic situation, among the unemployed and among own-account workers.
As for age, persons aged 46 and over were more likely than younger subjects to perceive that there were fewer job opportunities in the country. exclusively due to the first of the two factors.
Indeed, not only did the employment gap between quintiles remain virtually unchanged in several countries: it even increased in some of them.
The distributive improvement in income among persons employed is due to several different factors.
Mentioned as explanations are a steady improvement in education distribution and the narrowing wage gaps between more highly-skilled and less-skilled workers.
In some countries, this drop in labour income inequality among persons employed may be due, to a certain extent, to labour and other policies rolled out by the governments in an effort to improve distributive equality.
The information provided in this subchapter is based on special tabulations of the Latinobarómetro surveys conducted between 1996 and 2009 in 18 countries in Latin America.
Data have been available for the Dominican Republic available from 2004 onwards. b Includes senior management, middle management, independent professionals and salaried professionals. c Includes those who were temporarily out of work at the time of the interview.
In addition, distrust of labour unions has remained very high for the past 15 years.
It is more frequent among business managers and directors, an occupational group that is also more likely to perceive greater conflict between entrepreneurs and workers (see figure 4).
Perceptions concerning enforcement of labour laws (labour contracts, dismissal and severance pay, workday length, overtime pay and minimum wage) are more negative among those living in countries with severe structural heterogeneity,3 among the unemployed and among own-account workers.
Perceptions of the lack of social security guarantees are more prevalent among those living in countries with severe structural heterogeneity and among older persons.
The data available for 1996 and 2009 indicate that feelings of uncertainty linked to the possibility of job loss tend to be more prevalent during economic contractions and less so during expansions, and that they are more frequent among persons living in countries with greater structural heterogeneity even if the gap has been closing in recent years.
And the fear of unemployment is greater among those with less schooling, among own-account workers and among low- and middle-rank employees while it is less prevalent among men and among older subjects.
The values reported correspond to the percentage who answered that they had little or no confidence in the trade unions. c Question used in the Latinobarómetro survey: In every country there are differences or even conflicts between different social groups.
The reported values correspond to the percentage who answered that there was a very serious or serious conflict. d For the question on confidence in the trade unions, the reported data were obtained by combining the observations available for 1996, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008 and 2009.
For the question on conflict between employers and workers, the reported data were obtained by combining the information for 2007 and 2008.
Current status and outlook for fertility in Latin America Introduction The demographic evolution of Latin America, especially the decline in fertility, provides an unprecedented opportunity for economic advancement and for improving household living standards in the region.
The positive effects of this change include the relative Structural heterogeneity refers to profound productivity gaps in the national economies, and it is characteristic of the countries of Latin America.
These gaps are found between large companies, SMEs and what is usually largely associated with the informal sector (microenterprises, own-account workers and domestic workers).
For the purposes of this study the countries have been grouped into increase in the potentially productive population and the concomitant benefits for the economy, improved sexual and reproductive health and broader education and employment opportunities for women.
This situation particularly impacts adolescent Latin American girls, especially those with less education and income.
It is therefore important to review fertility trends in the region in their economic, social and demographic context, so as to spotlight the challenges the countries will face in the future.
Fertility in Latin America Fertility in Latin America began to plummet in the mid-twentieth century as development gained traction in the countries of this subregion and brought changes in reproductive behaviour.
Since then, rapidly-falling fertility in the region has narrowed those gaps considerably: towards 2015 the TFR in Latin America and the Caribbean will be 2.1 children per women versus 1.7 children in the developed countries.
The decline in fertility in the region always surprised researchers by repeatedly exceeding their estimates.
Initial projections were for a negligible drop of 0.27 children per woman per five-year period, but the actual decline between the 1960s (the turning point for the fertility trend in Latin America) and the most recent five-year period observed was 0.41 children per woman per five-year period.
But as is to be expected in a subregion with striking economic and social inequalities, the timing and the rate of decline differed widely among the countries.
The steepest drops were in the 1960s and 1970s, and the countries with the highest initial levels saw the greatest drops in fertility, resulting in a marked convergent trend (see figure 6).
Limited access to education is closely linked to socioeconomic inequalities, and it is a barrier to progress in the sphere of reproduction.
So it is still always the case that the lower women’s education level, the higher the total fertility rate.
In absolute terms, this is most striking in Ecuador, Haiti and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, with differences of more than three children between uneducated women and those who have reached secondary education.
This inequality becomes more pronounced when taking into account women who have reached higher education.
While fertility has recently been falling across all education levels, different groups have seen different rates of decline; in general, the slowest decline has been among uneducated women.
The result is a deepening of relative differences in half of the countries examined here.
In all of the countries considered, the contraceptive prevalence rate is lower among women with less schooling.
This in turn is closely correlated with the unmet demand for family planning services.
The challenge facing the countries of Latin America here is to adopt measures and step up efforts to meet target 5.B of the Millennium decline compared with natural fertility.5 But the impact of contraceptive use, which accounts for almost 40% of the decline, is growing quickly as contraceptives —and the use of modern contraceptive methods— become more widespread.
In Latin America, changes in the age at first marriage have been slow, with little variation or a slight increase in age.
In contrast, the age at which sexual activity begins is trending younger and the gap between it and age at first marriage is growing.
The foregoing notwithstanding, in Latin America there are indeed different patterns for marriage (both formal and consensual) and for the initiation of motherhood, and they are strongly influenced by education.
Women with a higher level of education systematically start sexual activity at a later age than less-educated women do, and they delay the formation of unions and motherhood.
The fact that women in more privileged social sectors and more highly-educated women marry and bear children at a later age supports the idea that in these sectors there is more autonomy in making sexual and reproductive decisions.
Outlook for fertility in the light of changes in education Most of the countries of Latin America have made substantial progress over the past few decades in improving access to education and increasing the number of years of schooling.
Because economic and demographic behavior usually differs in keeping with education levels, projected educational attainment is a key input for economic and demographic projections.
This education dynamic is expected to speed up the decline in fertility as women attain higher levels of education.
In a goodly number of countries in Latin Natural fertility is the number of children that a fertile woman would bear, absent contraceptives or other constraints.
For the region, this has been calculated at 21 children per woman.
America, the fertility gap by level of education is not only holding: it is growing.
But there are reasons to think that these differences will diminish over the long run if the decline in fertility among more highly-educated women runs its course and fertility among less-educated women continues to fall.
Data from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) show the direct contribution of changes in education gaps to falling fertility in four countries (Brazil, Colombia, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia) over a 15-year period.
While they are not yet the dominant force behind the decline in fertility, changes in the distribution of educational attainment have contributed substantially to the decrease.
Fertility projections based on this distribution corroborate the conclusions reached with other methodologies: low levels of fertility will increasingly shape the region’s demographic and economic future.
As a result, there will be a sustained decrease in the number of births and the age structure will gradually skew older.
These changes have major implications in terms of the care economy, female labour participation and dependency relationships within families.
Adolescent fertility: a priority for action and research It is interesting to see that adolescent fertility is declining at a much slower pace than total fertility.
A look at shorter, more recent periods reveals that adolescent fertility rose in almost all of the countries in the region during the 1990s (see figure 7) while total fertility dropped sharply.
The most frequently used indicators show that sexual activity is starting earlier in adolescence, tending to make pregnancy during this stage more likely.
This earlier sexual activity has not come with earlier unions, meaning that premarital sexual activity is on the rise.
The only way to keep these trends from translating into higher adolescent fertility is to significantly increase the effective use of modern contraceptives during adolescence.
Although traditional indicators of coverage point to an increase, a detailed examination of their use leads to a much less encouraging conclusion.
Part of the increased use of contraceptives is among women who start using them after having their first child; obviously, this does nothing to prevent adolescent motherhood (although it does help avoid second pregnancies).
Moreover, use among adolescent girls and boys is usually less consistent and effective, thus yielding a smaller protective effect than in other age groups.
Last, protected sexual initiation, which is the best predictor of childless adolescence, is still rare in a goodly proportion of the countries.
Unlike prior periods, surveys conducted during the 2000s show a systematic drop in the desirability of children conceived during adolescence, and lower levels of desirability for such births versus total births in most of the countries.
Unequal fertility levels among groups with different levels of education are especially striking in the case of adolescent motherhood.
Education remains a factor that protects against adolescent motherhood, but its preventive capacity has eroded.
Above all, the education threshold for minimizing the likelihood of adolescent motherhood has shifted from secondary school to the university level.
In countries where only a minority has access to secondary education, reaching that level still yields a sharp drop in the likelihood of being an adolescent mother.
Because progress towards universal secondary education in Latin America has not brought labour market improvements or a decline in social inequality, a considerable portion of the adolescent population attending school has low expectations as to the returns and opportunities that this increase in the number of years of schooling will bring later on in life.
For this reason, the losses and costs of early motherhood are not fully perceived by a large proportion of Latin American adolescents.
Along with progress in education, advancing towards more egalitarian societies with more opportunities for adolescents and young people would help bring down the region’s high adolescent fertility.
Final remarks Marked inequalities in fertility according to level of education, persistently high adolescent fertility and the obvious constraints for contraceptive use among adolescent girls and boys despite their desire to limit fertility, all reveal shortfalls in prevention and barriers to accessing modern contraceptive methods.
As ECLAC has repeatedly noted, this is the hard core of intergenerational reproduction of exclusion and inequality, which is perpetuated by a combination of low education levels, lack of childcare support, the trajectory of more vulnerable families, greater difficulty in earning an income and precarious access to social protection networks.
Mothers with small children and low income levels are precisely the ones who face greater difficulties in accessing employment and, when they do, end up concentrated in lower-productivity jobs.
Adolescent motherhood, with low levels of education and income, is thus a monumental barrier to productive paths and access to well-being throughout life.
Work, employment and labour markets: factories, circuits and hard cores of inequality reproduction As explained in chapter I, the progress that the region has made since 2002 in reducing poverty and, albeit to a lesser extent, inequality —and the evidence that rising labour income has a lot to do with that progress— provide good reason for optimism.
Gauging how much space there is for Latin America to continue to make strides in reducing inequality requires an examination of productivity gaps, their impact on labour market segmentation and how circuits of inequality operate at the intersection of the State, markets and families.
This linkage shows that even though the aggregate indicators for the past few years exhibit encouraging signs, the tendency towards wider gaps between higher- and lower-income sectors is very rigid.
Productive structure and labour markets: another side to the structural roots of inequality The internal markets of the economies of Latin America are structurally heterogeneous, i.e., they are extremely segmented because of wide productivity gaps.
The economic structure of the region can be studied in terms of three productivity strata (high, middle and low) with differing degrees of access to technology and markets.
The high stratum, encompassing large-scale export activities and companies (more than 200 workers) accounts for 66.9% of GDP and only 19.8% of total employment.
The middle stratum comprises small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and accounts for 22.5% of GDP and 30% of total employment.
And the low stratum, closely associated with what is commonly referred to as the informal sector, accounts for one half of employment and only 10.6% of GDP (see figure 8).
The implications of this marked disparity between each sector’s contribution to GDP and employment are obvious.
It results in a very unequal distribution of productivity (GDP per person employed) that ultimately leaves space for extremely heterogeneous appropriation of productivity gains among workers and operates as a structural parameter for disparities and access to well-being in the region.
Employment is concentrated in the low-productivity stratum but the greater appropriation of gains (participation in GDP) is in the high stratum, which absorbs just one of every five persons employed.
These asymmetries are largely responsible for labour income concentration in Latin America.
Productivity, formality, informality and inequality: beyond the dividing lines Income concentration is a worrisome consequence of structural heterogeneity, but it is not the only one.
It is definitely good news that the dividing line between these two sectors has shifted in recent years: in 2009 workers in low-productivity sectors accounted for 42.7% of the urban employed population.
This is an improvement over the figure posted around 1990, when the employed population in this sector accounted for 48.1% of the total.
But over the past two decades the dividing line between formal and informal employment has become sharper.
In other words, the gap between higher- and lower-productivity workers has grown (see figure 9).
Not only was the drop in informality clearly more marked among men than among women, it was also more stratified among women and was concentrated above all in higher-income women.
As a result, 82% of the employed women in the poorest 20% of the population work in low-productivity sectors.
The gap between employed women in quintiles I and V peaked in 2009.
Up to 2006, the figures for low- and high-productivity sectors do not include Colombia, which does not break down the data by company size.
These widening gaps among women are due in part to the many ways in which gender inequality intersects the connection between labour markets and families.
The pattern for resolving the pressure that the care burden exerts on households is extremely regressive in that it still essentially depends on the modalities and resources (economic and family) available to them.
The presence of small children in the household pushes lower-income women into informal employment in a much larger proportion than for higher-income women.
This disparity has grown more pronounced over the past 20 years: for all intents and purposes the proportion of lower-income women employed in low-productivity sectors has not decreased and stands in contrast to the marked decline in the proportion of higher-quintile women with small children working in low-productivity sectors (see figure 10).
Access to employment and inequality: the gender and generational viewpoint Rising female labour-force participation is perhaps one of the most dramatic changes taking place in the labour markets of Latin America over the past 20 years.
But here, too, the highly stratified process exposes a regressive pattern that is operating as a powerful transmitter of inequalities in the region.
A long-term look shows that the labour participation gap between women in the poorest sectors with small children (aged 5 and under) and those with children aged 6 to 14 has been growing since 2002.
This confirms that for the most vulnerable women the burden of caring for smaller children is still an obstacle in the path to labour market insertion.
And the gap between women in the highest and lowest quintiles living in households where there is a childcare burden has been growing steadily since 1994 —both for women with small children and for those in households with children aged 6 to 14.
In both cases the disparity is now the highest it has been since 1994, pointing to a hardening of this rigid circuit of inequality.
Unlike labour-force participation, unemployment is more closely associated with economic cycles, and there is a direct linkage between fluctuations in unemployment and stages of the cycle.
But perhaps most relevant here is the fact that from cycle to cycle some sectors systematically lose out.
This reflects unequal capacities for coping with the effects of unemployment; in other words, certain groups are more vulnerable to economic downturns while others are better able to weather cyclical economic contractions.
Because of this divergence, in 2009 unemployment among lower-income women was five times higher than among women in the highest quintile.
The incorporation of women into the labour market adds pressure for female employment, and less-educated women encounter more barriers to accessing employment at a time when not enough jobs are being created.
But in the most vulnerable sectors the demand for care can work against access to employment.
The unemployment rate tends to be higher among women living in households with smaller children.
Here, as well, the gap between them and women with children of an age for which there is a formal, more structured supply of schooling grows slightly as income levels fall.
Data for Argentina relate to Greater Buenos Aires; for the Plurinational State of Bolivia, to eight major cities, plus El Alto; for Ecuador, to urban areas; for Paraguay, to Asunción and the Central Department; and for Uruguay to urban areas. a Does The other group in which unemployment is at the most worrisome levels is young people.
According to household survey data, in 1990 the unemployment rate among young people aged 15 to 24 was almost twice that for the population overall.
Not only has this gap not narrowed: it seems to have grown since 2005.
Moreover, unemployment is much higher among young people from lower-income households than among the higher quintiles, and this gap has not changed significantly in the past 20 years.
The State at the intersection of labour markets and families In view of this picture, State intervention should be considered in at least four areas.
The first involves advancing towards a comprehensive policy for productive development grounded in appropriate macroeconomic regimes, development policies and market-based microeconomic incentives, as well as robust intervention in industrial and technological policy and in policies for supporting SMEs.
The region’s “dual” regulatory model is, without question, a major obstacle to facilitating the appropriation of productivity gains by lower-income workers and to breaking down the barrier between insiders and outsiders that ends up creeping into social protection.
The third relevant axis is linked to State efforts to decouple access to well-being from labour market status, which entails promoting greater equality across sectors.
Measures such as labour intermediation, competencies certification, training initiatives (focused, in the case of young people, on the transition from the education system to the world of work), unemployment insurance and mechanisms facilitating access by the unemployed to non-contributory protection systems are some of the options for decommodifying access to employment.
Lastly, the States should play an active role geared towards distributing childcare.
This would eliminate a substantial barrier to labour participation and performance among women with small children.
It is up to social protection to facilitate access to a network of care services that, while still quite limited in many of the countries of the region, needs to be improved and expanded.
Social protection and inequality: cracks, rigidities, open ground and opportunities Public social expenditure in Latin America has grown steadily since the 1990s (see chapter V).
Many countries have thus been able to enhance and stabilize social policies despite very small tax revenues for many States.
But the findings set out in the previous chapter add a question mark to the capacity and leeway that social protection systems will have in the future for curtailing the structural channels of transmission of inequality.
But, perhaps like never before, the current situation holds a new opportunity for transforming social protection as needed to make it a more effective tool for breaking the legacy of inequality.
In order to assess the systemic performance of social protection in the face of inequality, the following pages focus on the cracks and rigidities in social protection systems in Latin America, and on the margins and opportunities for action against the many faces of inequality.
Contributory linkages and social protection in Latin America Protection for workers and their families For some time now there has been agreement that the region’s labour markets have not managed to become the grand entrance to social protection systems.
The high degree of informality and weak labour regulations and institutions affect access to social security coverage through employment: at present, about half of the employed are registered with social security, and a large majority of them work in the formal sector.
During the downturn, the proportion of employed persons with contributory protection in the low-productivity sector fell more than in the medium- and high-productivity sector.
And when the economic cycle led to a new upturn in registration, recovery was more robust in the formal sector and far more moderate in the informal sector.
This differential evolution turned access to social protection into another factor contributing to the widening gaps between the two sectors.
Beyond coverage for the employed, the contributory rationale is not only to protect workers but also to protect their families in some way, through health insurance.
Indeed, it is not only the better-educated workers with higher wages who access social protection systems.
Those with fewer dependents (or those in smaller households) do, as well.
By contrast, those without access to social security are, predominantly, lower-income workers, employed women with small children, younger workers and workers in larger households.
A look at the data from the standpoint of households not only exposes lower levels of social security coverage (43% of the households have at least one member who is registered, and only in 32% of all households is the head of household or spouse registered); gender and generation gaps come to the fore as well.
Social security coverage for households headed by men (49.5%) is significantly higher than the average, while coverage for households headed by women is lower, at 41.3% (see figure 12).
In the simple average for the countries of the region, barely 1 in 10 Latin Americans aged 65 or older (40%) received retirement or pension benefits in 2009 despite the jump in the proportion of the population with such coverage over the past decade.
Women and men have unequal access to retirement and pension benefits, due to a combination of factors.
Differential insertion in the labour force, the feminization of informality, social security registration shortfalls in some sectors with a higher proportion of women and a persistently low activity ratio among women are some of the factors that determine the chances that women will have protection when they reach old age.
This is convincing proof that gender inequalities carried over from the active years transfer to old age in a relatively linear fashion.
For the population under age 15 the level drops to 43.4% (see figure 13).
Deeper differences surface when comparing the population living in urban and rural areas; the latter are at a disadvantage. a Simple average for the countries with data for both years under consideration.
The non-contributory pillar (public welfare transfers) covers some 12% of households and equates to 0.25% of GDP.
But these transfers do seem to target the risks of the population and make a big difference for the poorest households; this confirms the highly progressive distribution of public welfare transfers despite coverage constraints.
Narrowing the focus to lower-income households that receive public welfare transfers and have no members registered with social security shows that a higher proportion of them are headed by women.
Almost 4 of every 10 households (38.4%) in the poorest quintile that receive transfers and have no access to social security are headed by women —a relatively high percentage compared with the 27% of households in this quintile that are headed by women (see figure 15).
Cracks and omissions in social protection systems Regionwide, an average of 43% of households are relatively integrated, employed and covered by some sort of contributory protection.
A very small proportion of this sector (an average of 4% across the region) has “mixed” coverage in that they have at least one member registered with social security and receive some sort of public welfare transfer (see figure 16).
The proportion of households that only receive retirement or pension benefits (8%) is just as small and, as is to be expected, is higher in countries with more advanced retirement or pension systems (Argentina, Costa Rica, Uruguay).
And, as seen above, 12% of the households in the region are protected by non-contributory welfare transfers alone.
What is perhaps most relevant here is the large proportion of households receiving no form of public protection at all: on average, 36% of the households in the 13 countries examined have no members registered with social security and are not receiving public welfare transfers or retirement or pension benefits.
In the more-developed countries, households without protection range from 9% (Costa Rica and Uruguay) to 20% (Argentina).
By contrast, the poorer countries, with lower per capita GDP, less fiscal capacity and worse formal dependency ratios, rank near the regional average and, in some cases, far exceed it (households without protection stand at 58% in El Salvador, 63% in Guatemala and 69% in Paraguay).
But a significant percentage of the population in the middle and high sectors is in the same situation.
On average for 14 Latin American countries, 48% of the population in the first two quintiles receives no public social protection at all; the proportion for the next two quintiles is 38%, and it is 30% for the fifth quintile.
So it would seem that the lack of protection has different meanings.
One, for those in the middle and higher quintiles, might refer to “cream skimming” the public protection systems in combination with market-based self-insurance and out-of-pocket expenditures.
But the most likely meaning is that a majority proportion of the unprotected in the middle and high segments comprises workers in medium- and high-productivity sectors (and, perhaps to a certain extent, to those in low-productivity sectors) lacking access to social security or labour contracts as discussed in previous sections.
Social protection and its systemic role in the face of inequalities The initial conclusion from this analysis is that reducing inequality cannot be left up to social protection alone.
It is the third link in the chain that generates and reproduces inequalities.
The first is structural heterogeneity as the “factory” of inequality; the second is rigid labour market segmentation.
The second conclusion is that there is little leeway in the social protection systems because of their relative rigidity.
This rigidity is determined by fiscal capacity and the space that the countries have for expanding social expenditure, and by the ability to change distributive options that were chosen in the past when the risk structures was different from those now operating in most of the countries.
Within the bounds of social protection, several policy lines can help further these goals.
First, in several countries the contributory pillar is in need of reinforcement either through protection reform or through new devices, enhancing unemployment insurance regimes and making major changes to retirement and pension systems.
Direct income transfers to the poorest are effectively targeting efforts towards the most vulnerable sectors.
These transfers are an important tool for checking the decline in income and consumption capacity among the most vulnerable and for combating the juvenilization of poverty and reducing inequalities early in life.
Subsidized contributions to insurance systems (essentially, social security and health and guaranteed effective access to basic services) are a critical part of this pillar.
Last, the data provided expose high levels of precariousness among the region’s older adult population.
There is no getting around the importance of transferring income to vulnerable persons aged 65 and older.
And there should be no giving up on the idea of moving towards a universal transfer scheme for this stage of life combined with contributory transfers based on pension systems.
The inequalities highlighted in this chapter call for a new, rights-based approach where the challenge is to build universal social protection networks.
This challenge also calls for a contributory pillar and policies that fill in the gaps and, by targeting the most vulnerable groups, put the missing pieces in the puzzle of the universal right to wellbeing.
To put it another way, and in view of the data set out here, the effort to strengthen and reform the architectures of well-being in Latin America should be guided by the goal to achieve universal basic social protection.
With this fresh effort to increase public spending, both the absolute amounts allocated to social spending and their weight in GDP reached a two-decade high as the first decade of the new century came to a close (see figure 17).
The slight decline in the percentage in the most recent biennium considered (2008-2009) chiefly reflected the relatively steeper increase in non-social spending, mainly in 2008.
Public spending soared again in 2009, with a spike in social spending (9.3% over the The situation varies considerably from one country to the next.
This gap exists although all countries have boosted social spending relative to GDP since the 1990s.
The countries’ varying levels of development and tax burdens —and hence their very different general public budgets and, specifically, social budgets— lead to wide disparities in per capita allocations for social fields such as education, health, social security and welfare.
On average, the countries with the highest social spending manage to allocate up to eight times as much as those with the tightest budgets (see figure 18).
The variation in social spending by sector shows an increase in all the major items, which have thus felt to a greater or lesser extent the procyclical variations associated with the performance of the region’s economies.
Even so, this growth has been uneven: social security and social welfare are the categories with the greatest increases (equivalent to as much as three percentage points of GDP), accounting for more than half of the overall rise in public social spending (see figure 19).
The second-highest spending increase was recorded in education, whose share in GDP climbed by just over 50%.
But education spending has not escaped volatility either since, together with the health sector, it usually bears the brunt of fiscal adjustments, especially in the form of capital expenditure cuts and current expenditure freezes, the latter chiefly through the public-sector wage bill.
Moreover, the public health budget had shown little growth in the past two decades.
This has to do partly with the trend in several countries towards expansion of private-sector delivery of health services in the framework of reforms introduced following the structural adjustment of the 1980s.
But it also reflects the fact that health spending is highly procyclical and has a significant capital expenditure component that is heavily penalized during economic downswings or periods of flat growth.
Lastly, housing and other social expenditure (notably, water and sanitation) show the least public spending growth owing in part to the progressive privatization of investments in sanitation infrastructure and the tendering out of building contracts for social housing schemes in which public financing is combined with private (by households, through easier access to mortgage facilities).
Where the parameters of public spending are bound by the economic cycle, social and non-social public spending fluctuations are usually driven by the country’s economic performance.
Thus, the procyclicality of public spending (and much of social spending), rigidities in budget appropriations and the tendency to privatize certain items of expenditure conspire against steadier progress with social policies and social protection systems aimed at reducing inequality, all of which perpetuates the gaps and cracks identified in the preceding chapter.
Prudential fiscal management is a key element in long-term economic development, but the over-adjustments which commonly occur in public and social expenditure during economic downswings dampen those very processes that prudential fiscal management seeks to safeguard.
As a rule, social public spending reductions outnumber falls in growth in the region: between 1991 and 2009, there were 48 instances of absolute reductions in social public spending in the various countries and in 88% of these cases (42), the cut exceeded the decline in GDP (even during periods when GDP continued to expand).
Yet social spending is less sensitive to the business cycle than non-social public spending and the budget overall.
Thus, even with its procyclical traits, social spending has weathered economic fluctuations better than non-social public budgetary allocations.
So the countercyclical impact of social public spending is materialized asymmetrically, inasmuch as spending needs to be procyclical in boom periods, expanding in schemes conducive to ensuring the universal exercise of social rights —with an eye to longterm financial sustainability— and more countercyclical in economic downturns.
The financial crisis and social spending in the region In an effort largely unprecedented in magnitude to counter the international financial crisis, most of the region’s countries adopted measures, in most cases on a temporary basis, to increase public spending and tackle the hardships caused by the global financial crisis and its repercussions.
Many of these measures sought to alleviate the impact of the crisis on the real economy, sustain activity in local and regional economies, and curb the rise in unemployment and poverty.
The most widely used fiscal measures were tax cuts, hikes in subsidies and tax benefits, and increases or early disbursement of public spending allocations.
In the social and production spheres, governments also boosted resources for building housing and water and sanitation projects, promoting the SME and agricultural sectors (facilitation of loans and concessionary repayment horizons), strengthening labour policies (unemployment insurance, hiring subsidies, employment schemes) and funding social programmes, especially conditional transfer programmes.
Not all the countries expanded their public spending in 2009: the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Jamaica and Uruguay all cut back on public spending although Dominican Republic was the only country to do so significantly (by 10.7% compared with 2008).
But both this last country and Cuba had seen expenditure rise in 2008 by much more than the reduction in 2009.
Several of the remaining countries, including Argentina, Chile, Colombia, El Salvador, Paraguay and Peru, stepped up their spending by over 10% in 2008 and 2009.
Brazil, Ecuador and Honduras boosted their spending by over 7% (see table 3).
The rise in fiscal spending occurred mainly in nonsocial sectors, however, except in Brazil, El Salvador Mexico and Paraguay, where social spending rose faster than non-social spending.
In Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Cuba and Uruguay, the spending cuts fell mainly upon non-social items, which favoured a sharp expansion in social spending.
Jamaica reduced all types of spending, with the most significant cuts in social spending.
Dominican Republic also compressed its expenditures, with the sharpest cuts in non-social areas.
Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama increased their total public spending even while cutting social spending and in the remaining countries, social expenditures grew more slowly than other spending items.
Lastly, among the 10 countries for which information is available for 2010 (Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay and Peru), public spending appears to have been reduced in only four (Chile, Colombia, Cuba and Honduras), but continues to expand in the others.
Social security in the region and prospects for establishing a universal floor for pension and retirement benefits In most countries of the region, the social contributions administered by the public sector are insufficient for the State to finance all retirement benefits and pensions.
Given these estimates, the question is whether and to what extent it would be possible to use part of cumulative social security funds not just to institute a solidarity-based pillar among retirees but also to gradually establish a universal minimum pension for all older persons.
As shown in figure 20, the average cost in 2012 would be 1.7% of that year’s GDP and this percentage would fall to 1% of GDP on average if it were limited to the aggregate cost of a targeted minimum pension for underprivileged older persons.
The targeted pension is for older persons living in households with a per capita income equal to or below 1.8 poverty lines.
Some could even contemplate a universal pension, but this would call for more robust social security systems supported by stronger labour markets, greater labour force participation, a more dynamic formal sector and broader social security enrolment.
Nevertheless, in the long term, social security systems would have to be redesigned by means of a new wave of reforms, especially in those countries that implemented structural reforms based on the partial or total privatization of the social security system and on an expansion of resources through new fiscal covenants.
Such a strategy would facilitate the introduction of solidarity-based pillars in the systems (redistribution among retirees, financing of non-contributory pensions, award of a basic pension).
But even this might be insufficient: several countries would need to change their parameters, mainly by increasing the contributory burden (and possibly by changing the share paid by workers, employers and the State), ensuring as far as possible that this is achieved without diminishing the amount of old age, disability and death benefits.
Caribbean youth: exclusion and vulnerability Demographic profile of Caribbean youth Young people (aged from 15 to 29 years) represented a quarter of the total population of the Caribbean in 2010, just under the Latin American average, although the proportion ranges from 30% at the upper extreme (Belize and Haiti) to approximately 20% at the lower extreme (Cuba and Puerto Rico).
It is projected that the region’s young population as a proportion of the total will decline gradually in the years to come.
This forms part of what is known as the demographic dividend (see chapter I), a phenomenon which has begun in all Caribbean countries, but has already come to an end in the United States Virgin Islands while in Guyana it is expected to last until 2050.
The dividend offers unique opportunities, which may be exploited by promoting social investment in the youngest sectors of the population in order to emphatically strengthen their inclusion in education, health and training policies.
Migration is another phenomenon that has a significant impact on young people and on population dynamics in the Caribbean.
In general, while the emigration of young people is very high in this subregion, it is lower than that of adults.
According to data from 2000, people aged 15 to 24 years in Belize, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago make up almost a quarter of the total migrant population.
With regard to youth mortality, exogenous causes (homicides, accidents and suicides) account for just over half of deaths among young people aged between 15 and 29 in the Caribbean.
Youth and poverty: the risks of early emancipation As in Latin America, poverty in the English-speaking Caribbean generally has a greater impact on the child population (under 15 years).
Despite this, in Antigua and Barbuda 25.4% of people living in extreme poverty and 22.6% of all poor people are aged from 15 to 29 years.
In Saint Lucia, just over a quarter of the poor are young (from 15 to 29 years).
This percentage is lower in the Cayman Islands (22%) but not in Grenada or Trinidad and Tobago, where a third of those living in poverty are young (aged between 15 and 29).
In Belize, 21% of all poor are aged from 15 to 24, while just over half of Belizeans aged 14 to 17 are living in poverty.
From a life-cycle perspective, there is a highly significant correlation between the increased likelihood of living in poverty and emancipation at an early age from the youth phase, when the role of head of household or spouse is assumed.
Data from some countries show that in the first income quintiles the proportion of young people aged around 20 who are heads of household or spouses is much higher than the percentage of young people of the same age in the higher quintiles.
This phenomenon underscores the findings presented in chapter IV: social protection excludes some particularly vulnerable segments of the population and of the life cycle, and penalizes low-income sectors.
Sexual and reproductive health Estimates indicate that around 30% of adolescents in the English-speaking Caribbean subregion have had sex.
On average, men who have sexual relations during adolescence do so from the age of 11, and women from the age of 14-15.
Moreover, around half of sexually active adolescents report that their first sexual experience was non-consensual, while almost a third of sexually active adolescents have multiple sexual partners.
This presents policymakers with enormous challenges in terms of providing timely information and preventing sexual violence and assisting the victims.
One of the characteristics of the Latin America and the Caribbean region is a stubbornly high teenage maternity rate when compared to fertility rates for the population as a whole, as discussed in chapter II.
HIV/AIDS is a priority for the Caribbean countries, given its high incidence.
The prevalence of HIV among young people and adults (from 15 to 49 years), which equates to 1% of the total population, is the second-highest in the world, surpassed only by sub-Saharan Africa.
A prevalence of 0.1 in Cuba contrasts sharply with countries in which the prevalence is over 1%, such as the Bahamas Jamaica (1.7%), and Trinidad and Tobago (1.5%).
Although the number of new cases of HIV infection in the subregion has fallen slightly over the past decade, it is estimated that between 220,000 and 270,000 people are living with HIV, of whom approximately 53% are women.
In Trinidad and Tobago, for example, women make up 75% of new cases among people aged 15 to 24, while in Jamaica the ratio of infected women to men in this age group is 3 to 1.
Approximately 83% of HIV cases are diagnosed in people aged 15 to 54; a third of them are found among people aged between 25 and 34.
Given that the disease has an eight-year incubation period, it may be inferred that almost a third of new HIV cases occur among 15-24-year-olds.
As to condom use, recent studies indicate that 90% of sexually active adolescents in the English-speaking Caribbean region have used a condom, but only 16%-25% report doing so regularly.
When the group under examination is restricted to women aged 15 to 24 in countries such as Belize, the Dominican Republic, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago, almost 50% used condoms during their most recent sexual encounter, a relatively high percentage in comparison with some Latin American countries, but very low considering the increased risk of HIV infection.
Youth unemployment At the start of the previous decade, although young people (men and women) aged 15 to 24 years represented 20% to 30% of the workforce in Caribbean countries, they accounted for between 40% and 60% of the unemployed.
Likewise, unemployment rates among young people (aged 15 to 24) in some countries of the subregion were two to four times those of the adult population.
Failure to create the right conditions for young people to find decent employment reduces their opportunities, limits their present and future development and in many cases heightens existing levels of inequality and poverty.
In Antigua and Barbuda, for instance, 80% of unemployed men aged between 25 and 29 live in poverty, on less than US$ 2.51 a day (in general, 30.6% of the total unemployed population in that country live on less than that amount).
Institutional framework for youth policies The institutional framework and public policies on youth have been strengthened over the past two decades.
In some Caribbean countries, specific government departments are responsible for establishing links with government and civil society bodies involved in youth issues.
Some government ministries, while not being exclusively devoted to youth issues, do include these matters among their primary objectives.
For some Caribbean governments, youth issues and the institutional response fall within the jurisdiction of different agencies.
They are directed by action plans that bring together, in a single public youth policy, the different activities of the government, and the private sector in some cases.
In general, however, as in Latin America, more progress is needed on comprehensive approaches that rise above sectoral perspectives, as is the nature of the young actor, in whom risks, abilities, opportunities, systems of belonging and forms of participation come together.
Poverty In 2010, as economic growth recovered, poverty and indigence in the region fell to their lowest levels in 20 years.
Although the drop in poverty has been mainly due to average household income growth, declining inequality has also been making an increasing contribution.
This outcome was the result of a combination of situations ranging from high growth rates in some countries to falling output in others.
Per capita output in Haiti and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela fell by 6.6% and 3.0%, respectively (see table I.1).
GDP growth was driven by domestic demand, in the form of higher investment and private-sector consumption, and external demand, as manifested by substantial export growth in a number of the region’s countries (ECLAC, 2011a).
The Peru unemployment data are for the city of Lima. c The coverage of this index is usually very incomplete.
In most countries it covers only formal workers in the industrial sector. d Year-on-year changes to December.
The employment rate (the ratio between the number of people in work and the working-age population) rose by 0.6 percentage points to 54.9%, although this trend was not seen in all the countries.
Whereas this indicator rose by 0.4 percentage points in South America, it fell by 0.2 percentage points in Mexico and Central America.
During 2010, furthermore, there was a rise of 0.3 percentage points in the participation rate (the ratio between the economically active population and the working-age population).
The downward trend in the two variables since mid-2008 was thus reversed The urban unemployment rate fell from 8.1% to 7.3%, leaving it below not only the 2000-2008 average but all the annual values of the past 20 years.
Average wage growth was positive in real terms in 13 of the 14 countries with information available in 2010, the one exception being the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In nine of them, however, wage growth was lower than in 2009.
A feature of 2010 was a rise in inflation in all the countries of the region.
The simple average of their inflation rates was 6.5%, or 2.8 percentage points more than in 2009.
Although no other country had two-digit inflation, the number of countries with inflation rates below 5% fell from 16 to 8 between 2009 and 2010.
The increase in inflation was driven mainly by food and beverage prices, which on average rose 1.8 times as much as those for other products.
This is a particularly important consideration when it comes to measuring indigence, as described below.
The 2011 projection is for regional GDP to grow by 4.7%, giving a 3.6% rise in per capita GDP.
The recovery seen in the region since mid-2009 is thus continuing, albeit with slower growth than in 2010.
The unemployment rate is expected to fall even further, and inflation to carry on trending upward.
Recent evolution of poverty The poverty level in the region was 31.4% in 2010, including 12.3% of the population living in extreme poverty or indigence.
In absolute terms, these figures represented 177 million people in poverty, of whom 70 million were indigent (see figure I.1).
Whenever the necessary data were available, the cost of the basic food basket was estimated for each country and geographical area; this basket encompasses the goods required to cover people’s nutritional needs, taking into account consumption habits, the actual availability of foodstuffs and their relative prices, as well as price differences between metropolitan areas, other urban areas and rural areas.
To this value, the “indigence line”, was added the amount of money needed by a household to meet its basic non-food needs in order to calculate the total value of the poverty line.
Up to December 2006, the same factor was applied to both lines.
Since 2007, however, the indigence line has been adjusted to reflect changes in the food CPI, whereas the part of the poverty line that corresponds to non-food spending is adjusted by the relevant CPI.
Since 2007, therefore, the differential between the indigence and poverty lines has ceased to be constant.
Family income data have been taken from household surveys conducted in each country in the years corresponding to the poverty estimates presented in this edition.
In line with usual ECLAC practice, the data have been corrected to account for non-response to some income-related questions by wage earners, the selfemployed and retirees, and to mitigate probable underreporting biases.
This latter operation was carried out by comparing the income items in surveys with estimates based on the household income and expenditure accounts in each country’s system of national accounts, prepared for this purpose using official information.
Income here means total current income, i.e., income from wage labour (in both money and kind), self-employed work (including self-supply and the consumption value of products generated by the household), property income, retirement and other pensions and other transfers received by households.
For Brazil, the study used the indigence lines estimated for each area of the country as part of a joint project conducted by the Brazilian Geographical and Statistical Institute (IBGE), the Brazilian Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA) and ECLAC in the late 1990s.
The figures indicate that the economic recovery since the 2009 crisis has been at least partly reflected in the poverty indicators, with the poverty rate falling by 1.6 percentage points and the indigence rate by 0.8 percentage points from their 2009 levels.
These declines meant that the number of people living in poverty and indigence fell by some 7 million and 3 million, respectively.
The cumulative reduction in poverty since 1999 is 12.4 percentage points, while indigence has fallen by 6.3 percentage points.
Since 1990, furthermore, the two indicators have fallen by a total of 17.0 and 10.3 percentage points, respectively.
Projections for GDP growth and the expected evolution of inflation in each country suggest that the poverty rate will fall slightly in 2011 to 30.4%, about a percentage point below the 2010 rate.
Conversely, the indigence rate could actually rise, with the increase in food prices counteracting the expected growth in household incomes (see figure I.1).
The differences in the poverty and indigence dynamics are partly due to the way food prices have been changing relative to other goods and services.
Whereas food prices increased by 2.3 times as much as those of non-food goods in 2007 and 2008, in 2010 the difference was 1.8 times (taking a simple average of each country’s price indices) (see figure I.2).
This method of updating the indigence and poverty lines has been applied since 2007.
Formerly, both lines were updated using the same price deflator, so that the relationship between them stayed constant over time.
The indigence rate in Panama increased by 1.5 percentage points, while the other countries with information available (the Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Paraguay) did not register significant changes in their poverty and indigence rates (see figure I.3).
However, these are from a new household survey and are not strictly comparable with the earlier ones (see box I.2).
Poverty Mexico b Argentina a The findings described imply further progress towards attainment of the first Millennium Goal, which is to halve, between 1990 and 2015, the proportion of people in extreme poverty.
Dividing the total planned reduction in indigence (11.3 percentage points) by the cumulative reduction between 1990 and 2010 (10.2 percentage points) shows that Latin America is 91% of the way towards achieving this.
This is more than the elapsed percentage of the time allowed for meeting the goal, which is 80%.
Information for 2010, available in 12 countries of the region, reveals poverty rates both rising and falling in differing degrees relative to the previous year.2 Five countries recorded substantial declines in their poverty rates: Peru (-3.5 points), Ecuador (-3.0 points), Argentina (-2.7 points), Uruguay (-2.0 points) and Colombia (-1.4 points).
In these countries indigence rates also fell, by between 0.5 and 1.7 percentage points.
Honduras and Mexico were the only countries whose poverty and indigence rates rose substantially, by 1.7 and 1.0 percentage points in the first case and 1.5 and 2.1 percentage points in the second.
In the case of Mexico, it should be noted that the comparison was with the 2008 figures.
Consequently, it reflects not only the considerable expansion of the Mexican economy Indigence a Urban areas. b Annual change between 2008 and 2010.
Panama is an exception, as despite the absence of significant changes in the poverty rate it registers an appreciable rise in the poverty gap squared index, revealing a worsening of the situation among the poorest.
The poverty gap squared index also rose by slightly more than the poverty rate in Mexico.
Conversely, the poverty gap and the poverty gap squared fell by more than the poverty rate in the countries where this last indicator declined substantially.
Although these changes usually represent an advance, the comparability of series across time may be affected.
At least three countries have made changes to their surveys in recent years.
In 2009, the National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INDEC) in Argentina made some changes to the way information from the Permanent Household Survey (EPH) was treated for the series running from 2003 onward (the year the survey was made continuous rather than half-yearly as before).
These changes include the calibration of expansion factors, the method used to correct for non-responses to the income questions, and the construction of income aggregates for items that are not of monthly recurrence.
The new 2004-2010 data series, incorporating these adjustments, is included in this edition along with data up to 2002, even though the two series are not strictly comparable.
MESEP also carried out a review of the poverty measurement criteria, the result being a new 2002-2010 series. a Although the figures in this edition of the Social Panorama incorporate the modifications carried out for splicing purposes, they refer to the old DNP poverty estimate and not the recent update.
Consequently, the Costa Rica figures for 2010 are not comparable with the series In Paraguay, the Department of Statistics, Surveys and Censuses (DGEEC) readjusted the expansion factors of the Permanent Household Survey (EPH) for the years from 2003 to 2008 as a way of offsetting the non-response rate observed in that period.
Changes in the regional poverty rate are derived from the changes observed in the countries as described above and from the projections produced for countries where information is not available.
On this occasion, the regional aggregate is particularly sensitive to these projections, as they had to be applied to the region’s two most populous countries (Brazil in 2010 and Mexico in 2009).
In fact, almost half of the drop in regional poverty is the result of the projected decline in poverty in Brazil.3 Again, about a third of the reduction in The National Household Survey (PNAD) was not carried out in Brazil in 2010 because it was a census year.
The poverty projection for that year uses evidence from the 2010 Monthly Employment Survey (PME) and from per capita GDP and price indices. shows a general trend towards lower poverty in the region’s countries.
Factors underlying changes in poverty Two different methodological approaches are used to analyse changes in poverty.
The first of these disaggregates any variation in poverty and indigence rates into two components, growth in average income (“growth effect”) and changes in the way this income is distributed (“distribution effect”).
The latter involves assessing the role played by the different sources contributing to household income and paying special attention to the labour market factors accounting for changes in earnings.
In both cases, a comparison is made between the 2002-2008 period, prior to the economic crisis, and the 2002-2010 period, encompassing the crisis.4 As indicated in earlier editions of the Social Panorama, poverty reduction has been made possible by the complementarity of the growth and distribution effects.
The use of long periods makes changes in the poverty rate large enough for the decomposition analyses described to be carried out.
During the 2002-2010 period, nine countries reduced poverty mainly because of average income growth, while in six it was the distribution effect that predominated.
The growth effect was particularly important in Argentina, Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador and Honduras, where it accounted for 80% or more of the decline in poverty.
Even when it is the predominant factor, its contribution to the decline in poverty is usually under 60%.
It did exceed 100% in El Salvador and Mexico, but both are countries where the total change in the poverty rate was very small (see table I.2). periods shows a rise in the influence of distributive changes in reducing poverty in a number of countries.
In both Brazil and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the distribution effect came to outstrip the growth effect, with its contribution rising from 45% to 55%, and it increased substantially in another three countries.
The findings described imply that since the economic crisis, whose greatest effects were felt in 2009, poverty reduction has not only continued but has been accompanied by greater redistribution.
While the changes observed are small in size, they do indicate that countries have scope to deal with adverse economic situations by safeguarding the living conditions of the most disadvantaged in society.
Other income sources, particularly transfers, also contributed, but to a lesser degree.
In the second period, however, transfers played a much more important role.
In fact, they were the main source of poverty reduction in Chile and Panama and played an important role in Argentina, Colombia and the Dominican Republic (see figure I.5).
Changes in per capita earnings can be expressed as the product of changes in earnings per person employed and the percentage of people employed.
In the 2002-2008 period, the rise in employment contributed to earnings growth, but less so than the change in the remuneration of those employed.
In the 2008-2010 period, covering the economic crisis, employment fell in nine of the region’s countries, this being counteracted in some of them by growth in the earnings of those employed.
Colombia, Honduras, Peru and Uruguay are exceptions, as employment among poor households increased in the recent period (see figure I.6).
Distributive inequality The countries of Latin America are characterized by highly inequitable income distribution.
In recent years there has been a favourable shift towards a lessening of the inequality of income distribution, mainly as a result of improved distribution of earnings and the redistributive role played by the State through cash transfers.
Recent inequality trends It is a very well-known fact that income distribution in Latin America is among the world’s most unequal.
Although certain methodological details limit the comparability of inequality indicators across countries and regions (see box I.4), this does not change the fact that the region’s average Gini index is higher than any other’s.
Although the Latin American countries display differing degrees of income concentration, their individual Gini indices are all above the average for any of the regions analysed except sub-Saharan Africa (see figure I.7).
One of these difficulties, which is particularly significant when it comes to making comparisons with other regions of the world, stems from the use of spending rather than income as an indicator of wellbeing.
This variable, which is routinely used in some developing countries, has a less unequal distribution than income.
The different characteristics of the household surveys used to measure income are also a very important factor in comparability.
The type of survey used, the reference period for income and the amount and comprehensiveness of the income flows measured can have a significant effect on inequality indicators.
In addition, the countries follow different imputation practices when correcting for non-response to income questions, and the characteristics of these have varying impacts on inequality measurements.
For the estimates presented here, ECLAC has carried out an adjustment procedure to diminish the effect of underreporting of income in surveys.
This consists in multiplying income from each source by a factor that matches the discrepancy vis-à-vis the corresponding per capita income as reported in the national accounts.
In particular, it tends to yield higher values for inequality, chiefly owing to the fact that the capital income gap is imputed exclusively to the wealthiest quintile.
According to the most recent figures, the lowest-income 40% of the population receives an average of 15% of total income, while the 10% of the population at the top of the distribution receives a third of total income.
The average income of the wealthiest quintile is 18.3 times that of the poorest quintile.
The income share of the four poorest deciles is highest in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay, at around 20% or slightly over, while this share does not exceed 12% in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Colombia, the Dominican Republic and Honduras.
In the first two countries mentioned, meanwhile, the share of the wealthiest decile does not exceed 25%, whereas in Brazil and Guatemala it is close to 40% (see figure I.8).
Just as the scope for comparing inequality across regions is limited, so is the scope for comparisons between countries.
The differences in the characteristics of the surveys used to measure household income and the criteria used by the countries to deal with outlying values and correct for non-response to questions about income may substantially affect measurements of inequality (see box I.4).
Again, conditions of strict “dominance” commonly do not obtain between different countries’ income distributions; in other words, one distribution may be more equitable than another for one subset of the population and more inequitable for another, yielding different country rankings depending on the indicator used (see box I.5).
Taking these caveats into account, a regional overview of inequality ranks the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Uruguay as the countries with the least concentrated income, while the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Colombia and Guatemala are at the other extreme (see figure I.9).
This chapter uses three of i Atkinson index: Aε = 1 −  ∑  ∑∑ yi − y j n n Theil index: T where n = population size, yi = per capita income of the ith individual, μ = mean income, and log denotes the natural logarithm.
The Theil index can be decomposed additively for population subgroups, as follows: k Yj k Yj log where Y = total income of the population, Yj = total income of group j, N = total population and Nj = population of group j.
The best-known of the indices used to analyse income distribution is the Gini.
Its formulation is expressed graphically, as it corresponds to the area between the Lorenz curve and the equidistribution line.
The greater the income concentration, the the best-known inequality indicators, as detailed below. 1 n yi ∑ µ log µi larger this area will be and the higher the value of the indicator.
Despite its popularity, the Gini index does not satisfy the transfer sensitivity principle, a desirable property for inequality indicators.
According to this principle, inequality should decrease more in response to a progressive transfer of income (i.e., from a wealthier household to a poorer one) between poor individuals than when the transfer takes place between wealthy individuals.
This makes it advisable to supplement the analysis with other indicators that do conform to this principle, such as the Theil and Atkinson indices.
With all three indicators, the higher the value, the higher the inequality.
However, whereas the Gini and Atkinson indices take values in the range of [0,1] (where 0 corresponds to absolute equity and 1 represents absolute inequity), the maximum value of the Theil index is the log of population size, which exceeds 1.
Furthermore, the formulation of the Atkinson index employs an additional parameter called the “inequality aversion” parameter (ε).
The higher the value used, the higher the weighting given to observations in the lower part of the distribution, with the most commonly used values being between 0.5 and 2.0.
Furthermore, as each of these indicators measures partial aspects of inequality, they can generate different rankings for the distributions.
The ranking of a group of distributions can be considered definitive only if it does not vary when there is a change in the index used.
The best procedure, therefore, is to treat inequality indices as complementary to one another and analyse their results in combination.
During the 1990s and up until the early 2000s, inequality in the region was characterized either by marked downward rigidity or a slight upward trend.
Over this period, the largest reduction in the Gini index was in Uruguay, but the rate of change hardly exceeded 0.5% a year.
In contrast, inequality increased by half a percentage point or more annually in six countries (see figure I.10).
The years 2002 and 2003 were a turning point when inequality began to trend downward in a large group of countries, whether measured by the income shares of the groups at the bottom and top of the distribution or by synthetic indicators of inequality.
Although the decline in inequality has been small, and has not been enough to change Latin America’s status as the world’s most unequal region, it is nonetheless positive, especially in the wake of a prolonged period when general distributional improvements were lacking.
The trend towards better distribution in the region has not changed since the economic crisis.
Up until 2008, which can be taken roughly to represent the situation prior to the start of the crisis, the Gini index fell at a rate of 1% or more a year in 10 countries and rose appreciably only in Guatemala (according to data available up to 2006).
The figures for 2010, roughly reflecting the situation immediately after the crisis, indicate that inequality did not increase substantially in any of the 11 countries with information available.
On the contrary, the Gini index fell at a rate of over 2% a year in three of them (Mexico, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) and at least 1% a year in another two, El Salvador and Peru (see figure I.10).
Consequently, if we consider the cumulative changes between 2002 and 2010 (or 2009, depending on the information available), 11 countries presented distributional improvements within their inequality levels, irrespective of the indicator used to measure them: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Panama, Peru, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (see figure I.11).
Light blue lozenges indicate that the change between the two years is not statistically significant.
Factors related to distributional changes The decline in inequality in the region over a number of years represents a propitious opportunity, and one that is unprecedented in recent decades, to explore the factors underlying this trend.
Studies that have addressed the issue, using different methodologies, tend to be in accord on at least two aspects.
One is that the most important driver of the decline in inequality has been the labour market, essentially through more equitable distribution of earnings per person employed.
Explanatory factors mentioned to account for this include the progressive improvement in the distribution of education and the reduction in pay gaps between more and less skilled workers.
The second aspect highlighted is that public cash transfers have been a source of income which has helped to reduce the concentration of the per capita income distribution (Lustig, López-Calva and Ortiz-Juarez, 2011).
In Brazil, the decline in inequality between 2003 and 2007 derived from improved distribution of both earnings for those in work and of non-work income.
Depending on the inequality indicator used, earnings accounted for some 52% of the fall in inequality, as measured by the Gini index, or 41% if the ratio between the top and bottom quintiles is used.
Meanwhile, half the distributional improvement in earnings per employed person stemmed from the interaction between declining educational inequality and the narrowing of pay gaps between educational levels.
The reduction in different forms of pay discrimination (by race and gender) and wage differentials between geographical areas and sectors of activity was also an important factor in explaining the decline in inequality (Barros and others, 2010a).
The public transfers contributing most to the distributional improvement include social security benefits (30% of the total reduction) and non-contributory transfers, such as the Continuing Benefit and Bolsa Família, each of which contributed about 10% to the reduction in inequality (Barros and others, 2010b).
In the case of Mexico, the lessening in the concentration of earnings per employed person was the predominant factor in the decline in total inequality, coming to account for 66% of the change in the Gini coefficient in the 2000-2006 period.
As in the cases mentioned earlier, this improvement was associated with a narrowing of the pay gap between more and less skilled workers.
Non-work incomes, meanwhile, accounted for some 15% of the reduction in the Gini coefficient between 2000 and 2006 (Esquivel, Lustig and Scott, 2010).
CEDLAS (2009) presents a decomposition analysis for eight countries of the region.
According to the results, the changes that have occurred owe more on the whole to alterations in the distribution of income per adult than to demographic shifts (number of adults per household).
The distribution of income per adult, meanwhile, is mainly determined by changes in the distribution of earnings.
Besides the countries already mentioned, this was found to be the case in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Chile, which improved their distributional situation between the mid- and late 2000s.
The periods analysed are those when income distribution improved most significantly in 15 countries of the region.
For simplicity’s sake, the income gap is calculated by first adding up the sum total of income in each quintile and then dividing it by the number of people in the quintile, instead of the more usual method of averaging out the per capita income of people in the quintile.
Adults are deemed to be people of working age, i.e., those aged 15 and over.
For this, it calculates each of the variables described at the aggregate level for each quintile at two different points in time, t0 and t1.
Then it calculates the dependent variable of an equation by combining an independent variable observed in period t1 with an independent variable observed in period t0, for each quintile.
For example, to simulate per capita income in period t1, assuming that income per adult in the household remained constant, y’1 = a1 * r0 is calculated for the first and fifth quintiles.
The difference between the gap between quintiles resulting from this simulated variable and the gap actually observed represents the contribution to inequality of the proportion of adults in the household.
For each of the income variables to be decomposed, it indicates the annual change observed in the gap between the top and bottom quintiles and between the start and end years, and the percentage of this change attributable to each factor analysed.
The results indicate that, while the demographic factor did contribute to a narrowing of the gaps between quintiles, particularly in the countries with the greatest distributional improvements, its effect was slight.
Paraguay was the only country where the change in the percentage of adults per household accounted for close to 50% of the decline in the per capita income gap.
In the other countries, the contribution of this factor did not exceed 20%, and in some it actually worsened distribution.
The percentage of adults per household has in fact risen by an average of some three percentage points in the countries and periods analysed.
This increase, which is equivalent to a decline in the demographic dependency rate, translates into a rise in per capita household income that has indeed been instrumental in bringing down poverty.
This change in family structures has been fairly homogeneous across all income groups, however, which explains why it has done so little to reduce the gap between the highest and lowest quintiles.
As would be expected from the findings recorded in the literature cited, income per adult emerges as the main driver of per capita income distribution improvements.
This variable is the sum of earnings (per adult) and non-work income (per adult) in the household.
Changes in the distribution of non-work income accounted for 50% or more of the reduction in adult income inequality in Chile, the Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Paraguay and Uruguay, and for over 40% in Argentina and Brazil.
Non-work income comes from sources of various kinds and includes public transfers (retirement benefits and pensions, subsidies and poverty reduction programmes, among others) and private ones (such as transfers from other households and remittances), capital income (rents from property and interest received, for example) and imputed rent.
A common characteristic in countries where this income played a more prominent redistributive role is that it originated in public transfers, i.e., in specific government action through social policy.
In Argentina, the improvement in non-work income distribution has been due almost exclusively to an extension of the coverage and increase in the amount of non-contributory retirement benefits.
In Brazil, most of the change has come from monetary transfers to households as part of the Bolsa Família programme, in line with the findings of other studies.
In Chile, the distributive improvement has come both from retirement benefits and pensions and from government subsidies.
In Ecuador, the whole of the distributional improvement has come from the Human Development Grant, while in Panama it has come from retirement benefits and public subsidies.
Earnings per adult can be expressed as the product of remuneration per employed person and the employment rate (the ratio between the number of people in work and the number of adults).
The lessening of inequality observed in earnings per adult is almost exclusively due to the first of these two factors.
Indeed, the gap in the employment rate between quintiles not only remained virtually unchanged in several countries, but actually increased in some.
During periods when inequality diminished, the average employment rate rose in virtually all the countries, the exceptions being Ecuador and Mexico.
Although no direct relationship is observed between the narrowing of gaps in earnings per employed person and increases in average employment, inequality did decline by more in countries with larger increases in the first quintile employment rate.
Accordingly, even though remuneration may have been the main factor in the distributional improvements observed in the recent period, it is clear that job creation in the poorest strata has had a direct effect in reducing inequality (see figure I.12).
The improvement in income distribution for those in work originated in factors of different types.
A number of recent studies have highlighted the reduction in educational inequality and in the pay gap between education levels.
The earnings differential attributable to one additional year of education has indeed been falling systematically in the region.
Furthermore, the Gini coefficient for years of study was found to have fallen by an average of 1.2% in most of the countries over the periods analysed.
Although this process did not occur exclusively during the period of distributional improvement, but has been going on steadily for longer, the argument has been made that, in certain countries at least, the relative supply of skilled labour has accelerated since the beginning of the century (López-Calva and Lustig, 2010).
In any event, periods of more rapidly declining inequality do not necessarily coincide with those in which the dispersion of years of education narrowed most quickly (see figure I.13).
Some countries have also deployed wage policies that may have contributed to the reduction in the inequality of earnings.
In Brazil, minimum wages were increased significantly, which seems to have produced a noticeable improvement in the pay of workers most disadvantaged by the distribution.
Something similar happened in Argentina, although a more important role may have been played by direct wage-setting policies, brought in at the start of the effort to improve and intensify collective bargaining.
In the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the inclusion of public transfers in wages has played a prominent role.
Rep. of) 2000s, selected periods a The periods and geographical coverage in each country are as detailed in table I.3.
Characteristics of income distribution Income distribution can be characterized from different perspectives.
It is possible to analyse the contribution of each income source to total inequality using the model prepared by Lerman and Yitzhaki (1985).
According to this, the contribution of a particular source to total inequality is obtained by multiplying three factors: its relative weight in total income, its Gini index and its “Gini correlation” with total income (see box I.6).
Earnings from paid work are the most important source, as they represent an average of 77% of total income.
Thus, it is not surprising that the bulk of income inequality is due to earnings.
Some 76% of inequality as measured by the Gini index derives from this source (see table I.4).
Transfers, both public and private, represent 13% of total household income, although their relative weight varies considerably between the region’s countries.
The contribution of this source to total inequality is 12% across the region as a simple average, but also differs appreciably between countries.
On the one hand, transfers are a highly concentrated income source, as there is a large percentage of households whose income is zero because they are not beneficiaries of retirement benefits, pensions, remittances or cash transfer programmes.
Consequently, the effect of this factor of the decomposition is to increase overall inequality.
On the other, insofar as transfers go to less well-off households, their Gini correlation with total income will be smaller than that of other sources, which will reduce the contribution of this source to overall inequality.
In practice, income from this source combines flows with different redistributional implications.
Whereas retirement benefits tend to be regressive, as they reproduce the inequality of earnings, cash assistance programmes are highly redistributive.
Consequently, the contribution of transfers to overall inequality is not much different from their share of income, at least when the regional average is taken.
Capital income represents an average of 4% of total income and 6% of total inequality.
Because it is characterized by great concentration, the contribution of this source to total inequality is greater than its total income share in all the countries.
Lastly, the shares of total income and total inequality accounted for by “other income” are similar, with both averaging some 9% across the region. (b) Inequality of earnings Earnings inequality, a variable whose relationship with the characteristics of people in employment is analysed in this section, may be more or less pronounced than per capita income inequality.
Per capita income inequality is more pronounced in 11 countries and less in seven.
Panama and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela stand out as countries where the distribution of earnings improved by more than that of total income, while the Dominican Republic and Honduras are examples of the opposite (see figure I.14).
Gini index, around 2010 Earnings of those in work Per capita income The way earnings are distributed is closely related to the characteristics of those in employment.
It is thus interesting to evaluate the degree to which earnings inequality derives from differences in characteristics such as sex, age and educational level.
The analysis uses the Theil index to measure inequality, as it can be decomposed additively for different population subgroups, unlike the Gini index and other indicators.
The contribution of each population group to total inequality is determined both by its level of inequality and by its share of total income.
The sum of each group’s contributions gives rise to the “intragroup” component of inequality, i.e., the component deriving from the dispersion of income in each group.
There is also an “inter-group” component, which shows inequality deriving from differences between groups’ average incomes.
The sum of the two components gives the Theil index for the whole population (see box I.5).
Decomposition by sex reveals that, on average, 66% of income inequality among those in work relates to the income received by men.
Levels of inequality between men and women are not very different, although large differences favouring one or another of the two groups are observed in some countries (see figure I.15).
It does seem clear that the large contribution of the male population to inequality is due to its greater share of the labour market and thence of total income.
The inter-group factor, i.e., inequality arising from the difference in average incomes between men and women, accounted for an average of 3% of total inequality.
Nonetheless, this small percentage is not representative of the gender earnings gap, as it does not take account of the fact that women average more years of education than men in most of the region’s countries.
When average incomes are compared between people of different sexes with a similar education level, the pay gap affecting women becomes plain (see table A-23 of the statistical annex).
In comparison with 2002, recent figures show a slight increase in the contribution of the female population to total earnings inequality.
This is mainly because the earnings share of women grew in the interim, by an average of 2 percentage points.
Although the relationship between men’s and women’s inequality indicators did not change on average, appreciable changes one way or the other were recorded in 10 countries.
In the breakdown of earnings inequality by years of education, the inter-group factor presents a high level of heterogeneity between countries.
Whereas in Argentina, the Dominican Republic, Paraguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela the difference in average earnings between different educational levels accounts for just 12% or less of total inequality, the proportion is in excess of 30% in Brazil, Colombia and Honduras (see figure I.16).
Around 2010 Inter-group (average) (average) 16 and over a Employed people aged 25 and over. b Urban areas.
The working population was grouped into four levels by the number of years of education completed, roughly corresponding to the primary cycle (ages 0 to 6), the secondary cycle (ages 7 to 12), the technical higher education cycle (ages 13 to 15) and the university cycle (ages 16 and over).
Generally speaking, the contribution of each education level to inequality is determined mainly by the educational structure of the workforce.
In countries such as Argentina and Chile, where the population with six years of education or less represents a small percentage of the workforce, this group contributes less than 5% to total inequality.
That is, the difference in average incomes between educational levels represents a lesser contribution to total inequality.
This is consistent with what was stated earlier regarding the narrowing of gaps associated with the education premium as one of the factors accounting for the lessening of earnings inequality.
The distributional inequality of earnings has a fairly well-defined pattern in the region’s countries.
The incomes of younger people are more equitably distributed than those of the rest, and inequality tends to increase with age.
At the regional level, the Theil index is 6% higher for people aged 30 to 44 than for people aged 15 to 29.
Inequality for people aged 45 to 59 is 42% higher than It should be borne in mind that the results of the decomposition by educational level depend on the number and size of the categories constructed.
Furthermore, earnings rise with age, both because unemployment is lower among older workers and because average pay per worker is higher.
Income peaks among 45- to 59-year-olds and then declines in age groups above that.
The conjunction of these two factors means that the contribution of the youngest to total inequality (averaging 18%) is much smaller than the percentage of working people in this age group (averaging 32%).
The contribution of 30- to 44-year-olds to inequality (averaging 32%) is similar to the share of the employed population they account for (averaging 35%).
This group and the 45 to 59 group contribute most to earnings inequality.
Lastly, employed people aged 60 and over contribute an average of 12% of inequality, whereas they represent only 9% of those in work (see figure I.17).
Around de 2010 Inter-group (average) (average) 60 and over a Employed people aged 15 and over. b Urban areas.
Perceptions of how the labour market and its institutions function Latin America continues to be affected by problems with the functioning of the labour market and its institutions.
These problems create feelings of uncertainty and unease among working people, particularly those who have unstable and informal jobs, possess less human capital, are in a worse socioeconomic situation and live in countries affected by severe structural heterogeneity.
These are the groups most likely to fear losing their jobs and perceive that there are few work opportunities, that employment laws are flouted and that social security guarantees are lacking.
Dialogue between businesses and workers is hindered by the low rate of union membership, especially among the least skilled workers, and by mistrust of unions, which is greatest among company executives and managers.
Although the economic recovery in 2010 positively influenced the workings of the labour market, with the employment index rising and unemployment falling, the world of work continues to be one of the main factors in the reproduction of inequality in Latin America.
The heterogeneity of the production structure is really a continuum whose two extremes are a small section of the population with high productivity, pay and social protection, on the one hand, and a sector dominated by poor employment conditions, lower pay and limited access to social protection, on the other.
Again, both unemployment and employment in the low-productivity sector of the economy continue to affect the young and the poorest women most.
Objectively measurable segmentations and divides in Latin American labour markets have been examined in great depth.
The same is not true of differences in perceptions of the labour market that might derive from the different positions and experiences of people in that market.
This section will seek to provide some inputs regarding this facet of the problem, addressing: (a) perceptions of job opportunities and the severity of unemployment; (b) some perceptions of how well labour market institutions work (unionization, compliance with employment law); and (c) feelings of uncertainty and well-being or unease associated with work.
This review will concentrate on detecting subjective divides associated with subjects’ position in the labour market, whether through direct measurements (employment or job type) or indirect ones (sex, age and education, among others).
It should be pointed out that the limitations of the data make this essentially an exploratory exercise.
The source of subjective information is the 1996-2009 Latinobarómetro survey, which was not designed to measure perceptions of how labour markets work.
The discontinuity of some important questions (which means that series are incomplete or, in the case of some variables, that information is only available for one year), alterations to the wording of some relevant questions (making comparisons difficult) and constraints on sample sizes (making disaggregation by groups within each country unadvisable) are some of the limitations on the information available.
Thus, we have preferred to work with analyses aggregated at the regional level (which raises the difficulty that certain conclusions might not be valid for some countries) and with indicators that have the longest time coverage possible.
Perceptions of employment and unemployment From the standpoint of economic evolution, the 1996-2009 period can be divided into three stages: one of turbulence a more recent one in which the effects of the global financial crisis unleashed in mid-2008 made themselves felt.
The period between 2003 and 2008 was unprecedented in the region’s history, with six consecutive years of steady economic growth.
This period ended in 2009 when, in the context of the international crisis, the region experienced a drop of 3% in per capita GDP.
Generally speaking, unemployment and employment rates in the region have tracked the economic cycle.
Unemployment rose between 1998 and 2002 before declining systematically between 2003 and 2008 (the unemployment rate in the latter year was the lowest in the whole period studied) and rising again in 2009, although the impact of the international crisis on the labour market was less than initially expected.
Other aspects that need to be taken into account are the higher unemployment rates affecting the poorest women and young people, as these gaps have persisted and even widened in recent years (see chapter III of the present document).
Between 1996 and 2003, for example, 9% of Latinobarómetro respondents mentioned low wages as the country’s main problem, whereas between 2004 and 2009 (years when the open question was used) only 1.4% on average did so.
The same is true of job instability (values of 5.5% and 0.7%, respectively).
In the period immediately following (from 2005 to 2008), the perception of unemployment as the main problem fell more quickly than actual unemployment.
Thus, the recovery which followed the crisis of 2001 and 2002 originally took place in a context of deteriorating expectations about the capacity of the economy to generate jobs, and then in a situation of “accelerated adjustment” of perceptions regarding the behaviour of unemployment. close to the 24.2% for the whole Latinobarómetro sample.
However, there are differences by occupational situation: between 1996 and 2009, the unemployed were more likely than any of the other groups to say that unemployment was the country’s main problem, followed by own-account workers.
Conversely, the group composed of mid- and high-ranking executives and professionals were less likely to identify unemployment as the country’s main problem than the other groups (see figure I.19).
An open question began to be used in 2004. b Data for the Dominican Republic have been available since 2004. c Simple average for 18 countries of Latin America.
In contrast with the situation depicted by the objective unemployment figures, the perception that lack of work is the main problem was not significantly greater among the poorest young people and women than among the population generally.
Data for the Dominican Republic have been available since 2004. b Includes high- and mid-ranking executives and employed and self-employed professionals. c Includes people declaring they were temporarily jobless at the time of the interview.
When regressions are carried out for 2007, 2008 and 2009, with sex, age, socioeconomic situation, education and employment situation being taken as predictors of perceptions of job opportunities, the finding is that the perception that job opportunities are available is correlated with household ownership of goods (see figure I.20).
Perceptions of job availability are also found to be lower among the unemployed and, to a lesser extent, own-account workers.
At the same time, they are greater among young people aged 15 to 29 and also among those aged between 30 and 45, as compared to people aged 46 and over.
Thus, employment status and household socioeconomic situation are associated with perceptions of job availability and with the importance ascribed to unemployment as a problem in the country.
The same factor may explain the greater optimism of the young (see figure I.21).
In traditional gender role models, it is men who are supposed to be the main (if not only) breadwinners, making it more essential for them to find work.
The heterogeneity of the production structure affects the workings of labour market institutions.
Segmentation is manifested in productivity and pay gaps between sectors integrated into the international economy and those oriented towards the domestic market.
Levels of formal working and access to social security are relatively high in the former and low in the latter.
Reforms to labour market institutions, most of them implemented during the 1990s, fomented labour market deregulation and flexibility with a view to boosting efficiency and job creation (Weller, 2009), and they were associated with a trend towards more unstable and informal employment conditions and loss of access to social protection.
It should be borne in mind, however, that some countries which initially brought in reforms later reversed them.
One consequence of the reforms ought to be the erosion of employee negotiating power, manifested in lower rates of union membership and a reduced capacity for collective bargaining, but the information available is not conclusive.
In most of the region’s countries, furthermore, collective bargaining only covers between 8% and 10% of wage earners (ECLAC, 2011b).
Argentina and Brazil, with their higher levels of union density and collective bargaining, are exceptions in the region (ECLAC, 2011b).
Mention should also be made of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which has the second-highest union density of all the region’s countries.
The other side of the coin is Chile, which was a pioneer of labour-market reform11 and, with El Salvador, had the lowest rate of union membership and smallest average union size in Latin America at the end of the last decade.
In all the countries, public-sector workers are better placed as regards unionization and collective bargaining than the rest of the workforce Combining with low union density, the small size of unions and the limited incidence of collective bargaining is the fact that unionization is more common among more highly educated workers and employees in public-sector enterprises (see figure I.22).
Thus, the people most in need of union membership as a mechanism for increasing their bargaining power and gaining access to protection and rights are actually the least likely to have been unionized.
Nonetheless, the indicator presented is not a measure of current union membership, but illustrates the difficulty of unionizing less highly educated workers and those employed by private-sector firms.
Incomplete higher Complete secondary Incomplete secondary Complete primary Complete higher Incomplete higher Complete secondary A further factor is mistrust of unions, which has stood at a very high level for the last 15 years in Latin America (in 1996, the percentage of people saying they had little or no confidence in unions was 70%, while in 2009 it was 67%).
Mistrust of unions13 may not only discourage membership among workers but also create an adverse climate for the creation of unions within firms.
In practice, this must represent a serious obstacle to social dialogue, since an acceptance of unions among employers and managers is essential if these are to be created and maintained.
In any event, these data should be interpreted with caution, both because sample sizes for the high-level executive group are limited and because information from a number of years is aggregated, which may conceal changes over the course of the period studied.
In this situation, it is unsurprising that perceptions of compliance with employment law (including provisions relating to the signing of employment contracts, dismissal and redundancy payments, length of the working day, overtime payments and the minimum wage) are more negative among people living in countries with severe structural heterogeneity and among the unemployed and own-account workers.
Conversely, perceptions are more positive among those living in countries with moderate and intermediate levels of structural heterogeneity and among wage earners.
In any event, the similarity of the values for wage employees in the public and private sectors contrasts with the higher incidence of unionization and collective bargaining in the public sector, something that ought to be manifested Chile’s labour-market reforms were implemented between 1978 and 1981.
They recognized the right for unions to organize only at the firm level, and they promoted voluntary membership and union pluralism, fomenting the creation of unions within firms.
Anything that constrained employers’ power to manage and run their firms was excluded from the purview of collective bargaining, A similar tendency is seen with respect to other institutions.
Anything that constrained employers’ power to manage and run their firms was excluded from the purview of collective bargaining, and the right to strike was limited to 60 days; after this period, the employer’s proposals would be applied.
In some sectors of activity, such as health care and national security, striking was banned. 12 Given that skills are positively associated with the capacity to make collective demands, greater diversity of skills in a single workplace would increase the opportunities for the unskilled to participate in organizations that would enable them to uphold their interests and rights.
Conversely, working alongside peers whose levels of educational capital are uniformly low will reduce opportunities of access to organizational support in the effort to secure protections and rights (Kaztman, 2010). 13 A similar tendency is seen with respect to other institutions. in better compliance with employment legislation in that sector.
Perhaps what evens out perceptions is that the criteria used by wage workers in public-sector enterprises to gauge compliance with employment laws are more stringent than those applied by private-sector wage workers.
In your opinion, how severe is the conflict between employers and workers: very severe, severe, slight or non-existent?” The values recorded are the percentages saying this conflict was very severe or severe. d For the question about confidence in unions, the data recorded were obtained by aggregating the observations available for 1996, 2003, 2004, 2005, 2008 and 2009.
For the question about conflict between employers and workers, the data recorded were obtained by aggregating the information for 2007 and 2008. basis of special tabulations of the Latinobarómetro database, 2006 and ECLAC, “Empleo y protección social.
The internal consistency of the scale is 0.89 (alpha coefficient), the scale is one-dimensional and the questions are correlated by a factor that accounts for 76% of variability.
The greater frequency of negative perceptions in older age groups should also be noted, a situation that is more pronounced in countries with severe structural heterogeneity.
Borrador para comentarios”, 2011, unpublished. a The percentages are of people answering “not sure at all” to the question: “To what extent is social security guaranteed in your country?”.
Although differences by age are not as great in countries with lower levels of heterogeneity, it is possible to offer some conjectures that might be helpful for future studies and that have policy implications.
Feelings of uncertainty and well-being or unease associated with work Attention has begun to be paid in recent years to feelings of uncertainty associated with work, which can erode people’s quality of life.16 The possible sources of insecurity are many, operate at different levels and can be interrelated.
Another source, found especially in economies characterized by structural segmentation and heterogeneity, is employment in low-productivity jobs, where lack of protection, job instability and low incomes are the norm.
A third source, which has been studied for its psychosocial effects in developed economies (Salama, 2005), are changes in models of work organization in the formal sector, involving the use of technologies that replace human labour, outsourcing of services, and increasingly flexible pay and working conditions.
A final source of insecurity are the changes driven by the information society, with human capital accumulation becoming a vital asset for securing more stable and better-paid jobs.
The incidence of the first two sources of uncertainty can be visualized in figure I.26.
Throughout the period analysed, this fear was greater among people living in countries with intermediate and severe structural heterogeneity than among those living in countries with moderate structural heterogeneity.
Nonetheless, the dominant trend in both groups of countries has been towards a considerable lessening of people’s fear of losing their jobs, a situation that is more marked in countries with intermediate or severe heterogeneity.
This has translated into a narrowing of the divide between countries with different levels of structural heterogeneity as regards the fear of unemployment.
The effect of insecure and informal working conditions on people’s fear of losing their jobs can be analysed from microdata, in conjunction with other factors, such as the respondent’s education level, sex and age.
To this end, a regression covering the whole Latinobarómetro sample from 1996 to 2006 was carried out.
The analysis made it possible to establish that people with less education, If the idea of decent work is taken as a parameter, the region evinces very advanced levels of ratification of international conventions, and recent trends are positive.
Furthermore, fear of becoming unemployed was lower among men and older people (see table I.A-4 in the annex to chapter I).
Further studies are thus needed to form a more definite idea as to whether some groups —particularly the most vulnerable— have put away the notion of “lifetime employment” when making their life plans.
Another matter of interest is the relationship between employment and some indicators of subjective well-being.
First, people have internalized the idea that material aspirations are met by well-paid, stable and protected jobs.
On this logic, those who are unemployed or uncertainly employed face barriers to social integration and the affirmation of their identities and self-esteem (Kaztman, 2010).
At the same time, these people might experience a gap between aspirations and expectations, resulting in reduced subjective well-being (ECLAC, 2007).
Second, work experience appears to have ceased to be the main source of autonomous improvements in well-being, owing to the devaluation of the credit given by society to skills acquired in the workplace (Kaztman, 2010).
The 2007 Latinobarómetro study included for the first time a question about people’s satisfaction with their work, which may serve to analyse the relationship between employment type and well-being as measured by subjective indicators.
One of the risks to the reliability of measures of this kind is that expectations may adapt (declining intensity of response to a reiterated stimulus or “treatment”).
If this risk materializes, subjects with very different jobs will present similar levels of satisfaction with their work.
Figures I.29 and I.30 reveal significant differences in work satisfaction by employment type and education level, indicating that adaptation does not do away with the effects of the quality of the jobs taken or education level attained.
Thus, satisfaction with work is greatest among professionals and mid- and high-ranking executives and lowest among farmers and fishermen.
Again, those with incomplete or complete higher education are more satisfied than people with incomplete basic education.
There0is also another, = totally dissatisfied and 10 = totally satisfied) 7.5 parallel, tradition of psychological well-being dealing with feelings 7.0 of self-realization (the eudemonia perspective).
It should also be 6.5 noted that satisfaction with work and with life generally are not 6.0 identical: someone may be happy with their work and dissatisfied 5.5 with their life.
See Villatoro (2011) for further details. 18 Extrinsic satisfaction includes assessment of aspects relating to 4.5 the organization of work, such as working hours, pay and physical 4.0 working conditions (Moreno-Jiménez and Hidalgo, 2011).
Questions about satisfaction form part of the cognitive aspect of the tradition of subjective well-being (the other branch within this aspect analyses flows of pleasure and pain).
There is also another, parallel, tradition of psychological well-being dealing with feelings of self-realization (the eudaimonic perspective).
It should also be noted that satisfaction with work and with life generally are not identical: someone may be happy with their work and dissatisfied with their life.
See Villatoro (2011) for further details. 18 Extrinsic satisfaction includes assessment of aspects relating to the organization of work, such as working hours, pay and physical working conditions (Moreno-Jiménez and Hidalgo, 2011).
These figures do not include the modifications to the poverty measurement made in g Asunción metropolitan area. h Figures from the National Institute of Statistics and Informatics (INEI) of Peru.
These values are not comparable with those of earlier years owing to the change in the sampling framework of the household survey. i Estimate for 18 countries of the subregion plus Haiti.
Chapter II Current situation and outlook for fertility in Latin America Introduction The decline in fertility in Latin America provides an unprecedented opportunity for economic growth and better household living standards in the region.
The positive impact of fertility decline is not limited to reducing household size; more important, it completely transforms the age structure of the population and provides countries, for a considerable period of time, with a large and growing potentially productive population combined with a shrinking economically dependent population.
Besides the fall in the number of births, lower fertility leads to improvements in mother and child health and broader education and employment opportunities for women.
These advantages make households less vulnerable and provide women with more autonomy in reproductive decision-making, creating a virtuous circle linking demographic trends with socioeconomic progress.
At the same time, as will be shown in the following chapters of this edition of Social Panorama, emerging demographic trends, with a steadily ageing population, have significant implications in terms of the care economy and dependency ratios within families.
The high levels of poverty and inequality in the region, which are closely linked to low levels of education, mean that substantial segments of the population still face barriers to accessing sexual and reproductive health information and services and exhibit high unwanted fertility.
The situation is particularly worrying in the case of adolescent girls in Latin America.
In a context of family vulnerability and limited support in raising children, high fertility at a young age makes it difficult to enter the labour market, find employment and access social protection mechanisms.
Education is a key policy variable for promoting universal access to sexual and reproductive health and can help break the vicious cycle of fertility, poverty and exclusion.
Education helps change reproductive behaviour and reduces the likelihood of adolescent motherhood.
Substantial efforts should be made not only to increase education coverage but also to ensure that education effectively helps women —especially adolescent girls— make informed, independent decisions on reproductive matters.
All of the above underlines the importance of analysing fertility trends in Latin America and how they fit into the economic, social and demographic context, in order to spotlight the achievements and, especially, pinpoint the challenges that countries will face in the short and medium term in this regard.
Although the main factors behind this decline relate to exposure to sexual relations, the use of contraception has had a rapidly increasing impact, partly due to growing contraceptive prevalence and partly due to the use of modern methods.
Although the downward trend has been a general one, the onset and pace of the decline have varied between countries in the region.
Current levels and trends in the global context In the mid-twentieth century, fertility began to decline markedly in Latin America as development gathered steam in the region and led to changes in reproductive behaviour.
In general, fertility levels in the major regions of the world have been converging since the 1950s.
The demographic transition theory seeks to provide a general explanation of the decline in mortality and fertility rates as a result of industrialization and modernization.
Industrialization and, in particular, modernization, lead to improved living and health conditions and, therefore, lower mortality rates.
This decline causes demographic pressures within families because, at the same fertility level, the number of surviving children increases.
This in turn causes families to lower their fertility rates in the medium term (Welti, 1998).
The surprisingly sharp drop in fertility in Latin America The decline in fertility in Latin America has surprised the experts by repeatedly exceeding their estimates.
But even then, the subregion was not expected to reach replacement level fertility within the projection horizon (up to 2025).4 When the projections were revised in 2008 it was clear that fertility levels were below all forecasts and that the region would reach the replacement level in 2005-2010.
Although initial projections pointed to a slight decline of 0.27 children every five years, in reality, from the 1960s ­ which marked the turning point in fertility The component method entails analysing the historical evolution of the determinant variables for demographic trends (fertility, mortality and migration) and developing hypotheses regarding future trends.
It uses the balancing equation, which establishes the balance between the population at a given starting point plus the number of births, minus the number of deaths, plus immigrants, minus emigrants, to estimate the population at the ending point.
The balancing equation is disaggregated by sex and age and enables each cohort to be tracked from a given starting point or base study year for a given period (CEPAL, 2007).
Disparities within Latin America Fertility rates are declining in all countries in the region, but, as is to be expected in a region with significant internal economic and social inequalities, the onset and the pace of the decline differ markedly between countries.
Those with very low fertility rates that are below the replacement level (Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Cuba) illustrate the diverse trajectories of the decline in fertility in Latin America.
In Costa Rica, for example, the fertility rate began to decline in 1965 and has plummeted from seven children per woman in 1965 to two children per woman at present.
Declines of this magnitude entail not only significant changes in macroeconomic terms but also radical transformations in family life, family burdens and the organization of society itself.
By contrast, in Cuba the total fertility rate stood at around four children per woman at the start of the second half of the twentieth century and then began to drop sharply, especially between 1970 and 1980.
It has been below the replacement level since the 1980s (see figure II.3).
In the projections made 30 years ago, it was assumed that fertility levels would not reach the replacement level in any country, except Cuba, before 2025.
But even in the case of Cuba the projection was fairly conservative, since the total fertility rate was expected to be 2.1 children per woman in 2005-2015.
In the mid-twentieth century, Davis and Blake (1956) defined a series of variables referred to as intermediate fertility variables; they are related to exposure to sexual relations, the risk of conceiving, pregnancy and successful birth.
In general, the main factors driving the decline in fertility are those related to exposure to sexual relations, such as not forming a union or delaying it to a later age, together with temporary or permanent separations.
Despite the marked progress in the use of contraception in the region, from the point of view of Millennium Development Goal target 5.B (universal access to reproductive health), there is still much to be done to ensure the availability of contraceptive methods and universal access to them.
In fact, there is still substantial unmet demand for contraception in the region (see table).d In Haiti, for example, more than one third of sexually active women who were not using contraception had wanted to delay the birth of their last child or their last pregnancy, or did not want any more children.
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia the figure is one in every five women.
As shown in the table below, and as explained further in section E of this chapter, the figures are even higher among adolescents aged 15 to 19.
For a summary of these approaches, see Ruiz and others (2005). b The demographic and health survey programme has been conducted since 1984 as a follow-up to the World Fertility Survey (WFS) and the Contraceptive Prevalence Surveys (CPS), an important component being issues relating to maternal and child health.
So far, 45 surveys have been conducted in Latin America. c Natural fertility denotes the number of children a fertile woman would bear, absent contraceptives or any other constraints.
For Latin America, the figure is 21 children per woman. d Unmet demand refers to the use of contraceptive methods for determining the number, spacing and timing of children.
In general, there is a relationship between high initial fertility rates and rapid decline, although it has changed over time.
During the 1950s, most countries recorded high fertility levels and a slow rate of change, and fertility even rose in some cases such as Costa Rica and Argentina.
In others it remained stable (Uruguay) or dropped slightly, causing a slight rise in the regional average.
In the subsequent decades, the rate of decline was significant in most countries.
In the 1980s and 1990s, fertility rates in the region were low or intermediate and the decline was more moderate, at between 15% and 30%, although Cuba still saw a decline of nearly 50%.
In the first decade of the twenty-first century, the large majority of countries recorded low or very low fertility levels and a low rate of decline.
In short, the sharpest general decline in fertility in the region took place in the 1960s; although there are still disparities between countries, the relationship between a high initial fertility rate and a sharp rate of decline has led to a clear convergence in fertility levels in Latin America.
The link between education and fertility intensity and timing The lower a woman’s level of education, the higher her fertility; this is still invariably the case.
While fertility has recently fallen among women of all levels of education, in many countries the rate of decline has differed across groups and is usually slower for less-educated women.
By and large, contraceptive prevalence is lower among women with lower levels of schooling, and this is closely linked to the unmet demand for family planning services.
Fertility and education in Latin America As explained in the previous section, fertility has declined steadily in the countries of Latin America.
Although the intensity and timing of the change have varied, there is now a trend towards convergence.
Within countries, however, there are still significant disparities in the average number of children born in different social groups; this reflects the socioeconomic inequalities that continue to define Latin America as one of the most unequal regions in the world.
Numerous studies have shown the link between structural factors and fertility: on average, poor, marginalized women, whether living in rural or urban households, have a higher number of children.
This is also the case with indigenous peoples, whose fertility rates are systematically higher, although in this case the figures have to be interpreted in the light of coexisting factors of inequality and cultural ideals that value high fertility.
The structure of Latin American societies and the socio-economic conditions in which couples live have an impact on the proximate variables of fertility (age at union, the use of contraception, the practice of abortion, duration of breastfeeding, and others) and without a doubt help maintain the gap in levels of this variable.
However, in the past three decades socio-economic factors and demographic trends have behaved relatively independently.
In the 1980s and 1990s, little progress was made in combating poverty, and income distribution indicators remained the same or even regressed (ECLAC, 2003; ECLAC, 2005).
Despite persistent poverty, levels of education have risen in the subregion (see section D).
Furthermore, in recent decades, the gender gap has narrowed significantly in terms of access to education and educational achievement, which is helping to empower women and enhance their access to resources and therefore improve their capacity to make individual or negotiated decisions concerning their sexual and reproductive life.
Increasing education coverage is not enough in itself: the key is how education serves to enhance decision-making and disseminate information.
As shown in table II.1, it is invariably the case that the higher women’s educational levels the lower the total fertility rate.
In absolute terms, the sharpest contrast is seen in Ecuador, Haiti and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, where women with no education have upwards of three children more than those who have completed secondary education.
Based on the most recent surveys conducted in each country, the average number of children born to women with no formal education is at least double the number born to women who have completed secondary education.
The difference is even more marked if the comparison takes into account women who have completed higher education.
According to the latest surveys, such women have fewer than two children in Brazil (1 child), Colombia (1.4 children), Peru (1.9 children) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (1.9 children), so women with no education have between three and four times as many children as those with higher education.
Nonetheless, fertility has continued to decline recently, regardless of the level of education.
In Paraguay and Honduras, it has fallen by more than two children in each of the educational brackets considered.
The pace of the decline has varied among groups, however, and has generally been less sharp among women with no education.
Consequently, the relative disparities have not only persisted over time —in half of the countries examined, they have become more pronounced (see table II.1).
The wealth of cultural, economic and social opportunities afforded by education is also reflected in the proximate determinants of fertility, especially the use of contraception.
The link between education and the use of contraception is illustrated in figure II.4, which shows that in several countries contraceptive prevalence is significantly larger among more highly-educated women.
Inequalities with regard to timing may also exist, such as lower contraceptive prevalence in the first sexual encounter among less-educated women compared with those with more years of schooling.
Moreover, in countries with significant fertility gaps according to women’s educational levels, there are also marked inequalities in terms of access to family planning methods (see figure II.4B).
An extreme case is Haiti, where the general prevalence is very low but the rate is as high as 40% for more-educated women versus only 25% for those with no formal schooling.
This suggests that they have more limited access to family planning services.
In Guatemala and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, only 40% of women with no education who live in a union use contraception, compared with 70% of educated women.
The latter three countries have a substantial indigenous population, whose women tend to be the most disadvantaged by poor access to the education system and other factors.
The main obstacles include poor quality services and the lack of cultural appropriateness, as pointed out by various indigenous women’s organizations, which are increasingly putting sexual and reproductive health on their agendas.
Despite the disparities, it is clear that in all countries women with less schooling have more children and are less likely to use contraception.
Moreover, previous studies have demonstrated the close link between contraceptive prevalence and unmet demand for family planning services.
There are numerous advantages to being able to decide the number and timing of children.
Besides reducing the number of births, it improves mother and child health and expands women’s education and employment opportunities, which in turn reduces poverty.
Thus, the figures given here reflect the persistent gaps in ensuring the right to sexual and reproductive health; these gaps directly or indirectly restrict the exercise of other economic and social rights.
In this regard, the countries of Latin America face the challenge of implementing measures and stepping up efforts to attain Millennium Development Goal target 5.B: achieve universal access to reproductive health by 2015.8 When the Millennium Development Goal targets were expanded in 2005, a target was included on universal access to reproductive health. 2.
Conjugal union continues to be the form of adult life chosen by most women and men in the subregion, although there is a gradual tendency to continue to delay this deeply entrenched cultural option.
As mentioned earlier, exposure to sexual relations is one of the factors that have the greatest impact on fertility levels and trends.
Thus, it is useful to consider patterns such as age at sexual initiation and age upon entering a union, by education level, and to see how these are linked to the beginning of motherhood.
In Latin America, the age at start of marital life has varied little or increased slightly.
In Peru, over a period of just over 20 years, it moved up slightly, from 20.5 years to 21.0 years.
By contrast, the general trend is for sexual activity to start at a younger age and for the gap between this initiation and the age at first marriage to widen, although these changes are, as a rule, gradual.
Surveys conducted recently in seven countries of the region (Brazil, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Haiti, Nicaragua, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia) reveal that in the last few years the median age at which women give birth to their first child has fallen, with this age decrease ranging from 0.2 years in Haiti to 1.4 years in Brazil.
In 1996, half of Brazilian women had had their first child before the age of 22.4; by 2006, the age had dropped to below 21 years.
The above trends indicate that the Latin American model contrasts with the patterns of formation of unions and reproduction that emerged in the developed countries in the 1960s and are considered to be typical of the second demographic transition.
Among the typical features of the second transition are, precisely, postponement of unions and the tendency to initiate motherhood at an older age.9 Notwithstanding the foregoing, various types of marriage patterns —formal or consensual— exist in Latin America and these, together with the timing of starting motherhood, are strongly influenced by education.
As shown in table II.2, women with a higher level of education systematically become sexually active at a later age than less-educated ones, and they delay forming unions and becoming mothers.
Honduras, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia are the countries with the most glaring inequalities.
At the other extreme, the median age of young women with no formal schooling is 17 years for the first union and around 18 years for the birth of their first child.
There is also a trend towards forming the first union and bearing the first child at a younger age, both among uneducated women and among those who have completed primary or secondary education.
But among more highly-educated women Other features of the second demographic transition are growing rates of cohabitation and extramarital parenthood, and an increase in the dissolution of unions and in the existence of blended families.
As shown in box II.2, in Mexico and Panama there is a trend towards delaying motherhood (and even an increase in lifetime nulliparity), strongly influenced by the level of education; the most significant variations are seen among the most highly-educated women.
This pattern implies a certain polarization in fertility timing depending on the level of education, with higher education marking a turning point.
There is a trend For several countries, it was not possible to compute the median age at formation of the first union or birth of the first child for highlyeducated young women aged 25 to 29 because more than half of them had not yet formed a union or had any children.
This means that, in these cases, the median age at which these milestones occur is higher for the 25-to-29-year age group than for the 45-to-49-year age group. towards convergence in the beginning of sexual activity among young women of different educational levels.
And there is clear divergence in the age at marriage and at birth of the first child.
Population censuses are an important source for this indicator as they present a broad disaggregation of other relevant variables such as women’s education levels and age without being constrained by the number of cases or by sampling errors, as occurs with surveys.
According to the two censuses conducted in Mexico and Panama, the percentage of childless women increases with their level of schooling, irrespective of age, although the increase is most obvious among young women (see figures 1 and 2).
In Mexico, more than half (54%) of 30-year- old women who have completed university studies (at least 17 years of education) still have not had children, compared with only 15% of those with less than 7 years of schooling.
In Panama, 47% of more highly-educated 30-year-old women are nulliparous, compared with 8% for those who have completed a total of 6 years of schooling.
Women aged 40 Years of schooling Years of schooling While the nulliparity rate among women with 12 years or less of schooling did not change significantly in the intercensal periods considered in figures 1 and 2, there is clearly a period effect among women with more education (13 years or over).
In other words, for both younger and older women of childbearing age, the percentage of women with higher education who have still not had children was higher in the most recent census than in the previous one.
These changes over time indicate that these women have been delaying childbearing.
In the future, this postponement will probably lead to an increase in lifetime nulliparity.
The fact that women from more privileged social sectors and those with higher levels of education tend to delay the age at which they marry and become mothers suggests that women in these sectors have greater autonomy in making sexual and reproductive decisions.
Moreover, national averages suggest that changes in the age at which women first marry and become mothers have been slight.
As more and more women pursue higher studies, however, it is highly likely that changes will intensify in the next few years and that this will have a greater impact on fertility levels in the region.
Future outlook for fertility based on changes in education levels Over the past decades, educational distribution has evolved rapidly in most Latin American countries.
At the same time, the difference in fertility by level of education has not just persisted but has actually deepened in some countries.
Sharper declines in fertility rates may therefore be expected as a larger proportion of women attain higher levels of education.
Fertility forecasts based on educational distribution within the population confirm the conclusion that the demographic and economic future of the region will increasingly be shaped by low fertility levels, with all that this implies in terms of the care economy, female labour-force participation and dependency ratios within families.
Changes in educational distribution among women in Latin America Over the past decades, educational distribution has evolved rapidly in most Latin American countries.
These data serve not only as a record of past changes but also as inputs for projecting future changes (see Miller, 2006).
Among older women, the percentage who never attended school is significant: 39% in the case of the group aged 75 and over.
This proportion has diminished progressively in younger cohorts to stand at zero for the youngest (aged 20 to 24).
The opposite trend is observed for the proportion of women attending university.
Among older women, the proportion is very small (less than 3% among those aged 75 and over), but it has increased steadily among the youngest cohorts to peak in the 20-to-24-year-old cohort, in which over one in four women have some level of post-secondary education.
These differences by age are mainly the reflection of the expansion of the education system over time, although the higher survival rates among more-educated persons and differences in migration patterns also have a bearing.
The rapid transition in education observed in Mexico is also seen in several countries in the region.
The experience of the countries in Latin America has been varied in the past 30 years.
Some countries at the forefront of educational attainment in 1980 showed little subsequent progress, while others that started with low levels of education progressed rapidly in the past three decades.
Thus, the development of national education systems since 1980 has varied considerably across the region.
Barro and Lee’s studies present estimates of the levels of education by age and sex in 146 countries, between 1950 and 2010.
The education systems expanded rapidly, which was reflected in the average increase of 3.5 years of schooling among women aged 25 to 29.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia is a case in point: since 1980, the average number of years of schooling among women aged 25 to 29 has increased by 7 years.
Brazil and Mexico, for their part, have shown gains of 6 years and 5.5 years, respectively, since that year.
Rep. of) 4.9 Guatemala 3.4 Haiti Guatemala 2.8 Nicaragua 2.5 To the extent that economic and demographic trends usually vary with the level of education, projections of educational distribution are important inputs for economic and demographic projections.
For example, changes in the educational distribution of the labour force generate conditions that favour more accelerated economic growth, insofar as a more educated labour force is usually more productive.
In the same way, changes in educational distribution will probably bring about a faster decline in fertility because more highly-educated women tend to have lower fertility.
The following section considers the extent to which changes in educational distribution have helped to speed up the decline in fertility.
Lee, “A new data set of educational attainment in the world, 2.
How changes in educational distribution contribute to the decline in fertility As the level of education of women in the region has been rising, fertility has been declining rapidly, as indicated in the previous sections.
It has also been shown that levels of education correlate inversely with fertility, since fertility is lower among women who are more highly educated.
One theory is that disparities in fertility according to level of education are linked to modernization.
The idea is that the disparities noted are temporary and reflect differences in access to and participation in modern life.
Modernization is initially concentrated in urban areas among people with a higher level of education, but then extends to the whole of society.
Thus, low fertility rates are recorded first among the most educated strata of society, but over time they spread to all other groups.
Consequently, a look at the current reproductive behaviour of women with a university education shows the future course of fertility for all women.
Based on this theory, the disparities that exist today will eventually disappear as modernization spreads throughout society.
An alternative theory is that education acts as a stratification mechanism and an institution that ultimately groups the population by types of employment.
Employment opportunities for women with a low level of education tend to revolve around occupations that do not compete directly with motherhood, whereas women with a high level of education tend to focus on professions that do.
According to this theory, disparities in fertility levels according to level of education will persist over time.
In fact, as seen in table II.1, in many countries in Latin America, the disparities in fertility rates according to level of education are not only still present but are becoming sharper.
Nonetheless, there are grounds to think that the disparities could lessen in the long term: the decline in fertility among more educated women could eventually stop, whereas fertility among less-educated women could continue to decline.
Data from demographic and health surveys were used to determine the direct contribution of changes in educational distribution to the decline in fertility in four countries (Brazil, Colombia, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia) over a period of 15 years.
The first was the fertility level that the country would reach if the fertility patterns in each education group remained the same but educational distribution changed.
The second was the fertility level that the country would reach if educational distribution remained the same but the fertility patterns in each education group changed.
This made it possible to assess the magnitude of the rate effect (the impact of the decline in fertility in each education group) and the composition effect (the impact of changes in educational distribution) on the variations in fertility levels.
The decline in the total fertility rate was sharpest in Brazil, where the rate dropped by 1.9 children per woman, but was still significant in the other countries, which showed declines of 1.3 children in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, 1.0 children in Peru and 0.8 children in Colombia.
In Brazil, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the decline in fertility was mainly due to changes in fertility rates within the education groups (rate effect), whereas in Colombia the magnitude of the rate and composition effects was the same.
Although not the dominant driver of the decline in fertility, changes in educational distribution (composition effect) contributed substantially to the decline: 0.7 births in Brazil, 0.4 births in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Colombia, and 0.2 births in Peru.
Future trends in education and impact on fertility The projections made by the United Nations Population Division show the possible course of fertility in the future.
These projections are based on the general decline in fertility noted in all countries, weighted for specific patterns in the country concerned.
Specifically, they use a Bayesian hierarchical model to determine the rate of change in the total fertility rate from its current level.
The projections for Latin America indicate that fertility levels will soon drop below the replacement level14 in a growing number of countries.
Another approach to studying future fertility trends in Latin America is to project fertility based on educational distribution within the population.
By way of example, projections based on this method are set out below for Brazil, Colombia, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
The forecasts are based on both future changes in educational distribution across the population and changes in fertility rates within each education group.
Changes in the educational composition of the female population of childbearing age were based on projections made by IIASA.
See footnote No. 4. the past 15 years and will converge towards the lowest fertility rates recorded among the most highly educated.
In Brazil, fertility among women with a university education in the 40-to-49 age bracket stood at 1.5 children per woman in 2006, compared with a current rate of only 1.0 child per woman.
The rate of 1.0 child per woman is likely to be temporary, owing to the delay in motherhood, and could rise to 1.5 children per woman for this cohort.
Fertility in the other education groups is assumed to drop to 1.5 children per woman, at the rate historically observed in Brazil.
In fact, for the four countries covered by this exercise, the rate of 1.5 children per woman was established as the minimum admissible rate for the group with a university education.
In the four countries, fertility among women with a university education is currently below the replacement level: 1.5 children per woman in Colombia, 1.6 children in Peru and 1.9 children in the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
In general, the findings based on the two methodologies are similar in predicting a sharp decline in fertility in the future.
In both cases, fertility is expected to drop to 1.6 births in Brazil and 1.9 births in Colombia over the next 20 years.
But the main conclusion drawn from this analysis is that the findings support the prediction that low fertility levels will increasingly shape the demographic and economic future of the region.
Within one generation, fertility rates will drop below the replacement level in virtually every country in Latin America.
The emergence of low fertility levels in the region will have several consequences.
In most countries in the region, the birth rate has already peaked and is now declining.
For example, the highest number of births recorded in Cuba was in 1965, while in Brazil it was in 1983 and in Peru it was in 1991 (see table II.3).
These large cohorts are being replaced by cohorts with successively fewer births, and this is causing gradual population ageing.
As will be explained in the following chapters, these changes entail major implications in terms of the care economy, female labour-force participation and family dependency ratios.
According to projections made using data from the National Transfer Accounts project, Cuba has already been an aged economy for several years (see table II.3 and box II.3).
Within the next 15 years, another five countries are expected to allocate more resources to older people than to children: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay.
Within 15 years after that, another seven countries are expected to pass this threshold, and within one generation aged economies will be the dominant economic form in Latin America, as well as in most of the world.
The National Transfer Accounts system offers a comprehensive approach to measuring aggregate economic flows between age groups over time.
The accounts include flows associated with capital accumulation and transfers, and distinguish transfers mediated by public institutions from those relying on private institutions.
Estimates are mostly based on household surveys relating to income, spending, assets, the workforce and transfers, in addition to detailed administrative records from government bodies.
Economic activity varies considerably according to age, so changes in the age structure of the population in future decades will have a major impact on national economies, public budgets and national debt.
Adolescent fertility: a priority for action and research Adolescent fertility has fallen at a much more moderate pace than total fertility.
In many countries in the region it even rose during the 1990s, whereas the total fertility rate declined significantly.
The inequality in fertility levels between groups with different education levels is usually particularly marked in the case of adolescent mothers.
Evidence of the declining percentage of planned births among adolescent mothers offers a powerful argument in favour of bolstering public policies and programmes on sexual and reproductive health targeting this group.
It is calculated as the ratio of live births that year to mothers between 15 and 19 years of age (numerator) to the average population of girls of the same age during the same year.
Live births to mothers under 15 years of age are typically included in the numerator, as a result of which the figure overestimates fertility in the 15-19 age group, although nearly always only slightly because there are very few births to girls under 15 years of age.
For the purposes of interpretation, a rate of 70 per 1,000, for example, means that, assuming that a woman cannot have more than one child in a calendar year, 70 in every 1,000 adolescent girls between 15 and 19 years of age became mothers in that calendar year.
By contrast, adolescent motherhood is measured by a proportion that shows the relative frequency of this attribute (becoming a mother) among adolescent girls at a given point in time.
If it is calculated for the exact age of 20 years, it indicates the probability of becoming a mother during adolescence.
When censuses are used as a source, the numerator is mothers aged 15 to19 who report that they have had one or more live births.
When specialized surveys are used (Demographic and Health Surveys or International Reproductive Health Surveys), the numerator normally corresponds to women aged 15 to19 who report that they have had one or more live births and women who are pregnant for the first time.
In both cases, the denominator is all women aged 15 to19. rate as one of its indicators.
Since then, follow-up reports on the Millennium Development Goals have indicated that the subregion with the highest adolescent fertility rates in the world is sub-Saharan Africa, where it is about 120 births per 1,000 women in this age group.
Latin America has the second highest rate, which is still over 80 per 1,000, followed by the Caribbean, where the rate stands at 70 per 1,000.
Based on the percentage of first-time adolescent mothers or first-time pregnant adolescents recorded in specialized surveys conducted in the 1980s or 1990s and the 2000s, the picture is mixed: in six countries adolescent fertility has declined but in five it has risen (see table II.4).
In short, the figures confirm the distinctive path of adolescent fertility and its resistance to downward change in many countries in the region in the past two decades.
Peru, Panama, Mexico, Nicaragua, Honduras, Guatemala, El Salvador, Ecuador, Costa Rica, Colombia, Chile, Brazil, Argentina, Fertility has declined in Latin America across all age groups, and there is no doubt that adolescent fertility rates in the region are currently lower than they were when fertility began to decline steadily in the mid-1960s.
However, when the decline in total fertility is compared with the decline in adolescent fertility, a clear pattern emerges: adolescent fertility has fallen much more slowly.
In a few countries, especially in those in which total fertility declined first, such as Argentina and Uruguay, adolescent fertility is even higher now than in 1960 (Rodríguez, 2011).
A look at fertility trends over more recent, shorter periods shows that in the 1990s nearly all countries in the region recorded a rise in adolescent fertility, even though total fertility was falling sharply.
The 2010 round of censuses will show the latest trends in adolescent motherhood.
In the meantime, censuses carried out in Panama and Mexico Bolivia (Plur.
While the total fertility rate remains high in sub-Saharan Africa, in Latin America it has declined sharply in recent decades.
Consequently, the high adolescent fertility in Latin America is regarded as an anomaly at the global level.
This is a trend shared by nearly all countries in the region, which stand out because of adolescent fertility rates that are considerably higher than might be expected based on their total fertility rates (Rodríguez, 2011).
In general, these findings suggest that structural socio-economic changes, cultural shifts and public programmes that encouraged the rapid, sustained decline in total fertility have not had the same effect on adolescent fertility.
Determinants of adolescent fertility (a) Proximate determinants at the end of the period regarded as adolescence in this text.
Almost without exception (Guatemala is one of the exceptions) the percentages have risen for all age groups between the 1980s and the 2000s.
It also shows that while women are becoming sexually active at a younger age, they are not entering unions any earlier, which implies an increase in premarital sexual activity.
The increasingly weaker link between sexual initiation in adolescence and adolescent union means that the analysis and calculations are focused on sexually active adolescents, regardless of whether they are in a union.
At the same time, however, union patterns are still relevant, since sexual activity in this context is more likely to result in a pregnancy and birth.
It is very difficult to analyse the proximate determinants of adolescent fertility because of the difficulties encountered in estimating the frequency of sexual activity and the effective use of contraception (Rodríguez, 2009).
With regard to sexual activity, the indicators most often used —none of which accurately reflect the full exposure to risk— suggest that sexual activity during adolescence is increasingly common, which tends to increase the likelihood of adolescent pregnancy.
The adolescent pregnancy rate for the year was estimated at almost 200 per 1,000.
The difference between the pregnancy rate and the fertility rate is almost entirely due to intentional abortion (Rodríguez, 2005).
Surveys conducted during the 1980s and 1990s bear out the greater desirability hypothesis given that in all countries the percentage of births described as “wanted at the time” was higher for births to women under the age of 20.
Surveys carried out during the first decade of the twenty-first century, however, point to (i) a systematic and significant drop in some countries in the desirability of children conceived during adolescence; and (ii) lower levels of desirability for births during adolescence compared with all births in most countries.
State of), 1994 The only way to keep these trends in the two intermediate variables described above from leading to a rise in adolescent fertility is to significantly increase the effective use of modern contraception in adolescence.
Although the traditional coverage indicators show an increase in contraceptive use, a detailed analysis yields a far less encouraging conclusion.
First, because the increased use of contraception is partly the result of women who start to use it after having their first child, which obviously does nothing to prevent adolescent motherhood (although it does prevent a second pregnancy).
Second, the use of contraception tends to be less effective and less consistent among adolescents, so increased use has a smaller protective effect than in other age groups.
Last, the most relevant indicator for predicting an adolescence without children —contraceptive use at first intercourse— is still extremely low in many countries.16 With regard to abortion, what little evidence there is for the region is fragmented.
Only recently have international demographic and health surveys and reproductive health surveys included questions on abortions; the findings are pending technical validation.
The percentage is much higher based on male responses, but responses from men on these matters tend to be less reliable and less consistent.
The lack of information means that this proximate determinant has to be excluded from the analysis herein despite its importance.
These findings are highly relevant for policy purposes, since they signal a greater need for sexual and reproductive health services, in particular access to contraception (see box II.4).
They also suggest that there is considerable scope for programmes promoting preventive behaviour with regard to teenage pregnancy.
In the 1960s, the high levels of unwanted fertility detected by surveys under the programme of comparative fertility surveys in Latin America (PECFAL) conducted among women from a number of Latin American cities (CELADE/CFSC, 1972) led to the establishment of family planning programmes in the subregion.
The evidence regarding the decline in planned births among adolescent mothers is an incentive and a powerful argument for stepping up reproductive and sexual health public policies and programmes for this group.
If contraception were not being used because of an explicit desire to have children, policies would need to focus more on expectations, given that programmes to increase access to contraception would have no effect as long as those expectations remained unchanged.
However, data show that this appears not to be the case and that the reasons for not using contraception in the first sexual relation have little to do with a desire to have children and more to do with a lack of prevention and with barriers to accessing contraception.
The desire to have a child was cited as a reason for not using contraception by 12.2% of respondents in El Salvador, 5.7% in Chile and 4.6% in Paraguay.
In Ecuador, El Salvador and Paraguay, a distinction is made between marital sexual initiation (in a union) and premarital sexual initiation (outside a union), and the reasons given for not using contraception vary between the two groups, with married adolescents more likely to respond that they wanted children.
This is the main reason cited in the 2008 survey carried out in El Salvador.b These data reinforce the strong association between sexual activity, union and pregnancy in adolescence.
On the one hand, sexual activity before a union is becoming more common, which in principle reduces the importance of a union as a factor explaining adolescent fertility.
But, on the other hand, a large proportion of Latin American adolescent girls, especially poor ones, form unions early and in many cases they already have explicit expectations of early reproduction, as a result of which union continues to signal early reproduction.
In fact, the evidence available suggests that the reverse is true given the increase in the proportion of single adolescent mothers and adolescent mothers who live with their parents and have not set up a household of their own.
Adolescent fertility in Latin America: an expression of social inequalities The disparities in fertility levels between different education groups tend to be far more pronounced in the case of adolescent motherhood.
The close correlation between education and adolescent motherhood has raised expectations that the predicted expansion in secondary and university education coverage in the region will be accompanied by a sustained decline in adolescent fertility.
Simply because of a statistical composition effect, more years of schooling do in fact tend to reduce aggregate levels of adolescent fertility and motherhood (Rodríguez, 2009).
This effect has been seen, for example, in recent data from the 2010 Panama census.
Without a doubt, education continues to be a factor protecting against adolescent motherhood.
Above all, the educational threshold needed to provide a close-to-zero probability of adolescent motherhood has shifted from secondary school to university.
This is much more marked in countries where secondary education is widely available, since socio-economic disparities in these countries are increasingly expressed as a distinction between adolescents who enter higher education and those who do not.
In countries where only a minority of adolescents have access to secondary education, attaining this level still prompts a sudden drop in the likelihood of becoming an adolescent mother.
However, when this percentage is disaggregated by level of education, an increase in all categories is observed, with the exception of the “no education” group (see figure II.13).
While the trend in the national percentage for adolescent motherhood is less clear-cut, this is due to the composition effect, which arises from the declining proportion of adolescents with low levels of education, who, as has been explained and demonstrated, continue to experience far higher levels of adolescent motherhood than highly educated adolescents.
Given that progress towards providing universal secondary education in Latin America has not been accompanied by improvements in the job market or a decrease in social inequality (ECLAC, 2010b), a large proportion of the adolescent population attending school has low expectations regarding the benefits and opportunities that these extra years of study will bring.
They find it difficult to find good jobs; they see going to university as difficult or financially unfeasible, and alternative paths to personal fulfilment based on economic and domestic emancipation seem out of reach.
Because of these factors, a segment of Latin American adolescents (boys and girls) does not see the losses and costs associated with early motherhood as being so important.
As such, structural change in the form of a more equal society that offers adolescents and young people more opportunities should clearly foster a decline in the subregion’s high adolescent fertility rate.
Conclusion Despite the widespread decline in fertility, significant disparities persist between social groups within countries.
They reflect the socio-economic inequalities that continue to define Latin America as one of the most unequal subregions in the world.
In particular, it is still invariably the case that the higher a woman’s education level, the lower her fertility.
Given the strong link between level of education and family income level, the tendency for lower-income women to have more children signals, as will be shown in the following chapters, significant inequalities in access to employment and social protection.
Women with a larger number of dependent children, especially in the 0-5 age group, and in particular those in the lowest quintiles, face more obstacles in entering the labour market, finding work and accessing social protection mechanisms.
This results in a negative cycle of inequality and exclusion where different fertility patterns are linked to social exclusion throughout the life cycle.
Despite the persistent, significant differences in fertility levels according to level of education in Latin America, in most of the countries in the region women’s educational distribution has improved rapidly in recent decades and has contributed considerably to reducing total fertility levels.
In fact, as women increasingly participate in secondary and higher education, it is very likely that fertility rates will plummet in the future, supporting the view that low fertility levels will increasingly shape the economic and demographic future of the region.
The changes in reproductive behaviour that triggered the rapid, sustained decline in total fertility have not had the same impact on all age groups of Latin American women.
Fertility of girls aged 15 to 19 in Latin America is more than three times higher than the average in developed countries and 1.5 times higher than the average in developing countries.
Even more serious is the fact that in nearly all countries in the region, fertility in this age group rose in the 1990s.
Despite the desire of adolescents to limit fertility, restrictions relating to their use of contraception lead to a lack of prevention and to obstacles in accessing modern contraceptive methods.
The stubbornly high adolescent fertility is much more marked among adolescents with a lower level of education and those from low-income families.
As ECLAC has repeatedly pointed out, this group constitutes a “hard core” of intergenerational reproduction of exclusion and inequality that combines low education levels, a lack of childcare support, increased family vulnerability, greater difficulties in carrying out income-generating activities and precarious access to social protection networks.
In summary, governments in the region are facing two major challenges relating to fertility.
First, they need to step up efforts to achieve Millennium Development Goal target 5.B to guarantee universal access to reproductive health by 2015 with a view to closing the significant gaps in fertility levels between social groups.
To that end, improving education coverage and structure should be a top priority.
Education helps to change reproductive behaviour throughout the entire population and helps prevent adolescent motherhood.
However, it is clear that increasing education is not enough in itself.
It is also necessary to analyse how education enhances decision-making and the availability of information.
Second, governments should anticipate the challenges posed by —and the consequences of— the new lowfertility context in the subregion, by adapting policies and institutions in order to deal with inexorable changes in the structure of families, society and the economy.
Chapter III Work, employment and labour markets: factories, circuits and hard cores of inequality reproduction A.
Introduction Recent achievements in poverty reduction and income concentration make it necessary to gauge how much space there is for Latin America to continue to make strides against one of the factors that is most hindering progress: inequality.
Structural heterogeneity, stratification of the fertility decline and gender inequality operate as true factories of inequality in the labour markets of Latin America.
This dynamic gives rise to hard cores of inequality and vulnerability that embed in certain sectors, such as young low-income women with small children, low-income young people and workers (especially women) in low-productivity areas.
As explained in chapter I, the progress that the region has made since 2002 in reducing poverty and, albeit to a lesser extent, inequality —and the evidence that rising labour income has a lot to do with that progress— are good reason for optimism.
In the labour markets, female participation has risen sharply; productivity has been increasing and is on its way back to the levels seen in the region before the “lost decade” began (Weller, 2009).
After the critical early 2000s, economic growth led to steadily rising employment rates, declining unemployment and slightly expanding formal employment (ECLAC, 2009).
Despite the fallout from the 2008 crisis (ECLAC/ILO, 2009), by late 2009 the labour markets were showing clear signs of recovery thanks largely to job protection policies implemented in several countries in the region There are two complementary approaches to examining the present and future implications of this favourable scenario.
Obviously, we must look at the formulas that made these achievements possible, the policy instruments that have proven to be the most effective and, above all, the relevance and sustainability of the efforts that the countries of the region have made to contain the effects of the most recent crisis.
But we must also gauge how much space there is for Latin America to continue to make strides against one of the factors that is most hindering progress: inequality.
Such an examination requires pinpointing the sources of these inequalities and the circuits through which they are transmitted.
This chapter shows that the headway made this decade in terms of labour income and its distributive and poverty reduction impact is butting up against “hard limits” in the form of structural features associated with the tremendous gaps in labour force productivity, as well as access and performance difficulties in extremely segmented labour markets.
For that very reason, progressing toward convergence and higher labour income also requires more equal productivity levels and broader access to high-quality employment, paying particular attention to specific groups that are at a clear disadvantage.
This edition of Social Panorama proposes that the mechanisms and circuits operating at the point where the State, markets and families intersect and interact are, following the classic idea of Esping-Andersen (1990 and 1999), at the root of the relative rigidity of inequality during periods of growth.
This chapter looks at some of these mechanisms and circuits as they are reflected in the operation of labour markets and in the inequalities these harbour; they are the product of the interplay between the structural and temporal components of the spheres of well-being.
One of those structural components (examined in depth in the previous chapter) is the generation of inequalities due to changes in fertility and the stratified patterns accompanying these changes.
This dynamic is creating differential dependency relationships in Latin American societies, making some sectors more vulnerable and, in some spheres, widening the gaps between the higher-income population segment and the most vulnerable one.
But there is no question that inequality in Latin America is also the result of long-standing productive and labour factors.
The labour market is a prime source of both well-being and risk for people in the region, and it is there that structural phenomena have helped to make the mechanisms that generate and reproduce inequalities even more rigid (Filgueira, 2007; Infante, 2011).
This chapter looks at the legacies of inequality in the productive sphere, highlighting the impacts of structural heterogeneity on labour market segmentation.
In keeping with the analytical approach of previous editions of Social Panorama, it goes on to examine the interaction between the State, markets and families, focusing on the relative inelasticity of inequality in Latin America and arguing that this inelasticity is rooted in structural factors that are not new.
This is exactly why it is brought to the fore by a close examination of aggregate indicators taking other key variables into consideration.
This approach yields a clearer understanding of why the gaps between lower- and higher-income segments have not only not narrowed but seem to be increasing in some aspects despite encouraging signs from aggregate indicators (essentially, income concentration) in recent years.
The analysis is grounded in three basic assumptions: The first one, which has already been outlined, is that the demographic and productive processes that have shaped the history of Latin America over the years have a lot to do with the generation and rigid reproduction of inequalities.
As both processes transfer to the labour markets they drag along old inequalities that combine to generate new ones.
The second assumption is that State intervention can be extremely effective in reducing the structural inequalities that transfer to the labour markets.
So, the lack of —or skewed— intervention goes a long way towards explaining the emergence of factories and circuits of inequality at the juncture between markets and families.
The third and final assumption is that at the centre of the intersection between families and labour markets, gender inequality plays a key part.
The distribution of roles between men and women, trade-offs between paid and unpaid work, discrimination and historical patterns of dominance all come into play at the point of contact between the State, markets and families, and they tend to reinforce the structural legacy of inequality and open new spaces for new disparities.
Production structure and labour markets: another side to the structural conditioning of inequality 1 The high degree of structural heterogeneity that marks the region’s productive structures results in striking disparities between the contribution that each productive sector makes to GDP and employment.
This creates an extremely unequal distribution of productivity and, ultimately, an extremely unequal appropriation of gains among workers.
The linkage between structural heterogeneity and income inequality casts a rigid pattern that is stable over time.
The characteristics of the labour market reflect relatively durable underlying structures deriving from demographic and productive transformations over time (such as those examined in the previous chapter).
This second structural conditioning factor explains a goodly portion of the inequalities that determine how Latin America’s labour markets operate.
While this facet is frequently discussed Productivity and economic structure In every country, technical progress occurs at different rates in the various sectors and technology and opportunities for innovation are unevenly distributed (ECLAC, 2010a).
But these differences are far more marked in Latin America than in the developed economies, and the sectors and agents that lag behind are not catching up with the “frontrunners” despite the rise in average productivity.
Even within sectors that in aggregate terms could be considered to have medium or high levels of productivity there are still strata of companies and employment where productivity is extremely low.
All in all, the internal markets of the economies of Latin America are not homogeneous; in other words, they are structurally heterogeneous.2 ECLAC research in the 1960s and 1970s already revealed profound differences in productivity both in studies it is not often tied into analyses of well-being and social inequality in the region.
This section seeks to go beyond this approach, building on the ideas set forth in Time for equality: closing gaps, opening trails (ECLAC, 2010a) and focusing once more on the notion of structural heterogeneity —a cornerstone of the ECLAC school of thought.
To trace the conceptual development of the notion of structural heterogeneity, see Durán (2011). between and within productive strata and sectors.
These differences had to do with slow technological progress and the unequal distribution of that progress among sectors (Pinto, 1965 and 1975).
Four decades later and albeit with somewhat different traits, evidence still confirms this phenomenon (ECLAC, 2010a): the economic structure of the region can be seen as consisting of three productivity strata with differing degrees of access to technology and markets.
The first stratum, the high one, encompasses large-scale export activities and companies (more than 200 workers) capturing a decisive portion of the local market and whose productivity per employed person approaches the average for the developed economies.
Modern operations expand dynamically far above the average, but they have little effect on job creation and are not much linked with the other productive strata.
The high stratum is more capital- and technology-intensive and is thus more productive, and it has more formalized labour relations.
The persons employed in the high stratum include large public and private corporate employers and their workers, as well as self-employed professionals and technicians.
This stratum currently accounts for 66.9% of GDP and only 19.8 % of total employment (see figure III.1).
The middle stratum is one step down in terms of technological advances and productivity.
Because their participation in growth is only tangential, growth —no matter how robust— does not yield the expected outcomes for this segment in terms of production and employment.
This stratum comprises small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs); productivity per person employed is similar to the average for the countries.
As figure III.1 shows, this stratum accounts for 22.5% of GDP and 30% of total employment.
And in family microenterprises, the roles of worker and entrepreneur usually overlap in practice.
This stratum currently accounts for one half of employment and only 10.6% of GDP (see figure III.1).
This means that a significant proportion of employed persons is in the low stratum, which accounts for a negligible portion of GDP while, on the other hand, the high (or large corporate) stratum, which employs a very small fraction of the labour force, accounts for a very high percentage of GDP.
This unequal distribution of the labour force among productive strata is due to the low capacity of the more modern, advanced sectors to absorb labour force, driving surplus labour towards less-productive sectors.
This dynamic is heightened when the labour supply in an economy is relatively elastic, i.e., where changing demand keeps wages at very low levels (Durán, 2011).
The implications of this marked disparity between the contributions of each sector to GDP and employment are obvious: it leads to an extremely unequal distribution of productivity (measured in terms of GDP per person employed) and, in the final analysis, leaves room for an extremely unequal appropriation of gains among workers.
The data in figure III.2 show that GDP per person employed in the high stratum is 16.3 times that of the low stratum and 4.5 times GDP per person employed in the middle stratum.
GDP per person employed in the middle stratum is 3.7 times that of the low-productivity stratum.
Last, there is a low stratum with minimal levels of productivity and income.
This stratum comprises the informal sector, which includes low-productivity economic units that are barely mechanized, have very low capital density and use extraordinarily outdated technology.
It includes enterprises with up to five workers, unskilled own-account workers, family workers and domestic workers.
Labour relations in this stratum are not very structured because workers can freely enter and leave High stratum Middle stratum Low stratum basis of R.
Heterogeneity, inequality, distributive rigidity and well-being This ranking is based on several indicators of economic performance, employment and structural heterogeneity: GDP per capita, GDP per person employed, employment-population ratio, composition of GDP and employment per productive stratum and productivity per productive stratum.
Un ejercicio de convergencia productiva”, Working document, No. 14, Inclusive development project, Santiago, Chile, ECLAC, June 2011, and special tabulations of household surveys conducted in the respective countries.
In each quintile, per capita income is made up of income per person employed and the respective employment-population ratio.
Income per person employed depends on productivity, which is, in turn, a function of the composition of employment per productive strata in each quintile.
Hence, for example, employment in the lower quintiles has a high proportion of persons employed in the low-productivity stratum.
By contrast, in the higher quintiles a large fraction of the persons employed are in the high-productivity stratum.
This sequence would seem to explain much of the income differential and the unequal distribution of income.
The distribution of per capita income in three groups of countries ranked according to their degree of structural heterogeneity makes this relationship obvious.3 In countries with moderate structural heterogeneity (Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico and Uruguay), per capita income in the fifth quintile is 13.1 times that of the first quintile.
In countries with intermediate structural heterogeneity (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia and Panama) per capita income in the fifth quintile is 15.8 times that of the first quintile.
In keeping with the above, the Gini coefficient in countries with moderate structural heterogeneity is the lowest of the three groups (49.7).
In the group with intermediate structural heterogeneity it is 52.2; in the group of counties with severe structural heterogeneity the Gini coefficient is 53.3.
The joint evolution of structural heterogeneity and income concentration over time confirms how rigid this mechanism is.
As figure III.4 shows, the dispersion of productivity in the region (an indicator of sectoral inequality) between 1990 and 2008 and the Gini coefficient have both evolved along similar patterns).
Higher index values reflect greater sectoral inequality of productivity, that is, a greater distance between sectors in terms of productivity levels.
This was in the context of an aggregate increase in average productivity starting in the second half of the 1990s.
The Gini coefficient pattern is identical: an upward trend peaking in 1998, a barely perceptible drop in the 2000s and a more noticeable C.
Productivity, formality, informality and inequality: beyond the dividing lines 4 Income concentration also leads to marked labour market segmentation, manifested, among other ways, in the dividing line between medium- and high- productivity employment and low-productivity employment.
Employment in low-productivity sectors has fallen off over the past two decades, but the distance between it and the medium- and high-productivity sectors has increased.
Women (especially low-income women with a care burden) account for an increasingly large proportion of employment in low-productivity sectors, with a marked concentration of labour income.
Not only have these patterns not been corrected: in some spheres they seem to have deepened.
This definition is based on the argument that “productive heterogeneity generates and maintains the informal sector” (ECLAC, 2009: 109).
It is true that this indicator does not consider important dimensions of the notion of informality such as social protection and outsourcing, both of which are linked to a view of informality as a source of breaches of basic labour rights (ECLAC, 2009).
This implies that there is no perfect overlap (although there is a significant one) between low productivity as measured here and the broader notion of informality.
With this qualification in mind, and for the sake of discussion and readability, the two terms are used interchangeably in this section.
The data used in the previous section to define the three productive strata differ from those used in the present section to measure the number of workers in medium-high and low-productivity sectors.
In the second, special tabulations of data from the household surveys conducted in the countries were prepared (hence, a breakdown between the medium- and high-productivity strata cannot be provided because of the way in which company size is recorded in these surveys).
Their income is also usually higher, although they are still very much underpaid with relation to their levels of productivity (Durán, 2011).
This is better than the figure posted around 1990, when the employed population in this sector accounted for 48.1% of the total (see figure III.5).
Average monthly labour income for persons employed in low-productivity sectors was US$ 297 in 2009; for persons employed in medium- and high-productivity sectors it was US$ 565.
These figures confirm that during the recent period of economic growth, the upward trend in real compensation for employed persons and wage earners was largely due to the performance of income in higher-productivity sectors; these increases have, essentially, not trickled down to the informal sector (ECLAC, 2010c) (see figure III.6).
Medium- and high-productivity sectors include government employees, private employers and wage earners in establishments employing more than five persons and own-account professionals and technicians.
This category does not include domestic employees. b Weighted average of the countries on which data is available for the periods under review.
Nevertheless, this evolution should not mask other, far less encouraging, signs that the data reveal.
Over the past two decades the dividing line between employment in higher- and lower-productivity sectors has become sharper.
As already noted in other ECLAC publications, the compensation gap between the two sectors is wider than Data from 2008, selected countries.
Employed in low-productivity sectors c Employed in medium- and high-productivity sectors d a Urban employed persons over 15 who declared labour income (does not include unpaid workers). b Weighted average of the countries on which data is available for all of the periods under review.
Up to 2006, does not include Colombia, which does not break down the data by company size.
According to data from 2009, registration with social security in this sector was barely 22%, and only slightly more than one of every four wage earners (28.5%) had a formal contract The key to understanding this aggregate evolution seems to lie in what happened within each sector.
Between 1990 and 2009, the proportion of persons employed in low-productivity sectors went from 40% to 32% in the highest-income quintile (quintile V); the drop in the lowest quintile (quintile I) was not nearly as sharp —from 72% to 69%.
The decline in the proportion of the employed population in low-productivity sectors took place primarily over the past 10 years except for the highest quintile, where it had already fallen off sharply between 1990 and 2000.
In other words, the decrease in the proportion of the population employed in low-productivity sectors over the past two decades was more favourable to the higher-income sectors (see figure III.7a).
Latin America (17 countries): urban population employed in medium- and high-productivity sectors A.
Urban population employed in low-productivity sectors Does not include data for Colombia. a The low-productivity sector includes persons employed in microenterprises (establishments employing up to five persons), domestic employees and unskilled own-account workers, including the self-employed and unpaid family members with no professional or technical skills.
The medium- and high-productivity sectors include government employees, private employers and wage earners in establishments employing more than five persons and own-account professionals and technicians.
The obvious flip side of this trend is the widening gap between the higher and lower quintiles in higher-productivity sectors.
Over the past two decades, the difference between the percentage of the population employed in the highest and lowest quintiles of medium- and high-productivity sectors went from 32 percentage points to 38 percentage points (see figure III.7.b).
All things considered, the reason for the widening dividing line between employment in higher- and lower-productivity sectors appears to lie in the increasing stratification within them.
In the latter, there is a decrease that is seen above all in the higher quintiles and is far less marked among the lower-income employed.
This process, resulting from somewhat skewed employment generation dynamics combined with the marked disparity in skills development (ECLAC, 2011a), is plain to see in two worrisome phenomena.
They are (i) the link between informality and poverty and indigence; and (ii) differential patterns between the two sectors in terms of labour income concentration.
It comes as no surprise that low productivity is more linked to poverty than productive employment, since labour income in low-productivity sectors is often not enough to avoid poverty9 (ECLAC, 2010c).
Between 1990 and 2009 there was a sharp rise in the proportion of indigent and poor persons employed in low-productivity sectors (from 73% to 80% and from 56% to 60% respectively), and the percentage of workers in these sectors who are not poor fell from 44% to 40% (see figure III.8).
Two facts stand out, however: (i) labour income is far more concentrated in the informal sector than in the formal one; and (ii) the distance between the two has not changed since 1990, although when it did (in 2000), it was because the Gini coefficient for the formal sector worsened, not because of declining inequality in the informal sector.
The latter fell by barely one point in the 1990s and is currently at the same level as in 2000 (see figure III.9).
The greater distance between higher- and lowerproductivity employment is also reflected in the differential labour income concentration between the medium- and high-productivity sector and the low-productivity one.
Gini coefficient calculations for the former show upward behaviour between 1990 and 2000 (from 0.45 to 0.48) with a decline in the past decade that places the current value slightly below the one for the early 1990s (0.44).
By contrast, the Gini coefficient for labour income among persons employed in low-productivity sectors has Total employed Low productivity Medium- and high productivity respective countries.
These trends would seem to show that variations in labour income concentration in the region follow the same pattern as in the formal sector —they essentially mirror the evolution of labour income in the sector.
By contrast, labour income concentration in the low-productivity sector has barely changed and has shown to be highly rigid over time.
Gender inequality rigidities: a potential key The examination so far shows how important it is to explore labour-related sources of inequality.
But, as noted at the beginning of this chapter, behind these trends there is another factor operating in the region’s distributive rigidity: the dividing line between low- and medium- and high-productivity sectors is intersected by another line —the one that divides women from men.
The proportion of women employed in low-productivity sectors is 52.5%, compared with 44.1% for men.
This gender gap is far from narrowing; it has grown slightly in the past two decades.
Informal employment is highly stratified and, as noted earlier, concentrated above all among lower-income, less-educated workers.
These two factors together are driving an ever-larger wedge between the higher and lower quintiles that, while affecting both sexes, impacts women more.
As can be seen in figure III.10, employment stratification in low-productivity sectors rose for men and women alike and the gap between higher- and lower-income quintiles increased.
In 1990 the informality differentials between male workers in quintile I and quintile V were nearly 27 percentage points.
These trends are seen in very high levels of labour income concentration among women employed in low-productivity sectors, with a Gini coefficient that rose by two points (from 0.55 to 0.57) between 1990 and 2009.
This figure stands in contrast to the Gini coefficient for labour income for men working in the same sector, which is not only lower but decreased between 1990 and 2009 (see figure III.11).
While labour income concentration for women employed in the formal sector is lower than for men working in the same sector, their Gini coefficient rose more as inequality increased (in 2000) but subsequently declined less in the latest available measure.
In short, it was more elastic during the economic downturn but less elastic during the growth period.
This increase and the greater rigidity in labour income concentration for women are due in part to the many —and overlapping— points at which gender inequality intersects the connection between labour markets and families.
The pressure that the care burden exerts on households is resolved by an extremely regressive pattern because it continues to fall essentially on the modalities and resources (economic and family) at their disposal to cope with it.
As examined in the 2009 edition of Social Panorama, the demand for care operates as a severe constraint on labour-force participation and employment among women in the most vulnerable sectors (ECLAC, 2010b).
In the middle sectors, the declining fertility rate and the use of family and social networks to care for dependents become frequently-used adaptation strategies.
In the high sectors, the demand for care can be met with family support or by buying care services on the market, to be provided at home or elsewhere (ECLAC, 2010b).
The age of the children living in the household does not seem to make much of a difference in employment in the highest-income sectors; it conditions employment for women in the middle sectors, and it clearly becomes a major obstacle for the poorest women (ECLAC, 2010b) (see figure III.12).
But this pattern changes when looking at the distribution of income in low-productivity sectors; it does not operate in the lower-income strata but does seem to affect women employed in the informal sector in the higher quintiles.
As figure III.12.b shows, for the lowest-income quintile the employment rate in low-productivity sectors among women living in households with small children is even slightly higher than for women living in households with children aged 6 to 14 (46% and 43%, respectively).
But this trend changes significantly from the second quintile on, where the burden of caring for smaller children once again operates as a constraint for employment, even in the low-productivity sector.
This could be showing that the presence of children under five is usually an obstacle to employment insertion, but in the lower quintiles it might operate in the opposite direction and drive lower-income women into informal employment (ILO/UNDP, 2009).
Informal employment might, in principle, make it somewhat easier to reconcile labour and domestic life in terms of time, schedules and mobility (ILO/UNDP, 2009).
But it is essentially the lack of facilities and public services, especially public systems to care for children, older adults and persons with disabilities, that is behind the biases observed.
These tasks, which primarily fall to women (and above all to lower-income women), make informality and low-productivity occupations the only employment option open in these sectors.
A look at the evolution of this datum over the medium term makes it clear how rigid this mechanism is.
As figure III.13 shows, the levels of informal employment among low-income women with small children have gone virtually unchanged over the past 20 years, unlike the marked decline that has taken place in the medium-income sectors (10% decline between 1990 and 2009) and, above all, in the higher-income sectors (20% decline during the period).
Unequal labour-force participation and unemployment The stratified incorporation of Latin American women into the labour market means that, instead of narrowing, the gap between higher- and lower-income women has grown slightly over the past two decades.
Greater childcare pressure and the glaring lack of protection in this sphere for the most vulnerable sectors reflect a rigid circuit of inequality that is far from being broken.
The youth unemployment rate seems to be increasingly higher than the adult unemployment rate, and the distance between the lower and higher quintiles has not changed significantly over the past 20 years.
The previous section showed some of the facets of inequality among the employed population.
It illustrated the influence of labour segmentation and the rigidity with which this segmentation operates when combined with inequalities (as in assets and human and social capital) within families.
How structural heterogeneity operates on the ability of labour markets to absorb unemployed or inactive labour force must be taken into consideration, as must the hubs of inequality arising from the process.
Labour-force participation at the crossroads: recent trends The increase in female labour-force participation is perhaps one of the most drastic changes taking place in the labour markets of Latin America over the past 20 years.
For the typically active ages of 25 to 54, female labour-force participation has increased by nearly 18 percentage points.
This trend has narrowed the distance between the two, taking it from 47 percentage points in 1990 to 28 percentage points in 2009.
The 2009 edition of Social Panorama already argued that this advance is indispensable because it represents a significant increase in the contribution that women make to total household income.
It is often this contribution that keeps them from falling into poverty (ECLAC, 2010b).
And the process is irreversible because it mirrors the profound, long-term cultural and demographic transformations taking place: female autonomy, declining fertility, rising educational credentials (ECLAC, 2010b).
The 2009 edition also stressed that this is a highly stratified development reflecting an extremely regressive pattern: labour-force participation rates for lower-income women, who usually have more children (see the previous chapter), are significantly lower than for women in higher quintiles.
The core reasons for stratified labour participation are the same as those already set out for the female bias and low income levels associated with low-productivity employment.
In the poorest sectors, the demand for care exerts pressure and leads to the unequal distribution of paid and unpaid work in households, puts the burden of caring for dependents on women and holds them back from entering the labour market (ECLAC, 2010b).
A look at the data makes this phenomenon clear: in 2009, 48% of lower-income women aged 25 to 54 participated in the labour market while the proportion for women in the same age bracket but in the highest income quintile was 79%.
But figure III.14 also shows that this is the widest gap since 1990 and that it has been growing steadily since 2000.
In this sphere, too, inequality is threatening to take root and spread.
The data for Colombia and Nicaragua refer to 2005, and those for Argentina, Chile and Mexico refer to 2006.
Two developments are at work in this pattern: (i) stagnant growth affecting all of the social sectors; and (ii) a recent trend change in the lower-income quintiles, where for the first time in nearly 20 years the latest measure available shows that labour market participation is not only not growing but that it is declining slightly.
Interpreting these trends is complicated and beyond the scope of this chapter.
However, some reflections on their implications and possible causes are in order.
The evolution of the indicator in the most vulnerable sectors sets off a warning bell.
The incorporation of women in the labour market significantly increases their contribution to total household income10 and is often what allows that household to exit poverty (ECLAC, 2010b), so any halt in this process (a critical one for the poorest families to attain minimal levels of well-being) in the medium term would be cause for concern.
The problem is that a more detailed look at the relationship between labour market participation and the childcare burden does not yield an encouraging long-term picture.
As can be seen in figure III.15, the gap between women in the poorest sectors with smaller children (aged 5 and under) and those with children aged 6 to 14 has been growing since 2002.
This confirms that for the most vulnerable women the burden of caring for smaller children is still an obstacle in the path to labour market insertion (ECLAC, 2010b).
And the gap between women in the highest and lowest quintiles living in households where there is a childcare burden has been growing steadily since 1994.
Far from it: the data show that this rigid circuit of inequality is hardening.
The recent economic crisis might help explain recent trends, perhaps because it has changed expectations for entering the labour market.
Rising unemployment (especially among women) can be discouraging or act as a disincentive for working for those who, while inactive, would be willing to work if the opportunity arose.
It is true that, so far, the indicator has not been sensitive, at least in aggregate terms, to prior economic crises.
But as participation increases and approaches a “ceiling,” the variations associated with economic growth could start to be more frequent.
One last factor to bear in mind is the conditional cash transfer programmes that have become more widespread in the past few years.
Making women the receivers of cash transfers does seek to favour their direct access to income and, in the final analysis, promote their economic autonomy.
And it is held that women should receive the income because they are the ones in charge of caring for the children and making decisions in this regard.
But this approach has sparked considerable debate (Molyneux, 2008; Martínez Franzoni and Voreend, 2010) in that the requirements and paperwork for obtaining these benefits take up women’s time and might discourage those who face systematic obstacles from entering the labour market (ECLAC, 2010d).
Although there is still little research on this and more evidence would be needed, it cannot be ruled out that these initiatives might be acting like a new, unexpected obstacle to labour market participation.
Unemployment: “outside the outside” and farther apart Unemployment is closely linked to economic cycles, and there is a direct link between variations in the unemployment rate and stages of the cycle.
Extensive research on this relationship in Latin America and the Caribbean has shown how economic crises have had a direct impact, with unemployment rates rising and then tending to fall during the recovery.
But perhaps most relevant to an examination of inequality is the fact that from cycle to cycle some sectors systematically lose out.
This reflects unequal capacities to cope with the effects of unemployment; in other words, certain groups are more vulnerable to economic downturns while others are more able to weather the shocks.
Not only does the female unemployment rate tend to be higher than the male unemployment rate, but the gap between the two has been growing steadily over the past few years.
In 1990, the male unemployment rate was approximately 80% of the female unemployment rate.
Nearly 20 years later, with some fluctuation, the male unemployment rate stands at just 65% of the rate for women, i.e. the unemployment rate is 35% higher for women than for men (see figure III.16).
Beyond the fluctuations associated with economic cycles in the region, the gap between women in the highest and lowest quintiles narrowed slightly during the 1990s but began to widen again in 2000.
As a result, in 2009 the unemployment rate for lower-income women was five times higher than for women in the highest quintile, at 21% versus 4% (see figure III.17).
The incorporation of women into the labour market adds pressure for female employment; this is compounded by the fact that less-educated women encounter more barriers to accessing employment at a time when not enough jobs are being created.
This dynamic is clearly fed by the skills deficits and the social definition and gender segmentation of occupations that hinder women’s access to certain professions (ECLAC, 2010d).
But in the most vulnerable sectors the demand for care can also be working against access to employment.11 The care burden has traditionally had a visible impact on labourforce participation.
But the trends showing the effects of this variable on the unemployment rate for women in lower-income quintiles reveal the need to continue to fine-tune the measure of labour participation and its meanings.
This entails better capturing As figure III.18 shows, the unemployment rate tends to be higher among women living in households with smaller children.
The other group in which unemployment is at worrisome levels is young people.12 As some studies have suggested, youth unemployment seems to be the first to increase during economic crises and the last to decrease during periods of growth (Tokman, 1997; ECLAC, 2010c), making it a particularly hard core in the chain that reproduces inequalities (ECLAC, 2010b).
This chapter focuses on youth unemployment as a key circuit in the generation and reproduction of inequalities that are seen in the labour markets but are rooted in historical patterns that leave this segment of the population especially unprotected and translate into multiple tensions associated with youth emancipation.
While this chapter does not explore these hard cores of inequality in depth, there are many studies that clearly show what a complex issue this is.
Quintile I: With children aged 5 and under in the household Quintile I: With children and adolescents aged 6 to 14 in the household Quintile V: With children aged 5 and under in the household Quintile V: With children and adolescents aged 6 to 14 in the household respective countries.
Not only has this gap not narrowed significantly: it seems to have grown since 2005 (see figure III.19).
Higher education credentials are playing a key role in increasing youth unemployment rates (UNDP, 2001; ECLAC, 2011a).
ECLAC has provided conclusive evidence that for quite some time the intermediate education cycle has not operated as a bridge to access to employment (ECLAC/OIJ, this is strongly correlated to productive structure stability and structural heterogeneity, job creation is not keeping pace with the region’s progress in education (ECLAC, 2010c).
It goes without saying that high youth unemployment rates can spark considerable frustration.
Over the medium and long term they can impact social cohesion and the general flow of new generations into society as a whole (United Nations, 2003, ECLAC/OIJ, 2008), hindering access to employment and thus to social protection at a key point in the life cycle when the emancipation process begins.
Because unemployment at these ages is quite stratified and particularly affects the lower-income sectors, it is a substantial obstacle to skill accumulation and, in the final analysis, to raising productivity in the new generations.
Unemployment is much higher among young people from lower-income households than among those in the higher quintiles.
Once again, the greatest cause for concern lies in the fact that the gap between the lower and higher quintiles has not changed significantly in the past 20 years.
In other words, the gap between lower-income and higher-income groups is not narrowing.
Quite to the contrary: in 2009 it was wider than ever, at 17 percentage points (see figure III.20).
This is because the uptick in aggregate youth unemployment is due to a differential increase between quintiles, where the lower-income sectors seem to get the short end of the stick (the unemployment rate for this group went from 13% to 27% between 1990 and 2009).
These trends become even more complex when factoring in the fact that —as with other age brackets— for young people aged 15 to 24 the female unemployment rate is higher than the male unemployment rate.
Indeed, the gender gap (the distance between unemployment curves for young men and young women) is far from narrowing; it grew wider between 1990 and 2009 (see figure III.21).
As with the more adult population, unemployment among the young is more stratified for women than for men.
Not only do the data confirm this greater inequality (the curves are steeper for women), but they show that between 1990 and 2009 the trend has deepened to a much greater degree among women than among men.
These variables influence the stratified incorporation of women into the world of work, employment and medium- and highproductivity occupations.
The evidence provided in this chapter confirms the obstacles that lower-income women face and that set them apart from their peers in higher quintiles and, obviously, from men (ECLAC, 2010d).
In lower-income households there are usually more children than in higher-income ones, so these women are living in households with more children and adolescents.
As the previous chapter showed, the total fertility rate is significantly lower among women with secondary or higher education than among those who have not completed the primary cycle.
In some countries (Ecuador, Haiti, the Plurinational State of Bolivia) the difference can even be more than three children (see chapter II).
Because of these configurations, on top of dealing with a heavier care burden these women have lower per capita income because they live in larger households.
This makes it far more difficult to find market-based solutions to family member care needs.
The picture becomes even more complicated when taking into consideration the fact that these women are more vulnerable to poverty when they are heads of singleparent households, which are increasing in number and tend to be found more in the lower-income sectors.
According to data from a recent study, single-parent households headed by women in the first income quintile (Rico and Maldonado, 2011, page 38).
Given this web of variables and patterns in these sectors, it comes as no surprise that these women are subject to greater tensions than other women are.
They must reconcile paid work with family responsibilities but have fewer monetary and family resources to do so (and often lack a spouse in the household to share the unpaid work).
Add to this the fact that they are usually less educated and tend to lack appropriate skills and the picture becomes bleak indeed.
The examination set out in this chapter provides forceful evidence of the need for this hard core of inequality to continue to be front and centre in the debate on public policies geared towards combating poverty and reducing inequality.
Maldonado, “¿Qué muestra la evolución de los hogares sobre la evolución de las familias en América Latina?”, Las familias latinoamericanas interrogadas.
The State at the intersection of labour markets and families The State is at the hub of this web of factories, circuits and hard cores of inequality.
It is robust and targeted State intervention that makes it possible to address inequalities and leave more or less space for combating the structural legacy.
Decisive State intervention should be considered in the productive sphere, in labour regulations and institutions, in labour market policy and in redistributing childcare.
The foregoing pages looked at labour inequality in Latin America, examining the role of structural heterogeneity, the stratification of declining fertility and gender inequality as factories of inequality.
This dynamic gives rise to hard cores of inequality and vulnerability that become entrenched in certain sectors, such as young low-income women with small children, low-income young people and workers (especially women) in low-productivity sectors.
The main steps in this sequence are illustrated below (see diagram III.1).
Low-income young people Circuit Gender inequality: Unequal distribution of paid and unpaid work, differential effects of the care burden Youth unemployment: Regressive stratification and increasing inequality.
Greater vulnerability of young women Stratification of declining fertility Young low-income women with small children Female labour participation: Regressive stratification of labour participation and employment.
Recent stagnation of labour participation in lower-income sectors Workers in low-productivity sectors The State is at the hub of this web of factories, circuits and hard cores of inequality.
Beyond these processes, it is robust and targeted State intervention that makes it possible to address inequalities and leave more or less space for combating the structural legacy.
In the light of this analysis, there are at least four areas in which State intervention should be considered.
The first is the high degree of structural heterogeneity in the region and the pressing need to act on this first link in the chain of reproduction of inequalities feeding into the labour market.
This calls for advancing towards a comprehensive policy for productive development grounded in appropriate macroeconomic regimes, development policies and market-based microeconomic incentives.
While some efforts have been promising, the achievements are still far from obvious.
Such outcomes highlight the need to strengthen the institutional capacities of the States of the region to improve policy design, implementation and assessment, influence the price structure and ensure more horizontal access to innovation.
Latin America has serious labour institution shortcomings and some unfinished business in the area of labour market regulation.
There are substantial gender and age biases, as well as large sectors of workers who are not benefiting from core labour standards.
The region’s “dual” regulatory model is, without question, a major obstacle to lower-income workers being able to appropriate gains in productivity and to breaking down the barrier between insiders and outsiders that creeps into social protection.
Implementers of public policy should view labour market segmentation as closely linked to structural heterogeneity.
Ignoring this link means that labour institutions will not bridge the different productive strata and that policies will be designed as if the labour market were homogeneous.
Instead of contributing to productive convergence they will exacerbate the gaps between productivity and compensation, making real distributive justice impossible.
Rapid economicgrowth and rising labour productivity create the conditions for generating high-quality employment with rights but do not ensure that this will happen.
Rather, labour institutions should be designed so as to create and enhance virtuous circles between the two factors (Weller and Roethlisberger, 2011).
This requires, on the one hand, ensuring that a portion of the gains in productivity goes to improving labour conditions (in the form of higher wages, other monetary benefits and non-monetary aspects of employment quality).
On the other hand, it involves enhancing subjective and objective aspects of employment quality that can increase productivity, such as job training and other factors that influence job satisfaction and personal commitment.
The third relevant axis is linked to what States can do to decouple access to well-being from labour market status and thus promote greater equality across sectors.
Labour market policy has a crucial role to play here: for example, as a tool that can be very effective in combating unemployment in the hardest hit sectors.
Measures such as labour intermediation, competencies certification, training initiatives (focused, in the case of young people, on transitioning from the education system to the world of work), unemployment insurance and mechanisms for helping the unemployed access non-contributory protection systems are some of the options for decommodifying access to employment.
Emergency public jobs programmes and labour-intensive public works perform the same function (ECLAC/ILO, 2009), as do measures that support self-generation of employment.
It is especially important to develop active policies that facilitate access to the first job and introduce labour market incentives through positive action geared towards improving employment access for the young.
Last, these findings indicate that the States of the region still have much unfinished business regarding intervention in basic aspects of protection and well-being that have, traditionally, been left up to families.
Advancing towards defamilization is essential for reducing inequalities between men and women and for combating the growing gaps among women that are rooted in older divides.
In many Latin American households there is still a division of labour that assigns the role of head of household and breadwinner to the man and the role of mother and housewife to the woman.
Clearly linked to this are the key role that social protection can play in reinforcing action and the redistributive role of the State regarding childcare.
It is up to social protection to facilitate access to a system of care services that is still quite limited in many of the countries of the region and needs to be improved and expanded (Pautassi and Rico, 2011).
But such initiatives should go farther, to promote the creation of national public care systems.
This would correct, up to a point, the pattern of inequality in female participation in the labour market.
Not only that: it would cushion the impacts of the care crisis on unemployment for lower-income women and the prevalence of informal employment among them, creating an environment that would allow them to delegate dependent care to specialized services.
The importance of advancing in this direction is confirmed by conclusive international evidence of the positive impacts that expanding the supply of care services has on freeing the female labour force and improving its labour insertion (with the resulting increase in income).
The efforts that the countries of the region make in the sphere of childcare services should be grounded in three premises.
First, there is an obvious need to start with measures targeting the most vulnerable sectors, those that are most affected by the tension between paid and unpaid work.
But that tension is also found in medium- and high-income sectors and it blocks access to jobs in the formal sector and to higher-quality employment.
Second, it would seem that the creation and expansion of the supply of care services should be aligned with the needs of the different productive strata and —within the low-productivity sectors— focus on those that can yield the best outcomes in terms of female labour insertion.
Last, companies should be involved in the supply of care; the provision of services should be mandatory (Pautassi Chapter IV Social protection and inequality: cracks, rigidities, open ground and opportunities A.
Introduction Many of the Latin American countries have increased their social spending significantly in the past few years.
Yet the region’s structural lag is such that any conclusions about the performance of social protection in breaking the chains of inequality transmission may be drawn only with caution.
So it is important to form a picture of the systemic performance of social protection in reducing inequality in Latin America, by looking at the cracks and rigidities in the region’s social protection systems while also identifying the open ground and opportunities for tackling the many faces of inequality.
Chapter III examined some of the mechanisms which appear to be driving the generation and reproduction of labour-related inequalities in Latin America.
Great structural heterogeneity, a stratified decline in fertility rates and gender inequality overlap to form perverse combinations of poverty, informality, care burdens and generational gaps.
The region is thus dragging a heavy anchor when it comes to reducing inequality in its labour markets.
A steady rise in public social spending in the region since the 1990s has made it possible to increase the coverage and stability of social policies in many countries, although the State’s tax revenues is limited in some cases (ECLAC, 2010a and 2010b).
But the findings set forth in chapter III suggest the need for caution in drawing conclusions about how effective social protection has been in breaking cycles of inequality transmission and how much ground still lies open for further progress in this direction.
The region’s social protection systems certainly face huge and very complex challenges.
Yet current conditions offer a greater opportunity than ever before to rethink social protection and carry forward the changes needed to make it a more effective instrument in breaking the hereditary chain of inequality.
First, the last few years have unquestionably provided favourable conditions for implementing long-term development strategies.
The region has enjoyed steady economic growth and achieved stronger macroeconomic balances.
Second, Latin America still has opportunities to tap the demographic dividend created by its falling demographic dependency ratio —the increase in the economically active population proportionally to the dependent population— which also has implications for household size (ECLAC, Third, conditions are relatively favourable for overhauling social policy.
In the last few years, the orthodox thinking of the 1980s and 1990s appears to have receded in favour of new ways of perceiving the role of the State vis-à-vis social protection, poverty and inequality (ECLAC, 2010a).
Perhaps the clearest sign of this lies in the past decade’s wave of policies implemented to strengthen the non-contributory pillar of social protection and the more universalist approach taken to extending rights and benefits in terms of health care, pensions and the coverage of basic services (ECLAC, 2010b).
Lastly, the legacy of specific policies and instruments left by the response to the 2008 crisis represents another opportunity for the region.
This chapter offers analytical routes towards tapping the favourable conditions described above and towards building a systemic perspective, looking at both factors which hinder the action of social protection systems and the ground which lies open for action to tackle the many aspects of inequality.
There follows a brief description of the extent of non-contributory social protection and its adaptation to the risk profile of the population.
Next, the combined coverage of the two pillars is examined to develop a more systemic approach, looking especially at sectors which are currently covered by neither.
The last section portrays the systemic performance of social protection in terms of the various dimensions of inequality and offers policy alternatives aimed at correcting their main cracks and omissions.
The contributory link and social protection in Latin America The association between employment and social protection has generated major challenges in Latin America, which determinedly emulated the contributory model developed in the European countries even though its starting point was much further behind.
Limited registration in social security systems and the fact that they operate only through the channel of formal employment has resulted in precisely the most numerous, female-headed and rural households having least access to social protection through the contributions mechanism.
In addition the shortfalls of social security coverage are reproduced in old age.
Pension and retirement benefits still have very limited coverage and leave women and those on low incomes with least protection.
The close link between employment and social protection arose from the consolidation of welfare States in post-war Europe.
It is based on a model in which male breadwinners in two-parent families provided economic sustenance for their family group, while women mainly cared for children and older persons and were entitled to social protection as dependants.
Thus the notion of “job-related” protection (Tokman, 2006, p. 40) or “formal-employment-related protection” (Cecchini and Martínez, 2011) was consolidated, in which workers and their families were protected against the risks associated with employment (or the lack of it), the life cycle and retirement (through retirement benefits and pensions) and disease (through health coverage).
This model has encountered a number of difficulties in the developed world.
In the 1970s, the oil price shock eroded governments’ fiscal capacities, at the same time as production and occupational structures began to change (OECD, 2007a), regional disparities grew up in the labour market, unemployment rates rose and forms of employment became more diverse, with more temporary and part-time work and self-employment (OECD, 1999 and 2010).
Lastly, women’s growing participation in the labour market —and, thus, their ability to access social protection in their own right— coincided with a time of deep transformations in family composition (OECD, 2007b), a drop in fertility rates and a significant increase in life expectancy (OECD, 2009c).
These shifts led to the formation of hard cores of vulnerability for which the classic contributory model of employment and protection was unprepared.
A mismatch gradually became apparent in many countries between the existing welfare architecture and the risks facing the population (Esping-Andersen, 1999; Esping-Andersen and others, 2002; Pierson, 2001).
In the case of Latin America, however, the difficulties have run much deeper because the region’s structural inequalities have not only doomed the model to failure but have in fact transformed it into a catalyst of inequities.
The highly heterogeneous production structure in Latin America and its translation into segmented and asymmetric labour markets, extensive informality, unemployment rates and the inequality associated with women’s incorporation into the labour market have led in quite a linear fashion to inequalities in access to social protection.
This has produced a clear dividing line between insiders and outsiders with respect to the contributory protection model, the main route of access to protection from the State.
As a result, Latin America has succeeded in setting up only a weak correlation between employment and social protection.
Accordingly, policies not only fail to even out the inequalities passed on by the production structure and the labour markets, but also create new circuits of exclusion that further entrench the original inequities.
This section examines some of the main traits of this contributory model from two angles: the protection of workers and their families (based on analysis of social security registration) and the protection of older persons (based on the coverage of retirement and pension transfers).
Although, as ECLAC has frequently noted, access to health services is a key component of the contributory model of social protection (Mesa-Lago, 2005), the forms of organization of the health sector in the region encompass a broad variety of institutions, models of financing and regulations and different combinations between public and private stakeholders and social security systems.
In some countries, social security is recognized as a universal right for all workers, making health care an equally universal right.
This has resulted in a form of service provision that is unevenly structured between the public and private sectors but nevertheless forms part of a single system combining financing from general revenues with non-contributory financing.
This category includes Costa Rica, which has an integrated system with contributory financing and a single level of coverage provided through social security (Costa Rican Social Security Fund).
The access of the working population to social security coverage through employers’ contributions, covers a percentage of the contribution of independent workers and encompasses the low-income sectors with no contributory capacity.
Chile and Colombia also have systems with a certain level of integration, although the contributory and non-contributory pillars are combined in slightly different ways in these countries.
Mexico and Uruguay, too, have made reforms recently which move in that direction.
A third type of system seen in the region has little or no articulation between public financing and social security, with quite fragmented social security systems existing alongside one another.
With such diverse models, it is difficult to identify contributory health coverage through household surveys, which are the main source for analysis used in this chapter.
Registration with social security is highest among wage-earners in the public sector (91.4%) and the private sector (67.9% and 72.2%, for professional and non-professional workers, respectively).
Just over half (53%) of formal sector employers and only 28.4% of independent professionals are enrolled in a social security scheme.
In low-productivity sectors social security registration stands at 23.6% for employers (small and medium-sized enterprises), 22.7% for domestic employees and a meagre 8% for unskilled independent workers (see figure IV.1).
While registration was falling, the proportion of employed persons with contributory protection fell more rapidly in the low-productivity sector than in the medium- and high-productivity sectors.
And when the economic cycle began to fuel a recovery in enrolment levels, registration climbed more strongly in the formal than in the informal sector.
This differentiated evolution has turned social protection into an additional wedge driving the two sectors apart (see figure IV.3).
The “dual” functioning which divides the higher- and lower-productivity sectors is not neutral and the boundary between social security insiders and outsiders shows some heavy biases.
As explained in chapter III, the data used are based on the first of these classifications, which was developed by ECLAC.
Although this is considered to be a good proxy for formality and informality, clearly the data used here miss out some important dimensions of informality. a Weighted average for the countries which have data for all the years examined.
There are some interesting examples in the region of measures aimed at increasing formalization.
Brazil, for instance, has developed policies for promoting the formalization of microenterprises (Supersimples) and of non-professional independent workers (the individual entrepreneur scheme, MEI).
Does not include Colombia before 2006, since the data for previous years do not distinguish company size.
The first obvious bias is that social security registration is associated with higher income brackets: at the latest measurement, unregistered employed workers received on average just over half of the earnings of those registered with a social security scheme (US$ 288 compared to US$ 545 per month).
The gap is slightly smaller than it was in 2002 and 2006, but still far wider than the income gap associated with social security contribution in the early 1990s, when the average income of non-registered earners was 73% of that of registered earners (see figure IV.4).
Examination of a group of countries with information available for 1990, 2000 and 2009 shows a heavy drop in social security registration in the 1990s, and access become no less stratified with the upturn in registration in the 2000s.
On the contrary, the gap between higher- and lower-income sectors seems to have widened.
In 1990 workers in the first quintile who were registered with a social security scheme represented 56% of registered fifth quintile workers.
In 2000, this ratio had worsened (42%), albeit amid a widespread decline in affiliation.
The feminization of informal employment discussed in chapter III has led to women’s social security registration in lower-income sectors being almost 10 percentage points below the figure for men.
The gap tends to narrow as income rises and practically disappears between men and women in the highest income quintile (see figures IV.6 and IV.7).
As a result, not only are the overall registration figures lower for female than for male workers —which prejudices women both during their working lives and beyond, since it reduces their chances of receiving a pension— but contributory access is also unevenly distributed between women.
Accordingly, women must contend with clearly concentrated and overlapping risks and inequalities (ECLAC, 2010b).
In the past 20 years, the gap between higher-earning women and those living in first quintile households has widened, especially in the period during which social security coverage increased among employed workers: registration in quintile I represented 43% of quintile V registration in 1990, then dropped to 36% in 2000 and just 24% in 2009.
Among men, social security enrolment in quintile I fell from 60% of quintile V male The gaps have certainly widened for both sexes, but much more alarmingly for women (see figures IV.7 and IV.8).
Lower levels of labour-market participation, higher rates of unemployment, biases in labour regulations and the lack of policies for reconciling paid and unpaid work all conspire against women’s coverage through the channel of employment-related contributions (ECLAC, 2010d).
The many labour-related gaps between women and men and among women themselves are thus extensively reproduced.
The third bias concerns the fact that, beyond providing coverage for the employed, the contributory rationale is intended to protect not only workers, but also their families through health insurance.
Here it should be recalled that, as discussed in chapter III, the workers who have most social protection are not only the most educated and better paid, but also those with fewest dependants or less numerous households.
By Female-headed households Male-headed households Households with head of household or spouse registered Households with at least one member registered Examination of the proportion of children living in households covered by contributory protection alongside figures for the economically active population shows children at a clear disadvantage.
Half (50.2%) the population aged between 15 and 59 —but only 43.4% of the population aged under 15— lives in households which have at least one member registered with social security (see figure IV.9).
This gap compounds the more limited female and youth access to formal employment with social protection, the regressive workings of contributory protection and the stratification of demographic changes, especially the drop in fertility rates (ECLAC, 2010b).
Review of the data are at the household level shows not only narrow social security coverage (only 43% of households have at least one member registered and only 32% have an registered head of household or spouse) but, here again, gender and generational gaps.
Social security coverage is significantly above average (49.5%) in male-headed households, but much lower (41.3%) in female-headed households (see figure IV.8).
Factors such as the sex of the head of household and the age of household members are certainly closely associated with contributory patterns and the possibilities of securing social protection through this channel.
It is therefore no coincidence that the workings of the contributory system worsen inequality and that the gap between lower- and higher- income sectors is larger among female-headed than among male-headed households, and in the child and adolescent population (ages 0 - 15) than among those aged between 15 and 59.
In the case of the child population, as may be expected, inequality in the region’s countries tends to increase sharply where contributory systems encompass smaller proportions of the population.
But even in countries with more consolidated systems (with the exception of Costa Rica) the gap between the lowest-income quintile and the other four is heavily stratified, with the economically worst-off more severely disadvantaged in terms of protection too (see figure IV.10).
In Uruguay, for example, children aged under 15 living in quintile I households with at least one member enrolled in a social security scheme represent only 40% of the comparable group in the highest income quintile.
In Peru the figure in this respect is larger for children in quintile V than for those in quintile I by a factor of 9, in Colombia by a factor of 26 and in Paraguay by a factor of 35 (see figure IV.10).
Data for Guatemala and Mexico refer to 2006; those for Honduras, to 2007; and those for Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, to 2008.
Protection of older persons through transfers: the contributory base and non-contributory benefits In the contributory model, social protection for older persons is a deferred benefit of employment, which provides some replacement for wages in retirement.
So, in principle, protection at this stage of life follows the same rationale as contributory protection during working life and the limitations and inadequacies of social security coverage are reproduced during old age.
The outcome of this rationale is that, on average, in 2009 just 4 of every 10 Latin American citizens aged 65 or over (40%) received some sort of pension or retirement benefit in the countries of the region (see figure IV.11).
The data show major gaps between the countries with regard to the coverage of pensions and retirement benefits.
Coverage rates are over 80% in the Southern Cone countries (and as high as 89% in Argentina), around 65% in Costa Rica and slightly under 50% in Mexico and Panama.
Lastly, in a third group with coverage rates of under 20% are Paraguay, Nicaragua, Guatemala, El Salvador, Dominican Republic and Honduras, with a figure as low as 7% in this last country (see figure IV.11).
So, with the exception of very few countries, the possibility of a retirement pension is fairly remote for most older persons in Latin America.
The possibility of being an “exclusive retiree” is remoter still (Bertranou, 2008).
Nevertheless, the percentage of the over-65 population covered by pension schemes and retirement benefits has risen considerably over the past decade.
Coverage in the countries averaged 34% in 2000 but has risen in the last two measurements in 11 of the 16 countries which have information available.
Bycontrast, coverage has fallen in Brazil, Uruguay, Peru and Paraguay, though significantly only in this last country.
These efforts have produced a non-linear shift in the disparities between working-age men and women in some countries, although they do not appear to be sufficient to entirely close the gender gap.
This gap is evident in virtually all the region’s countries (see figure IV.12).
The gap in the figures for women and men evidently results from a combination of factors, several of which have been discussed in this chapter and in chapter III.
Uneven labour-market status, the feminization of informality, shortfalls in social security registration in female-dominated sectors and women’s still-low activity rates are some of the elements limiting women’s possibilities of having social protection in old age.
In many of the region’s countries, social security legislation contains specifically discriminatory provisions.
This practice transforms one of the few advantages enjoyed by women into a disadvantage, which is worsened in countries in which women retire earlier, since a smaller cumulative amount divided by a larger number of years obviously gives a smaller pension.
And those women —a large proportion— who are devoted exclusively to care work, child-rearing and domestic work are social security system outsiders, unless they have been married to or cohabited with a man for a long period and providing that they meet a series of conditions such as having children with the contributor or retiree or not having remarried.
The remaining option for women in this situation is a welfare pension which, where it exists, is usually significantly smaller (Marco, 2004).
Another clear indication of gender disparities in access to pension and retirement benefits is the large proportion of older persons who have no income of their own: 25% in the case of women over 60 living in urban areas.
Particularly worrisome is the percentage of women with no income of their own in Colombia, El Salvador, Ecuador and Mexico, and the heavy gender disparity seen even in countries where pension and retirement benefit coverage is relatively high, such as Costa Rica, Brazil, Chile or Uruguay (see figure IV.13).
Issues of economic autonomy at this life stage impact on well-being, inasmuch as they represent a differentiated pattern of access to income which is fundamental for acquiring, in turn, food, basic consumption goods, health services, care services and housing, precisely at a time when the possibility of obtaining them through employment is waning (Mesa-Lago, 2009).
Employment is not a possible or viable option for a large proportion of older persons and particularly not for women.
As may be expected, rates of employment for the male population aged over 65 are higher where the coverage of pension and retirement benefits is lower.
However, with few exceptions, female employment rates remain relatively low in those same countries.
And where women aged over 65 do engage in paid employment, this tends to be in low-productivity sectors virtually across all the social strata, which leaves them particularly vulnerable, since their jobs do not give them access to social protection or health coverage.
As noted in the 2009 edition of Social Panorama of Latin America, a number of countries are making significant efforts to guarantee income for older persons.
The efforts are highly progressive inasmuch as they address primary income distribution, especially in those countries in which pension and retirement schemes are most developed (ECLAC, 2010b).
It comes as no surprise that older persons gain a substantially improved position in the income distribution structure of the overall population after receipt of this sort of transfers.
The exercise shows that including receipt of guaranteed income transfers only 15% of those aged 65 and over fall into the poorest income quintile, compared with 30% in the absence of such transfers.
Refers to the proportion of the population aged 60 and over receiving no individual monetary income (in the form of wages, salaries, independent workers’ labour earnings, pensions and retirement benefits, household transfers and transfers from abroad, social benefits from the government, fixed-term investments, income from property or other income).
The evidence reviewed thus far shows how labour trajectories and the structure of social protection systems produce new inequalities in access to well-being in old age.
The overlapping biases in these equalities combine with —and are sometimes deepened by— pension systems based on legal frameworks and assumptions that, far from correcting biases, entrench them further.
The first is that gender inequalities carry over from working life to old age in a relatively linear fashion.
The family-biased matrix on which welfare regimes in the region are based imposes inequalities between women and men, especially in the less developed countries (Martínez Franzoni, 2008; Bertranou, 2008).
And the demographic context of population ageing in which this is occurring means that more and more older persons —especially women— are living alone and for longer (Huenchuan, 2009).
As a result, growing demands for care in old age are posing unprecedented challenges in terms of social protection systems, access to basic services, especially health, and the design of policies for a larger older population in general (Huenchuan and Guzmán, 2007; Huenchuan, 2009; Jaccoud, 2010).
The second point has to do with what systems of pension and retirement benefits do to reduce the income inequality Before pensions and retirement benefits After pensions and retirement benefits a Simple average for the countries.
The third point refers to the efforts which countries of the region need to make in terms of social spending in order to reduce inequalities in old age, the way that spending is targeted and the rules informing the design of social protection in old age (Prado and Sojo, 2010).
The discussion presented here makes at least two contributions to the debate in these regards.
First, it illustrates from another angle the limitations of Latin America’s incomplete adaptation of the formalemployment-based protection model.
Most older persons in Latin America do not transition from covered employment to contributory pension benefits: many remain in the labour market, often in highly informal employment.
Second, it offers an insight into future problems with social protection systems in old age, insofar as these problems are linked to failings that are still accumulating throughout the life cycle.
Poverty and vulnerability in childhood, low-productivity labour trajectories and difficulties in accessing social protection during economically active years will make future older generations more vulnerable.
The failures of contributory coverage for older persons are leaving more and more ground to be made up by social spending, which is increasingly unable to do so.
And, when combined with the population ageing under way in the region, they make the social protection challenges for the countries all the more obvious and urgent.
In order to sustain generations of older persons over time, the region’s countries must lose no time in investing in the younger population whose productivity must finance and sustain the social protection provisions of the future.
The non-contributory pillar: scope and risk-coverage of welfare transfers 5 In terms of transfers alone, the non-contributory pillar of social protection covers about 12% of all households and represents 0.25% of GDP.
Despite their limited coverage, these transfers do seem to target the risks faced by the population and make a big difference for the poorest households.
They are therefore highly progressive, as demonstrated by the fact that this pillar provides coverage for a large proportion of the women-headed households and households with children and adolescents that fall into the first income quintile.
The non-contributory pillar of the social security system was originally designed to provide coverage for a residual sector of the population which, for various reasons, did not fit into the contributory model.
It was thus seen as a mechanism for providing this sector with access to health care or for making transfers to it.
However, although for very different reasons from those explored in previous sections, the development of this pillar has produced mixed results.
Other benefits that might be regarded as components of the non-contributory pillar, such as health-care benefits, are not included here either. coverage to the broad sectors of the population that have no secure income or insurance coverage fall far short of the mark (ECLAC, 2010b).
These transfers do appear to target the risks facing this segment of the population quite accurately, and they actually double the income of households in the first income decile (ECLAC, 2010b), which indicates just how great an impact they have on the region’s poorest households.
This goes to show that, despite their limited coverage, these transfers have a highly progressive distributional effect (ECLAC, 2010b).
All in all, some 41% of the people in the first income quintile live in households that receive some type of public welfare transfer, whereas the figure for the third quintile verges on 15%.
In the first income quintile, the coverage of welfare transfers for the 10-14 and 15-24 age groups amounts to about 45%.
The figure is roughly the same for the 25-34 age group, which spans a period that encompasses many of the landmark events in the transition to adulthood, such as emancipation and reproduction.
A disproportionately large number of the low-income households that receive public welfare transfers and that have no member with social security coverage are headed by women.
Nearly 4 out of every 10 households (38.4%) in the poorest quintile fall into this category, whereas, overall, 27% of the households in this quintile are headed by women (see figure IV.15).
A larger percentage of the heads of these households state that they are unemployed (19.1% versus 12% for all households in this quintile).
Welfare transfers that serve as the only form of social protection do not appear to be reaching a larger proportion of unemployed low-income heads of household than their employed counterparts, however, and, in fact, three out of every four heads of household in this category (75%) are employed (see figure IV.16).
The data for Argentina refer to Greater Buenos Aires, while the statistics for Ecuador refer to urban areas.
Cracks and gaps in social protection systems An analysis of the contributory and non-contributory portions of social protection systems in Latin America points to the existence of wide cracks in the system, and sizeable sectors of the region’s households fall through those cracks.
A large percentage of the population in the region is not covered by the traditional type of employment-based social security system and does not receive public welfare transfers either.
While this group does include some people in upper-income households, nearly half of those who belong to it are in the poorest 40% of the population.
The discussion of the contributory (including both economically active persons and older adults) and noncontributory pillars in earlier sections provides a number of clues as to how the existing inequalities in terms of social protection have arisen and what their significance is.
The prospects for the continued implementation of the employment-based contributory model are fairly bleak, since, given the wide gaps opened up by the existing contributory pattern, the target figures for the non-contributory pillars which the region is just beginning to deploy are extraordinarily high.
In addition, the data show up the many different cracks in the system of protection for older adults.
As is also the case of most of the available studies, the analysis undertaken thus far suffers from a shortcoming: it does not provide the type of information needed to gauge how the different kinds of benefits are channelled to households (which are the end recipients) nor how they may be combined or how they may overlap.
When these components are brought together and incorporated into a system of classification, they confirm the findings of a number of other studies but also yield some new results as well (see box IV.1).
In methodological terms, most of the research done so far focuses on the coverage of both the contributory pillar (retirement pensions, the percentage of workers who pay into the social security system) and non-contributory pillar (coverage of non-contributory pensions and of public welfare transfers).
These analyses have contributed a great deal to a better understanding of the scope of social protection systems in the region and of how they tie in with employment.
This approach does not, however, provide a clear picture of the end result of these two types of benefits at the household level (i.e., how these two types of benefits are combined and what the results of that combination is).
An empirical analysis of the combined scope of the two main pillars of social protection systems in the region and, above all, how they tie in with employment is needed in order to put together such a picture.
The household is used as the unit of analysis for this typology, which categorizes households according to whether or not they include at least one member has social security coverage (including unemployment coverage), whether or not they receive public welfare transfers and whether or not they receive retirement or other pensions.
This is why the category of households in which retirement or other pensions are received does not include all such households but only those that receive such pensions and that do not have social security coverage and do not receive public welfare transfers.
Caution must be used in relation to four methodological aspects of this exercise when interpreting these results.
First, although, in constructing this typology, income variables were taken into account wherever possible (see the table below), the exercise as such shows whether or not there is coverage, but does not provide information about the quality or scope of coverage.
Consequently, the fact that a household receives non-contributory benefits, for example, does not necessarily mean that it has a higher income or is better off than one that has no form of social protection at all.
In other words, income levels are not part of this exercise, which is simply being used to show what percentages of households have and do not have some form of social protection, regardless of its quality.
Third, it is important to bear in mind that the analysis of retirement and other pensions included in this exercise is confined to recipient households that do not fall into any of the other categories because the chief aim is to establish the link between social protection and employment status.
In addition, since not all household surveys distinguish between contributory and non-contributory retirement and other pensions, this distinction was not made here either.
Finally, it should be noted that this is a general analysis of the way in which social security coverage and different types of transfers are combined in different households and thus does not include other basic determinants of well-being, such as housing, health care, education and access to social services in general.
Empty boxes in the unemployment insurance column indicate that the corresponding household surveys did not cover these variables. a Only This cross-checking of different types of benefits shows, here again, that approximately 43% of all households are fairly well integrated into society and include employed persons who are covered by the contributory social security system.
Within this sector, a very small portion of households (4% as a regional average) have combined forms of coverage (i.e., they have at least one member with social security coverage and receive some type of public welfare transfer) (see figure IV.18).
This analysis also shows that the only income received by a significant proportion (8%) of households is in the form of retirement or other pensions, with these households being concentrated, unsurprisingly, in the countries with more well-developed retirement and pension systems (Costa Rica, Uruguay and Argentina).
In addition, as mentioned earlier, the only stream of income for 12% of all households in the region is in the form of non-contributory welfare transfers.
In the more developed countries, the proportion of unprotected households ranges from 9% (Costa Rica and Uruguay) to 20% (Argentina).
Rep. the proportion of households with no form of protection whatsoever is closer to the regional average, but greatly exceeds it in some cases (58% in El Salvador, 63% in Guatemala and 69% in Paraguay).
These households are being bypassed by the multicomponent public social protection systems that are being set up in the region.
As illustrated by the above figure, this pattern is repeated in all the countries to varying extents except Chile and the Dominican Republic, where households without social security coverage, welfare transfers or retirement or other pension benefits include a larger proportion of persons in upper-income categories.
The absence of social protection therefore appears to steam from a number of different factors.
One of those —which has to do with the members of households in the middle- and upper-income categories— may be that public protection systems are skimming off these top layers by using the market as a filter.
The most probable reason for this, however, is that a majority of the members of middleand upper-income sectors who lack social protection are workers in mid-level and high-productivity sectors (although some may also be employed in low-productivity sectors) who, as discussed in earlier sections, are unable to obtain social security coverage or an employment contract.
In any event, this “skimming” effect poses a challenge in terms of the mid- and long-term outlook for the establishment of universal protection systems because it undermines the social security systems’ vertical solidarity (between upper-income and lower-income segments) components as well as threatening to undercut their financing mechanisms.
The most worrisome facet of this situation, however, has to do with the households in the poorest 40% of the distribution.
These households include a larger number of women than the unprotected upper-income households do (53% in quintiles I and II versus 48% in quintiles IV and V) and a larger percentage of people between the ages of 15 and 24 (35% in quintiles I and II versus 30% in quintiles IV and V) (see figures IV.20 and IV.21).
This is true of such households in both the lower- and the higher-income quintiles, but it especially marked among the poorer ones.
In fact, 56% of the households in the poorest 40% of the distribution that are headed by women do not have any social security coverage and receive no public welfare transfers or retirement or other pension benefits (see figure IV.22).
Another important point is that nearly 80% of the heads of households in quintiles I and II that receive no benefits are employed, although these households also include a larger number of unemployed and economically inactive heads of household than their counterparts in the upper-income quintiles do.
A comparison of these households with those that receive only non-contributory benefits shows that households with no benefits have a higher proportion of employed persons (79% versus 74%), fewer economically inactive members (13% versus 19%) and more unemployed persons (see figures IV.23 and IV.24).
The above analysis provides some clues as to why, with the same level of income, some households have access to the social safety net and others do not.
An examination of the employment status of heads of households that receive no social benefits shows that informal employment (independent and low-productivity employment) and low-skilled wage employment in the formal sector are influential factors in this regard (see figure IV.25).
When compared to households in the same quintiles (I and II) that receive non-contributory forms of protection only, it can be seen that more of the households that receive no benefits at all are headed by non-professionals who work in the informal or formal private sector.
Households that receive only non-contributory benefits have a larger proportion of workers in domestic service activities and unskilled independent workers.
The data for Guatemala refer to 2006; those for Honduras, to 2007; and those for Mexico, In addition, households that receive non-contributory benefits tend to be larger than those receiving contributory benefits, while households that receive no social benefits tend to be smaller.
Calculations based on all households indicate that, on average, households that receive noncontributory benefits are made up of 5.1 persons, those that receive contributory benefits are composed of 3.9 persons and households that receive no social benefits at all consist of 3.6 persons.
This pattern is evident when all households are taken together and when the households in each income quintile are considered separately (see figure IV.26).
The data for Guatemala refer to 2006; those for Honduras, to 2007; and those for Mexico, There may be two reasons for this.
Households where no social benefits are received have more members over 60 years of age than the others do, which is unsurprising, given the large percentage of the older adult population that receives no retirement or other pension.
These households also have fewer children than those which receive non-contributory benefits, which may be one of the reasons why, in some countries, they do not have access to public welfare transfers, since the presence of children is often one of the criteria used to determine eligibility for transfer programmes.
The data discussed above suggest that there is still a large percentage of people in Latin America who have been sidelined from the traditional employment-based model of social protection but who do not receive public welfare transfers either.
And while it is true that this group includes some members of higher-income households, just under half of this group is in the poorest 40% of the population.
This last group, which seems to have been stranded somewhere in between the two main components of the social protection system, includes a larger percentage of economically active persons and older adults than households that receive non-contributory benefits do.
In addition, although some 10% of these households are headed by economically inactive persons, a considerable portion of the heads of household in this group (more than in the case of households receiving public welfare transfers only) are employed.
Although most of them are in low-productivity jobs, they are in a less vulnerable position than those of their counterparts who receive public welfare transfers.
Although more research is needed, it can reasonably be posited that, at least in some of the countries in which social protection systems are more fully developed, there is a segment of the population that is positioned between the sectors that have contributory coverage and non-contributory coverage.
The people in this segment do not pay contributions and do not have access to social security coverage, but they are employed (primarily in the informal sector), have some income and do not meet the eligibility requirements for public welfare transfer programmes.
In the less developed countries, on the other hand, this segment may more closely correspond to marginalized sectors whose incomes are even lower than those of the households covered by the non-contributory pillar and who are systematically bypassed by welfare transfer policies.
Social protection systems and their success in dealing with inequalities This evaluation of the performance of Latin America’s social protection systems shows up clear failings and shortcomings, although the implications of these problems differ from one country to the next in this extremely heterogeneous region.
These fairly frail systems, which have limited fiscal capacity and relatively rigid —if any— welfare architectures, are facing tremendous redistributive challenges.
A systemic approach to these challenges should draw both on the contributory pillar and on more or less targeted rights-based policies in order to progress towards truly universal, solidarity-based protection systems.
This analysis has looked at how eligibility for contributory pension schemes is stratified in ways that generate a chain reaction of inequality.
This chain starts with the countries’ structural heterogeneity, leads on to the labour market and continues on from there to the social protection system.
This sequence can be mapped to provide a clear picture of who is included and who is excluded from the employment-based model of social protection.
This chapter has also traced the ways in which gaps in employment and the relationship they bear to payments into social protection systems carry over from the stage during which people are economically active into retirement.
This situation is clearly reflected in inequalities of access to retirement and other pensions between different sectors of the population and between men and women.
And this occurs despite the fact that a number of countries in the region have developed non-contributory or solidarity-based mechanisms for the specific purpose of making up for the shortfall in social protection generated by the absence or insufficiency of the contributions paid by people during their working lives.
Finally, the data presented here also provide some idea of the scope of the growing but still limited noncontributory pillar of public welfare transfers.
These transfers are being fairly accurately tailored to address the risks faced by the population and are thus reaching households headed by women and those that include larger numbers of children and adolescents.
And this picture indicates that Latin America’s social protection systems have a number of serious weaknesses.
First of all, the systems are riddled with deep cracks, and sizeable sectors of the population fall through those cracks.
Second, they fall short of what is needed in ways that differ from country to country in this highly heterogeneous region.
In the less developed countries of the region, the system provides coverage only for a relatively small percentage of the population.
In the more developed ones, the combined coverage is greater, but there are still sectors that are not being reached by any of the components discussed here (see diagram IV.1).
The first conclusion that can be drawn is that the task of reducing inequality cannot be shouldered by the social protection system alone.
If action is focused only on the third link in the chain of the generation and reproduction of inequality (structural heterogeneity, labour market, social protection), the results may be very disappointing or, at the least, the process may soon reach a point where no further progress can be made.
The second conclusion is that the manoeuvring room in this area is limited by the relative rigidity of the existing social protection systems.
This rigidity, which, in its turn, is clearly linked to the countries’ restricted fiscal capacity and ability to raise social spending levels, is also influenced by the difficulty of altering distributional options that were established in the past to deal with risks and combinations of risks that differed from those that most of the countries are facing today.
Different courses of policy action relating to social protection can be used to work towards these objectives: First, in a number of countries, reforms or new mechanisms need to be brought in to reinforce the contributory pillar.
This includes unemployment insurance, which is an essential support for workers’ income levels.
This kind of scheme is still underdeveloped in the region and its coverage needs to be expanded.
There are at least two main lines of action for the establishment of an agenda for change that need to be widely debated.
The first calls for an assessment of public, solidaritybased alternatives to individually funded systems.
The second focuses on the need to achieve greater equality between men and women.
The provisions regarding women who perform unpaid work also have to be reviewed and modified in order to promote the cultural changes that need to be made in regard to their role in society.
The review of the factors discussed in this chapter also demonstrates the need to step up direct cash transfers to the poorest sectors of society and to focus them even more on the promotion of employment.
These mechanisms, which operate through monetary transfers and other benefits, make it possible to guarantee a minimum income Chile’s latest pension system reform provides an informative example in this connection. for people living in poverty and to halt the decline in the incomes and buying power of those who find themselves in vulnerable positions.
ECLAC estimates attest to how great an influence these mechanisms could have on poverty levels.
There are also other components of the noncontributory pillar that need to be strengthened in order to guarantee access to a basic minimum standard of well-being.
The diagnostic analysis undertaken here points up at least two areas in which the region has to make a greater effort.
One has to do with subsidies for the payment of contributions to insurance schemes (mainly social security and health-care plans) in order to bring the people who cannot afford those payments into the system.
This line of action focuses on addressing the situations of vulnerability in which informal-sector workers, low-income young people and women (and, within that group, especially young women with small children) find themselves.
The other deals with the conditions needed to ensure effective access to basic services.
Discounted fees for certain types of priority social services and for mass transit (ECLAC, 2010b) should definitely be part of the social protection package and should be coordinated with income transfer programmes for the most vulnerable sectors of the population.
Finally, the data also show that older adults in the region are in a very precarious position.
This is more true in the less developed countries, but even in the more developed ones where social protection systems for older adults have broader coverage, there are still pockets of inequality – areas or sectors in which many people have no access to social protection benefits at all.
To rectify this situation, income transfers to persons aged 65 and over who have need of them seem to be part of the solution, and the idea of working towards a universal transfer system for persons in this age group should definitely remain on the table.
The modification of these mechanisms should be informed by a rights-based approach and should reflect the policy lines examined earlier, with the ultimate objective being the establishment of universal social safety nets.
To accomplish this, it will be necessary to draw upon both the contributory pillar and fairly well-targeted policies designed to make the transition to genuinely universal, solidarity-based social protection systems.
The data presented here indicate that, far from being ruled out, the universalization of basic levels of social protection should be the cornerstone for the effort to strengthen and reform Latin America’s welfare architectures.
Reaching a goal of this nature will inevitably require the State to take up a central role once again as a guarantor, regulator and —in some cases, perhaps— lender.
It will also require the formation of sturdy redistributive coalitions, which is not something that Latin American policy has generally promoted.
This is why, as indicated by the analysis of the situation presented here, policymakers need to take up the proposals set forth in Time for equality: closing gaps, opening trails (ECLAC, 2010a) and reaffirm, yet again, the crucial role of policy in improving the effectiveness of the region’s social protection systems in combating inequality.
Chapter V Trends in social spending during the crisis and challenges in financing social security expenditure A.
Introduction After a period of structural adjustment that occurred in virtually all the region’s economies and resulted in sharp public spending cuts —especially in social spending— countries in the region have done much over the past two decades to make more resources available to fund social policy.
Nearly all items of social public spending have shown increases not only in relative terms but in absolute terms as well, albeit with some exceptions for certain countries and periods.
Much of this effort has been closely linked to economic growth, which facilitated the gradual but fairly systematic expansion of resources.
Increases in total budgets, and social budgets in particular, have been outpacing GDP growth —particularly during the 1990s— but at the same time, minor contractions of GDP have sparked deeperthan-expected budget cuts.
While the procyclical behaviour of budgetary spending is in general consistent with the principles of fiscal responsibility and with international recommendations, in some areas of expenditure, such as education, health and social welfare, budgetary cutbacks, primarily on the current expenditure side, can entail high economic and social costs.
Although occasional cutbacks in capital spending in a given sector may not have major repercussions on national economies, a medium and long-term adjustment is bound to result in the deterioration of the infrastructure and material inputs that are often needed to produce social services.
In a largely unprecedented effort to counter the procyclical tendency of spending at times when it would normally fall, most countries of the region have taken measures (for the most part temporary) to boost public spending in order to tackle the hardships caused by the global financial crisis and its repercussions.
To a large extent, these measures were intended to alleviate the impact of the crisis on the real economy, to sustain activity in local and regional economies, and to curb the rise in unemployment and, of course, in poverty.
The following pages review the long-term trends as well as recent changes in the growth of social public spending, once the potential impact of the international economic crisis became clear.
Lastly, this chapter reviews and projects the social security situation and the short and long-term financial possibilities of introducing a rights-based minimum old-age pension.
Social spending in Latin America For the region as a whole, public expenditure, and especially social spending, has increased sharply over the last two decades.
The largest increase has been in social security and welfare (up by the equivalent of 3.5% of GDP), followed by education.
Yet in countries where per capita social spending is less than US$ 1,000, education is the largest expenditure item.
It is only in the relatively more developed countries that spending on social security and welfare accounts for more.
These trends did not change with the onset of the international financial crisis, but the traditionally procyclical behaviour of social spending was altered.
Generally speaking, countries reacted to the crisis by temporarily expanding public expenditure instead of shrinking it as in the past.
Yet that expansion did not always have a social focus, although the social repercussions were considerable.
With this fresh effort to increase public spending, both the absolute amounts allocated to social spending and their weight in GDP reached a two-decade high as the first decade of the new century came to a close (see figure V.1).
At the same time, although total public spending remained relatively stable during the period 1990-2009, it rose significantly in absolute terms: even with the absolute decline recorded in 2002 (down by 3.7% in that one year, region-wide), public spending nearly doubled between 1990 and 2009, and currently stands at around US$ 900 billion in the region.
Nevertheless, social public spending has grown steadily across the region, with some slowing associated with various subregional upheavals such as the tequila crisis of 1994-1995 or those of Argentina and Uruguay in 2002-2003 (see figure V.2).
Given the relative stability of total public spending, social expenditure has been gaining ground fairly systematically: whereas in 1990-1991 it corresponded to 45% of total spending, at the beginning of the third millennium it already represented 58%, and jumped to 63% in 2006-2007.
The slight decline in its share in the most recent biennium considered (2008-2009) chiefly reflected the relatively steeper increase in non-social spending, mainly in 2008.
Yet the situation varies considerably from one country to the next, both in terms of the increase in social expenditure and also in the relative and absolute amounts of that increase.
In 2008-2009, the macroeconomic priority attached to social spending varied significantly with Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Guatemala, Panama, Paraguay and Peru spending less than 10% of GDP, while Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Cuba and Uruguay spent twice as much (see the institutional coverage of social public spending in box V.1).
This gap exists even though nearly all countries have made efforts to increase the macroeconomic priority of social spending since the 1990s.
Differences between countries relate, however, not only to the share of social spending in GDP but also to each country’s level of wealth.
Countries’ varying levels of development and tax burdens —and hence their very different general public budgets and, specifically, social budgets— lead to wide disparities in per capita allocations for social fields such as education, health, social security and welfare.
On average, the countries with the highest social spending manage to allocate up to eight times as much as those with the tightest budgets (see figure V.3).
Overall, the great majority of countries have systematically increased per capita social spending, and all recorded an increase in the period 2008-2009, which was dominated by the fallout from the international financial crisis.
Information up to 2010 was obtained for 10 of the 21 countries considered, and these figures have been published because it is important to have recent data, even if they are provisional, estimated or incomplete.
The figures were updated during the third quarter of 2011; the cut-off point was mid-September.
In most cases it was possible to collect data on central government budget execution, and in a number of countries figures were obtained for actual spending by agencies with budgetary autonomy, local governments and non-financial public enterprises.
Although differences in institutional coverage make comparisons between countries difficult, the most extensive data available for each country are being published except when they involve significant constraints for constructing a series for 1990-2010.
The following is a classification of the countries by institutional coverage of the social expenditure series used: Total public sector (NFPS + FPS): Costa Rica.
General State budget (public sector minus social security, PFE, NFPE and autonomous and decentralized governments: Ecuador (the 2008 Constitution establishes the general State budget as the instrument for determining and managing State revenues and expenditures), Trinidad and Tobago, and Uruguay.
Budgetary public sector: Mexico, where: AA: agencies with budgetary autonomy; BCG: budgetary central government; CG: central government; LG: local government; NFPE: non-financial public enterprises; PFE: public financial enterprises.
Considering that a number of countries only very recently adopted the classification system of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001, which is harmonized with the 1993 System of National Accounts (SNA), the 1990-2010 series is not always compatible at the subfunctions or subgroups level, or both.
The series for Ecuador refers to central government until 2007 and to the general State budget from 2008, and does not include figures on social security (social protection function); this is also the case with the series for Nicaragua.
For Colombia, a methodological change and a switch in the basis for calculating GDP mean that the series is not comparable between the 1990-1999 series covers budgetary central government, the series for 2000 onward is for general government.
Lastly, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has series for agreed public spending (budget act and amendments as of 31 December each year) and for disbursed public spending, the latter beginning in 1999.
Because it is a federal country, the published figures may underestimate total social spending by more than those of other countries reporting this coverage.
The indicators published are for total public social spending and its component functions and sectors (education, health, social security and assistance, and housing, sanitation and other functions not included in the above categories) as a percentage of GDP, in dollars per capita, and as a percentage of total public spending.
In the case of this last indicator, official information from the countries is used, but these figures may differ from those based on other systems (such as economic or administrative classification of spending) because some include interest payments on the public debt and others do not, and because different methodologies are used to classify disbursements.
Henceforth, all social spending calculations in constant dollars will be expressed at 2005 prices.
The figures used to calculate percentages are in current prices for each year and each country.
This may result in certain variations in relation to the data in constant currency reported by the countries, which depend on the degree of exchange-rate appreciation or depreciation implicit in the official parity of each country’s currency in relation to 2005, and also on the population data on which the per capita calculations are based.
Figures at current prices on overall and social public spending (and the sectoral breakdown of the latter) are official data provided by the corresponding government bodies.
Depending on the country, these may be directorates, departments, sections or units for planning, budgeting or social policy within the ministries of the treasury, finance or the economy.
The figures for constant 2005 dollar GDP are official ECLAC statistics; the population figures come from projections by the Latin American and Caribbean Demographic Centre (CELADE)-Population Division of ECLAC.
Even so, this growth has been uneven: social security and social welfare are the categories that have grown the most (by 3.5 percentage points of GDP), accounting for more than half of the overall rise in social public spending.
This is due, in part, to the boom in antipoverty policies, and especially in conditional transfer programmes.
But an ageing population and government commitments to finance and pay retirement allowances and pensions, as well as the improvement in social security systems in various countries of the region, including a strengthening of their non-contributory components, have fostered greater growth in this sector than in others (see figure V.4).
The second-highest spending increase was recorded in education, consistent with the various international commitments that countries of the region have signed on to.
The share of education spending in GDP climbed by just over 50%.
But this significant increase in resources has not been immune to volatility since the education sector, together with the health sector, usually bears the brunt of fiscal adjustments, especially in the form of capital expenditure cuts and current expenditure freezes, the latter chiefly through the public-sector wage bill.
Among the sectors that can be identified across all countries considered, the public health budget has shown little growth in the past two decades.
But it also reflects the fact that health spending is highly procyclical and has a significant capital expenditure component that is heavily penalized during economic downswings or periods of flat growth (ECLAC, 2008).
Yet the importance of sectors varies among countries, as does the trend in spending in each of these items.
For example, a grouping of countries by levels of their present per capita social spending reveals significant differences (see figure V.5).
Housing and other The first group, comprising Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Plurinational State of Bolivia, where current spending is below US$ 300 per capita (see figure V.5.A), focus the bulk of their social spending on education, which has also seen the greatest growth in absolute terms (from US$ 34 to US$ 96 per capita over the period).
The remaining expenditure items show more modest per capita levels, although there has been a relatively greater increase in social security and welfare (up 8% per year throughout the period, to a level of US$ 42 per capita).
These last expenditure items have been approaching the level of health spending, which at the beginning of the 1990s was relatively more important (see figure V.5.B).
In all these countries, the health sector has recorded the least growth (2.9% a year).
Despite this, its rate of growth has been notably lower than that in the other groups of countries (3.6% per year), and less than growth in the health sector (4.6% per year), which however received less than half its funding per capita (US$ 322 in comparison with US$ 629 for social security and welfare).
The procyclical nature of social spending relative to economic growth Although the region’s countries have steadily increased their government budgets, particularly where social spending is concerned, in most cases these have fluctuated for reasons generally determined by local economic developments.
Although budgeting tied to the economic cycle generally reflects responsible fiscal management, it can sometimes impair economic and social development processes that depend on a stable flow of resources.
This is because many of the processes involved in the production of public services entail a large proportion of recurrent expenditure deriving from legal or contractual commitments, such as wages and retirement and other pensions.
Budgetary fluctuations can sometimes affect pay levels and continuity for the personnel required to maintain public services.
In other cases the non-discretionary nature of some public spending results in drastic cuts to investment (for example, in building, maintaining, renovating and equipping public facilities such as schools and hospitals).
Prudential fiscal management is a key element in long-term economic development, but the over-adjustments which commonly occur in public and social expenditure during economic downswings dampen those very processes that prudent fiscal management seeks to safeguard.
As a rule, cuts in social public spending outnumber episodes of falling growth in the region: between 1991 and 2009, there were 48 instances of absolute reductions in social public spending in the various countries and in 88% of these cases (42), the cut exceeded the decline in GDP, with some occurring even during periods when GDP continued to expand.
Change in social public spending and GDP Change in GDP Notwithstanding this, social spending is less sensitive to the economic cycle than the overall budget, as figure V.6 shows.
For all its procyclicality, then, social spending has been better protected against economic fluctuations than non-social budget items.
Inertial social spending may be insensitive to economic downturns, but it will not be sensitive to economic expansion either, and wholly countercyclical social spending is not desirable because it would fall just when the economy was growing.
Of course, it is to be expected that some specific spending items will indeed be countercyclical, like those which finance emergency programmes at times of crisis and rising poverty and tail off in periods of economic growth.
Others may prove more stable because they involve regular payment commitments, as is the case with social security.
Still others can be expected to expand along with the economy to a reasonable degree that does not trigger macroeconomic imbalances or a tendency towards deficit spending.
Clearly, social public spending should be asymmetrical in terms of its countercyclical nature: it should be more procyclical at times of prosperity, with expenditure increasing so as to generalize the exercise of social rights (with due regard to the long-term sustainability of its financing), and much more countercyclical at times of economic downturn.
Social spending in the region during the financial crisis The region’s countries adopted a broad range of measures in the face of the financial crisis of 2008-2009.
Unlike action taken on similar occasions (such as the crises of the 1980s and 1990s), these measures set out not to shrink spending but to expand it, at least temporarily (see figure V.6).
Measures of this kind encompassed monetary and financial policy, fiscal policy, exchange-rate and foreign trade policy, sectoral policies, employment and social policies and multilateral financing (ECLAC, 2010a).
The various economic policy measures taken can be divided, broadly, into those designed to restore confidence and get financial markets operating again, and those intended to boost flagging aggregate demand and create employment.
Initially, central banks took a series of steps of various kinds to guarantee adequate liquidity in local financial markets.
The generalized fall in the inflation rate, reflecting lower food and energy prices, allowed for more flexible monetary policy, both in countries that observe explicit inflation targets and in those that follow some monetary aggregate or other operational criterion.
The cuts in benchmark interest rates were accompanied by the easing of liquidity requirements and stepped-up monetary expansion, especially in domestic credit, at a time when reserve assets were falling, a situation that reversed itself over the course of 2009.
However, the low degree of monetization and the thinness of the region’s financial markets, as well as the uncertainty that characterized financial activity from the end of 2008 and through much of 2009, limited the impact of these measures on activity levels.
In some cases, governments attempted to offset the weak supply of financing by having the public banking system play an active role.
The effectiveness of that instrument depends on the volume of credit in the economy and on the public banking system’s share of total credit, meaning that its usefulness is confined to a small number of countries.
More generally, and particularly from the first quarter of 2009, countries announced and gradually implemented a strategy based on increasing the fiscal stimulus in their economies.
Brazil, Ecuador and Honduras boosted their spending by over 7% (see table V.1).
The rise in fiscal spending occurred mainly in social sectors, however, except in Brazil, El Salvador, Mexico and Paraguay, where non-social spending rose faster.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Cuba and Uruguay, the spending cuts fell mainly upon non-social items, which favoured a sharp expansion in social spending.
The most commonly used fiscal measures included cutting taxes, increasing tax benefits and subsidies and raising or bringing forward expenditure.
In the social and production sectors, considerable extra resources were put into housing, water and sanitation, support for small and medium-sized enterprises and the agricultural sector (easier credit and repayment terms), enhanced employment policies (unemployment insurance, recruitment subsidies, job creation programmes) and social programmes, especially conditional cash transfer programmes.
Nevertheless, it must be recalled that the expansion in non-social public spending had a social impact, primarily through employment generation and wage increases, which are not counted as social spending.
Of the four countries that cut spending in 2010, Chile and Colombia did so by reducing social expenditure but expanding non-social outlays.
In contrast, Honduras did the opposite: it expanded social spending slightly and cut non-social spending more severely.
Cuba shrank both forms of expenditure, although social spending was cut to a lesser extent.
Social security in the region and prospects for establishing a universal floor for pension and retirement benefits The labour market has not shown sufficient capacity to collect resources through social contributions in the amount needed to introduce non-contributory components in social protection systems.
These problems were intensified by the reforms that fragmented social security systems and privatized management of their funds in many countries.
Otherwise, over the longer term, there will be mounting difficulties in financing universal social protection in societies that are ageing and where the workforce is becoming proportionately smaller.
One of the ongoing challenges for countries of the region is to generate positive synergies between economic growth and social equity.
This challenge arises in the context of modernization of the productive apparatus, which is aimed at enhancing human capacities, productive employment and citizen participation.
Within this framework, social policy has a fundamental role to play, but social protection systems must shift their focus in light of the new global order and its impact on national societies.
In this regard, it must be recognized that the labour market has not been able to promote inclusiveness either by creating decent job opportunities or by increasing social security contributions.
The region’s labour markets have not succeeded in transforming themselves into a universal and dynamic gateway to social protection systems (ECLAC, 2006).
Consequently, social protection can no longer be restricted to contributory mechanisms mediated by the labour market.
In addition to seeking ways to improve the capacity of domestic economies to generate decent jobs and extend the tax base, countries will have to guarantee adequate and stable financing to supplement employment-based protection with non-contributory protection mechanisms.
The great challenge, then, is to rethink the redistributive dimension of social protection in a more integrated way —i.e., both within and beyond the world of work— in order to develop systems that combine contributory and non-contributory mechanisms.
Hence the importance of promoting non-contributory social protection mechanisms, which today are generally limited by fiscal constraints, meaning that in practice broad sectors of the population are excluded from formal protection systems.
Nevertheless, it must be recognized that the resources derived from contributory mechanisms are important for financing social protection, and in particular social security benefits.
This calls for consideration of the possibilities and the constraints of those mechanisms for incorporating redistributive components into social protection for the elderly, with particular attention to the recent ECLAC proposal of a minimum universal pension (ECLAC, 2010d).
Naturally, this margin of funding that could be devoted to non-contributory financing of social security will depend to a large extent on the current schemes for financing security systems and any needed reforms to them.
As well, part of the additional resources that could be collected through a stronger labour market can be earmarked to other non-contributory components of social protection, for example by devoting a portion of contributions to childhood in the name of intergenerational solidarity.
The following pages examine the current and potential capacities for contributory financing of social security.
This is compared with the total volume of retirement and pension transfers and the challenges of financing a basic universal old-age pension.
The section examines countries’ possibilities to finance a universal Social security systems in the region During the 1990s and the first decade of this century, countries of the region instituted structural and parametric reforms in pensions and health systems.
The structural reforms have closed public systems (or social insurance systems) or have transformed them in fundamental ways, making them either wholly or to a large extent private.
The parametric (non-structural) reforms have tended to strengthen public systems over the long term, regulating them, boosting contributions, improving efficiency, controlling costs and, in the case of pensions, raising the retirement age, restricting the calculation formula, or doing both.
Those reforms have been tailored according to at least three models: (i) the substitution model, found in Chile (which pioneered it in 1981), Dominican Republic (not social protection system for the elderly that combines contributory and non-contributory components through the labour market.
The remaining 10 Latin American countries still have entirely public systems, and several (most recently Brazil and Cuba) have introduced parametric reforms.
The first decade of the 21st century, however, has witnessed a slight increase in the weight of the formal sector of the economy and in social security enrolment (ECLAC, 2008).
On the other hand, a relatively significant proportion of persons over the normal retirement age (65 years) are still working and paying social contributions: around 15% of older workers (or some 1.5 million people) are still enrolled in and contributing to social security.
As would be expected, there is a high correlation between levels of social security enrolment and coverage among older persons, as can be appreciated from figure V.9.
Yet as noted earlier, some older persons continue to work and to be enrolled in social security, reflecting the inadequate benefits to which they would be entitled (in Percentage of older persons with benefits b Percentage of workers enrolled a Data for Argentina refer to urban areas only. b Pearson’s correlation coefficient squared.
Current social contribution levels (regardless of system) and total funding earmarked for pensions and retirement benefits for non-contributory social protection will require a restructuring of government spending or an increase in the tax burden.
One way to achieve that increase is to strengthen and formalize the labour market, which would yield greater proceeds from social contributions and from direct and indirect taxes.
In many countries, this would mean a significant overhaul of social security systems, which today are to a large extent privatized and which, although they allow the introduction of redistributive components for the most vulnerable population, make it very difficult to earmark funds for other non-contributory social protection programmes.
These new outlooks, then, seek to combine the fight against poverty with the fight against inequality and the promotion of social cohesion.
They strive to achieve this through an array of social programmes designed to articulate the achievements of traditional social security with the provision of social services, and the range of welfare programmes.
In this sense, the “solidarity” (redistributive or non-contributory) pillar has now gained recognition in debates and on the public agenda is a key feature of social protection systems.
Resources collected through public contributory systems fall far short of public spending on social security.
When spending associated with other social welfare programmes is added in, public financing through social contributions is clearly in deficit, which means drawing upon general government revenues (see figure V.10).
The few exceptions to this rule occur precisely in countries where a lower proportion of older persons are receiving pensions and retirement benefits.
Moreover, an examination of government revenue and expenditure as a whole shows that most countries of the region are facing great funding constraints and, indeed, fiscal deficits in implementing their overall budgets, and this reduces still further the prospect for boosting social welfare financing through non-contributory mechanisms (ECLAC, 2011).
Given these constraints, any significant increase in the volume of funding earmarked Percentage of GDP Revenues from social contributions Social security and welfare spending basis of official figures from the countries. a Institutional coverage of public revenues from social contributions is: general government for Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba and Ecuador.
Social security accounts for around 80%-85% of total public spending on security and welfare.
Potential revenues from social contributions In most countries public, mixed and private systems coexist.
Generally speaking, the funds collected are managed by one or more autonomous public agencies or by private organizations: these bodies provide the various benefits defined by law (although the law does not necessarily stipulate the amount of the benefit), they invest the assets in fixed or variable income instruments, and they are paid a management fee.
Depending on the country, the worker will be responsible for paying the contributions, and this responsibility may be shared by the employer and, to a lesser extent, the state.
These contributions are earmarked for one or several funds or agencies, depending on the country, that provide different types of specific benefits.
A portion of the contribution may be earmarked for “solidarity” purposes, particularly in countries where the State also contributes.
For analytical purposes, the estimate was based on the parameters and makeup of the contribution applied in each country, and did not include contributions for health coverage (see box V.2).
This estimate of contributory capacity refers only to potential and not actual revenue flows, recognizing the variability of unemployment and the contribution gaps this may generate, as well as the fact that firms and workers will not always make their mandatory and voluntary contributions.
Consequently, the calculation of available contributory resources does not claim to be accurate, but rather to establish orders of magnitude that can serve as a benchmark for comparisons between countries and across time.
As a rule, household surveys record workers’ net remuneration; for this reason, an estimate was made of gross remuneration for employed persons who declared that Yb = where Yb is taxable remuneration, Yn is net remuneration reported in each household survey, and F is the factor corresponding to the percentage withholdings for the worker (column 1 of the table).
F consists they were enrolled in social security and health systems, using the following formula: Yn of the Social Security withholding (column 2) and the health withholding (column 1 minus column 2).
IPCref is the value of the consumer price index for the survey reference period, IPC2005 is the average CPI for the year 2005 and TC2005 is the average exchange rate for the year 2005 (series rf).
The sum of all potentially collectible resources was expressed in 2005 dollars in order to state it as a percentage of GDP in that currency.
It must be noted that the estimated collectible resources are only potential, as the surveys provide no information on the continuity of workers’ payments over the year, episodes of unemployment, and the effective contribution to social security systems.
Moreover, allowance must be made for the practice, common with household surveys, of underreporting income, particularly the earnings of independent workers, who as voluntary affiliates are more likely not to make their contributions.
On the other hand, where there are various social security subsystems or laws that differentiate among types of workers or levels of remuneration, the parameters of the general regimes or the contribution percentages of the largest group of affiliated workers were used.
In making the projections, the percentage of affiliated workers was kept constant, as were the employment rates (with the only variant being the number of workers).
Social security payments were projected while keeping constant the percentage of persons over 65 with retirement or pension coverage (with the only variant being the number of older persons).
Taxable remuneration, contributions and pension payments were projected using a real growth rate equivalent to one half the projected GDP growth rate.
The projections, then, do not claim to portray precisely the available resources in countries’ social security systems.
According to the projections conducted, in 2012 no country should encounter a shortfall between the total of funds potentially collectible for social security and the outlays needed to cover all retirees and pensioners.
Countries would in fact run a surplus, projected at an average of 1.6% of GDP (see figure V.11).
Contributions intended to finance health benefits, in whole or in part, are excluded from the total.
Whether or not all or a portion of the additional funds will be available depends to a large extent on the design of the social security systems which, as discussed earlier, are fragmented and at least partially privatized in nearly all countries.
Of course, attention will have to be paid to securing an adequate return on funds in order to ensure their long-term sustainability, given the ageing population profile and the imminent disappearance of the demographic bonus in many countries of the region.
According to long-term projections, and assuming no increase in labour market participation rates, in enrolment rates, or in the percentage cover of old-age security, the demographic impact of the change in the size of the workforce and the number of older persons would still leave a surplus of contributory funds in most countries, at least until 2030.
With the exception of Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador and Mexico, the long-term projections indicate that the annual balance of funds earmarked for social security is positive, although it tends to decline (see table V.2).
It is the countries that have relatively younger populations but at the same time higher rates of poverty and lower levels of relative development that will gradually come to enjoy a greater margin of available resources, even without considering the cumulative return to those funds over the period analysed.
Establishing a universal minimum old-age pension Social protection cannot rely exclusively on contributory systems linked to the labour market, and this calls for a rethinking of redistribution mechanisms (ECLAC, 2006).
Social security systems have provided only very limited coverage for the rural population.
Yet an even greater constraint has been that imposed by the extensive informality in the region’s economies.
In the wake of the social security reforms, many governments have been attempting to offset the negative distributive effects of the reform through new public programmes.
In particular they have begun to consider the most reasonable ways to ensure coverage for those who cannot build up the level of contributions required by legislation.
This implies significant strengthening of the non-contributory component and generates fiscal pressures.
Following attempts to combine stratified pay-as-you-go contributory systems and privately administered individual capitalization models, public debate and policies are now embracing the option of non-contributory uniform pensions, whether universal or targeted (ECLAC, 2006; Filgueira and others, 2006; Tanzi, 2008).
These systems or instruments are intended to guarantee a basic level of income that is fiscally sustainable and fairer from an intergenerational viewpoint.
In Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay (at the provincial and national levels) as well as in Mexico (Federal District and some states) it has been found that a basic guarantee for older persons can be both fiscally prudent and socially desirable if subsidies to the better-off retirees and pensioners (generally men) are limited.
In a recent document prepared for its thirty-third session, entitled Time for equality: closing gaps, opening trails, ECLAC proposes a universal pension for older persons, regardless of their income levels and the other social services to which they may be entitled.
It also estimates the cost of a targeted pension for older persons in households with per capita incomes that leave them vulnerable (incomes equal to 1.8 times the poverty line or less in each country).
The annual transfer cost for a minimum universal pension equal to the value of the basic-needs basket in each country (the national poverty line) varies between 0.84% and 2.62% of GDP in 2012 (see table V.3).
Inter-country differences are due primarily to the interaction between the age profile, the individual cost of the transfer, and the country’s relative level of development.
For this reason, the countries that would have to devote the most resources as a percentage of GDP are the poorest countries of the region (Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Plurinational State of Bolivia), together with the country with the oldest population (Uruguay).
Cost of universal minimum pension Percentage of persons Percentage of older persons around 2009 Percentage of Poverty Cost of targeted minimum pension Payment of universal pension Vulnerability b Percentage of persons Balance between social contributions minus retirement allowances and current pensions and...
The targeted pension is for older persons living in households with per capita incomes of 1.8 poverty lines or less. b Includes older persons living in poverty.
Naturally, targeting the transfer at vulnerable older persons entails a much lower cost per year, although the difference within each country between the cost of a universal pension and the cost of a targeted pension will depend to a great extent on the incidence of poverty and vulnerability in the total population, and particularly among older persons.
Indeed, it is the relatively less developed countries that have the greatest levels of income vulnerability among their older population: El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Plurinational State of Bolivia.
An analysis of the annual resources available from social security as a source of financing the universal or targeted pension in 2012 (last two columns of box V.3) shows that, for the universal pension, Chile, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Peru, Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay would need additional funds from other sources.
The model allocates an amount equivalent to one poverty line to each eligible older person (under the universal and targeted transfer scenarios) and computes the new household income.
In this way, besides estimating the aggregate transfer, poverty and inequality indicators can be re-estimated and the impact of the transfer on those indicators can be simulated.
The mathematical procedure used is fairly simple: Cost % GDP  where q represents the eligible population, pi represents each person eligible, and B represents the benefits stipulated for that population.
The figure resulting from this simulation is multiplied by 12 (annualized monthly benefit) and expressed in dollars at the exchange rate ER.
This amount is divided by GDP and multiplied by 100 to express the fiscal cost of benefits as a percentage of GDP.
In this chapter, these costs have been projected to 2030 taking into account the absolute increase in the older population and, for the vulnerable older population, a reduction in the percentage of persons in that situation based on the vulnerabilitygrowth elasticity observed in the period 2002-2009, using household surveys and growth projections to 2030.
It is important to note that some countries could fall into deficit in the payment of contributory retirement benefits and pensions (see tables V.2 and V.4).
Meanwhile, in Panama, Peru and Uruguay the funds available for paying pensions would gradually decline to around 3% of projected GDP in 2030.
One possible way of addressing the progressive deficit that could arise in the countries indicated is to strengthen labour markets by encouraging affiliation by both dependent and independent workers in high productivity sectors.
In the remaining countries (Colombia, Dominican Republic and El Salvador) the deficit would be virtually eliminated with such measures, at least until 2030.
One way of securing long-term financing —particularly in countries that would face a social security funding deficit within the period under review, even if affiliation and the systems were strengthened— is to undertake some kind of parametric reform, specifically in the level of contributions (percentage of gross remuneration contributed).
If these countries were to increase the contribution rate to 12%, they would eliminate the deficit, or at least postpone it by several years, as can be seen in figure V.12 (red line).
In countries where the amount of withholding is closer to this benchmark (Chile and Ecuador), the effect of this change would be to cover the projected deficit for a few more years, although other, additional financing mechanisms would have to be used prior to 2030 for contributory and non-contributory social security payments.
In sum, the evidence indicates that several countries could begin to run deficits associated with retirement and pension benefits, particularly if they introduce a minimum pension, even if its coverage were extended only gradually.
Within the period under review, most countries would have no great problem in financing both compulsory social security and the minimum pension, and even other social welfare programmes, but over a longer time horizon they can be expected to encounter difficulties with financing from labour market-sourced contributions.
In the long run, social security systems will need to be restructured, and parametric reforms will be required, not only to strengthen their redistributive aspect but also to incorporate non-contributory financing components.
It will require the negotiation of new fiscal covenants that will make economic and social development sustainable over the long term.
Equality of rights provides the normative framework and the basis for social covenants that will create greater opportunities for those who have less, while promoting social integration and cohesion and, consequently, new social compacts.
A fiscal covenant that calls for a more redistributive tax structure and burden, capable of strengthening the role of the State and of public policy in order to guarantee thresholds of well-being, is part of the equality agenda, one that includes but goes beyond the creation of labour institutions that will protect employment security.
Introduction In the Caribbean, as in Latin America, these are challenging times for youth inclusion.
Such times call for new measures to improve and balance education achievements with smooth passage to employment.
The demographic transition holds opportunities for young people, but these opportunities must be seized in the short term so that population ageing will not cut even more into the resources available for investing in developing youth capacities and productivity.
Young people are healthier and at less risk of disease than other age groups, but they are very much exposed to exogenous risks, especially accidents and assault.
Persistently high adolescent maternity rates and exposure to sexually transmitted diseases, particularly HIV/AIDS, constitute a warning sign that needs to be forcefully addressed.
Public and policy awareness has grown over the past few decades; government institutions have been established and tasked with developing youth plans and programmes.
Instruments have been deployed to raise awareness and knowledge of youth issues and improve the effectiveness and focus of public policies in this area.
Public youth policies have been strengthened in recent years, but strides need to be made on comprehensive approaches that can go beyond sector-based rationales, taking into account the very nature of this age group and its risks, capacities, opportunities, systems of belonging and modalities of involvement.
With the International Year of Youth1 having come to an end, this chapter assesses the main demographic and socio-economic trends relating to youth in the Caribbean, focusing on the conditions that determine their degree of social inclusion or exclusion.
An added challenge is how to make youth policies part of the Millennium Development Goals agenda and the decent work agenda.
Employment, education, reproductive health and closing gender gaps constitute explicit targets and goals under a global agenda for youth inclusion.
This chapter covers employment, education and reproductive health, as well as demographic factors and the youth policy agenda in the countries of the Caribbean.
Some of the issues raised in previous chapters are covered again here (but with specific reference to the youth population in the countries of the Caribbean), particularly adolescent fertility, labour market insertion and social protection challenges that pose specific risks for young people, relating above all to sexual and reproductive health.
With inequality as the central theme of this edition of Social Panorama, this chapter stresses that young people are at the receiving end of legacies shaped by their socio-economic background that determine their access to critical assets for capacity development.
The assets that they accumulate now The International Year of Youth began on 12 August 2010 and ended on 11 August 2011.
In this context, society should ensure that young people have opportunities to participate in development processes, that is to say actions and investments that enable youth to consistently complete the transition into adulthood and take advantage of opportunities to develop and use their human capital in the process (United Nations, 2007).
Failure to do so can lead to the exclusion and marginalization of youth while depriving society of their energy and innovativeness.
Inadequate investment in education, ineffective social protection programmes and constraints in access to the labour market are among the factors that prevent young people from reaching their full potential and helping to improve the well-being of their communities.
Decisive action by governments in the Caribbean is therefore required to involve youth in the development agenda, including measures to address exclusion and the opportunities actually available to young people to build or change their livelihoods.
Efforts to promote youth inclusion in our societies should encompass recognition of the rights of young people and their appropriation and use of such rights.
It presents a general and demographic overview, together with information on the education and employment situation of young people.
The role of public policies targeting young people is examined, as is the need to strengthen, increase and expand the appropriation of assets (such as education, employment and participation) in youth development and inclusion.
The World Programme of Action for Youth to the Year 2000 and Beyond is one of the most important resolutions relating to young people.
It provides a policy framework and practical guidelines for the adoption of measures to enhance the quality and quantity of opportunities available to young people for full, effective and constructive participation in society.
The programme identifies 10 priority areas for action: education, employment, hunger and poverty, health, environment, drug abuse, juvenile delinquency, leisure activities, girls and young women, and the full and effective participation of youth in the life of society and in decision-making (United Nations, 1996).
Caribbean youth demographics, poverty and health Population change and the demographic dividend The limitations and difficulties of defining youth and the age groups it encompasses have been widely discussed in the specialized literature.
The countries of the Caribbean lack uniform official age ranges for youth.
In some countries, including Dominica, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago, the range is from ages 15 to 30.
According to some authors, the reason for such a wide range is the high youth unemployment rate that keeps young people from acquiring the responsibilities and status of adults (Danns, Henry and LaFleur, 1997, cited in World Bank, 2003).
Other countries (Belize and Jamaica are examples) follow the demographic definition established by the United Nations: men and women aged 15 to 24.
For the general purposes of this chapter, the age range for young people is 15 to 29, thus providing more scope for the transition between key life stages such as school completion and entry into the labour market.
In view of the marked differences within this age group, however, in some instances the data are broken down by sub-group.
But the average annual growth rate per 100 inhabitants is slowing compared with prior periods: it is expected to fall to 0.76 between 2010 and 2015 due in part to a sharp drop in the crude birth rate, which is expected to decline to 17.9 per 1,000 inhabitants during the same period (ECLAC, 2010b).
Young people (aged 15 to 29) represented a quarter of the total population of the Caribbean in 2010, just under the Latin American average.
In this case, though, the average is not a proxy for the general trend in the composition of the youth population in the Caribbean because the proportion in several countries and territories is far from this average.
In countries like Belize (29.4%), the Dominican Republic (27.3%) Haiti (30.1%), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (27%), Saint Lucia (28.2%) and Trinidad and Tobago (27.8%), the proportion of young people to the total population is several percentage points above the average for the region.
In others, such as and the United States Virgin Islands (21.4%), it is several percentage points below (ECLAC, 2010b).
For this reason, the regional aggregates are not equal to the sum total of the countries listed.
According to projections for the next few years, the youth population as a proportion of the total will decline gradually in the Caribbean except for Trinidad and Tobago and Saint Lucia, where by 2020 a sharper drop will bring it down by 8 and 5 percentage points, respectively, compared with 2010 (ECLAC, 2010b).
The demographic dividend is a stage at which the ratio of dependents to working-age people is below three to two.
It includes a period during which the dependency ratio is falling and also the early part of the phase in which it rises again, but while the balance between the age groups continues to favour investment.
While the dividend has already ended in the United States Virgin Islands, in Guyana is it expected to last until 2050 (see figure VI.2).
The dividend holds unique opportunities for the younger sectors of the population if it is capitalized on by policies promoting social investment in young people and boosting their access to, among other things, education, health and training.
The high emigration rate is also having a significant impact on young people and population dynamics in the Caribbean.
It is estimated that some 5 million Caribbeans have emigrated over the past 50 years (CDB, 2010).
But not much up-to-date data are available, making it riskier to draw forceful conclusions than to put forth hypotheses.
Generally speaking, in the Caribbean the proportion of young people emigrating is lower than for adults.
But young people and adults combined account for the bulk of emigrants: more than half (55%) are between the ages of 22 and 40 (CDB, 2010).
Nevertheless, if the trend has not changed substantially over the past decade there could be cases in which young emigrants make up a larger share.
For example, data from 2000 indicate that in Belize, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago almost one fourth of all emigrants are young people aged 15 to 24 (Thomas-Hope, 2009).
It can be inferred that the emigrant flow of young people accelerates population ageing in their communities of origin.
Thomas-Hope, “Regional special topic monography on international migration, based on the analysis of the 2000 round census data of eighteen Caribbean countries”, Greater Georgetown, Secretariat of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), 2009.
Youth and poverty: the risks of early emancipation For young people, as for the rest of the population, the ratio of household income to consumption is an indicator of well-being but is not the only relevant factor.
It is nevertheless one of the main assets for meeting basic needs and a key variable for defining indigence and poverty.
In the English-speaking Caribbean it is hard to make comparable estimates of poverty levels because of the scarcity of consistent data on the magnitude and trend of poverty there.
Several agencies and governments have produced data on the incidence of income poverty by consumption level based on national income poverty lines, but the sources and measurement methodologies are so different that they pose an obstacle to comparative analysis of the data (ECLAC, 2010c).
Nevertheless, and with these qualifications in mind, they do yield a general picture of the youth poverty rate in the English-speaking Caribbean.
As in Latin America, poverty in the English-speaking Caribbean is, generally, more concentrated in the child population (aged under 15).
This does not mean, however, that the youth poverty rate should be ignored.
For example, in the early 2000s, almost one fifth of the total poor population of the British Virgin Islands was between the ages of 15 and 24 (CDB/Government of the British Virgin Islands, 2003).
According to more recent estimates, in Antigua and Barbuda 25.4% of the indigent population and 22.6% of the total poor population are in the 15-to-29-year age group.
In Saint Lucia, just over a quarter of the individuals identified as poor are young (aged 15 to 29).
This percentage is lower in the Cayman Islands (22%) but not in Grenada or Trinidad and Tobago, where a third of those living in poverty are in this age group.
Unlike other countries, then, young people are proportionally overrepresented in the poor population In Dominica and Anguilla, 16.4% and 22.3%, respectively, of the population living below the poverty line is aged 15 to 24.
The breakdown between Nevis and Saint Kitts shows that this age group accounts for 15.8% and 25.7%, respectively, of the total poor Belize, 21% of all poor are aged 15 to 24, while just over half of Belizeans aged 14 to 17 are living in poverty (Government of Belize/CDB, 2010).
This confirms the general trend: the youth poverty rate is usually not higher than the overall population average, but the adolescent poverty rate is.
From a life-cycle perspective, it is important to bear in mind that the increased likelihood of living in poverty is correlated with emancipation early in youth combined with taking on the role of head of household or his or her spouse.
Data from some countries show that in the first income quintiles the proportion of young people aged around 20 who are heads of household or spouses is much higher than in the higher quintiles.
A case in point is Grenada, where 58% of the young people in the first income quintile who are heads of household or spouses are aged 24 or under while just 19% of the young people in the last quintile are in this age group.
In Guyana, 12% of all such young people in the first quintile are aged 15 to 19; 2.5% of all young people in the fifth quintile who are heads of household or spouses are aged 19 or under.
In the countries of the Caribbean, the fact that early emancipation is closely linked to low family income could suggest weak or non-existent social protections for young people for whom early emancipation means shouldering more responsibilities and taking on the role of household breadwinner.
In this case, the lack of social protection networks is especially problematic because at this stage in the life cycle young people are in need of support if they are to continue to acquire capacities and assets.
Youth mortality Disease prevalence is lower among young people than in other age groups, and their mortality rate is lower both in the Caribbean and throughout the world (see figure VI.3).
Nevertheless, they are more likely than other age groups to suffer the negative impacts of external risks linked to youthful behaviour or conduct.
In other words, the leading causes of death among young people are not degenerative or microbiological diseases but rather violence and avoidable accidents.
In the Caribbean, just over half of the deaths among young people aged 15 to 29 are from external causes (including homicides, accidents and suicide).
Strikingly, in Latin America and the Caribbean the proportion of deaths among young people is above the world average, as the homicide rate for the region is also higher than the world average and violence is pretty much centred on youth (see figure VI.3).
As table VI.3 shows, for a total of 25 countries and territories in the Caribbean assaults, accidents and suicide are common causes of death among the population aged 15 to 29.
High crime rates lead to low levels of human and economic development (UNODC, 2011).
It has negative consequences in terms of well-being, especially for young people, who are overrepresented both as victims and as perpetrators of crime and violence (UNODC/World Bank, 2007).
Recent data show that these and related issues should be high on government agendas in the Caribbean.
Along with Central America, South America and Southern Africa, it is in the Caribbean that homicide rates are highest and (unlike elsewhere in the world, where rates have been falling for the past 25 years) have been rising except for a dip around 2006.
The Dominican Republic, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago are among the countries hit hardest by this trend (UNODC, 2011).
Congenital malformations, deformations and chromosomal abnormalities Hypertensive diseases While there is no conclusive evidence, studies do suggest that segmenting the youth population and analysing mortality rate patterns reveal factors of social inequality and exclusion that make death more likely among persons living in poverty than among their peers who are not poor.
In other words, mortality rates among poor young people are higher because this group is more exposed to disease, accidents and violence (ECLAC/OIJ, 2004).
Sexual and reproductive health There is no question that sexuality and reproduction are key youth issues.
They are often approached one-dimensionally as a health matter alone, with a focus, inter alia, on fertility, the birth rate and sexually transmitted diseases.
Initiatives arising from this approach confine sexuality and reproduction to the physical act itself and its repercussions despite the fact that these issues cut across other spheres as well.
Sexuality and reproduction are linked to several aspects of well-being and spill over into other areas of development (Cornwall and Jolly, 2006; Jolly, 2010).
Youth, sexuality and reproduction are particularly relevant issues in the Caribbean because for a large part of the population sexual initiation takes place at such an early age.
Estimates indicate that around 30% of adolescents of both genders in the English-speaking Caribbean have had sexual relations, many at a very early age.
On average, men who are sexually active during adolescence start at the age of 11, and women at the age of 14-15.
Moreover, around half of sexually active adolescent girls report that their first sexual experience was non-consensual; almost a third of sexually active adolescents of both genders report having multiple sexual partners (Pilgrim and Blum, 2011).
This presents policymakers with enormous challenges in terms of providing timely information, preventing sexual violence and tending to the victims.
One of the characteristics of Latin America and the Caribbean is a stubbornly high adolescent motherhood rate when compared with fertility rates for the population as a whole.
Adolescent motherhood is markedly higher in the region among less-educated women and thus among women in lower-income socio-economic strata (ECLAC/ OIJ, 2008; Rodríguez, 2009).
However, the adolescent fertility rate (ratio of the number of births to total number of women in this age group) is markedly lower in the Caribbean than in Latin America: of the 19 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean whose rate is lower than 61 births per 1,000 women aged 15 to 19, 17 are in the Caribbean.
In most of the countries of the Caribbean, adolescent fertility rates have been falling over the past few years, albeit at paces that differ by as much as 40 percentage points.
Aruba, Guyana and Montserrat have posted increases; in Guyana, the rate is up by nearly 24% against the early 1990s (see table VI.5).
The fact that the adolescent motherhood rate is far higher among poor, less-educated women is cause for considerable concern because it reveals, first and foremost, unequal access to full reproductive rights especially when involuntary pregnancies are involved.
Second, it denotes the intergenerational reproduction of inequality and exclusion because early motherhood among the poor and less educated considerably diminishes employment prospects throughout life.
These mothers are highly unlikely to continue their studies or be able to turn to social networks for childcare.
Thus the cycle of exclusion is perpetuated from one generation to the next.
These unequal opportunities and life-cycle prospects do indeed pose a major challenge for social protection and care systems because they involve a population group (young mothers with small children) that is, as seen in Chapter IV, often excluded from access to these systems and lacks the resources to buy care services on the market.
HIV/AIDS is a priority for the Caribbean countries, given its high prevalence.
The Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa are the only regions of the world where the proportion of women who are carriers of HIV is higher than that of men (UNAIDS, 2010).
State of), 2008 Also in the Caribbean, the prevalence of HIV/AIDS among young people and adults (aged 15 to 49), which equates to 1% of the total population, is the second-highest in the world and is surpassed only by sub-Saharan Africa.
By comparison, the average for Central America and South America is half that for the Caribbean (UNAIDS, 2010).
However, prevalence not only varies among subregions in the Americas, but within them as well.
A prevalence of 0.1 in Cuba contrasts sharply with countries in which the prevalence is over 1%, such as the Bahamas (3.1%), Barbados (1.4%), Belize (2.3%), Haiti (1.9%), Jamaica HIV is a particularly important issue for the youth population of the Caribbean.
Approximately 83% of HIV cases are diagnosed in people aged 15 to 54; a third of them are found among people aged 25 to 34.
Given that the disease has an 8-year incubation period, it may be inferred that almost a third of new HIV cases occur among 15-to-24-year-olds (World Bank, 2003).
Recent studies indicate that 90% of sexually active adolescents in the English-speaking Caribbean report having used a condom, but only 16%-25% report doing so regularly (Pilgrim and Blum, 2011).
When the group under examination is restricted to women aged 15 to 24 in Caribbean countries such as Belize, the Dominican Republic, Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago, almost 50% report using condoms during their most recent sexual encounter.
This is a relatively high percentage in comparison with some Latin American countries.
The concentration of HIV/AIDS among the youth population of the Caribbean also has economic repercussions for the countries because of the negative impacts on the population group with the highest productive potential.
And because these young people are sometimes supporting their households economically or are contributing to household income, some of the consequences of living with the disease make them and their households more vulnerable and keep them in poverty —or push them into C.
Access to education Education is critical for people’s lives and for society as a whole.
It provides the means for future income generation as well as skills for exercising new kinds of citizenship, living constructively in a multicultural environment and combining immediate experience with media-transmitted experience (ECLAC/OIJ, 2004, page 165).
Education is even more critical for young people, for whom it holds the key to their livelihood.
Modern formal schooling and teaching methods were designed above all for children and young people, based on the assumption that they are starting on their learning path and can absorb appropriate and necessary knowledge in homogeneous age groups.
But many education indicators do not reveal much about young people as a social construct or as a population group at the receiving end of formal education, focusing as they do on people as participants in institutional processes of learning.
This is due in part to the fact that defining and interpreting education outcomes, especially on a comparative basis, is complicated because they are highly context-driven.
Education access and progress vary, and data quantity and quality are heterogeneous (United Nations, 2003).
Nevertheless, the data do paint a picture in which the gaps and inequalities that already surfaced in primary education only to persist and deepen at tertiary levels spill over from education to impact a person’s livelihood.
Learning that is less segmented by socio-economic level will help close inequality gaps from one generation to the next.
It will offer greater opportunities for social and occupational mobility throughout the life cycle, thereby reducing future wage and well-being gaps (ECLAC, 2010a).
Latin America and the Caribbean have high enrolment rates in the early levels of education, but they fall off substantially in the secondary and tertiary levels, especially in the Caribbean.
The literacy rate for young people aged 15 to 24 in the Caribbean, at 89%, is below the 97% average for Latin America.
The gross enrolment ratio at the primary and secondary levels is high: at or above 98% except for Dominica (82%, one of the lowest at these education levels), Anguilla, the Cayman Islands and Jamaica (in the area of 93.5%) (United Nations, 2010).
In Dominica (105%) the rate is higher than at the primary level; countries such as Antigua and Barbuda, Grenada, the British Virgin Islands, Montserrat and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines have secondary education enrolment rates at or above 100%).
The most dramatic drops in the gross enrolment ratio at the secondary level from the immediately preceding level are Anguilla (from 94% to 80%), Aruba (from 114% to 95%), the Bahamas (from 103% to 93%), Belize Dominican Republic (from 104% to 75%) and Trinidad and Tobago (from 103% to 89%).
In Saint Lucia (from 98% to 93%) and Jamaica (from 93% to 91% the gross enrolment ratio falls off slightly between these two levels of education (UNESCO, 2011).
However, secondary education completion rates in Jamaica are far lower, in the area of 85% for women aged 20 to 24 and 75% for men in the same age group.
In Guyana the rate is 68% for women and 60% for men; in Belize it is just 24% for women and 19% for men.5 The sharpest declines in enrolment rates are at the tertiary level, except for Cuba where it is above 100%.
Of the countries in the Caribbean on which data from 2008 are available, Grenada has one of the highest gross enrolment ratios at this education level (59%), followed by the Cayman Islands (36%), Aruba (33%), Jamaica (24%) and Montserrat (17%).
Saint Lucia and Belize are just above 10% (at 15% and 11%, respectively) and Anguilla, Dominica and the British Virgin Islands are below 6% (5%, 4% and 1%, respectively) (UNESCO, 2011).
However, these low gross enrolment ratios at the tertiary level might be due in part to the high rates of international mobility among students at this level.
The mobility rate at this level is 88.4% in Saint Lucia and 32.6% in the British Virgin Islands.
Several other Caribbean countries have mobility rates above the 1% average for Latin America and the Caribbean.
The (five-year) university completion rate is much lower: for young people aged 25 to 29 it is just around 3% in Jamaica and 4% in Guyana.6 The data vary little according to sex.
In many cases the enrolment rate for women is even higher than for men.
Gender is, then, declining in importance as a factor behind unequal education.
It would seem that other social inequalities, such as income disparity and territorial isolation, have a greater impact on educational opportunity gaps.
For example, in Saint Lucia, the higher the consumption quintile the lower the proportion of persons aged 15 or over lacking a post-secondary certificate.
In the lowest consumption quintile, 69% of the people in this age group lack a post-secondary certificate; for the highest quintile the proportion is 51%.
Taking the tertiary level by itself, 1.1% of the people in the lowest quintile have had access; the proportion rises to 25.6% in the highest consumption quintile (CDB/ The picture is similar in Grenada and in Saint Kitts and Nevis.
By contrast, just 55.5%, 6.8% and less than 1% of persons in the same age groups in the poorest quintile are attending school (CDB/KCL, 2009a).
In Saint Kitts and Nevis, the difference between young people aged 15 to 19 in quintiles 1 and 5 who are attending school is just over 10 percentage points (55% and 67.9% respectively); the difference is greater among young people aged 20 to 29.
Thirty-one percent of the people aged 20 to 24 in the highest consumption quintile are in school, compared with 5.9% in the same age group in the lowest quintile.
For persons aged 25 to 29, 4.9% of those in the first quintile have access to education, against 12.7% of young people in the same age group in the highest quintile (CDB/KCL, 2009b).
In Dominica, almost all (95.3%) of the young people aged 15 to 19 in the fifth quintile are enrolled in school.
As in other countries in the Caribbean, the gaps for higher education are wider.
School attendance figures in Antigua and Barbuda also show that persons in the lowest consumption quintiles are less likely than their peers in the higher quintiles to attend and complete secondary school (CDB/ The data on the post-secondary and tertiary levels in Belize reveal a marked bias in favour of higher-income persons.
Of the total enrolled in these levels, just 16% and 11%, respectively, are from the two lowest quintiles.
Overall, 23% of young people aged 17 and 18 in the first and second income quintiles are enrolled at the post-secondary or tertiary level.
The proportion for the same population group in the last two quintiles is 80% (Government of Belize/CDB, 2010).
In Trinidad and Tobago, the difference in school attendance between the first income quintile and the last is 30 percentage points for persons aged 15 to 17 (61.1% for the first quintile and 90.7% for the fifth quintile) (ECLAC, 2011b).
In Belize, 65% of all secondary-school age (13 to 16) young people in rural areas attend school, compared with 88% in urban areas (Government of Belize/CDB, 2010).
In Jamaica, 11.6% of the urban population aged 19 to 24 is attending school; only 8% of persons in the same age group living in rural areas are attending an educational institution (ECLAC, 2011b).
The issue of education for young people has many facets and poses several challenges.
It involves more than enrolment or insertion in an educational institution structure.
A more- and better-educated society is in a better position to take advantage of current technologies and socio-economic conditions.
So, while early childhood and primary education are indeed extremely important for later in life, the significance of post-secondary and tertiary education (where most of the enrollees are, traditionally, young people) for individuals and society should not be underestimated.
Studies have shown that low education levels are strongly correlated with the risk of social exclusion (United Nations, 2003).
It has also been established that improving the education supply can help dissociate the social origin of individuals from their well-being (ECLAC, 2010a).
Governments and societies of the Caribbean should therefore take action to reduce the opportunity cost that continuing their studies poses for young people, especially for those in the lower income quintiles and for those living far from urban areas.
Youth unemployment Employment is among the most significant factors in the development of young people.
A decent job does more than provide the monetary income for meeting certain needs related to well-being.
It is also a way to secure, enhance and consolidate a feeling of belonging, as individuals perceive they are contributing to collective progress and are part of a system of contributions and benefits (ECLAC/OIJ, 2008, page 169).
What is more, a formal job is what determines access to many social protection and social security systems.
In other words, the lack of a source of formal employment is a mechanism of exclusion from some of these systems.
For these and other reasons a decent job is a necessity, especially for young people because the way they enter the labour market has a direct impact on their future.
That is what makes the high prevalence of youth unemployment so worrisome.
Estimates are that participation in employment by young people will continue to fall, as has been the trend over the past decade.
And the recent economic crisis revealed how fragile their employment status is: around the world, 77.7 million young people aged 15 to 24 were unemployed in 2010.
That is 4.2 million more than the year before the crisis (2007) (ILO, 2011a) In addition, young people are more likely than adults to enter the labour market by means of a vulnerable job In Latin America and the Caribbean, unemployment among young people aged 15 to 24 rose by 1.5 percentage points between 2007 and 2009, to 15.7%.
The result was that labour force participation for this population group shrank by 0.5 percentage points during the period, to Focusing on the countries of the Caribbean, in the early 2000s young people aged 15 to 24 accounted for 40% to 60% of the unemployed but 20% to 30% of the labour force.
In some Caribbean countries, the unemployment rate for this age group was two or even four times that of the adult population (World Bank, 2003).
In Belize, the 2009 unemployment rate for young people aged 20 to 24 was 7 percentage points above the national average of 13%.
Unemployment among women was higher: 43% for young women aged 14 to 19 versus 26% for young men in the same age group.
In the 20-to-24 age bracket, unemployment for women was 28% and the rate for men was 16% (Government of Belize/CDB, 2010).
In Grenada, more than half (54%) of the unemployed were young people (aged 15 to 29) (CDB/KCL, 2009a).
A survey of living conditions conducted in Saint Lucia found a high concentration of unemployment in the population group aged 19 to 35 (CDB/KCL, 2007c).
International Labour Organization data reveal a similar situation in other Caribbean countries.
Young people aged 15 to 24 make up some 31% of the total unemployed, with Guadeloupe and Martinique several percentage points below the average.
Saint Lucia and Trinidad and Tobago have the highest percentages among this group of countries.
However, in several cases expanding the age cohort to between 15 and 29 increases the proportion of unemployed young people relative to the total employed, to 29% in Martinique and nearly 57% in Trinidad and Tobago (ILO, 2011b).
High unemployment rates among young people in the Caribbean are wasting the demographic dividend and the window of opportunities that the demographic trend offers the countries of the Caribbean because they affect a high proportion of the economically active population.
But, even more important, failure to create the right conditions for young people to find decent employment reduces their opportunities, limits their present and future development and in many cases heightens existing levels of inequality and poverty.
In Antigua and Barbuda, for instance, 80% of unemployed men aged 25 to 29 live in precarious conditions, on less than US$ 2.51 a day; 30.6% of the total unemployed population in that country lives on even less (CDB/KCL, 2007a).
Another feature of youth unemployment is that young people in the lower consumption quintiles are overrepresented in the workforce compared with their peers in the higher quintiles, while the reverse is true for adults.
For example, in Saint Kitts and Nevis, 21.2% of all working young people are from the first quintile and 15.2% are from the highest quintile.
Taking the total workforce aged 30 and over, 12.5% are from the first quintile and 27.4% are from the fifth quintile.
In Antigua and Barbuda, the percentage of young people aged 15 to 29 who are in the workforce is similar for the highest and lowest quintiles, at 17% and 15.5%, respectively.
Bringing older people (aged 30 to 64) into the equation widens the gap between the two, to 13.5% of the total adult workforce for the first quintile and 30% for the fifth quintile.
Early entry into the labour market can restrict the acquisition and development of the knowledge needed for access to more productive employment during adulthood, keeping young people from developing their capacities and making them more vulnerable throughout their working life.
Over the past few years the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have implemented public policy measures geared towards youth development.
Institutions have been established and tasked with crafting, implementing and coordinating youth plans and programmes.
First comes a look at potential approaches to programme and government strategy design, how youth issues can be mainstreamed into public policy and the different ways in which the countries of the Caribbean have included youth policies in their institutions and action structures.
There follows an analysis of how assets influence an individual’s livelihood and how useful classifying those assets can be for pinpointing areas in which public youth policies are having little or no impact.
The review in this section on public youth policies adopted by the countries of the Caribbean is not exhaustive and is not intended to yield assessments or conclusions as to the effective impact of such policies on the target population.
Youth issues: focuses and institutions Several years ago public mechanisms were implemented in Latin America and the Caribbean to establish an institutional framework for youth issues by, inter alia, creating ministries or departments for youth affairs, designing and implementing action plans that cut across sectors and changing the legal and regulatory framework.
Policymakers followed a variety of approaches to better integrate youth into the public and social space.
Beyond the difficulty of establishing age ranges for young people, some of the mechanisms used are based on a standard unit assuming that all young people and their needs are similar.
The goal in this case is to offer services and programmes, without taking into consideration the different realities and opportunities young people face (social integration approach).
Others focus more on disadvantages, with public policy action targeting young people with greater lags and social exclusions (risk approach).
Still others centre on the role of young people as active participants in actions geared towards improving their standard of living (active approach, or young people as strategic development actors).
Some put more emphasis on a voice and participation for young people, seeking to boost their leverage with policymakers (social capital approach).
Last, there are mechanisms that approach young people as individuals on a path seeking more independence.
Here, policies centre on factors such as employment and access to housing (emancipation These policy approaches are not mutually exclusive.
They can complement each other or overlap within a given public policy strategy.
How youth issues are positioned in the institutional policy framework is important too, i.e., whether themes and actions in this sphere are addressed more or less separately by different administrative sectors of the State, or whether they are a thread running through and cutting across sector boundaries.
In the former arrangement, the subject can be a recipient or beneficiary of sector-based programmes (designed to meet a need or requirement under the purview of the sector in question) and tailored not to young people per se but rather to the purposes of the sector.
In the latter, while young people are still the recipients or beneficiaries of the programmes implemented by departments in charge of different sectors, interventions on youth issues are guided not by individual programme mandates but rather by a consistent, comprehensive public policy framework.
For this reason, some Caribbean countries have departments for liaising with other government agencies and civil society organizations involved in youth affairs.
Sometimes these departments are at the ministerial level (usually education or social development), as in the British Virgin Islands and the Cayman Islands.
They conduct youth programmes in the areas of job and sports training and community integration, among others (CDB/Government of the British Virgin Islands, 2003; CDB/KCL, 2008).
Some ministries, while not being exclusively devoted to youth issues, do include these matters among their primary objectives.
It also has a Department of Youth, which, as part of the Ministry of Education, is tasked with coordinating actions on youth issues in the country in order to avoid duplication of efforts.
The activities of these offices encompass areas such as HIV/ AIDS and youth participation (CDB/KCL, 2009c).
Government agencies whose mandate is not limited to youth affairs but that do have sector-based programmes that explicitly target youth issues are found in Barbados, Dominica, Grenada and Saint Lucia.
In Grenada, the functions of the Ministry of Youth Empowerment and Sports include planning and implementing youth development programmes and fostering youth involvement.
For some Caribbean countries, youth affairs cut across the jurisdictions of several institutions and agencies and are governed by action plans that bring together, under a single public youth policy, both government and private-sector action.
In Belize, the Ministry of Education and Youth is in charge of youth affairs, including the Youth for the Future initiative to coordinate government youth development policies and cooperation projects with civil organizations and international agencies (Government of Belize, 2011).
Jamaica’s national youth policy provides a multisector framework for youth development with clearly defined focal points.
They are: the environment for development, education and training; employment and entrepreneurship; health, participation and empowerment; and care and protection.
The National Centre for Youth Development, which is part of the Ministry of Youth, Sports and Culture, oversees implementation of youth policy, coordinates and integrates youth development activities and services and issues recommendations for designing and updating programmes in order to promote youth development (Government of Jamaica, 2003; 2009).
Trinidad and Tobago has a national youth policy, too; instead of programmes per se it provides a framework for action on youth affairs by government agencies and civil society organizations.
Some of the focal points are employment, infrastructure and services, training, leadership, violence and the creation of spaces for expression and financing (Government of Trinidad and Tobago, 2006).
In other cases —Antigua and Barbuda is one— there is no specific government agency for youth affairs.
Instead, the government provides support for civil organizations operating in this sphere (CDB/KCL, 2007a).
Assets and capital: mapping the influence of public youth policies In the sphere of public youth policy, it is worthwhile to look at how government action can improve the livelihoods of young people, at least by programs for developing opportunities and capacities.
A livelihood is not just the activities in which an individual or a household engages to meet basic daily needs, but also the assets (the stock of knowledge and access to and use of certain resources) skills and activities required to generate meaning and determine the living gained (Chambers and Conway, 1991).
Assets are therefore an intrinsic part of the conceptual frameworks associated with livelihoods, stressing the importance of capital and the use of tangible and intangible resources.
Assets give meaning to a person’s world, enable being and doing, and are vehicles for three kinds of action: instrumental action (making a living and developing), hermeneutic action (making living meaningful) and emancipatory action (challenging the structures under which one makes a living) (Bebbington, 1999, page 2022).
But the value and meaning of assets is not the same for all individuals and households, and there is a range of processes whereby individuals transform assets into the appropriation and use of rights, and of ways in which they optimize their stock of assets.
These and other factors, such as institutions and social relations, shape how households and individuals use assets to build their livelihoods.
Put another way, the scope and limitations of some livelihoods are subject to formal and informal institutional processes (Ellis, 2000; There is a parallel here with the rights-based methodological framework developed by Sen (1982), which establishes that the appropriation of rights depends on the political, economic, legal and social characteristics of a society and an individual’s position in it.
The livelihood-based conceptual framework thus seeks public policy instruments designed to boost both the accumulation and the value of the assets of the population and to promote and facilitate the optimal use of existing underutilized assets (Ellis, 2000 and 2006).
Beyond the debate about asset categories, classifying them makes it possible to distinguish between those that are understood and are expected (either separately or together) from public policy and social action.
In other words, classifying assets reveals the link between multidimensional aspects and the factors that influence the ways and means that individuals —especially young people— can access to build their lives.
A World Bank report noted that most Caribbean countries have identified youth as a target for social development planning, having set up youth desks and departments in government and assigned budget resources for youth, as discussed earlier in this section.
But their focus has been on leisure and community service rather than on action to meet the needs and challenges of youth development (World Bank, 2003).
This no longer seems to be the case, although policymakers and policy implementers have indeed tended to focus more on specific youth development issues.
All of the countries of the Caribbean have action plans and strategies focused on the human capital of young people.
This is understandable, because health, education and other factors exert such an influence on youth development.
In the sphere of education, there are usually programmes providing scholarships and support for paying for books, meals and transportation for secondary-school students, as well as sports programmes.
There are also some educational initiatives targeting specific segments of the youth population.
Grenada, for example, has programmes designed to keep young single mothers from dropping out of school.
And in the Cayman Islands there are support programmes for university studies.
Health is also high on government agendas, although action in this sphere tends to be sector-based instead of specifically focused on youth.
Most health initiatives targeting youth have to do with prevention, especially as related to HIV/AIDS.
The governments of Bahamas, Belize, Granada, the Cayman Islands, Saint Lucia and Trinidad and Tobago have sexual health and HIV/AIDS programmes, as well as programmes for the prevention of sexually transmitted diseases.
In many Caribbean countries, drug use prevention and rehabilitation is another pillar of youth strategy.
Job training for young people is a widespread practice among the countries of the Caribbean.
Such programmes do help build the human capital of youth but, because they focus on labour skills, they may be regarded as contributing to physical capital.
However, some of these programmes focus more on teaching trades instead of providing training or continuing education for accessing more sophisticated labour markets where wages and benefits have historically been better.
Initiatives to promote business development among young people are less common; there are a few in Barbados, Belize, Dominica and Jamaica.
The British Virgin Islands has an income generation project for single mothers, but youth job programmes are less frequent than those geared towards training alone.
There is not much information available on public youth policies in the spheres of financial capital and natural capital, but this does not mean that there are none.
The countries of the Caribbean have quite a few programmes for supporting activities related to fishing, farming and microcredit and other financial services.
Strictly speaking, young people are not barred from participating in these programmes or benefitting from the policies.
But their participation is often limited by the fact that these initiatives are designed for generic beneficiaries and users.
Young people have different potentialities and realities than adults; figuring them into the design and implementation of public policies for developing the natural and financial capital of the youth population could improve the outcomes of existing programmes.
Institutional frameworks encompass youth affairs to varying degrees, but they are a constant throughout the countries of the Caribbean.
There may be different approaches to integrating youth issues, with some countries stressing the role of young people as active participants in policies that target them.
Such initiatives tend to develop youth social capital more because their impact goes beyond formal institutions (government structures) to act on informal structures as well by promoting the political and participatory empowerment of the youth population.
Some of the Caribbean countries, such as Belize and Jamaica, have programmes whose primary objective is to enhance the voice of young people.
But there is a need for broader institutional channels to harness the natural energy of this age group.
It is during this stage in life that individuals claim some of their fundamental political rights (such as the right to vote and to be elected to represent the people).
There is therefore a need for public policies designed to develop youth social capital and encourage young people to become more involved in the democratic process.
Conclusions The range of realities that young people live calls for further study of the social and economic dynamics that both create and limit their space for development.
Generally speaking, today’s youth population in the Caribbean has more assets than did their peers in previous generations.
But there remain unequal structures of opportunities that continue to operate as cores of exclusion.
The acquisition and appropriation of assets by young people is, to varying degrees, conditioned and stratified by factors such as household income and consumption, location and access to basic services.
To provide an example, the data suggest that the high opportunity cost of education beyond the secondary level for young people in lower-income households or those who live far from urban areas can lead them to drop out of school and enter the labour market early.
Premature entry into the workforce not only goes against international child labour standards if it takes place during early youth —it also interrupts the development of knowledge and capacities and thus affects the future by keeping these young people from accessing better-paid jobs and confining many of them to vulnerable work.
The evidence suggests that there is a need for targeted action to guide public youth policy efforts towards the enhancement of capacities and opportunities, especially for the most socially excluded young people who are being deprived of opportunities to develop their capacities.
This does not just mean improving and ensuring the equality of educational achievements and attainments.
It also entails promoting access by vulnerable sectors of youth to social protections (such as health, care and cash transfers) political participation, labour intermediation and financial services, and providing them with productive support.
The information provided here shows that in most of the countries of the Caribbean, some youth issues are part of the government action agenda and have been integrated into the government institutional structure.
But there is a need for more comprehensive youth interventions and less sector-based action.
Comprehensive social protection and promotion systems need to be designed and put in place to meet the specific needs of young people in the Caribbean and address the main obstacles that they face.
These measures should be based on the acquisition of assets and capacities by youth and on the exercise of internationally recognized rights and guarantees.
Burchell, B. (2005), “The welfare costs of job insecurity: psychological well-being and family life”, Reconciling Labour Flexibility with Social Cohesion.
Contribución de sus principales determinantes (1995 – 2006)”, Investigación para la política pública, desarrollo incluyente (ID-152009), New York, , United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
Moreno-Jiménez, M. and Carmen Hidalgo (2011), “Medición y predicción de la satisfacción con la vida en inmigrantes empleados en España.
Diferencias según su situación administrativa”, Anales de psicología, vol. 27, No. 1.
United Nations publication, Villatoro, P. (2011), “La medición del bienestar a través de indicadores subjetivos: una revisión”, unpublished.
Bongaarts, John (1982), “The fertility-inhibiting effects of the intermediate fertility variables”, Studies in Family Planning, vol. 13, No. 6/7. (1978), “A framework for analyzing the proximate determinants of fertlity”, Population and Development Review, vol. 4, No. 1.
Comparaisons mondiales et évolutions récentes », Population et sociétés, Nº 391, Institut national d’études démographiques (INED).
Enge, Kjell (1998), “Salud y reproducción: qué piensan, sienten y desean los mayas”, Documento de trabajo, No. 20, Population Council.
Montes (2007), “Análisis regional de los determinantes próximos de fecundidad en México”, Papeles de población, No. 051, Toluca.
Frank Furstenberg (2007), “Changes in the transition to adulthood in less developed countries”, European Journal of Population, vol. 23.
Greene, Margaret and Ann Biddlecom (2000), “Absent and problematic men: accounts of male reproductive roles”, Population and Development Review, vol. 26, No. 1.
Rodríguez, Lily (2010), “Políticas públicas para el reconocimiento de la diversidad cultural y étnica y el ejercicio del derecho a la salud: Modelos interculturales de salud Ecuador”, paper presented at the fourth Congress of the Latin American Population Association, Havana, 16-18 November.
Rance (1994), “Misinformation, mistrust, and mistreatment: family planning among Bolivian market women”, Studies in Family Planning, Stern, Claudio (1997), “El embarazo en la adolescencia como problema público: una visión crítica”, Salud pública de México, vol. 39, No. 2.
Fabiola (2008), “Disminución acelerada de la fecundidad en Colombia y sus regiones, factores directos que inciden sobre la tasa que se acerca al nivel de reemplazo”, paper presented at the third Congress of the Latin American Population Association (ALAP), Córdoba, September.
Pinto, A. (1975), “Heterogeneidad estructural y modelo de desarrollo reciente en América Latina”, Inflación: raíces estructurales, Mexico City, Fondo de Cultura Económica. (1965), “Concentración del progreso técnico y de sus frutos en el desarrollo de América Latina”, El trimestre económico, vol. 32(1), No. 125, January-March.
Maldonado (2011), “¿Qué muestra la evolución de los hogares sobre la evolución de las familias en América Latina?”, Las familias latinoamericanas interrogadas.
Weller, J. (2009), “Avances y retos para el perfeccionamiento de la institucionalidad laboral en América Latina”, El nuevo escenario laboral latinoamericano: Regulación, protección y políticas activas en los mercados de trabajo, Buenos Aires, Siglo Veintiuno Editores/Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
E.08.II.G.89. (2009b), The reactions of the Governments of the Americas to the international crisis.
Hopenhayn, M. (2006), “La juventud latinoamericana en sus tensiones y sus violencias”, Juventudes, violencia y exclusión.
Jaccoud, L. (2010), “Envejecimiento, dependencia y oferta de servicios asistenciales: Un nuevo desafío para los sistemas de protección social”, Envejecimiento en América Latina.
Rico, Nieves and Carlos Maldonado (2011), “¿Qué muestra la evolución de los hogares sobre la evolución de las familias en América Latina?”, Las familias latinoamericanas interrogadas.
Tanzi, Vito (2008), “The role of the State and public finance in the next generation”, OECD Journal on Budgeting, vol. 8, No. 2.
Chapter VI Bebbington, A. (1999), “Capitals and capabilities: a framework for analyzing peasant viability, rural livelihoods and poverty”, World Development, vol.27, No. 12.
Special issue on the impact of the global economic crisis on youth, Geneva.
Pilgrim, A. and Blum, R. (2011), “Protective and risk factors associated with adolescent sexual and reproductive health in the English-speaking Caribbean: a literature review”, Journal of Adolescent Health, forthcoming.
Thomas-Hope, E. (2009), “Regional special topic monography on international migration, based on the analysis of the 2000 round Census data of eighteen Caribbean countries”, Greater Georgetown, CARICOM Secretariat.
The values shown for 2002 on are not strictly comparable with those for earlier years owing to methodological changes made by DNP and DANE. c Figures from the Institute of Statistics and Informatics (INEI) of Peru.
The values shown for 2004 on are not strictly comparable with those for earlier years owing to methodological changes made by INEI. d From 1997, the sample design for the survey does not permit urban-rural breakdown.
Figures therefore correspond to the national total. e Estimate for 18 countries of the region plus Haiti.
Since 1993, however, this category refers to wage-earners in establishments employing up to five persons. g In the 1989 and 1994 surveys, no information was gathered on the size of the establishments employing wage-earners. h Asunción metropolitan area. i Since 1997, the sample design for the survey does not distinguish between urban and rural areas.
The figures for 1990-1999 relate to total unemployment (urban and rural); those for 2003-2008 relate to urban unemployment. c Total for urban areas, with the exception of the figure for 1990, which relates to the Asunción metropolitan area. d The sample design for the surveys conducted since 1997 does not distinguish between urban and rural areas.
In addition, in the case of non-professional, non-technical workers, the figures for the following countries include establishments with up to four employees: Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile (1996), the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Panama (up to 2002), the Plurinational State of Bolivia (1999 and 2002) and Uruguay (1990).
Where no information is available on the size of establishments, no figures are given for the total number of employed in low-productivity sectors. b Includes professional, technical and own-account workers. c Greater Buenos Aires. d Eight departmental capitals plus El Alto. e No information is available on the size of establishments for 1990.
This differential is calculated as the quotient of average female income and average male income, multiplied by 100. b Refers to the income differential in total income among wage-earners.
This differential is calculated as the quotient of average female income and average male income, multiplied c Greater Buenos Aires. d Eight departmental capitals plus El Alto. e Asunción metropolitan area.
The previous series is from the National Planning Department (DNP) and the National Adminstrative Department of Statistics (DANE). d The data on social spending do not include information on social security spending.
The figure for h The figure for 1996-1997 corresponds to 1996. i The figure for 2006-2007 is from 2006. j Simple average of the countries; includes estimates in cases where information on certain countries is missing. k Weighted average of the countries; includes estimates in cases where information on certain countries is missing.
The previous series is from the National Planning Department (DNP) and the National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE). d The data on social spending do not include information on social security spending.
The figure for 1998-1999 corresponds h The figure for 1996-1997 corresponds to 1996. i The figure listed for 2006-2007 is the 2006 figure. j Simple average of the countries; includes estimates in cases where information on certain countries is missing. k Weighted average of the countries; includes estimates in cases where information on certain countries is missing.
Does not include Nicaragua. k Weighted average of the countries; includes estimates in cases where information on certain countries is missing.
Does not include Honduras. k Weighted average of the countries; includes estimates in cases where information on certain countries is missing.
The figures for 1990 are not comparable with those for 2000 and onwards. averages. d The figures refer to urban areas. e Corresponds to the proportion of the population with income below one purchasing power parity (PPP) dollar per day.
Figures for 1990 are not comparable with those for 2000 and onwards. c The figures refer to urban areas. d Weighted averages. e orresponds to the proportion of the population with income below one purchasing power parity (PPP) dollar per day.
The same is true if the supply of qualified human resources grows faster than the number of new jobs that would make productive use of them.
Both situations entail high costs for individuals and for society as a whole.
Despite its importance, this problem has received little attention in recent years.
The second chapter of this edition of the Social Panorama provides background information on the speed at which the supply of skilled human resources and the capacities of the Latin American economies to generate jobs that take advantage of these skills have expanded.
Little historical information is available for the region in this regard, and most such data refer to misalignments between the supply of specific types of professionals or technicians and the demand for them, or to highly circumscribed sectors of economic activity.
The study also suggests a procedure for estimating the degree to which such post–secondary technical and university–level professional skills are being put to use in the countries.
The first issue considered is the capacity of the school system and the human resources training system in general to provide the countries with a technically and professionally qualified workforce.
This gives rise to questions such as how fast these resources are expanding in the different countries of the region, how much of the increase is accounted for by women in comparison to men, what percentage of Latin America’s total working–age population has post–secondary technical or professional qualifications and what differences exist between the countries in this regard.
In the 1990s, the number of people of full working age (25 to 59) with higher qualifications acquired through the completion of professional training at a university or post–secondary technical training grew much faster than the urban and rural working– age population as a whole.
Whereas the latter expanded by 3.1% a year, the number of professionals and technicians rose by 7.5% a year.
In 9 out of 14 countries, the population of qualified professionals and technicians –who must complete at least 14 years of study to be considered as such– expanded at more than twice the annual rate observed for the population without such qualifications.
The estimates show that, out of the increase of just over 32 million people of full working age, 7.9 million had post–secondary qualifications (4.3 million technicians and 3.6 million professionals).
However, this large expansion in the space of a decade reduced by only 2.6 percentage points the high proportion of unskilled workers out of the total (from 86.5% to 83.9%).
The supply of skilled labour and the recent changes seen in the region in this regard have three salient features.
The first is that the supply of qualified human resources has grown fastest in rural areas, though it remains very small, as only about 3% of the working–age rural population has technical or professional skills.
Lastly, the number of women with such qualifications has grown faster than the number of men nearly everywhere in the region.
This had an impact on women’s increasing participation in economic activity, especially as wage earners, and on the narrowing of the gender wage gap over the past decade.
Even though its supply of professionals and technicians expanded significantly in the 1990s, Latin America still faces the constraints imposed by a very low–skilled working– age population.
If the trends of the past decade continue, the proportion of the population with technical or professional post–secondary education will reach nearly 29% of the total working–age population by 2015, meaning that a very large proportion of Latin Americans will still be entering the labour market with very few qualifications.
As a result, the Millennium development goals will be hard to achieve, particularly in terms of reducing poverty, since much of the workforce not only will earn insufficient income to guarantee that they and their families can stay above the poverty line and withstand recessionary cycles, but also will face frequent episodes of unemployment.
The countries of the region must therefore meet the urgent challenge of improving the quality of human resources to enhance the systemic competitiveness of their economies.
The demand for professionals and technicians has given rise to a new and complex relationship between education and the world of work which has altered the ways in which these resources are used.
Despite the steep rise in the number of professionally or technically qualified women in the region, gender inequalities persist in terms of the extent to which these qualifications are used at both the social and individual levels.
This is apparent in the persistently low rates of economic participation among women with post–secondary qualifications, which are considerably lower than those for similarly qualified men: women’s average participation rate in the late 1990s was 14 percentage points lower than the rate for men in the case of technicians and 10 points lower in the case of professionals.
This is one area in which skills are going to waste, in terms of both the income forgone by these women professionals and technicians and the private and public resources invested in training them.
Open unemployment among highly qualified workers is another example of how human resources are being underused or wasted in the region.
The persistence of relatively high open unemployment rates, with longer periods of unemployment for the economically active population as a whole, but also for the more highly skilled population, points to an erosion of the Latin American economies’ capacity to generate enough jobs to absorb the supply of technically and professionally qualified workers.
The trend away from salaried positions for more highly qualified workers and their concentration in lower–paying tertiary activities (about 50% of them work in social, community and personal services) clearly illustrate the economies’ poor capacity to make productive use of the greatly increased supply of skilled human resources.
Another way in which qualified human resources are wasted is the employment of professionals and technicians to perform functions that do not make use of the knowledge and skills they have acquired as a result of public and private investment in the formal post–secondary education system.
This is apparent in the very low effective remuneration obtained in the urban labour market by some 2.4 million wage earners and 1.1 million own–account workers with advanced qualifications (see figure 4).
Unemployment also represents a waste of skilled workers; while unemployment is lower among professionals and technicians than among less qualified workers, the time that elapses between jobs and, accordingly, the time for which these human resources go unused is longer for the former group: in the late 1990s, over a million people with advanced qualifications were in this situation.
A comparison between the supply of professionally and technically qualified workers and the degree to which their skills are used reveals that, while this supply is expanding relatively quickly in the region, the relevant economies have failed to generate enough jobs to absorb this expansion, even during relatively high–growth periods.
In urban areas, out of a total of 19 million professionals and technicians, the skills of nearly 4.5 million are not being put to full use.
Of these, just over 1 million are openly unemployed, while the rest work in jobs whose pay levels are not commensurate with the educational investment represented by these workers.
The extent to which qualifications go unused implies that the region’s higher education and training systems should be made more flexible so that they can adapt to changes in the demand for specialized human resources.
This would enable them to meet the emerging needs of production systems by responding to rapid technological changes and to the new requirements imposed by participation in international trade flows.
School drop–out rates in Latin America O towards the Millennium development goals is the achievement of the goal ne of the biggest challenges that the region must meet in order to progress concerning education.
A number of ECLAC documents and previous editions of the Social Panorama have pointed out that the completion of secondary school is now the minimum educational achievement required to give individuals a good chance of staying above the poverty line during their working lives.
In some countries, however, this achievement is already insufficient because the speedy expansion of education has led to its devaluation in the labour market, which now offers fewer jobs and demands that candidates meet ever–increasing skill requirements to fill them.
Thus, the goal of universal primary education by 2015 is a necessary but insufficient condition for the region.
In other words, it cannot be ignored –since its achievement by 2015 is by no means certain– but it is also clearly inadequate to supply the skills necessary for Latin American development.
Accordingly, without failing to pay due attention to the full achievement of the objective laid down in the Millennium Declaration, the countries of the region should seek to identify the obstacles they face in universalizing high–quality primary education and progressing towards educational goals that are better suited to their particular national circumstances.
These goals should focus not only on setting a minimum number of years of schooling for both boys and girls, but also on the quality and relevance of the material taught and, especially, on eliminating disparities between the educational achievements of public– and private–school students.
The analysis in this edition of the Social Panorama emphasizes that, despite the broad coverage of basic education and the expansion of enrolment in secondary education over the past decade, Latin America still has very high drop–out rates.
This phenomenon, which characterizes both primary and secondary education, is one of the main stumbling blocks hindering the region’s fulfilment of all the goals set by the United Nations for 2015.
The countries of the region must therefore allocate more resources to policies and programmes aimed at preventing children from leaving school before they have finished their basic education and at significantly reducing drop–out rates in secondary education.
Even as progress has been made towards universal basic education, especially in urban areas, a very high proportion of boys, girls and teenagers leave the school system at an early stage without attaining the minimum knowledge and skill levels they need to become productive members of society.
Insufficient preschool education coverage, together with ample access to basic education but poor retention rates in primary and secondary school, are features of the educational systems of all the countries of the region, to a 4 See United Nations (2001). greater or lesser extent.
Grade repetition and falling behind in school –which often precede the decision to drop out– and a poor grasp of basic educational material are characteristic problems of Latin American school systems that undermine their capacity to promote equal opportunity and social inclusion.
It is therefore important to develop a regional overview of the level and trends of drop–out rates and of some of the main factors associated with the capacity of the family and the educational system to prevent children and teenagers from leaving the system before completing secondary school.
This edition of the Social Panorama provides estimates of drop–out rates in the Latin American countries and of how they changed in the 1990s.
To this end, a methodology based on household survey information was developed to complement and regularly follow up on the scarce background data available on this phenomenon, which often are not very comparable.
The analysis begins with a classification of the educational status of young people between the ages of 15 and 19.
On this basis, a set of indicators of drop–out rates at various stages of primary and secondary education was developed (see chapter III, box III.1).
Background information on drop–out rates in 18 Latin American countries indicates that, as of 2000, some 15 million between the ages of 15 and 19, out of a total of 49.4 million, had left school before completing 12 years of study.
About 70% of them (10.5 million) had done so at an early stage, before or upon completing primary school.
Over and above these figures, 1.4 million had never attended school or had left before completing the first year of primary school.
The gap between urban and rural areas was narrowed somewhat by improvements in school retention rates in nearly all the Latin American countries over the past decade.
Wide disparities persist, however: circa 2000 the total drop–out rate in rural areas (48%) was nearly twice the rate for urban areas (26%) (see table 2).
The overall drop–out rate among urban teenagers was less than 20% in Bolivia, Chile, Peru and the Dominican Republic.
In eight countries (Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Uruguay and Venezuela), the rate was between 25% and 35%, while in Honduras and Guatemala it reached 40% and 47%, respectively (see figure 5).
With respect to gender differences, the analysis shows that girls in urban areas drop out less often than boys; they also have lower repetition rates, and more girls than boys between the ages of 15 and 19 complete secondary school on schedule.
In rural areas, however, girls tend to leave school earlier than boys, especially in the initial years of primary school, and in some countries (Bolivia, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and the Dominican Republic) a higher percentage of girls than boys never enter the system or leave it without completing the first grade.
Dropping out is the culmination of a process shaped by multiple factors and circumstances, some of which concern children and teenagers themselves or their socio–economic status (out–of–school factors), while others are associated with shortcomings in the educational system (in–school factors).
It is crucial to identify these drop–out risk factors more precisely, as well as the circumstances and processes that induce young people to give up their studies, in order to design policies and programmes to achieve rapid improvements in retention rates and to progress towards the fulfilment of the Millennium development goals.
Among the out–of–school factors, low household income and the various deficiencies in the material well–being of poor children and teenagers are a key reason why their drop–out and repetition rates are higher than those of their middle– and high–income counterparts.
On average, drop–out rates for teenagers from urban households in the lowest income quartile are triple the rates for teenagers from households in the top income quartile.
While dropping out at an early stage is less frequent in these countries than in the others, it is an increasingly intractable problem of social policy.
A look at drop–out trends in the 1990s reveals that the overall improvements recorded did not significantly narrow the disparities between the educational achievements of teenagers from different social groups.
This implies that one consequence of the persistence of educational underachievement in the region is the maintenance of inequalities and social exclusion among Latin America’s youth.
It also shows that household income levels and shortages are still a decisive –perhaps an even more decisive– consideration for steering policies and targeting programme benefits, though the design of such policies and programmes should be based on an understanding of the varied and complex factors that influence decisions to leave school at different stages of the education process.
The final decision to drop out is rarely unexpected; it is, rather, the culmination of a chain of circumstances that raise the drop–out risk as the student gets older and experiences mounting difficulties in performance and adaptation, especially at the point of transition from primary to secondary school.
Among these factors, a low level of education on the part of the mother (five or fewer years of study) and, to a lesser extent, the absence of one of the parents have clear effects on drop–out rates.
While the presence of only one parent in the household increases the risk of dropping out by an average of nearly 40% in urban areas, a poorly educated mother increases this risk by over 170%.
Since both factors precede children’s entry into the educational system, both are clearly attributive factors.
These circumstances, particularly the mother’s level of education, are therefore considered key elements in the transmission of socio–economic inequality.
As for the immediate reasons given by young people for dropping out of school, over 70% of drop–outs in Bolivia, Nicaragua, Paraguay and El Salvador say that they left because of economic problems or because they were working or looking for work, while over 50% of drop–outs in Chile, Peru and Venezuela give these reasons.
Among young women, economic factors are equally important, but household chores and pregnancy or motherhood are often mentioned as well.
As might be expected, only in rural areas is lack of access to schools a relatively common reason for dropping out.
Youth employment is also associated with differences in drop–out rates: in urban areas, 53% of young people who work gave up their studies before finishing secondary school, with 15% dropping out at an early stage, while the proportions among young people who do not work are only 19% and 6%, respectively.
In rural areas, 71% of young people who work have not completed their education, compared to 38% of those who do not work.
These differences, however, do not necessarily mean that work is a factor that raises drop–out rates, since it is impossible to tell from household surveys whether the young people concerned began to work before or after leaving school.
The high social and private costs generated by high drop–out rates in Latin America point to the need to launch new programmes and devote more resources to the urgent task of keeping children and teenagers in the school system.
Indeed, there are few areas in which resource investments bring higher returns.
The social costs of dropping out include those that result from having a less qualified and less “qualifiable” workforce, when individuals have not attained the minimum level of education they need to benefit from training programmes offered by the State or by firms.
The extreme case is the cost of dropping out at a very early stage of the education process, which leads to functional illiteracy.
Low labour productivity and its dampening effect on economic growth, as well as the higher expenditure needed to finance social programmes and transfers to sectors that cannot generate their own resources, are also regarded as some of the social costs of dropping out.
At another level, the social costs can also be deemed to include the intergenerational transmission of social inequalities and its adverse impact on social integration, which undermines efforts to strengthen and deepen democracy.
To generate orders of magnitude of the individual losses that result from dropping out of school, estimates were prepared of the returns or wage income obtained in the region’s urban labour markets for each additional year of education.
On that basis, it was possible to calculate the costs (in terms of lower future income) incurred by those who complete fewer years of study in comparison to a baseline level of education.
The estimates –which refer to the returns obtained in urban labour markets for additional years of education– show that, in countries where dropping out occurs early in the education process, increasing retention up to the end of primary school (four additional years of study) translates into a 25%–to–60% increase in earned income.
In countries where dropping out usually coincides with the end of primary school, the completion of three more years of education (up to the end of middle school) results in increases of between 30% and 50%.
In countries that have achieved relatively high secondary education coverage, dropping out before the end of secondary school also entails considerable private and social losses: leaving secondary school two years before completing it results in a 20%–to–30% loss of income.
In conclusion, policies to help keep children in school yield significant benefits not only by reducing social costs, but also by increasing earned income.
More opportunities to obtain better–paid jobs also mean fewer and shorter periods of unemployment for those who complete secondary school and can continue their studies, as well as smaller wage losses upon starting a new job.
Enhancing the internal efficiency of school systems also results in considerable savings of public resources, since repeating students and drop–outs are concentrated in State–run and/or State–financed educational institutions.
An equally important consideration is that drastically reducing the number of children who leave school before or upon completing their primary education is the best way to prevent child labour and comply with international agreements on this subject, as laid down in the Convention on the Rights of the Child.
In addition, the findings on the private rewards to be derived from additional years of education suggests that, as a rule, continued enrolment in school yields higher returns for girls than for boys in urban labour markets, meaning that policies to keep girls in school should help to narrow the gender wage gap.
It should be reiterated that social programmes to discourage dropping out at an early stage should be given priority on the agendas of the region’s governments.
Efforts to raise retention rates in primary school, along with improvements in education quality, are crucial for enabling the region to meet the Millennium development goals.
These efforts not only promote progress towards the education goals adopted by governments for 2015, but are also a precondition for reducing inequalities and achieving more ambitious objectives in terms of improving the quality of Latin America’s human resources.
It is therefore essential to continue to assess the achievements, constraints and impact on retention rates of programmes such as Brazil’s “Bolsa Escola” scholarship programme and Mexico’s “Progresa” education, health and food programme,5 which, if replicated in other countries, could have an equally profound impact on poverty reduction and the improvement of human capital in the longer term.
The structure of the labour supply must be more closely aligned with that of labour demand, in a context of rising productivity and income, to guarantee that the additional years of study undertaken by young people are duly rewarded and that education is not devalued.
The potential and limitations of social capital he purpose of the social agenda is to provide an assessment of emerging social issues in Latin America.
Recently, the issue of social capital and its potential contribution to social policies has taken on increasing importance.
The variety of definitions of social capital reflects, in part, the fact that the concept is used in different disciplines, each of which focuses on separate aspects.
International development agencies consider it useful because it emphasizes the need to understand the relationships between economic agents and between their organizations (both formal and informal), and serves to enhance the efficiency of economic and social activities.
Such social and institutional relationships are deemed desirable because they generate positive externalities for development.
According to this view, there is a form of complementation between public policies and associativity and the social capital paradigm based on trust, reciprocity and cooperation.
Social capital is regarded as a factor that reduces transaction costs, produces public goods and facilitates the work of effective grass–roots organizations.
These limitations are compounded by the fact that, owing to the multifaceted nature of this concept, common indicators have yet to be developed and measured.
The concept of social capital can nonetheless represent a valuable input for poverty reduction programmes.
Notable in this regard are efforts to broaden participation through the active involvement of stakeholders, as a way of enhancing accountability and attaching due importance to the programme environment.
Suggestions for building or strengthening existing social capital include four possible types of policies: promotional, cultural, participatory and coordination– and synergy–oriented policies.
Lessons can be drawn from experiences in Brazil, Chile and Guatemala on the usefulness of incorporating social capital components into poverty eradication programmes.
They include the use of non–traditional forms of social capital, the adoption of innovative organizational structures and, most importantly, genuine political will on the part of State institutions to share their economic resources and, ultimately, their power.
From a methodological standpoint, consideration of the forms of social capital that exist or have existed in a community facilitates the development of participatory methodologies and the empowerment of weak social actors.
It must be stressed, however, that this process can be slow, and in some cases very costly, though it does produce interesting results when it is underpinned with adequate resources and training, along with the political will to change the conditions of poverty of specific population groups.
It can, however, help ensure the success of programmes and projects for reducing poverty in the region.
Like past editions, this year’s Social Panorama includes a section on the international social agenda, which outlines major international meetings and agreements on social issues over the past year.
At both meetings, the heads of State and Government of the region reaffirmed their commitment to strengthening peace, development, environmental protection and human rights.
Specifically, the participants in the Ibero–American Summit focused on the rights of the child, while those in the Rio Group summit centred their discussions on policies concerning the family.
Non–governmental organizations, meanwhile, held two world social forums in Porto Alegre, Brazil, which attracted a broad range of participants.
At both meetings the new features of globalization were analysed, with particular emphasis on their social impact.
Under the banner “Another world is possible”, various thematic proposals were put forward for combating and offering alternatives to what has been called the “single development model”.
Chapter I Possibilities and limitations for the reduction of poverty and the redistribution of income A.
The recent situation The economic growth of Latin America as a whole has been marked by sluggishness and instability, due partly to the changing international environment.
Thus, in 2002 the region will have lost half a decade of growth since the Asian crisis, with a decline of around 2% in the per capita product compared with the 1997 level.
The region as a whole, then, registered a GDP growth rate of 3.9% in 2000, as compared with only 0.5% in 1999, though the per capita figures were only 2.3% and -1.1%, respectively.
It should be remembered, however, that in a number of cases the better performance in 2000 only reflected a partial recovery from Furthermore, the year 2001 was marked by the weakening or exhaustion of several of the growth factors mentioned.
The external environment was characterized by the simultaneous loss of dynamism of all the main world economies, i.e., the United States, the European Union and Japan, although the intensity and mechanisms by which each country was affected by the world economic slowdown were not the same in all cases.
In some cases (Mexico and Central America, for example) the main factor was the slower growth of trade volumes, whereas in others (the countries exporting petroleum, minerals and tropical products) the deterioration in the terms of trade was more important, and still others (Argentina and Brazil) were affected in particular by the reduced access to external finance.
Moreover, a with the 1990s (see table I.1 and table 1 of the statistical appendix). number of countries had ongoing imbalances and domestic problems which were aggravated or revealed by the deterioration in the external environment but in any case were hindrances to growth in themselves.
Examples of these are the energy crisis in Brazil and the problems of over–indebtedness and the system of "convertibility" in Argentina.
Thus, all in all Latin America registered GDP growth of only 0.4% in 2001, which amounts to a 1.1% contraction in the per capita product.
Finally, it may be noted that notwithstanding the foregoing, urban minimum wages showed a general upward trend in the region in the 2000–2001 period, although by widely differing amounts.
Whereas in Guatemala the minimum wage rose by 10.8%, in Argentina, Colombia and Mexico it did not increase by more than 1.0%, and in Costa Rica and Uruguay it actually went down.
For its part, inflation remained relatively stable in most of the countries, with average monthly rises in the consumer price index of less than 1% in all cases except Ecuador and Venezuela.
The inflation rates registered in 2001 were generally lower than in 2000, the only exceptions being Brazil, Costa Rica and Guatemala.
The 2000–2001 period thus displays two opposing movements as regards per capita GDP growth, that is to say, a year of growth followed by a year of contraction.
Taking the average for 2000 and 2001, the Latin American per capita GDP grew at an average rate of 0.5%.
Several countries suffered a decline in their per capita product in that period, especially in the case of such South American countries as Argentina (-3.9%), Uruguay (-3.0%), Paraguay (-1.6%) and Bolivia (-0.4%).
Special mention may be made of the case of Argentina, whose current economic crisis is one of the most serious registered in the region in recent decades (see box I.2).
Substantial falls in the per capita product were also registered, however, in Haiti (-1.2%) and Costa Rica (-0.6%).
In terms of the percentage of poor and extremely poor persons, the figures for the latter year represented 44% and 18% respectively of the Latin American population.
The achievements in reducing the relative incidence of poverty were not reflected in a similar reduction in absolute terms, however, since the number of poor grew by 11 million to a total of 211 million in 1999.
In the case of the indigent population, however, there was a reduction of approximately 4 million This alternation of growth and contraction gave rise in the 2000–2001 period to one of the highest unemployment rates observed in the region in the last ten years, exceeding the 1990–1999 average by 1.3 percentage points.
The rates were still higher in Argentina, Colombia, Paraguay and Uruguay, where they were between four and six percentage points higher than those of the previous decade.
In most of the countries it refers only to formal workers in the industrial sector.The figure for 2000 is a preliminary estimate.
Costa Rica, Guatemala and Uruguay the reductions were between 5 and 10 percentage points.
In Venezuela, however, poverty increased by over nine points and in Paraguay by nearly seven points, while Ecuador, Colombia, Honduras and Mexico did not achieve any significant reductions in poverty levels (see table I.2). persons, to a total of 89 million at the end of 1999 (see table I.2).
The evolution of poverty in the region during the 1990s was the result of a combination of heterogeneous trends at the individual country level.
On the basis of these trends of the past decade, ECLAC projections2 indicate that around the year 2000 the incidence of poverty in Latin America was around 42.1% and that of indigence around 17.8%.
This means that in that year the rates of poverty and indigence had been brought down thanks to the modest but positive growth registered by various coun- tries of the region.
Furthermore, this reduction in percentage terms is also estimated to have been reflected in a smaller volume of the population living in conditions of want, since the poor totalled 206.7 million and the indigent 87.5 million, i.e., 5 million and 3 million less, respectively, than in 1999 (see box I.1).
Identifying those effects calls for new measurements based on the household surveys held in these years.
Currently, however, there are few cases where processed data from household surveys carried out after 1999 are available.
The poverty figures given hereafter were obtained in most cases by projecting the data from 1999 household surveys, taking into account both the expected economic growth and the changes in distribution.The micro–simulation method used for this purpose is described in box I.4.
In recent months, due to such factors as the marked deterioration in the purchasing power of the peso, growing unemployment and the lack of a safety net for the neediest sectors, there has been a drastic decline in the living conditions of the population, whose real extent has yet to be determined.
Indigence, for its part, is estimated to have increased by 5.4 percentage points between 1999 and 2001 and will very likely increase by a further 4.1 points in 2002.
The trend that may be gathered from these figures is in line with other estimates of poverty in Argentina.
According to the National Institute of Statistics and Censuses (INDEC), in May 2002 poverty affected 49.7% of the population of Greater Buenos Aires –23 points more than in October 1999– while the rate of indigence was 22.7%: an increase of 16 points compared with 1999.
Although these figures are not directly comparable with the ECLAC projections, they are just as illustrative of the speed with which economic crises can affect social conditions and wipe out the achievements previously attained.
A broader picture of the problem, which confirms the foregoing, may be obtained from the behaviour of the open unemployment rate in urban areas, which came to 21.5% in May 2002, representing an increase of 7.7 points since October 1999.
It is important to note that the Argentine crisis not only affects the present economic and social conditions but also seriously limits the country’s future possibilities of reducing poverty and fulfilling the Millennium Goals, because not only has the drop in the product been very pronounced but also it will probably take several years even to recover the previous levels.
In the year 2000, ten countries had reduced their poverty rates by at least 0.4 percentage points compared with 1999.
Outstanding among them were Mexico and the Dominican Republic, whose reductions exceeded five points: a major achievement in a period of only two years (1998–2000).
Other countries which are estimated to have reduced their levels of poverty by quite substantial amounts (around 2.4 percentage points) were Ecuador and Nicaragua.
As in the case of overall poverty, Paraguay displayed the biggest deterioration in terms of extreme poverty, with an increase of nearly two percentage points.
Moreover, as already noted at the start of this chapter, the performance of the economy during 2001 was far below what was expected at the beginning of the year.
Not only was the growth rate of the regional product much lower, but also there was an enormous deterioration in the social situation in countries like Argentina and Uruguay.
In addition, all the countries of the region were affected –some more than others– by the slowdown in economic growth.
In view of all this, it is hardly surprising that the incidence of poverty probably increased in 2001, thus reversing the downward trend in that incidence during the 1990s.
The most notable deterioration was in Argentina, which, with its figures of a 5.6% increase in poverty and a 3.1% rise in indigence, is clearly an exceptional case in the region.
Mexico, Uruguay and Peru are also estimated to have registered increases (of between 1.0 and 1.2 percentage points) in their rates of poverty.
At the other extreme, it is estimated, Chile, Ecuador, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela not only avoided an increase in their rates of poverty and indigence but may even have managed to reduce them.
These figures also show that the poverty rate for Latin America as a whole went down by 0.8 percentage points between 1999 and 2001, thanks to the marked reduction registered during the year 2000, which the subsequent deterioration did not succeed in offsetting.
Indigence, however, is estimated to have remained almost unchanged compared with 1999, varying by only 0.1 points.
In this case, the increase projected for 2001 does appear to have outweighed the reduction achieved in the year 2000.
In absolute terms, although the results of the projections predict a reduction in the relative rate of poverty at the regional level, the number of poor in Latin America nevertheless grew by some 3 million persons between 1999 and 2001.
If the comparison is made between 2000 and 2001, the growth in the number of poor persons would amount to over 7 million, of which 5 million are indigent.
This is a matter of particular concern, since it would appear to indicate that the deterioration in living conditions was greatest for the most vulnerable groups.
Finally, one of the clearest consequences of the recent economic slowdown is the downward review of economic growth expectations for the year 2002.
According to the latest available projections, the per capita product of the region will go down by around 2.4% during the present year, with the biggest declines being in Argentina (-15%) and Uruguay and Venezuela (around -5% in both cases).
A reduction in the per capita GDP, although by a substantially smaller amount, is also expected in Bolivia, Colombia, Mexico, Panama and Paraguay, with a state of stagnation in Brazil and most of Central America.
These negative growth expectations are reflected in an increase in the level of poverty projected for 2002, when the percentage of persons in a state of poverty will probably reach around 44%, one percentage point higher than in 2001, while the proportion of indigents will amount to a little less than 20%.
The greatest increase in poverty is expected to be registered once again in Argentina, as in 2001; there could also be significant increases in Venezuela, Paraguay and Uruguay, while only in Peru and the Dominican Republic is there likely to be a slight reduction in poverty.
With regard to the total number of poor, the projections for 2002 indicate a probable increase of around seven million persons compared with 2001, of whom six million will be indigent.
If these assumptions come true, the number of poor in the region will have increased by 15 million during the 2000–2002 period, which represents a serious deterioration in the social situation in the region.
It should be noted, however, that these figures do not represent proportional increases in the volume of poverty in all the countries of the region: the increase in the number of poor in Argentina, which accounts for one–third of the total increase in the region, would be one of the main elements in the overall deterioration.
All the projections made so far are based on the assumption that, during periods of negative or very low growth, income distribution suffered only minimal deterioration compared with the previous year.
As emphasized later on in this article, the notable effect that small reductions in inequality can have on poverty highlights the importance that public policies should attach to the income distribution aspect as a fundamental element in the fight against poverty.
Towards fulfilment of the targets in terms of poverty reduction Although the reduction of extreme poverty by half by the year 2015 continues to be feasible for Latin America, the more modest expectations regarding the economic growth that can be attained during the period give rise to restrictions and doubts in this respect.
It is therefore increasingly important to formulate policies which will strengthen the growth capacity but at the same time permit the progressive redistribution of resources so as to give preference to the aim of raising the standards of living of the most deprived sectors. growth rate of 3.8% per year).
It was also noted that, because of the wide range of different economic and social conditions among the countries, some would have to make major growth efforts, while others could meet the desired target with somewhat lower growth rates.
Among those targets, one which has received the greatest attention is that of reducing extreme poverty by half by the year 2015.4 The previous edition of the Social Panorama contained a projection of the possibility of fulfilling the target of reducing extreme poverty in Latin America, based on the historical relation between growth and poverty.
At this historic event, the heads of State and Government of the world undertook to participate actively in the fulfillment of the nine development goals for the coming decades, set forth in the Millennium Declaration.
The targets and commitments expressed in the Millennium Declaration are based on values considered to be of fundamental importance for the proper functioning of international relations, such as freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect for nature and shared responsibility.
In this context, the duties of the world community are to solve problems related with world peace and disarmament, development and poverty eradication, protection of the environment, human rights and democracy, protection of the vulnerable population, meeting the special needs of Africa, and strengthening the United Nations.
The explicit agreement of the countries to attain common development objectives and the definition of new goals make the Millennium Declaration a document of transcendental importance.
In particular, this edition of the Social Panorama of Latin America evaluates the conditions needed to make possible the fulfillment of the first of the above objectives, namely, halving the number of persons in a state of extreme poverty.
Firstly, in line with the formulation presented by the Secretary–General of the United Nations,6 the benchmark poverty rates are those of 1990: i.e., the target is to halve, by 2015, the rates of extreme poverty registered in 1990.
Secondly, we are now using a simulation methodology which explicitly makes it possible to take account of the changes in income distribution (see box I.4). similar figure, but the countries with the highest levels of poverty would need to maintain a growth rate close to 4% per year.
In this edition of the Social Panorama it has been considered appropriate to review the region’s capacity to meet the target set in the Millennium Declaration, because of the significant changes in growth expectations which have taken place in the present two–year period.
By comparing the income vector ynew with the value of the poverty line, we obtain the corresponding poverty rate.
In the particular case of figure I.4, the poverty level represented by the "iso–poverty curves" is that corresponding to half the poverty rate registered in 1990 for each country.
It is important to note that a given reduction in the Gini index can be obtained in various ways.
Both a transfer of income from the richest to the poorest segments and a transfer between persons in the intermediate distribution segment are compatible with a reduction of x% in inequality, but they will have different effects on the poverty rate.
In this particular case, the reduction in inequality is obtained by reducing, by a percentage equal to α, the distance of each of the incomes concerned from the mean µ.
Consequently, the changes affect the extremes of the distribution scale –the incomes furthest from the mean– most strongly and have less effect on those in the centre.This assumption simplifies the process of calculation and the interpretation of the results, although it may not coincide exactly with the empirical evidence on changes in distribution.
Although the results given by this method are valid for illustrating the effect of income distribution on poverty reduction, the values may be subject to margins of variation.
Moreover, the possibility of drastic and unpredictable changes in the evolution of the economy, like those observed in the present Argentine crisis, highlights the need for caution when analysing any projection of this nature.
A first aspect to be addressed is that of determining the most appropriate poverty line for making the projections to the year 2015 for the Latin American countries.
In the Millennium Declaration it is proposed that an income of a dollar a day, adjusted by the purchasing power parity, should be used as the extreme poverty line, corresponding to an international minimum poverty standard by which a person would be considered poor in any country in the world.
Such a minimum standard is not very representative of the than advancing.
According to this approach, the incidence of extreme poverty in Latin America went down by 4.7 percentage points between 1990 and 2000, which represents 41% fulfillment of the target. over 95% progress towards the goal, and Uruguay, with over 82% progress.
Countries like Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Mexico and Nicaragua have made nearly 40% progress: in other words, they are on the right track for meeting the target by the year 2015.
Argentina, Bolivia, Honduras and Peru have also made progress towards the target, albeit at rates which, if not increased, would not enable them to meet it by the end of the stipulated period.
According to the new estimates, in order to halve the 1990 level of extreme poverty in Latin America by the year 2015, an annual per capita GDP growth rate of the order of 1.4% would be required during the period from 2000 to 2015, assuming that income distribution remains unchanged throughout the period.
In terms of total GDP, the annual growth rate required would be 2.7% (see table I.3). groups of countries.
Thus, the countries classified as "high poverty" would require a per capital GDP growth rate of 3.5% per year; the intermediate group would need to grow at a rate of 1.4%, and the countries with the lowest levels of poverty would need a per capita GDP growth rate of only 1.3% per year.
These figures correspond to total GDP growth rates of 5.7%, 2.7% and 2.5% per year, respectively.
As the degree of progress of the countries of the region in the fight against poverty is very uneven, the situation should be evaluated as a function of that progress.
In this case, the countries have been classified as "high poverty" (over 30%), "medium poverty" (between 11.1% and 30%) and "low poverty" (11% or less), as a function of the poverty levels estimated for the year 2000.
The big differences between the growth rates needed by the three groups are due to two factors.
The first is the absolute difference (in percentage points) between the indigence level registered in 1990 and the target for 2015, because the smaller this difference is, the lower the per capita GDP growth rate needed, generally speaking.
The second factor affecting these growth rates is the performance of the countries between 1990 and 2000 in terms of poverty reduction, which tended to be better among those with less poverty.
It is interesting to note that in this respect only one country –Venezuela– has slipped back from the 1990 levels; the rest have all achieved some kind of advance towards the goal (although in four cases this advance is no more than 5%) (see figure I.2).
An additional target set –more in keeping, in principle, with Latin America’s relative degree of development in the world context– was to halve total poverty, and not just extreme poverty.
From this perspective, no Latin American country has yet reached this goal, although Chile, Panama and Uruguay seem to have come closest, with progress of at least 70% towards this target.
According to these results, the poorest countries’ possibilities of reaching the target are very small, as the 7% annual growth of the total product which would be needed is far beyond their historical possibilities (see figure I.3).
The smallest (positive) difference between the two rates is in the case of Venezuela, where a growth rate like that needed to halve indigence would give a similar result for total poverty too. 2000–2015 period.
Two years of this period have already elapsed in which the region’s performance was well below what is needed, with per capita GDP growth rates that were very low, and even negative in some countries, to say nothing of the serious crisis in Argentina and its effect on the economies of the region.
The results obtained show that the effects of changes in distribution on the rates of poverty and indigence are by no means negligible, and that an effort in this direction would greatly ease the burden of raising the living standards of the neediest, as compared with efforts based exclusively on economic growth.
In view of the foregoing, it is obvious, first of all, that the goal of reducing extreme poverty involves very different challenges for the different countries.
Specifically, whereas the countries with high rates of poverty need to grow much faster than they did in the 1990s, on average the countries with low rates only need to keep up the performance they registered during that period.
Secondly, meeting the targets in terms of the reduction of total poverty represents an enormous challenge for the whole region, which, although still feasible if there is a possible recovery of growth in the coming years, will be increasingly arduous in the present context of low expectations and prolonged crises.
This confirms yet again the need to adopt economic and social policies which, while strengthening the possibilities of broadening the production base, also include the progressive redistribution of income, as a complementary option to economic growth which will make it possible to substantially raise the standard of living of the poorest sectors of the population.
If it is assumed that the region can secure some small improvements in income distribution in the coming years, this considerably reduces the efforts to increase the product which would be needed in order to meet the targets.
Merely assuming a 2% reduction in the Gini index in each of the countries –corresponding to a reduction of 0.01 points or less in the value of that coefficient– would mean that the region would only need to grow on average by 0.9% per year (instead of 1.4%) in order to halve the rate of extreme poverty.
From another perspective, if the region were able to maintain a growth rate around 1.4% per year, then a reduction of 2% in the average Gini index would mean that the target could be reached five years earlier.
A somewhat larger reduction in inequality (reduction of the Gini index by 5%) would mean that indigence could be halved with only a 0.3% annual increase in the per capita product (see table I.4) or, alternatively, that only four years would be needed to reach the poverty target.
In this respect, it is well known that most of the Latin American countries have average income levels which are several times higher than the poverty line, so that hypothetical equitable distribution of total income would be more than sufficient to provide all the inhabitants of the region with a decent standard of living.
Changes in inequality would also favour the process of reducing total poverty.
A reduction of 2% in the Gini index of each country would reduce the regional growth rate needed for this target by 0.4 percentage points.
If inequality were reduced by 5%, 0.9 percentage points less of annual growth of the per capita product would be needed, or alternatively the goal could be reached by 2010.
The combinations referred to above correspond to specific points on these curves.
With regard to the combinations between growth and changes in inequality needed to reduce poverty, two general results are noted.
Firstly, although any improvement in income distribution favours the reduction of both poverty and indigence, the biggest impact is noted in the reduction of indigence, at least for small changes in distribution.
It should be noted that this result could be affected if the changes in distribution were implemented in a different way from that used in the simulation.
Secondly, it is noted that, the lower the level of extreme poverty assumed in the target for 2015, the more the reduction of the growth rate needed to attain that goal will be favoured by small changes in distribution.
This becomes clear from the fact that the growth rates needed when progressing from no redistribution at all to a reduction of 2% in the Gini coefficient go down proportionately more, the lower is the indigence target of a country (leaving aside cases where the target is very close to being reached).
For example, if in the case of Costa Rica the Gini coefficient were reduced by 2%, the growth rate needed to halve extreme poverty would be 0.9 percentage points lower than that needed if distribution remained unchanged.
In the case of Honduras, in contrast –the country with the highest target for indigence– the growth rate needed would go down by only 0.3 percentage points for a similar reduction in the rate of inequality. in order to reach the indigence target.
A similar analysis, but this time with regard to the halving of total poverty, indicates that with a 10% improvement in the Gini index, the growth rate needed to reach the target would be less than 0.5% per year in Argentina (before the crisis), Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Panama, the Dominican Republic and Uruguay.
In Bolivia and Honduras, however, the required growth rate would continue to be very high: of the order of 4.1% per year in the first case and 5.8% in the second.
Thus, poverty reduction in Latin America is a disparate phenomenon in terms of the factors that have the greatest incidence on it.
In some countries (mostly those with low indices of poverty) income inequality is the most important factor in poverty reduction, whereas in others (typically those with high indices of poverty) economic growth is the factor with the biggest impact on reduction of the percentage of the population who are poor.
Joint analysis of the iso–poverty curves and the figures in table I.4 make it possible to characterize the countries as a function of their growth and redistribution requirements.
For example, Argentina (before the crisis), Brazil, Mexico, the Dominican Republic and Uruguay are countries which, by reducing their Gini indexes by 5%, would not need to increase their growth rates in order to halve extreme poverty (plus, of course, countries which have already reached that target, such as Chile and Panama).
Costa Rica could also be added to the list if it made a 10% reduction in that indicator of inequality.
At the other extreme are Honduras and Bolivia, which, even with a drastic reduction in inequality of income distribution, would need high growth rates The fact that the assumptions of the simulation model do not faithfully represent the actual situations in terms of changes in distribution does not invalidate the results obtained.
By way of illustration, box I.5 presents some "iso–poverty curves" for 1990, assuming that it had been desired to reach the poverty levels of the year 1999.
In most cases, the combination of growth and distributional changes which actually took place between 1990 and 1999 corresponds to a point close to the intersection of the poverty and indigence curves, which suggests that the method is reasonably robust for representing those changes.
However, its effectiveness can be significantly reduced by such factors as insufficiently representative sources of information, shifts in poverty lines, or distributional changes which are not reflected by the method.
In order to evaluate the empirical consistency of the model, "iso–poverty curves" were constructed for 1990 which show the combinations of growth and redistribution that would have made it possible to reach the poverty levels actually recorded in 1999.
The figure also identifies the point corresponding to the changes in per capita GDP and the Gini index observed between 1990 and 1999 in each country.
A snapshot of income distribution in the region Labour remuneration, made up principally of wages and salaries, is the main component of family income in Latin America.
Improving the distribution of income from this source, as well as that from property rents, calls for the implementation of policies which will help to increase the productive resources of the poorest sectors, and these normally only bear fruit in the medium or long term.
Public transfers, in contrast, have more immediate effects, but their low incidence in total household income considerably reduces their distributive impact, although they undoubtedly have a significant effect in raising the living standards of deprived sectors.
Moreover, heads of household continue to be the main breadwinners, in spite of the sustained increase in the contribution made by secondary recipients.
In this respect, women’s contribution to the household budget now amounts to a third of the whole, after having registered a significant increase in the 1990s.
A the Social Panorama of Latin America 2000– reached in the preceding section on the importance of improvements in distribution in the fight against poverty.
At all events, it is worth taking a brief look at the income generation structure underlying the patterns of concentration observed in the countries of the region.
Thus, of the fourteen countries analysed in that edition, only two showed signs of a reduction in inequality (ECLAC, 2001a, tables 22 and 24 in the statistical appendix).
This rigidity in income distribution is a matter of concern, especially in the light of the conclusions An analysis of household income structure by sources10 confirms, first of all, the continuing importance of labour remuneration in the income profile prevailing in the majority of countries.
In 1999 it represented on average between 63% (in Brazil) and 90% (in Ecuador and Nicaragua) of total household income, and in at least eleven countries this propor- tion exceeded 80%.
The predominant importance of this source suggests that its contribution to global inequality is very considerable and that, consequently, changes in its distribution can have significant effects on variations in the inequality of total income distribution (see table I.5).
It may be noted that the imputed rent is an important income source for the purpose of evaluating the standard of living of households, since in some countries it can represent a higher proportion of total income than transfers or income from property.
Within income deriving from the labour market, that received by wage earners plays a dominant role.
In seven of the eighteen countries analysed, the remuneration of this group represents over half of total family income, and in one of them (Costa Rica) it exceeds 60%.
In the regional context, the share of employers averages 12%, but this is associated with wide dispersion, as reflected in the extreme values of Panama (5.0%) and Ecuador (20.8%).
Thus, public and private transfers, mainly comprising pensions paid by social security systems, represent the third largest source of such income in many Latin American countries, after the income of wage earners and own–account workers, accounting for an average contribution of nearly 13% of total household resources.
Indeed, in some countries (such as Brazil and Uruguay) transfers represented the second most important source in 1999, after wages and salaries, accounting for nearly a quarter of the total family budget.
It should also be noted that in almost all the countries transfers accounted for a larger share than property rents, which, with an average share of 6.1%, were the smallest source of income.
The income of own–account workers represents the second most important element in household income.
Its regional average share of 20%, however, is made up of quite diverse extreme values, ranging from as little as 12% (in Peru, Uruguay and Panama) to over 30% (in Bolivia, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela).
Finally, the small share of the labour force represented in most of the countries by employers is also reflected in the composition of family income.
Thus, in practically all the countries (except for Ecuador In this context, public transfers appear as one of the few viable instruments capable of having an impact in the short term on disparities in income distribution.
Although they are increasingly related with poverty reduction, transfers of resources to families are reflected in the average composition of household income.
It should nevertheless be noted, however, that the small effect that transfers can have on distribution does not mean that they are not potentially highly effective for relieving the most extreme poverty situations, since they are usually among the most useful instruments for raising the standard of living of deprived sectors.
As is generally known, the flow of income that can be generated by a particular source depends basically on two factors: the initial endowment of production resources –especially human capital and physical and financial assets–11 and the price paid in the market for the use of those resources.
In the case of labour income –the most important income flow– public policies aimed at substantially altering the endowment of productive capital in the short term are usually of limited scope, as these are goods whose accumulation process is generally slow and gradual (especially in the cases of human and social capital).
Moreover, the State can only act to fix wages by specifying minimum wages as a means of narrowing income distribution gaps, since direct intervention in wages on a larger scale is considered inappropriate because of the adverse effects it has on the functioning of the labour market.
In this sense, the possibility of improving the distribution of labour income must be conceived from a long–term perspective, in conjunction with sustained increases in productivity.
Analysis of income concentration within each source provides complementary information on income structure, revealing both heterogeneous forms of behaviour between countries and also some elements which are common to all of them.
An example of the former occurs in the case of labour income, since whereas eight of the countries studied showed greater concentration in income generated by employers, in the remaining cases the greatest inequality was in the group of own–account workers (see table I.6).
Property rents, for their part, also offer only limited possibilities of fostering redistributive effects on a large scale, since the State’s work in this field is usually limited to the generation of policies –for housing, access to land, production subsidies, etc.– to support changes in the wealth of households located in the lowest part of the income distribution scale.
The possibility of increased use of progressive tax rates, which directly affect the distribution of the available income, is generally limited by its possible harmful effect on the behaviour of saving and investment –and hence employment– as well as by considerations of a political nature.
On the other hand, a feature common to the majority of the countries was that the inequality among the wage–earning group was the lowest of all the sources of income, with an average Gini coefficient of 0.45, although this does not mean that this distribution can be considered in any way equitable.
Rents from property ownership tend to be the least equitable form of income, with Gini coefficients that exceed 0.70 in many cases: a fact associated with the greater possibility that households in the upper part of the distribution have of possessing assets that provide them with gains. 11 See in particular in this respect ECLAC (1998).
Finally, transfers to households also display high Gini coefficients, reflecting inequitable distribution.
Whereas the first element is a way of correcting disparities in distribution, the second element tends to be more unequally distributed, both because it is associated with labour income and because individuals’ likelihood of having a continuous working life of formal employment is itself highly concentrated.
In three of the twelve countries where the relative contribution of the head of household went down (Venezuela, Honduras and Panama)it did so by over four percentage points.
In only four countries of the region did the head of household’s contribution increase, but in no case by more than one percentage point.
Another way of analysing the structure of income is to identify the income recipients of the household by their demographic characteristics such as sex, age, or head–of–household status.
With this aim, table I.5 gives information on the proportion of total income contributed by the heads of household, secondary recipients, women, persons between 15 and 24, and those aged 65 or more.
The lower dependence of households on the income generated by their heads has both positive and negative elements.
On the one hand, this lower dependence on the income of a single person reduces the vulnerability of the household to possible situations of unemployment or lower income, while it also furthers greater integration of the rest of the household into the labour market.
In all the countries of Latin America the main breadwinner is the head of household.
In no case is his contribution less than 55%, and in almost half of the countries it exceeds 65%, reflecting a generalized state of dependence on this income recipient.
Chile, Brazil and Mexico (with percentages close to 70%), on the one hand, and Venezuela (55.2%) and Peru (56.4%), on the other, represent the extremes in this respect.
Finally, young people between 15 and 24 years of age accounted for an average of 12.5% of labour income in Latin America.
This regional average covers different performances by the individual countries, ranging from as little as 5.5% in the case of Chile to the figure of 18.1% reported by the Dominican Republic.
Persons over 65, for their part, had an average share of 3.3%, with individual values ranging from 2.3% in Bolivia to 5.7% in Paraguay. buted by this group averages 24.5%, with extreme values ranging from 20.7% (in Mexico) to 28.8% (Panama and Venezuela).
In this section of the document we have discussed some of the elements of judgment which emerge when the sources and recipients of resources with the biggest shares and incidence in Latin American income distribution are identified.
In this context, it may be concluded that although the redistributive possibilities of public policies are limited in their scope and temporal aspects, there is nevertheless a wide field of action that governments can use to promote improvements in income distribution.
The evolution of women’s share in total household income during the 1990s reflects significant progress towards gender equality.
The average increase in the relative contribution of women was 4.9 percentage points, and in some cases it was nearly double that amount –in Honduras, for example, the increase was 9.3 points.
The average goes down to 4.3 points, however, if we take into account Nicaragua, which was the only country where women’s contribution went down in the 1990s.
In the 1990s, the growth rate in the number of persons of working age with higher qualifications (between 25 and 59) –corresponding to university or full post–secondary technical training– amply surpassed (at 7.5% per year) the growth rate of the total number of persons of working age (3.1% per year).
In all countries, the rate was higher for women (8.7%) than for men (6.4%), thus helping to increase women’s share in the labour market and to reduce income inequalities between the sexes.
Of the total of 32 million people who entered the urban population of persons of fully active age during the past decade, nearly 8 million had technical (4.3 million) or professional qualifications (3.6 million).
These changes are mainly reflected in new forms of linkage of workers with their firms and in the degree of wage–earning employment in the various activities, in changes in the sectoral structure of employment, and in the wages received by workers with different levels of qualifications.
ECLAC has analysed these changes and their main effects on the living conditions of the Latin American and Caribbean population in a number of documents, especially Globalization and Development.
In an era when the amount and type of professional and technical qualifications demanded by firms are changing more rapidly in order to adapt to the new technologies, increase their competitiveness and find a suitable place in international trade, there are also changes in human resources training needs.
However, the market signals to the educational system and training in general do not arrive directly or automatically, and when they do show themselves –especially through changes in the supply of jobs and in the relative wages of professions and trades– the response to them is slow and the adjustments take place with considerable delay.
This is largely due to the difficulties faced by training systems in responding quickly to changes in the needs for human resources for development.
Relatively little information is available on the supply of professional and post–secondary technical skills or the capacity of the Latin American countries to absorb that supply.
Most of the analyses and data on the disparities between labour supply and requirements are limited, in general, to studies on the relative scarcity or abundance of particular types of professionals or technicians, or to very specific sectors of economic activity.
Very often, the aggregate–level information on these disparities is based on a study of the rate and trend of open unemployment, in which it is claimed that the increase and persistence of high levels of unemployment among the skilled population (especially among young people) partly reflects the existence of such disparities.
The lack of a proper response to the demand for skilled human resources thus represents a bottleneck for the competitiveness of the Latin American countries.
See ECLAC, 2001a, chapter III, section B. force (wage–earning employment or own–account activity), employed or unemployed status, and the levels of income obtained in the labour market by professionals and technicians of both sexes.
Finally, evidence is provided on the disparity between the effective supply of skilled human resources and the demand for them in the market.
A procedure is also suggested for establishing approximate figures on the degree of utilization of professional and technical qualifications.
The analysis is based on information from the household surveys periodically effected in the countries of the region.
In view of the limitations of the source in question, together with the shortcomings of the information from other secondary sources, such as administrative records, it was decided to emphasize some characteristics which reflect longer–term changes in the structure of employment and which, directly or indirectly, may also be due to the globalization process.
These characteristics are the sector of economic activity, the form of insertion in the labour For the purposes of this document, the term “effective supply” refers to the economically active population (which covers both the employed and unemployed population), while “potential supply” refers to the total population of working age.
The considerable increase in the proportion of young people with post–secondary qualifications and the relative weight of this group in the total population largely explain the high rate of growth of the number of more highly qualified persons in the total 25–59 cohort.
However, this increase is also due to the departure of the older cohort of this age group, whose members passed through the educational system 40 years or more ago, when only a minority of the Latin American population had access to higher education.
Only countries which had urban and rural household surveys for around 1990 and 1999 were taken into account.
In both levels of coverage, the disaggregated figures on the size of the population with technical or professional qualifications do not include Mexico.
In simplified terms, three ways of estimating the human capital of the working age population have been used.The first of these is based on the educational history of the persons concerned, and uses as an indicator the highest level of education attained by each individual.
In this chapter, which seeks to analyse the social utilization of the post–secondary technical and professional qualifications possessed by the members of Latin American societies, the main source of information is the household surveys of the countries in question.
For this reason, it was decided to use the first method, even though the measurement of the number of years of studies completed by an individual, as associated with the completion of the various formal educational cycles, only captures some of the skills and types of knowledge which are important for economic activity.
Some key aspects of human capital, such as work experience, knowledge of languages, computer–related skills, or the loss of skills through disuse, are not taken into account by this type of measurement.
An alternative way of identifying those who possess technical or professional qualifications from the data of household surveys consists of analysing the occupations or trades declared by members of the labour force, as classified in the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO) (ILO, 1988).
Analysis of these data at the one–digit level makes it possible to select persons who declare that they are working in occupations that identify them as professionals, scientists and intellectuals, whether of upper or middle level (major groups 2 and 3 of the classification in question).
Also to be found in the “professionals, scientists and intellectuals” group are employees whose educational history does not reflect any formal professional qualifications, suggesting that they have reached positions based on their experience and on skills that cannot be measured through household surveys.
Although there is some degree of uniformity as regards the duration of the primary and secondary cycles in the different Latin American countries, the situation is quite different as regards post–secondary education, even within each country.
Thus, there are post–secondary technical training programmes which last one, two, three or even four years, while there are university–type professional training programmes that last anywhere between four and seven years.
Naturally, the first category (technical education) also includes persons with incomplete university education, but it was assumed that the acquisition of two or more years of university education implies the possession of sufficient human capital to obtain wages equivalent to those of the post–secondary technical level: an assumption based on the third type of approximation described earlier.
This trend is also clearly visible in the urban areas of a larger number of countries.
Thus, in 9 of a total of 14 countries, the population between 25 and 59 years of age with professional or technical qualifi- cations equivalent to at least 14 years of completed schooling expanded more than twice as fast as the population without such qualifications.
This could be due to greater internal mobility of the skilled labour force because of the growing demand for these resources as a result of the technification of agricultural, forestry 1999 in the number of professionals and technicians in urban areas of Latin America.
It may be seen from that table that, of the increase of rather more than 32 million persons of fully active working age, 7.9 million had post–secondary qualifications (4.3 million technicians and 3.6 million professionals).
As explained below, however, this notable expansion in the course of a decade only served to reduce by 2.6 percentage points (from 86.5% to 83.9%) the high proportion of persons without qualifications in the total (see table II.2).
There are three aspects which are particularly worthy of note as regards the potential supply of qualified personnel and the recent changes in this respect in the region.
Except in Paraguay (Asunción and Departamento Central) and Uruguay (urban areas), in all the countries the number of women with such qualifications grew faster than that of men (see figure II.1).
This trend clearly predominated in urban areas in the case of persons with professional qualifications (once again with the exception of Paraguay), but in the case of technicians the number of men grew more quickly than that of women in five countries (Chile, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Paraguay).
The lag in education and in the training of qualified human resources which built up in past decades explains why, in spite of the significant expansion in the potential supply of professionals and technicians in the 1990s, Latin America continues to suffer from the limitations caused by a working–age population with very low levels of qualifications.
Thus, towards the year 2000 no less than 80% of the population of the region between 25 and 59 years of age lacked any kind of technical or professional qualification.
As may be seen from table II.3, according to the information from household surveys for Brazil, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Dominican Republic, between 90% and 95% of the population in that age group do not have any post–secondary training.
These persons will not only earn incomes which are not sufficient to protect them or their family groups from poverty and from vulnerability to recessions, but will also suffer episodes of unemployment more frequently.
This means, in turn, that the average productivity and aggregate income of the economies in question will continue to grow only slowly, unless there are drastic changes in the present training systems and in the efforts made to upgrade the skills of those who did not receive training suitably adapted to the current demands of the labour market.
The region therefore faces the urgent challenge of improving the quality of the human resources needed in order to raise the systemic competitiveness of its economies.
It is also being increasingly recognized that the acquisition of new knowledge, skills and capabilities is essential for long–term growth within the globalized economy.
Absorption and under–utilization of qualified employees The economies of the region are not generating enough jobs to absorb the rapid expansion in the supply of professionals and technicians.
Open unemployment among persons with high levels of qualifications, which represents one of the most obvious forms of under–utilization of human resources, increased significantly –from 3.8% to 6.6%– between the beginning and end of the decade.
The rate of incorporation of women into economic activity was not uniform.
Those with the lowest levels of qualifications increased their participation rate more quickly (from 48% to 57%), although they started from a much lower rate.
The most notable feature was the rapidity with which this potential supply expanded in all of the countries, the fastest increase in the most highly–qualified human resources being registered in the countries which displayed relative lags within the region at the beginning of the 1990s.
It was also noted that the increase in the number of women with technical or professional qualifications was faster than in the case of men.
This fact explains a considerable part of the increase in the effective supply of qualified human resources in the 1990s.
A decisive factor in this rapid increase was the growing participation of women (both qualified and less–skilled) in economic activity.
Despite the rapid increase in the number of women with professional or technical qualifications, gender inequalities still persist in the region as regards the social and individual utilization of these qualifications.
This is reflected in the fact that the participation rates of women with post–secondary qualifications continue to be considerably lower than in the case of men with similar levels of qualifications.
In the last edition of the Social Panorama of Latin America12 it was noted that the increase in unemployment in Latin America during the last decade was one of the most worrying features of the performance of the labour market in the region, because of its heavy incidence on poverty and on income distribution inequality.
The relative dissociation which has taken place between economic growth and the level of employment in the countries suggests that the latter depends not only on conjunctural factors but also on factors of a structural nature, mainly connected with technological change.
In this respect, when analysing changes in the labour market the gender dimension highlights the lack of utilization of qualified human resources and the net loss this represents for the countries, both because of the private and public resources invested in the training of these female professionals and technicians and because of the income forgone by women.
This is why it is so important to facilitate the full incorporation of women into the labour market in order to take advantage of the greater technical and professional capabilities they now possess and to meet the demands arising from technical change and the growing integration of economies into international trade.
In this document, the category of un–utilized human resources is considered to apply both to the latter and to women who have been outside the labour market for relatively long periods of time because they are unable to participate in it on account of manifest role incompatibility.
The insufficient generation of jobs and the evolution of unemployment mean that there is greater failure to take advantage of the technical and professional qualifications of women than of men. professionals, and it hit women harder than men.
Thus, towards the end of the 1990s the global open unemployment rate in those nine countries was almost double the 1990 rate (9.5% compared with 5%), with a somewhat greater increase among workers without technical or professional qualifications (10.2% compared with 5.2%).
There was also a significant increase in unemployment among more qualified workers, although from a lower initial rate (6.6% compared with 3.8%).
The first, which has been observed in the urban areas of practically all the countries of the region and is connected with the type of links with or insertion in the labour market, concerns the relative predominance of wage–earning or self–employed status among workers.
The second concerns the form in which workers have been absorbed by the tertiary sector, as compared with the degree of concentration of the demand for qualified human resources, and the third is connected with income trends and disparities between qualified and non–qualified workers.
Gender differences are also evident in the capacity of the market to absorb qualified labour and generate enough jobs for technicians and professionals.
The first is that in the Latin American countries open unemployment is affecting women more than men, although this tendency is not completely generalized: in Mexico and the Central American countries (El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua)13 not only were the rates of failure to find jobs low but also there was less unemployment among women than among men.
A plausible explanation for this situation in Mexico and Central America (except for Nicaragua, which has unemployment rates of over 10%) is the growing importance of maquila-related activities —which employ a large number of women— within total industrial employment.
In general terms, the information on urban areas reflects a clear global trend towards the reduction of the proportion of wage earners among workers as a whole, both skilled and unskilled (see table II.5).
What should be emphasized in this process is that the rate of reduction of the proportion of wage earners is higher among the most highly–qualified workers, although the initial proportion was higher.
Professionals show a somewhat faster tendency towards the loss of wage–earning status, and at the end of the past decade one out of every four was working on his own account.
In both these countries, the percentage of employment accounted for by that type of activities increased by around 3 percentage points.
The fact that in the expansion of the tertiary sector the demand for qualified labour has tended to be concentrated in activities linked with the social services is an index of the insufficient capacity of the economies to generate productive jobs which will make it possible to absorb the rapid growth in the supply of technicians and professionals.
The evolution of the salaries of the workers with the highest qualifications in the tertiary sector, and especially in commerce and social services, tends to corroborate this statement.
Thus, as may be seen from table II.7, the sector with the lowest average wages for technicians and professionals is that of government, social, community and personal services; something similar occurs in the case of commerce, and as a general rule the average salaries of the most highly–qualified persons are lowest in these two areas of activities.
This would also mean that the wages paid would be much lower than could normally be expected in view of the investment made in education.
Another tendency which clearly reflects the inability of the economies to make productive use of the big increase in the supply of qualified human resources is the growing migration of the most highly qualified labour to the tertiary sector, as expressed in the concentration of the employment of technicians and professionals in certain activities.
The first noteworthy aspect of the sectoral structure of employment is that during the 1990s there continued to be a trend towards growth of the tertiary sector.
Thus, in the urban areas of all the countries except Honduras, there was an increase of some 3 percentage points in the proportion of the population employed in commerce, transport, communications, financial activities and other services (business services, government service, social, community and personal services, etc.).
A further element to be taken into account is that tertiary activities absorb a major proportion of qualified labour.
As may be seen from table II.6, some 85% of employees with technical or professional qualifications are in posts related with those activities, whereas this proportion goes down to 68% in the case of posts not requiring such qualifications.
As a general trend, most of the jobs created in the tertiary sector were in commerce.
At the regional level, this sector accounts for nearly a quarter of all urban employment, and it has been the sector which has absorbed most skilled and unskilled labour, along with government, social, community and personal services.
Whereas commerce tends to absorb the least–skilled labour, however, the opposite is the case in the last–named group of services, which accounts for a high proportion of the employment of the most highly–qualified labour (see table II.6).
Does not include Bolivia, Peru and Dominican Republic.The disaggregated figures on wage earners with technical and professional qualifications do not include Mexico, and the annual variation is a simple average of the annual variation of the countries.
Most of these people –around 65%– are technicians and professionals working in a wage–earning capacity. b) Another source of failure to take advantage of the stock of qualified technicians and professionals is open unemployment.
Although naturally not all technicians and professionals who are not working can be assumed to be in that situation against their will, the presence of high and, in many countries, rising levels of prolonged unemployment undoubtedly reflects the inability of the economy to make use of their skills and knowledge.
Although the rates of unemployment among professionals and technicians are lower than those of less–qualified workers, their periods of unemployment and, hence, of failure to utilize these human resources are longer.
III, table Likewise, one out of every twenty members of this group would appear to be in this situation because of open unemployment.
The proportion is even greater in the case of women, since almost two out of every twenty are without work because, as noted earlier, open unemployment in the region affects women more than men, especially in the countries which have registered the biggest increases in unemployment in recent years.
It can be seen from the table in question c) A third source of non–utilization of human capital is inactivity.
Since the analysis was limited to the population of fully active age (25 to 59 years of age), the two main reasons for non–participation in economic activity which involve under–utiliza- 16 The procedure adopted cannot be assimilated to the other approach which, though also based on effective income, gives what is known as “income–based underemployment”.
After the parameters (α) of the equation had been estimated, the set of wage earners between 25 and 59 years of age with post–secondary technical or university–level professional qualifications was selected and the effective hourly wage of each of them was compared with the wage they would have earned if they had only completed the secondary cycle.
In order to make this comparison between the declared wage and that predicted by equation (1), the number of years of potential experience was homogenized by deducting from the original estimate of potential experience the number of extra years of higher education completed.
In this way, a comparison was made between the effective wage of each worker with post–secondary education and the wage he would have obtained if he had not made this extra investment in education after completion of the secondary cycle, assuming the same number of years of potential experience.
An obstacle to achievement of the Millennium Development Targets Today, at the dawn of the 21st century, nine out of every ten Latin American children have access to primary education.
Despite this high coverage of the basic cycle and the expansion which has been registered in many countries in secondary cycle enrolment, there are still educational levels in the region which are very low, both by world standards and by the demands imposed by the globalization process.
While progress was made in the last decade towards universal access to primary education and greater retention of children and adolescents in school, Latin America still has very high rates of early school drop-out.
One of the main challenges for making decisive progress towards achievement of the Millennium Development Targets for the year 2015 is therefore to prevent children from dropping out of school before completing the basic cycle and to significantly reduce drop-out in the secondary cycle.
Thus, notwithstanding the progress made towards universal basic education –especially in urban areas– a very high proportion of children and adolescents still leave the school system very early, without reaching the minimum levels of knowledge and skills needed to integrate into society and thus also failing to receive the right to basic education laid down in the relevant international instruments.
P rican countries in the last decade in terms of rogress was made in most of the Latin Ame- access to primary education and, to a lesser extent, in the coverage of secondary education.
As reported in the document Globalization and Development (ECLAC, 2002b), during the 1990s rates of attendance in primary education rose to over 90% in the great majority of the countries of the region.
Rates of attendance in secondary education also rose, but only averaged around 70% towards the end of the decade.
This progress made it possible to reduce urban–rural disparities in access to education, and furthermore today there are almost no disparities in access between males and females in the region (see figure III.1).
There is thus a tendency towards the reproduction of inequality of opportunities from one generation to the next, so that factors of an ascriptive nature determine or decisively influence the achievements during the various stages of school life.
In view of both the limitations and possibilities of household surveys,2 special emphasis is placed on changes in the school drop-out risk associated with students’ socioeconomic origin, their urban or rural residence, the educational level of their mothers and different forms of family structure.
Special reference is also made to the potential of programmes that seek to improve the indices of retention in school by offering monetary transfers and subsidies to low–income families (the “Bolsa Escola” programme in Brazil and the educational component of the Education, Health and Food Programme (Progresa) in Mexico).
School drop-out: a proposal for analysing the educational situation of Latin American adolescents R to education, the problem of the educational school cycle.
The differences in opportunities of access to preschool education (which is a strong determinant of children’s performance in the early years of primary education) affect subsequent repetition and lagging behind, which, in turn, are closely related to school drop-out during basic education.
Although these problems are indeed serious and are present in all the countries of the region, they are additional to the more fundamental problem of the insufficient capacity to keep children and adolescents in school, especially during the primary cycle and the transition to the secondary cycle and also, in many cases, in the first two grades of primary school.
However, the scarcity of reliable and timely information on the extent and characteristics of school drop-out in the region makes it difficult to effect comparative analyses between countries and compare their recent trends in this respect.
The importance of this phenomenon thus clearly points to the need to develop measurement methods and approaches to this problem based on primary data sources –household surveys– whose periodical execution would make it possible to follow up the successes and failures in this field.
Details are given below (based on data from household surveys) on the magnitude of school drop-out before completion of the secondary cycle in 18 Latin American countries, and the changes which took place in this respect between the early and late 1990s.
In order to analyse school drop-out in the primary and secondary cycles, a classification was prepared which describes the school situation of adolescents between 15 and 19 years of age and, on its basis, a set of drop-out indicators was established for different points during the two cycles (see box III.1).
The inequalities in the educational capital that children from homes in different socioeconomic strata manage to accumulate grow throughout the See ECLAC (1994).
In some countries of the region which have attained higher average levels of education of the economically active population, completion of secondary education is no longer sufficient to ensure access to urban jobs with incomes high enough to keep the worker out of poverty throughout his working life.
The rates of drop-out associated with this type of measurement are generally much higher than in the case of the first type of indicator, since they include all cases of drop-out, regardless of when they occurred.
The nature and quality of the information available (administrative records) and the difficulty of using certain instruments (use of costly cross–sectional or longitudinal surveys) make drop-out one of the indicators of school system efficiency which is most difficult to collect, follow–up and compare.
It is therefore not surprising that there are no systematic comparable data for the region which enable this phenomenon to be studied through the different stages of school life. 2.
In view of the nature of the information provided by these surveys, the methodology which could be applied corresponds to the second type of calculation procedure: i.e., that which makes it possible to estimate the cumulative extent of drop-out among young people between 15 and 19 years of age at the time of each survey.
Furthermore, the data provided by the household surveys do not make it possible situations of temporary school drop-out (dropping out and returning after the normal age).
For example, if the official age of entry into the primary cycle is 6, then a young person of 15 should have 9 years’ schooling.
If the possibility of a lag due to late enrolment is taken into account, this category also includes students with 8 years’ schooling.
In the latter case it was necessary to change the criterion for category (e), limiting it to those who only needed one year to complete the secondary cycle and putting the remaining cases (students who drop out at the end of the primary cycle) in category (c).
The selected group includes both adolescents and young people who should have completed their primary education (even if they entered or completed it late) and those who should have completed their secondary education.
In many cases the rates reported are not sufficiently up to date and only refer to national averages, without any kind of breakdown, thus making it impossible to examine factors which are determinants or concomitant elements in early school drop-out.
Figures based on this type of indicator may be found in UNESCO/OREALC (2001).
In most of the countries it includes adolescents who have completed five or less years’ schooling.
In 11 of the 18 Latin American countries covered by this study, completion of the secondary cycle means completing 12 years’ schooling.
The relative differences in the educational status of adolescents in the four groups of countries selected for purposes of illustration are notable.
In the urban areas of Argentina, Chile and Panama, the global drop-out rate during the primary and secondary cycles amounts to one in every five adolescents, rising to one in three in the urban areas of El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua.
In rural areas, not only is the school drop-out rate considerably higher than in urban areas, but there are also greater differences among the countries.
In this respect, it is important to evaluate the capacity of the proposed educational status indicators to capture the differences in the level of school dropout in the various stages of the educational cycle which exist between countries and between urban and rural areas.
As shown in table III.1, these differences are also very pronounced, with the rate of early school drop-out ranging from an average of 2.8% in urban areas of Argentina, Chile and Panama to 16.6% in El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua, 22.1% in rural areas of Brazil, Colombia and Peru, and 29.7% in rural Bolivia, Honduras and Mexico.
Its benefits are concentrated directly on families in a state of extreme poverty in rural areas.
Like the Bolsa Escola programme in Brazil, Progresa gives its benefits exclusively to mothers, as it recognizes their greater potential for using the resources efficiently and effectively and applying them to the immediate needs of the family.
It makes the provision of benefits conditional on the level of income of the selected households in poor rural areas, on regular, proven school attendance by the children (an attendance record of not less than 85%), and on periodic visits to health centres to control the health of mothers and children.
The families in the programme which fulfill these requirements receive benefits for three years; at the end of that time they can apply for readmission, subject to a new appraisal of their socio–economic situation.
The educational component of Progresa gives monetary subsidies to children under 18 who regularly attend school between the third grade of primary education and the third grade of the secondary cycle.
In this way it tries to prevent school drop-out at critical moments: during or at the end of the primary cycle and in the first years of the secondary cycle.
The transfers or scholarships for children studying in the first cycle of secondary education are about 15% higher for girls, with the aim of avoiding the tendency of girls to leave school earlier than boys.
In the second half of 2000, for example, the subsidies were between 90 pesos (around nine dollars) per month for children in the third grade of the primary cycle, to a maximum of 335 pesos (34 dollars) per month for girls studying in the third grade of the secondary cycle.
Progresa also gives subsidies for school materials twice a year: in the year 2000 these amounted to 180 pesos (18 dollars) for primary school students and 225 pesos (23 dollars) for those attending secondary school.
In its first year the programme served around 400 000 households, but by 2001 this figure had risen to nearly 2.5 million households.
The evaluations which have been made of the effects of the different components of Progresa indicate that it has been a success, particularly as regards its educational component.a/ It should be recalled that the main educational target for the year 2015 laid down in the Millennium Development Targets involves the achievement of universal complete primary education.
The evaluations conclude that Progresa has had positive effects on the enrolment of boys and girls.These effects are greater in the secondary cycle (grades 7 to 9), than in the primary cycle (grades 3, 4, 5 and 6), and are also greater among girls than among boys.
Thus, for example, the proportional increase in school attendance in the first three grades of the secondary cycle (which was previously 67% for girls and 73% for boys) was between 7.2 and 9.3 percentage points for girls (representing an increase of between 11% and 14%).
In the case of boys, the increases (before and after the programme) were between 3.5 and 5.8 percentage points, representing increases of between 5% and 8% in enrolment.
These are substantial achievements considering the short time in which they took place (two years) and the high initial rates of school attendance, especially in primary education. 2.
Better rates of retention in school in the transition to the first year of the secondary cycle.
The greatest effects of the programme, in terms of retention in school, were achieved in the critical period of transition from the last primary grade to the first secondary one.
Retention is estimated to have increased by 14.8 percentage points among girls and 6.5 points among boys, which represent increases of 20% and 10%, respectively, over the rates prevailing before the introduction of the programme.
A larger proportion of girls are now entering and staying in the secondary cycle in poor rural areas of Mexico, thus reducing gender inequalities in this respect. 3.
Higher average years of schooling and future income in the labour market.
Progresa seems to have had a greater positive effect on enrolment than on regular school attendance.
Early in 2002 the Inter–American Development Bank (IDB) approved a loan of US$ 1 billion to expand and consolidate the Progresa programme.
School drop-out in Latin America and its evolution over the last decade On average, close to 37% of Latin American adolescents between 15 and 19 years of age drop out of school at some point in the school cycle, and almost half of those who drop out do so at an early stage, before completing their primary education.
In a number of countries, however, most of the drop-out takes place after that cycle has been completed, often during the first year of secondary education.
To a greater or lesser extent, all the countries of the region display shortcomings in their capacity to keep children in school, although almost all of them made progress in this respect during the last decade, especially in the form of a substantial reduction in early drop-out from school.
School drop-out displays pronounced differences between countries, but in all of them it is much more frequent in rural areas.
In the group of countries which have attained relatively higher levels of education, the global drop out rate in urban areas is between 16% and 25%; in another group school dropout is around 37%, while in a small number of countries with a lower level of primary educational coverage between 40% and 50% of adolescents drop out of school.
In rural areas, global drop-out rates range from nearly 30% to over 70% of all the children who enter the school system, with most of the drop-out taking place during the primary cycle. 19 was less than 20% in Bolivia, Chile, Peru and the Dominican Republic, while in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Panama it was between 20% and 25%.
A to be observed in school drop-out before round 2000, considerable differences were completion of secondary education in the urban areas of 18 Latin American countries.
Thus, the global drop-out rate among adolescents between 15 and At the end of the last decade, the gulf between urban and rural areas in terms of school drop-out was enormous.
The information available for 13 of the total of 18 countries studied shows that in ten of them the global rate of drop-out in rural areas was at least 20 percentage points higher than the urban rate, and in five countries it was 30 or more percentage points higher.
Dominican Republic, and to a lesser extent in Chile and Panama, were the differences smaller, but even so they were disturbingly high. 2.
Studying the stage in which school drop-out is concentrated8 is of the greatest importance, because the types of policies or programmes which are most suitable for improving the retention of children in school, their cost, and the (social and private) losses involved in failing to complete children’s schooling are very different.
It is in the urban areas of the countries, rather than in the rural ones, that the biggest differences are registered in this respect.
The drop-out rates were calculated taking into consideration the characteristics of the educational system of each country (age of entry and years of duration of each cycle).
Because of this, the early drop-out rate depends to a certain extent on the length of the primary cycle.The clearest case of this is Venezuela, where around 1990 the primary cycle lasted nine years, and at the national level, 87% of the drop-out took place before completion of that cycle.
In five countries (Argentina, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Honduras and Paraguay) over half or even as much as 60% of those who drop out of school do so after completing the primary cycle.
In this country the secondary cycle lasts only two years, so the category "drop-outs at the end of the secondary cycle" refers only to children who lack a year to complete that cycle (see box III.5).
In rural areas, as might be expected, drop-out occurs almost entirely or at least much more frequently during the primary cycle, and in some countries (Brazil, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela) only a very low percentage of children manage to complete that cycle.
The reduction in school drop-out in almost all the countries was aided by a (variable) combination of factors.
The reduction in drop-out in rural areas was greater than in urban areas, thus making it possible to reduce the enormous disparities prevailing at the beginning of the 1990s.
In Greater Buenos Aires there was also a significant reduction (by 13 percentage points).
In Venezuela, the reduction at the national level was by 9 points, but the information available does not make it possible to determine whether this was accompanied by a reduction in the urban–rural disparity.
In 15 countries of the region, the average rate of preschool enrolment rose from 29.4% to 40.2% • The greater involvement of parents and the introduction of incentives for their participation in school activities and in following up the school situation and performance of their children.
This hypothesis is backed up by the fact that the differences between the percentages of boys and girls between 15 and 19 years of age who are lagging behind increase among adolescents who are “seriously behind” (three or more years with respect to the age–for–grade), and this occurs in both urban and rural areas in most of the countries.
In urban areas, girls drop out of school less often than boys, go through the school cycle with fewer cases of repetition, and more girls than boys between 15 and 19 graduate from secondary education without any lag.
The faster expansion of enrolment in urban areas has been accompanied by greater capacity of the school systems to keep girls in school, as reflected in the lower drop-out rates for girls as compared with boys.
Thus, towards the end of the 1990s, in five countries of the region (Costa Rica, Honduras, the Dominican Republic, Uruguay and Venezuela) girls between 15 and 19 had a global drop-out rate between 5 and 9 percentage points lower than boys of the same age.
The differences between the sexes were smaller but nevertheless significant (the rates for girls were between 2 and 4 percentage points lower) in the urban areas of five other countries (Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Nicaragua and Panama).
In Chile, Guatemala, Mexico and Paraguay practically no differences were observed, while in Bolivia and El Salvador girls had somewhat higher drop-out rates than boys.
This may partly explain the moderate reduction in wage inequality between the sexes observed in a number of countries during the last decade.
This aspect will be addressed in greater detail later in this document.
It is interesting to note that girls not only drop out of school less than boys, but they pass through the educational cycle with fewer lags.
School drop-out and socio–economic inequalities The insufficient household income and the various deficits in the material well–being of children and adolescents of the poorer strata represent a decisive factor in the latter’s higher frequency of scholastic lag and school drop-out compared with young people from middle– and high–income households.
In spite of the substantial reduction in drop-out rates in Latin America over the last ten years, adolescents from the 25% poorest urban households have drop-out rates which are three times, on average, those of young people from the 25% richest households.
These inequalities between the top and bottom socio–economic strata are greater in urban than in rural areas; they are much greater in the case of early school drop-out, and as a general rule they are higher in the countries of the region which have progressed further towards universal access to primary and secondary education.
Although in the latter countries early school drop-out is less frequent than in the other countries, because greater importance is attached to keeping young people in school until they complete the secondary cycle, such drop-out is an increasingly “hard” area of social policies.
T children and adolescents from different investigation of its causes, but it is not a sufficient explanation for helping in the design of effective policies and programmes to reduce such drop-out. he big disparities in drop-out rates between socio–economic strata contribute very decisively, and from an early stage, to the reproduction of social inequalities.
In order to answer this question we compared the three measurements of school drop-out among adolescents between the ages of 15 and 19 from the bottom quartile (the 25% of families with the lowest incomes) with the measurements for the top quartile (the 25% of families with the highest incomes).
The disparities in terms of drop-out rates between the top and bottom income distribution quartiles tended to persist, although at lower levels.
On average,17 the global drop-out rate in the first quartile in urban areas is 37%, whereas in the highest–income quartile it is 14%.
The average rates of early school drop-out are 12% and 3%, respectively, while the averages for withdrawal from school on completion of the primary cycle are 16% in the poorest quartile and 5% in the richest.
Indeed, in Argentina (Greater Buenos Aires and the total for all urban areas), Chile, Costa Rica, Honduras, Mexico, Panama, Paraguay (Asunción and Departamento Central) and Uruguay, 60% or more of the children who drop out during the primary cycle come from the 25% poorest households (see table III.5).
As part of a strategy to combat poverty, the programme seeks to link education with minimum family income by giving a monthly financial incentive to families in a high–risk situation, in return for keeping their children in school in order to promote universal basic education and reduce school drop-out and repetition.
In its first year of large–scale application, the programme benefited 8.5 million school–age children from 4.9 million families.These represented around 57% of the potential number of eligible children, and the resources allocated to the programme were equivalent to nearly 0.1% of GDP.
In order to consolidate its activities, in 2001 the Fund for the Fight Against Poverty allocated nearly 1.7 billion reales (about US$ 800 million) to the Ministry of Education and Sport.
It is estimated that with these new resources the Bolsa Escola programme will be in a position to serve almost the whole of that universe.b/ As of 2001, the federal government became responsible for the whole of the resources needed to serve the families covered by the programme.
Families receiving benefits from the Child Labour Eradication Programme (PETI) cannot participate in the Bolsa Escola programme, nor can adolescents who are 16 or older or whose proven school attendance rate is below 85%.
The Bolsa Escola programme in Brazil and the Progresa programme in Mexico are examples of social programmes which, if given universal scope, could have a substantial impact on the retention in school of children from the low–income strata, with positive results in terms of the level of schooling of the population and the reduction of social inequalities.
It is therefore important to illustrate what the aggregate effects of the universalization of these programmes could be.
The greatest effect of the universal application of the programme, however, lies in its capacity to keep children and adolescents in school: that is to say, almost all of those who are currently in the various primary grades should stay in school until they complete the primary cycle.
In addition, there is the contingent of young people who dropped out of school temporarily and may now re–enter it.
A crucial point, therefore, is the programme’s capacity to bring about the re–entry of these persons.
Both these figures must be compared with the opportunity cost for low–income households of taking their children away from work to keep them in school: a cost which can vary considerably according to the geographical location of the household and the sex and age of the children.
In short, the improvements in the averages did not reduce the disparities in educational achievement between adolescents from different social strata.
Among other consequences, this means that the persistence of educational lags in the region will continue to be a factor in the maintenance of inequalities and social exclusion of young people.
On the other hand, among the reasons adduced by young people for dropping out, over 70% say they did so because of economic difficulties or because they found work or were seeking it (Bolivia, Nicaragua, Paraguay and El Salvador), while in Chile, Peru and Venezuela the same reasons were given by over half of those interviewed.
Among girls, economic factors are very important too, but they also very often mention housework and pregnancy and motherhood.
As might be expected, difficulty in reaching the school is given relatively frequently as the reason for dropping out only in rural areas.
S is affected by many factors and circumstances, tances and processes that induce young people to abandon their studies are essential requisites for designing policies and programmes designed to raise school retention rates in the near future and advance towards fulfillment of the Millennium Development Targets.
Identifying these drop-out risk factors more exactly and increasing our knowledge of the circums- ployment or whether progressive incompatibility grows up between early entry into the labour market and school attendance and performance.18 periodically, so as to improve the methods of investigating the educational situation of children and young people and their reasons for not going to school.
Definitive withdrawal from school is rarely an unexpected event; more often than not it is due to a chain of circumstances that gradually raise the risk of dropping out as children get older and experience growing difficulties of performance and adaptation, especially when moving from the primary to the secondary cycle.
The specialized literature on the causes of dropping out or withdrawing from school reflects two main views or frames of interpretation regarding the nature of the context that gives rise to factors which encourage withdrawal from the educational system.
These involve different social agents in both the generation of the problem and its solution.
Another line of analysis, which has been much criticised, tends to highlight the consumption of alcohol and drugs, situations of violence and adolescent pregnancy as generalized problems of young people (showing their high degree of “anomie”) which also contribute to or facilitate school drop-out.
The second frame of interpretation, which has gained currency as the first approach has displayed shortcomings in terms of explaining the phenomenon, focuses on the intra–system situations which make students’ continuation in school conflictive: poor performance, problems of conduct, authoritarian teachers, etc.
According to this view, there are various coexisting explanations which give more importance to one or another of these factors as the main element in the decision to give up studying.
According to this view, by refusing to ascribe any formative potential to the culture and juvenile activities of the poorest strata of the population, the teachers assume that their most specific role is to prepare young people for an adverse setting in which they will have to behave in a disciplined manner.
The school is reduced to a place where young people receive obligations and instructions, living passively in an environment which bores them and where there is no place for their interests, concerns and problems.
Resistance to the symbolic violence deployed by the system therefore takes the form of scholastic failure, normally followed by withdrawal from the school.19 Finally, in the framework of this second approach, it is suggested that the recognition by the socializing agents of the poverty of children and young people tends to be a factor negating their cultural potential.
The programme involves a complex strategy for action in two main areas: the teaching area, and the psycho–social area.
This is because it considers that the problem of school drop-out and poor school performance of the young people attending the secondary schools with the highest socio–educational vulnerability has a number of different causes.
The main concern of the teaching development area is to help secondary schools to build up suitable educational practices which will ensure high–quality educational processes, taking account of the diversity of their students.This area develops levelling–up projects, pilot plans for innovations in teaching practices in schools with adverse institutional conditions, and other innovative measures.
The main task of the psycho–social development area, for its part, is to support and strengthen conditions and capabilities in the schools which will make possible a learning experience based on suitable interpersonal relations and will foster a climate suitable for learning in the school, bearing in mind the actual conditions of the young people who attend it.
The programme is therefore based on an intervention strategy which combines two dimensions: the quality of life, and the quality of education of the young people concerned.
The first of these includes access to welfare services (mainly financial scholarships for the students who are most vulnerable and whose educational trajectory shows them to have the highest risk of dropping out), improvement of the conditions in the establishments, and the implementation of a school health programme designed to help keep young people in school.
With regard to the first type of evidence, not all the surveys reveal information on the reasons for school drop-out, and even those which do use questions with different possible answers referring to different factors, thus making it more difficult to compare the reasons for drop-out stated by those interviewed.
Thus, only 10 of the 18 countries studied ask the reasons for non–attendance at school; in one of those ten countries (Guatemala) the question is posed only to children between 5 and 14 years of age, while in another (Panama) the great majority of the answers in this respect are concentrated in a single category (“other reasons”).
In the other countries, the question on the reasons for dropping out of school offers a wide variety of possible types of answers.
In order to highlight some of the factors most frequently mentioned as the reason for dropping out of school, the answers used were those given by young people between the ages of 15 and 19 who had they had dropped out of school because of economic difficulties or because they were working or looking for work.
In the other three countries (Chile, Peru and Venezuela), over half those questioned gave this reason.
Finally, it may be noted that lack of interest in schooling is given as the main reason for dropping out more frequently than problems of scholastic performance, although the two factors are undoubtedly closely related.
In both urban and rural areas, more boys than girls stated that they had dropped out because of lack of interest in their studies.
This is consistent with the evidence of the longer period spent in school and the better performance achieved by In seven of the eight countries studied (excepting the Dominican Republic), the main reason for dropping out of school in the case of male adolescents was connected with economic factors.
In four of them (Bolivia, El Salvador, Nicaragua and Paraguay), over 70% of these young people stated that 22 Although it is not remunerated, housework is a motive for school drop-out which is basically of the same nature as paid employment, and as such could have been classified under “economic reasons”.
However, it has been classified under “family problems” in order to form a clearer contrast between the reasons for dropping out associated with the gender roles of boys and girls.
This decision also seems justified because the difference between the patterns of answers given by boys and girls suggests that adolescent pregnancy –one of the main reasons for dropping out among girls– could be “hidden” in the general category of “family problems”.
In Peru, only includes problems of scholastic performance. between 25% and 48%.
With regard to reasons connected with scholastic performance, only in Chile did a relatively high percentage of young drop-outs (between 6% and 12% of the total) give this as their reason for dropping out. adolescent girls as compared with boys, especially in secondary education.
In Chile, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Peru, between 10% and 25% of adolescents of both sexes give lack of interest as their main reason for dropping out of school.
In the Dominican Republic and Venezuela these percentages are higher: As noted earlier, another way of analysing the “causes” of school drop-out is to examine various factors assumed to be related with scholastic failure and drop-out.
As a simple average, among urban young people the fact of living in a state of poverty increases the probability of school drop-out by around 60% (23% for non–poor, compared with 37% for the poor), and the difference is even greater in the case of early drop-outs (6% compared with 13%).
IV). of education of the mother increases it by over 170% and raises the probability of early school drop-out by a factor of five.
Both these factors precede the entry of young people into the educational system and are therefore markedly ascriptive.
This approach makes it possible to illustrate the “process” effect that these factors have on the phenomenon of school drop-out.
This same “process” is observed in rural areas, but the levels are much higher because a low level of education of the parents is a generalized phenomenon.
Juvenile labour is the factor which appears to produce the biggest differences in levels of school drop-out: in urban areas, 53% of young people who work have left school without completing their secondary education (18% dropped out early), while among young people who do not work, this proportion only amounts to 19% (6% early drop-outs).
In rural areas, for their part, 71% of young people who work did not complete their secondary education, compared with 38% of those who do not work (see tables III.7 and III.8).
However, these differences do not provide convincing proof that work is a factor which causes drop-out from the educational system, because the household surveys do not make it possible to determine whether entry into the labour market preceded school drop-out or vice versa (i.e., those who dropped out subsequently started to work).
Low educational level of the mother (5 years’ schooling or less), and to a lesser extent the absence of one of the parents, also appear to have an effect on school drop-out.
Thus, among urban young people whose mothers had a low level of education, over 40% dropped out (55% in rural areas), whereas among those whose mothers had completed at least the primary cycle, the proportion was close to 15% in urban areas and 34% in rural areas.
This way of analysing the information is most useful, however, in the case of the work factor: among young urban drop-outs, 51% are working (54% in the case of early drop-outs), while 24% of those who have not dropped out but are seriously behind in their studies have jobs, whereas only 15% of the total universe of students are employed.
Likewise, in rural areas, while some 60% of drop-outs have jobs, only 27% of those who are still at school are employed, although this figure rises to 36% among those who are still studying but are seriously behind.
Although this cannot be ruled out, it seems more reasonable to assume that it is employment which undermines students’ school performance.
Social and private costs of school drop-out The high rates of school drop-out registered in Latin America indicate the need to establish new curricula and allocate more resources to the urgent need to keep children and adolescents in the educational system.
There are few areas where the resources invested give a higher rate of social and private return.
Estimates based on the return to extra years of schooling in urban labour markets indicate that in countries where school drop-out takes place at an early stage, an increase in school retention up to completion of the primary cycle (four more years’ schooling) would give between 25% and 60% higher labour income.
In countries where school drop-out tends to coincide with completion of the primary cycle, three more years’ schooling (up to completion of the first secondary cycle) would lead to wages that were between 30% and 50% higher.
Even in countries which have attained a relatively high level of full secondary educational coverage, withdrawal before completion of that cycle entails serious private and social losses: leaving secondary school two years before completing the cycle involves income losses of between 20% and 30%.
In a number of countries, the greater return per extra year of secondary education obtained by girls compared with boys indicates that the reduction of school drop-out in these cases helps to reduce the wage gap between the sexes.
Among the social costs, the literature mentions those due to the fact of having a labour force which is less qualified and less capable of being upgraded, when the persons in question have not reached certain minimum levels of education needed to derive benefit from training programmes offered by the State or by private enterprises.
The most extreme case is the social cost due to very early school drop-out, which results in functional illiteracy.
Other social chool drop-out gives rise to high social and private costs.
The former are not easy to estimate, and the literature generally only lists the factors responsible for them, without giving any estimates of their actual size.
With regard to private costs, these are normally evaluated by estimating the loss of income in the labour market suffered by those who drop out of formal education before completing a given number of years’ schooling. groups of countries.
Group A includes countries where the average educational levels of the economically active population are relatively high and the global drop-out rate among young people aged between 15 and 19 is relatively low; groups B and C include countries with intermediate and low levels of schooling and drop-out rates that are likewise intermediate or relatively high by regional standards.
In order to estimate the losses associated with school drop-out during the primary and secondary cycles, it is important to note, first of all, the significant differences in the returns per additional year of primary and secondary schooling.
Among both males and females, the returns on secondary education are much higher than those on primary schooling: 10.6% compared with 6.1% for males, and 12.1% and 6.0% for females.
The higher rate of return on secondary education in the case of women is a general tendency in the countries in groups A and B, but not in group C, where women obtain a higher rate of return from primary education.31 costs of school drop-out include low labour productivity and its effect in terms of (lower) economic growth.
They also include the higher outlays needed to finance the costs of social programmes and transfers to sectors which are incapable of generating their own resources.
The changes in the returns on secondary education, however, were less systematic, although they too showed a slight downward trend, especially among males in the first group of countries, where secondary enrolment expanded faster.
It is expected that α 1 , α 2 > 0 and that α 3 < 0, so that income is a decreasing function of the experience accumulated by individuals during their working life, and it is assumed that the returns remain constant regardless of the number of years of schooling.
Various studies have been made on this subject during the last decade, and in the case of Latin America the available results show the positive effect of schooling in determining labour income (Psacharopoulus and Chun Ng, 1992).
There is also abundant literature on the problems deriving from selection bias in the estimation of these models, as well as on the problems arising in the interpretation of the results when instrumental variables designed to correct them are incorporated (Kling, 2000).
The data bases used correspond to the microdata of household surveys carried out by the countries around the beginning and end of the 1990s, in order to evaluate the changes observed over the last ten years in the educational profile of the labour force and in the rates of return on the different educational cycles.
The model was estimated on information from urban areas and separate results were generated for males and females.The estimation method used was the weighted least squares method (LSM), and the expansion factor associated with each of the observations was incorporated in the calculation algorithm.
In order to identify the population of interest, a basic set of variables was selected.
The results obtained indicate that the selected variables make it possible to explain a large part of the observed variations in wages, while the great majority of the parameters estimated in the different models proved to be significant at the 5% level.
The estimates are given in tables III.14 and III.15 at the end of this chapter.
Group B: Countries with levels of education of the EAP close to the average for the region and global dropout rates somewhat higher than Group A.
Group C: Countries with relatively low average levels of education of the EAP and relatively high global dropout rates.
From the point of view of the returns in terms of higher income in the labour market, the arguments in favour of improving the retention of children and young persons in school are irrefutable.
It is therefore a question of determining the effect of completing secondary education.
In four of the six countries in the group35 this means completing 12 years’ schooling.
In this case, the results show greater increases in income than in the first group, because on average in the countries of this second group there is a greater return per additional year of secondary education; moreover, the hypothesis involves the successful completion of more years of schooling.
Thus, the increases in income are around 33% for male adolescents and 42% for women.
Furthermore, the evidence accumulated on the private returns of more years of schooling suggests that in the case of girls the prolongation of their education generally gives greater returns in urban labour markets than in the case of boys, so that policies designed to keep girls in school would appear to help narrow the wage gap between the sexes.
The estimated average increases in income are of the order of 36% for men and 44% for women.
In this group, there is more dispersion of the amounts of increase between countries: outstanding examples in this respect are Brazil, because of the high rate of return per extra year among men (11.2%) and Nicaragua, because of the high rate for women (11.7%).
In these two cases, the increase in income gained by those prolonging their schooling up to the end of the primary cycle is close to 60% (see table III.11).
It is worth repeating that social programmes designed to reduce early school drop-out should occupy a leading place on the agendas of the governments of the region.
Efforts to improve the indices of retention of children in the primary cycle, as well as to raise the quality of the education provided, are crucial for the fulfilment of the Millennium Development Targets.
They will not only help to attain the educational goals adopted by governments for the year 2015 but are also a necessary condition for reducing inequality and achieving more ambitious objectives in terms of improving the quality of human resources in Latin America.
The main reason for structuring formal educational systems in cycles is to fulfill a number of fundamental objectives and provide consistent minimum contents which maintain continuity through the different grades.
The first–named data were preferred because of their consistency with the changes made in the system in 1986 and their later updating.
It should be borne in mind that the special features of each educational system determine to a considerable extent the magnitude of the different types of school drop-out, because longer cycles increase the likelihood of drop-out during the cycle.
It should also be borne in mind that in some countries the application of systems of automatic promotion from one grade to the next –mainly in the primary cycle– tend to reduce drop-out due to scholastic failure (repetition).
The expression α1 + α2 + α3 corresponds to the private rate of return on each additional year of education in the higher cycle. α4: Regression coefficient associated with the potential experience of the individual in question. α5: Regression coefficient associated with the potential experience of the individual in question, squared.
The t statistics are shown in brackets.The values which are not statistically significant at the 5% level are marked with an (*).
For a complete explanation of the characteristics of the model applied, see box III.5.
Chapter IV The social agenda Social capital: its potential and limitations for the implementation of social policies and programmes Introduction T importance that the question of social capital and its possible contribution to social policies has he purpose of the social agenda is to provide a diagnosis of emerging social issues.
By way of contrast and comparison, it also summarizes the agreements adopted by the World Social Forum, which has twice brought together in Porto Alegre a varied group of non–governmental social and political actors who are opposed to what they call the “single development model”.
The information used in the preparation of this chapter came to a large extent from the Conference “In search of a new paradigm: social capital and poverty reduction in Latin America and the Caribbean”, jointly organized by ECLAC and Michigan State University and held at Santiago, Chile, from 24 to 26 September 2001.
Social capital: the origins of this concept The concept of social capital is not new.
Right from the start, the social sciences have analysed some of its constituent elements, such as reciprocity and types of exchanges and solidarity, and have studied its contribution to such functions as social control and support from inside and outside the family.
T issues have been addressed from the very de the rational element as a constituent factor of social phenomena.
The sociological literature has seen social capital as a source of social control, family support and generation of benefits transmitted through networks outside the family (Portes, 1999).
Important elements of the concept, just as it appears now, may be found in the works of the founders of sociology and anthropology (see table IV.1). he concept of social capital and related beginning by the social sciences, especially sociology and anthropology.
In both of these disciplines there are classic studies on the normative and value– related component of societies which guides social relations towards the expression of different types of solidarity, mutual exchanges or reciprocity.
Distinciones conceptuales básicas”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), unpublished, 2001; Alejandro Portes, “Capital social: sus orígenes y aplicaciones en la sociología moderna”, De igual a igual.
Main approaches and positions There is a wide variety of approaches and positions regarding social capital which lay stress on the capacity to mobilize resources; membership of networks; the sources originating social capital; the individual or collective actions that the social capital infrastructure makes possible; and finally, the positive and negative consequences and results that it can generate.
There are two main dimensions or guiding lines underlying the different ways of addressing this concept.
Both theoretical and empirical studies have been made of social capital from the standpoints of anthropology, economics, history, sociology and psychology.We are therefore dealing with a truly interdisciplinary paradigm (Robinson, Siles and Schmid, 2001). mobilization of resources by a group, while the second focuses on the availability of networks of social relations (Atria, 2002).
The capacity for mobilization involves two specially important notions: leadership, and its counterpart, empowerment (see table IV.3).
The capacity for mobilizing resources comprises the notion of associativity3 and the horizontality or verticality of social networks.
These characteristics have given rise to a distinction between networks of relations within a group or community (bonding), networks of relations between similar groups or communities (bridging) and networks of external relations (linking) (see box IV.1).
The social capital of a group could be understood as its effective capacity to mobilize in a productive manner, for the benefit of the community, the associative resources located in the various social networks to which its members have access.
The associative resources taken into account in order to estimate the social capital available to a group or community are the relations of confidence, reciprocity and cooperation.
Confidence is the result of the repetition of interactions with other persons who, in line with experience, will respond with an act of generosity, thus strengthening a link which combines acceptance of risk with a sense of affection or enhanced identity.
Reciprocity has been conceived as the guiding principle of a logic of interaction quite foreign to the logic of the market, which assumes exchanges based on gifts.
Cooperation, for its part, is a complementary action designed to achieve shared objectives of a common activity (Durston, 2001).
Developing social capital Predominance of outward–looking social networks (networks of alliances) B.
It would be of crucial importance to invest in the organizational capacity of the poor, which involves making investments at the micro level in order to promote the creation of organizations and acting at the macro level by changing rules and laws in order to support and sustain associative activity.
Some World Bank publications make a clear distinction between different types of social capital: one which creates ties among members of the same community (bonding), another which gives rise to synergies between dissimilar groups (bridging), and a third which links local communities with outside agents such as the State and NGOs (linking).
The first of these is limited to furthering the well–being of its members, the second opens up economic opportunities for poorer and excluded groups, and the third links social capital with broader dimensions of social and economic policy.
Associativity is understood as the voluntary unremunerated organization of individuals or groups which establish an explicit link in order to attain a common objective (UNDP, 2000, p. 114).
The first is the strategy of empowerment, which consists of actions designed to increase the mobilization capacity of the group by transforming the existing leadership within the group into leadership by the group. through their strategies and undertakings.
Flores and Rello (2001), for their part, classify the definitions according to the sources and infrastructure originating the social capital, the collective action that the infrastructure makes possible, and the results of that action.
According to these authors, the essential feature of social capital is that it is a capacity: the capacity to obtain benefits by making use of social networks.
The second course of action is a strategy of associativity, that is to say, actions designed to expand or strengthen the ambit or scope of the networks in which the group members participate and thus strengthen cooperation with other groups, through new linkages with their networks.
The considerable variety of definitions of social capital is due to the fact that it is a concept used by various different disciplines, each of which focuses on different aspects.
The international development institutions find it useful because it attaches importance to knowledge of the relations between economic actors and between their (formal or informal) types of organization and helps to increase the efficiency of economic and social activities.
These types of social and institutional relations are considered to be desirable because they share positive externalities for development and there would thus be a form of complementation between public policies and associativity and the social capital paradigm based on confidence, reciprocity and cooperation.
Social capital would reduce transaction costs, produce public goods and facilitate the activities of effective grass–roots organizations (Durston, 2000).
To stimulate the analysis and discussion of the ethical challenges and dilemmas arising in the development of the region and the assumption of responsibilities in connection with them by the main decision–makers. 2.
To further cooperation for the development of the social capital latent in the region by strengthening voluntary organizations, expanding the social responsibility of private enterprise, and promoting the adoption of codes of ethics by the key social actors. 3.
Fostering the inclusion of goals and criteria which involve ethical dimensions and the mobilization of social capital in the preparation and implementation of development projects by international organizations and government agencies. 4.
Promoting the integration into school curriculums of systematic programmes for the teaching of development ethics which will also favour the growth of social capital. 5.
Forming a network of academic and research centres which will further systematic long–term action in the field of ethics and development in the areas of research, publications and contributions to the public debate. 6.
Fostering greater knowledge and diffusion of the subjects of ethics and development and social capital among the mass media.
Furthermore, because of its wide conceptual diversity, the definition and measurement of common indicators continues to be a pending task. their economic, social and affective needs.
In that same social environment, however, there are also informal cultural norms whose logic may run counter to the urge to associate.
This is particularly evident in nations which are highly segmented in economic and social terms, like the Latin American countries (Ocampo, 2001). 1.Social and power–related inequalities here are two approaches to social capital.
The international institutions and much of the literature on this subject usually stress this second approach.
As already noted by various authors (Bourdieu, 1985; Fukuyama, 1999), social capital is not equally distributed in society, due to social gaps (educational and socio–economic level) or assigned (gender or race) or geographical (urban, rural) differences.
This concept therefore serves both to analyse assets or resources of poor sectors which are not being fully used and to examine the situation as regards inequality, although fewer studies have been made from the Thus, the raw material for building social capital may be found in all societies, subject to the special features typical of each culture.
Everyone uses social capital in their strategies and in the satisfaction of Bourdieu (1997) defines the social space as a field of opposing forces and struggles between agents.
This power field is the space for struggles between the different types of capital or between agents possessing one of the different types of capital to dominate the field in question, and the tension between positions is a constituent aspect of the structure of the field.
Nevertheless, however great the autonomy of the field may be, the result of these struggles is never completely independent of external factors.The relations of strength therefore depend on the state of the external struggles and the reinforcements that may be found in the exterior. duction and circulation of this social capital with the broader political scene (Feijoó, 2001). latter perspective.
As already noted, if the State limits itself to using the existing institutional channels, the resources it assigns may be obtained and distributed through informal relations, which are sometimes corrupt and may be subject to the unwritten rules of clientage.
This is the “caring economy”, which corresponds to the goods and services produced free of charge by women for their households and communities and is reflected in their caring for old people, the sick and children (Elson, 1998).
This voluntary domestic work, which is carried out especially by poorer women, produces major resource flows for the economy (UNIFEM, 2000).
In this respect, some authors have warned that there are socio–political dynamics in the development of social capital that operate both inside and outside groups and communities which lead to the establishment of power relations that can result in the emergence of local groups or factions and clientage–based alliances which divert State support.
This means that the State and its agents are part of a scenario which can create conditions that are either favourable or unfavourable to the development of social capital, at the local level and in society at large (Durston and Miranda, 2001).
Cases of clientage and nepotism are much more frequent at the local level, through expanded family networks and bossism, over which there is less capacity for control.
Generally speaking, the increase in female associativity is not subsequently expressed in an increase in their political empowerment (see box IV.3).
Although outside agents of change can spark off the process or create a supportive environment for it, in the final analysis it is persons who “empower” themselves.
True empowerment may not be a neutral process, so that those who are committed to it must be ready to face social upsets.
Empowerment is not a zero–sum game, although there may be winners and losers in certain senses.
Group processes are often crucial for the attainment of empowerment, but personal change in individuals is also essential.
Empowerment is not a synonym for decentralization or participation, nor for participation from the bottom up: it is a much more powerful concept than this.
A word of warning is also called for regarding the possible “naturalization” of women’s supposed “disposition” to help to maintain social capital, which means that it is all too easy to make them responsible for the proper development of some projects, such as those regarding family health, protection of the environment or community development (Molyneux, 2002).
The social ties can give greater control over undesirable forms of conduct and provide privileged access to resources, but they can also restrict individual liberties and prohibit outsiders from having access to those same resources, through particularist preferences.
For this reason, it seems preferable to view these multiple processes as social facts that should be studied in all their complexity, rather than as examples of a value. …..
As a label for the positive effects of sociability, I consider that social capital does have a place in theory and research, provided that its different sources and effects are recognized and that its bad aspects are examined just as closely as its good ones” (Portes, 1999, p. 262).
Some texts give examples of areas of conflict that can arise in the interaction of social and economic institutions and between agents and communities.
In the case of the rural sector, a distinction is made between the reason for the conflict (land, water, animals, infrastructure, etc.) and the environment in which it occurs (the household, relatives, groups, neighbours, etc.).
Different types of clientage may be distinguished within a continuum that extends from authoritarian to paternalistic varieties.
These types of relations may be enhanced with others which are more likely to strengthen collective social capital, such as the training of members of organizations until the latter become autonomous and public and private officials have to render accounts to them (see box IV.4).
It has been noted that “many of the failures in traditional anti–poverty programmes are due to the technocratic and paternalistic relations that exist between development agencies and the population they serve.
In a hierarchical State system in which carrying out orders is the main requirement for obtaining a positive rating, a view of the poor as people who lack various strengths is functional to this system of being accountable to those at a higher level.
Among the negative forms assumed by social capital, mention is usually made of mafia–type “families”, environments of prostitution and gambling, and juvenile gangs.
This is the counterpart to the greater outflow of women from these areas, which is 12% greater than the outflow of men between 15 and 29 years of age in the region.
Turns social capital into the passive receipt of products and creates dependence. 3.
Semi–clientage: “incubating” and training Fosters autonomous organization and training in management skills and the capacity to propose projects.
Protects organization in the social, economic and local and regional political fields. 4.
Authoritarian, repressive and kleptocratic clientage Continues to develop the system of self–management of already established organizations that operate with some degree of autonomy.
Expands the local level of action and strengthens weak social actors. 5.
Synergic co–production between the State and civil society The grassroots and second–level organizations establish and manage their own strategies, sign contracts with the State and other outside agencies, manage their financial resources and contract services to improve the quality of life of their members.The public officials and technicians hired are accountable to the organized users.
Su papel en la persistencia y en la superación de la pobreza en América Latina y el Caribe”, paper presented at the conference “En busca de un nuevo paradigma: capital social y reducción de la pobreza en América Latina y el Caribe”, Santiago, Chile, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)/University of Michigan, 24–26 September 2001.
It calls for measurement of the nature of collective action, the difficulties inherent in that action and the group concerned, and the performance and adaptability and resistance of the group in the face of difficulties.
One possibility would be to use social surveys on the values and confidence of citizens, although the answers to these questions will vary according to the way they are posed and the person asking them; generally speaking, the answers will lack continuity and information will not be available for many countries.
Another possibility would be to measure the absence of social capital, through traditional measurements of social conflictivity such as the crime rate, the incidence of use of drugs, the number of suicides, the level of tax evasion, etc. (Fukuyama, 1999).
In general, there are not many measurements of social capital for the region.
Some indicators have been defined for the analysis of personal networks and degrees of associativity (Espinoza, 2001).
Some efforts have also been made to measure the degree of associativity as a referent of the social capital existing, although this type of measurements runs into some obstacles which are listed in box IV.5 below.
One attempt made in Chile in 1999 indicates that associativity could represent the social base needed for the proper functioning of economic and political institutions.
In this sense, the expression “social capital” is used to sum up the degree of associativity, social confidence, reciprocity and civic commitment existing in the societies in question.
The study distinguishes between formal (i.e., in social, political and economic institutions) and informal associativity, and says that in Chile it seems reasonable to assume that many persons (especially the younger ones) are seeking new forms of association.
Some ways in which social capital Helps to overcome poverty The concept of social capital can represent a contribution to anti–poverty programmes.
Special mention should be made in this respect of efforts to increase participation through the active incorporation of the persons concerned, which makes possible proper accountability and gives due importance to the environment of the programmes in question.
It has been maintained that it is only possible to create and strengthen social capital and foster synergic relations between the public agent and poor communities by acting at the local and regional level in which they are located.
There are any number of examples of the efficacy of associative micro–enterprise programmes, community contributions to the construction and management of social infrastructure, and of the role that can be played by civic associations acting as pressure groups at the political level to ensure that the benefits of programmes effectively reach the groups they are intended for (Ocampo, 2001).
It calls for various changes in the outside agent: the latter must change its relationship with the groups served; it must be accountable to the population served; it must see itself as just another member of a community; and it must promote the co–production of goods by the State agent and the communities served.
What is known as community social capital complements public services in various ways (Durston, 2000).
Firstly, it links them with the household: something which is specially important in programmes designed to overcome poverty.
Secondly, the mobilization of community social capital helps to make programmes to promote urban micro–enterprises and peasant production more effective.
In both cases, the new approach contributes its capacity to integrate the inter–personal networks that permeate the relations between the State and society, in the place of the more traditional approach whereby these two levels are distinct and isolated from each other.
Suggestions for increasing or strengthening social capital7 Among the suggested ways of increasing or strengthening the existing social capital there are four possible types of policies: promotional, cultural, participative and coordination and synergy–oriented policies.
T of policies for removing the mechanisms which will link up with the community institutions to achieve their “empowerment”. he social capital approach offers four types for the intergenerational transmission of unequal opportunities for achieving well–being.
Firstly, it is necessary to establish policies to promote the social capital approach itself, so that social researchers, agents and promoters can be trained in both the theory and practical methods of social capital.
It has been suggested that in the new social policy model, and above all in the social capital approach, the personal commitment of officials or researchers is needed.
It is considered that all social capital analysts should carry out two main tasks: first, to promote the search for social capital precursors,8 and to study the social capital deposited and stored in the historical memory of groups, which existed in the past but has been weakened by internal rivalries or repressed by outside forces (Durston, 2000).
It has also been argued that social scientists are in an ambiguous situation between the scientific and political fields, and that their personal commitment to a community is therefore both normal and favourable for overcoming poverty (Bourdieu, 1995, cited in Second, it is important to establish a platform of cultural policies and, on that basis, promote pioneering social capital experiences.
Kliksberg (1999) considers a linkage between culture and social policies to be vital, because the cultural background of peoples is a positive way of generating social integration and also strengthening common values.
A conscious policy of promoting popular and peasant culture in Latin America would foster the local identity and make possible the emergence of social capital.
Fourth, it is necessary to promote policies for the coordination of social capital, since many of the areas of concern to governments, such as poverty, the family, gender or ethnic issues, are related with transverse dimensions of other policies which call for a high degree of coordination and integration in order to be effective.
Third, State action should be focused on policies for the creation and strengthening of social capital, as a form of direct intervention in the community.
It has been noted that community institutions can be induced by outside agents through suitable means, thus seeking the co–production of individual and family social capital This section is based on Franulic (2001).
The following precursors of social capital have been identified: social memory, identity (including ethnic identity), religion, neighbourhood, friendship, kinship, principles of horizontal and vertical reciprocity, and elements of socio–emotional satisfaction (Durston, 2001).
Good practices in the fight against poverty Some practices followed in Brazil, Chile and Guatemala offer lessons on the usefulness of applying the different dimensions of social capital to anti–poverty programmes.
Among them are: the use of non–traditional forms of social capital, the adoption of novel forms of organization, and, most importantly, the existence of a real political will to share the economic resources and, ultimately, power of the State institutions.
In this way, the population redirected resources to solve the most keenly felt problems: the coverage of drinking water supply increased to 98%, the coverage of the sewerage system rose to 80.4%, and the degree of paving of streets increased to 30%, while the coverage of the educational system was also expanded and an adult literacy programme was set up.
At the same time, the resource allocation process was made more transparent and there was effective social control of its execution.
The broad base of social support for the profound budgetary changes involved made it possible to increase tax collection and enhance fiscal equity, while the opportunities for corruption and clientage were sharply reduced. 1.The participative municipal budget of Porto Alegre, Brazil.
An example of the use of existing social capital9 T geting put into practice in the city of Porto he example of participative municipal bud- Alegre has aroused interest even at the international level, and nearly 70 municipalities in Brazil are now applying similar procedures.
In view of the social problems which existed and the limited access of broad sectors of the population to basic services, it was decided to invite the population to participate in the management of the investments section of the municipal budget.
For this purpose, the city was divided into 16 areas in which the budget execution figures and future estimates were analysed and priorities were identified at the neighbourhood level, to be subsequently harmonized at the area and global level.
Another analysis and decision–making mechanism operates with respect to major items of concern: urban development, transport, health attention, leisure, education and culture.
In all this, full use was made of the existing social capital, reflected in a tradition of community associations.
These were actively mobilized and played a fundamental role in the various levels of decision–making set up.
A vital element in this was the political will to share power and create genuine participation mechanisms which generated a climate of confidence and an incentive for constructive civic behaviour.
The persons involved in the project gained in their self–esteem because they were consulted and identified themselves with the project.
The educational issue was raised in all the various organizations and institutions making up the civil society and local government of the commune concerned.
Popular participation and the reactivation of community organizations was also facilitated through free reflection on education, contextualized according to the various different realities and needs and local interests and social movements.
This project provides for an intercultural dialogue, through work with predominantly Mapuche communities.
The organizations can express their views not only on specific matters (drinking water supply, health, housing) but also on other matters related with them in line with the logic of community development, and moreover they can submit their views in writing and thus make them public.
The existence within rural communities of conflicts and internal divisions which are to some extent a reflection of the long history of conflicts between the State and indigenous communities in Chile gave rise to difficulties and made it necessary to readapt the design of the project and extend the period of time before its initiation.
In addition, the conflicts between some communities and forestry companies gave rise to outbreaks of violence.
These situations show how complex the execution of the project has been, and have represented obstacles which have been very difficult to overcome.
Even in these circumstances, however, the communities used the possibilities offered by the project to open up real spaces for the expression of their desires and aspirations in educational matters.
The role of conflicts in the development of the process The main learning processes Methodologically, the project has shown its potential for mobilizing local communities, especially in terms of social reflection on a problem of collective interest (in this case, the education of the community).
Practical experience has shown the need to adapt the original design to the four contexts in which it was applied (one urban and three rural), so that in no place was the same pattern followed strictly.
Real progress has been made in securing greater community participation in these matters, and this 10 Based on Williamson (2002). 11 It is financed by the W.K.
Kellogg Foundation (US$ 400 000 for three years). mala, with the aim of significantly increasing the incomes of poor peasants.
This project centered on facilitating peasants’ access to bank credit and provided support in such areas as technical assistance for agriculture, road construction, organization and management, environmental conservation, improvement of housing, participation of peasant women in development, marketing, etc. has helped to improve relations between the schools and the community.
In some cases, closer relations between teachers and the community have been facilitated through the exchange of opinions –often divergent and critical– on educational matters.
Each of the sectors involved has made an analysis of its responsibility for what has been done or what has failed to be done to improve the educational process of the community, as manifested in the school.
When the Project began its activities in 1991, its target group –5 000 peasant families– lacked grassroots organizations; there were some citizens’ committees, but they were merely small factions of passive beneficiaries of non–governmental charitable organizations.
A system of participative planning was designed which linked together the kinship groups and networks of the community into a system of core groups –made up of between 7 and 12 households with ties of close neighbourhood– which took part in the determination of the needs and priorities with regard to the services and benefits of the Project.
Some 40 rural development promoters publicized the benefits of participation from house to house.
In short, the concept and methodology of participative research and action is an excellent means of generating social mobilization to build up the social and cultural demand for education and frame proposals.
It strengthens local capabilities, puts ideas and ideals in order, generates leadership capacity –though not always in the case of formal education– and can result in the construction of autonomous means of local participation and decision–making vis–à–vis the formal system.
At the same time, however, in so far as spaces are opened up for horizontal exchanges, some individuals or groups of individuals begin to establish informal territorial community links and to generate mechanisms of participation and association at the secondary– community level.
This is a challenge and a social process which is in the course of development.
As a result of these activities, by 1998 over 400 core groups had been created, together with over 100 community councils and 8 municipal coordination committees.
Almost 56% of these community organizations were evaluated as being moderately or highly autonomous in their form of operation, and during 1998 they were grouped together into a regional association of representatives which began to play a part in the establishment of rural development priorities for the region.
Among the factors explaining the success of the process of recovery of lost social capital in Guatemala are: 3.Guatemala: an example of the recovery of lost social capital12 i) the existence of small networks of relatives and neighbours sharing the value of common ancestry, as well as multiple ties based on cooperation, reciprocity and both horizontal and vertical confidence.
From a methodological perspective, it would seem that taking account of the forms of social capital which existed or exist in a community helps the development of participative methodologies and the empowerment of weak social actors.
It should be stressed, however, that it is a process which can be very slow and in some cases very costly, although it does give interesting results when it has strong support in terms of resources and training, together with the political will to change the state of poverty of specific population groups.
However, it can aid in the success of projects and programmes designed to reduce poverty in the region.
In short, emphasis must be placed on the importance of good practices with regard to social capital, although this is still a concept whose heuristic potential is in full process of development.
As Portes (1999) notes, however, the popularity of the social capital concept will keep on growing, even though it may be somewhat exaggerated, for two reasons: firstly, the set of processes covered by this concept are not new, and were already studied in the past under different names, so that using the term social ca- G.
At both these meetings the Heads of State and Government of the region reaffirmed their commitment to work for the strengthening of peace, development, protection of the environment and human rights.
More specifically, the Ibero–American Summit focused on the rights of the child, while the Rio Summit concentrated more on policies aimed at the family.
The non–governmental organizations, for their part, have met at two world social forums held in Porto Alegre, Brazil, where they analysed the new characteristics of globalization, with special emphasis on its social impact.
In this context, the member countries agree on the following points: We reiterate our unwavering commitment to protect, promote and guarantee the full application of human rights.This requires the prevalence of the rule of law as well as the creation and improvement of the conditions leading to its effective and full implementation.
We acknowledge the value and importance of Ibero–American women in the promotion of our societies' economic, social and cultural development.
Therefore, we reaffirm our commitment to insure women’s rights and to eliminate the obstacles that hamper their access to productive resources and their full and equitable participation in society.Within this context, we shall grant particular importance to women’s participation in programs aimed at eradicating poverty by creating opportunities for their professional training, social security and access to credit, among others.
We reaffirm the fundamental importance of children and adolescents, their rights in our societies, and the guiding role of the State in the design and implementation of social policies targeted at them and as guarantor of their rights, as well as the importance of the collaboration and initiatives provided by civil society.
Education represents a fundamental right and, as such, is a key factor for sustainable development and an indispensable means for participation in the social and economic systems of the XXI century.
Our Ibero– American community’s competitiveness requires a better educational level for its population and the ability to generate knowledge.
To this end, we reassert our commitment to make every effort to insure that by no later than the year 2015 all the children of Ibero–America have access to early initial education and free and obligatory primary education based, among other things, on the values o peace, liberty and democracy and the principles of non–discrimination, equity, belongingness, quality and efficiency.
The right to development, as an essential aspect of the comprehensive, reciprocal and complementary nature of all human rights, must be implemented through incentives and the creation of favourable conditions at both the national and the international level, particularly in those countries with a higher poverty index.
We renew our commitment to fight poverty and social exclusion by promoting suitable levels of productive and fairly remunerated employment, as well as access to free education and public health and housing services for the poorest sectors of the population, in order to help strengthen the full enjoyment of human rights, democratic institutions and social justice.
Within this context, we reiterate the need to increase the flows of financial resources and international cooperation in the struggle against poverty.
We stress the important role played by the entrepreneurial sector in the creation of employment.
In this regard, and in order to promote investment in the Ibero–American countries, we have agreed to hold a Forum on Ibero– American Investments to promote productive investment in the region, stimulate small, medium–sized and micro–enterprises and insure better access to the developed countries’ markets for their products.
We acknowledge that the globalization process presents both opportunities and challenges for the development and well–being of our peoples.
Nevertheless, we observe with concern that some countries are mired in economic stagnation and marginalization and that the economic, technological and productive gap between rich and poor countries has widened.
Finally, we agree to celebrate the Twelfth Ibero–American Summit of Heads of State and Government in the Dominican Republic, in the year 2002. and the non–proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the limitation of defence spending, and the repression of the illicit trade in small arms.
During its 14 years of existence, the Rio Group has analysed the situation of the countries of the region from various perspectives, studying such issues as democracy, unilateral measures, finances, the strengthening of multilateralism, sustainable development, and prevention and attention to natural disasters.
In this regard, they stress the need to take into account poverty’s many different forms and causes, in order to develop public policies and strengthen the family unit.
These brought together a broad range of social movements, political parties, labour unions and social organizations, and are the continuation of various “anti–Davos” meetings and of the activities of the organizations which had been joining together in mass protests at various international meetings of governments.
The aim was to seek answers that would help to build “another world”. • Access to wealth and sustainability: this included the analysis of knowledge and intellectual property, health and medicines, preservation of the environment, water as a common good, indigenous peoples, cities and urban populations, and food sovereignty.
At the closure of the World Social Forum 2001, when discussing the organization of a similar forum in 2002, the Organizing Committee proposed that such forums should be held every year at the same time as the Davos World Economic Forum and that an International Council of the World Social Forum should be formed.
The Forum attracted great interest, and a great variety of organizations were represented at it.
Among the most noteworthy declarations was that of the social movements (see box IV.8).
The global movement for social justice and solidarity faces enormous challenges: the struggle for peace and social rights means that poverty, discrimination and domination must be overcome and mankind must work to secure a sustainable society.
Along with the strengthening of electoral and participative democracy throughout the world, there is a special need to democratize the State and society and to combat dictatorship.
The abolition of the external debt and the granting to debtors of appropriate reparations.
The rejection of speculative activities, through the establishment of specific taxes such as the Tobin Tax on speculative capital, and the elimination of tax havens.
The right of women to be protected against violence, poverty and exploitation.
The rejection of war and militarism, foreign military bases and interventions, and the systematic increase in violence.
Priority must be given to dialogue, negotiation and the non–violent settlement of conflicts.
All peoples must have the right to international mediation, through the participation of independent civil bodies.
The right of young people to be socially independent and to receive free public education, while compulsory military service must be abolished.
Bahamondes, Miguel (2001), “Evaluación y fortalecimiento del capital social en comunidades campesinas”, consultancy final report Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)/National Institute for Agricultural Development (INDAP)/Inter–American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (IICA) for the project “Overcoming rural poverty: the reconstruction of peasant social capital”.
Dirven, Martine (2001), “Entre el ideario y la realidad: capital social y desarrollo agrícola.
Durston, John (2001), “Capital social: parte del problema, parte de la solución.
Elson, Diane (1998), “The economic, the political and the domestic: business, states and household organization of production”, New Political Economy, vol. 3, No. 2.
Espinoza, Vicente (2001), “Indicadores y generación de datos para un estudio comparativo de capital social y trayectorias laborales”, Capital social y políticas públicas en Chile, vols.
Granovetter, Mark (1985), “Economic action and social structure: the problem of embeddedness”, American Journal of Sociology, vol. 91, No. 3, November.
Kliksberg, Bernardo (2000), “El rol del capital social y de la cultura en el proceso de desarrollo”, Capital social y cultura: claves estratégicas para el desarrollo, Bernardo Kliksberg and Luciano Tomassini (eds.), Washington, D.C., Inter–American Development Bank (IDB). (1999), “Social capital and culture: master keys to development”, CEPAL Review, No. 69 (LC/ G.2067–P), Santiago, Chile, December.
Mincer, Jacob (1962), “On–the job training: costs, returns and some implications”, Journal of Political Economy, (1958), “Investment in human capital and personal income distribution”, Journal of Political Economy, Mincer, Jacob and Solomon Polachek (1974), “Family investments in human capital: earnings of women”, Journal of Political Economy, No. 82.
Portes, Alejandro (1999), “Capital social: sus orígenes y aplicaciones en la sociología moderna”, De igual a igual.
M. (1997), “La dinámica escolar: de la diferencia a la desigualdad”, Revista de Psicología de la Universidad de Chile, vol. 6.
Salazar, Gabriel (1998), “De la participación ciudadana: capital social y capital variable (explorando senderos trans–liberales)”, Sociedad civil, participación y ciudad emergente: proposiciones, No. 28, Ediciones SUR, September.
Woolcock, Michael (1998), “Social capital and economic development: toward a theoretical synthesis and policy framework”, Theory and Society, No. 27.
In those cases, wage earners in non–professional, non–technical occupations in establishments employing up to 5 workers are included in the figures for establishments employing over 5 workers.
In addition, for Chile (1996), El Salvador, Panama, Dominican Republic, Uruguay (1990) and Venezuela, this includes non–professional, non–technical wage earners in establishments employing up to four workers.
In the 1989 and 1994 surveys, no information was provided about the size of establishments in which wage earners were employed.
In 1994, however, the range of 0–5 years actually represents 0–9 years of schooling.
This is because the poverty line is calculated by multiplying the indigence line by a variable coefficient instead of a fixed value (2.0) as is the case in the other countries.
The centrality of equality for sustainable and inclusive development The struggle against inequality, poverty eradication and the quest for fairer, more inclusive societies with higher levels of well-being are at the heart of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the challenges associated with these objectives are structural, multifaceted and persistent.
However, the current global and regional situation appears to be a more adverse context in which to address them, at least when compared to the first decade and a half of this century.
Not only has social progress of various kinds slowed or levelled off in a weak economic environment, but there are strong signs that in some respects it has gone into reverse.
The structural shortcomings of the region have become more evident after five years of slow growth, and among the demands of large groups in society, particularly the new generations, is that they be corrected.
These demands include the rejection of a persistent culture of privilege in its many dimensions, particularly those associated with the concentration of wealth, segmented access to high-quality public and cultural services and failure to recognize the dignity of individuals and communities.
This is what many actors mean when they demand an end to abuses.
These causes are compounded by the problems associated with the effects of disasters and climate change, the demographic, epidemiological and nutritional transitions, the intensification of migratory movements and uncertainties related to the technological revolution, which will create new needs, risks and priorities.
In addition, the world is witnessing a period of global geopolitical change, great social discontent and growing polarization, accompanied in many cases by a process of delegitimization of politics and a growing rejection of traditional forms of organization and expression of interests.
In some cases, this has precipitated far-reaching political changes and challenges to consensuses of various kinds built up in recent decades, some of which have represented advances in the rights and inclusion agenda, while others have contributed to the reproduction of inequalities, exclusions and different forms of vulnerability.
This edition of Social Panorama of Latin America offers the customary analysis of trends in income inequality, poverty and social spending in Latin America, and includes an analysis of migration, which has moved up the region’s political and social agenda.
First, the book shows that the income of the richest 1% of the population has continued to climb and that estimates of inequality arrived at by combining the share of the richest 1% as ascertained from tax records with data from household surveys are substantially higher than those based on household surveys alone.
Improving the measurement of inequality is crucial as a support for public policies to combat it in the region.
The information presented confirms that middle-income strata continue to face different vulnerabilities (low levels of education, poor integration into the labour market, the low coverage and inadequacy of pension system provision).
All of this calls for a broader vision and progress towards comprehensive and universal social protection systems.
Third, a decisive commitment to equality requires a new social compact to consolidate agreements between different actors, conferring legitimacy and solidity on transformative policies and structural reforms.
A social compact 14 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Introduction for equality is one focused on redistributing income and other assets, recognizing diverse identities and autonomies and overcoming structural heterogeneity.
Among other elements, this requires a fiscal covenant to enhance distributive equity and the sustainability of social protection. 1.
Equality as the strategic objective of sustainable development Since its creation more than a quarter of a century ago, Social Panorama of Latin America has been analysing poverty and inequality as structural problems associated with the predominant development models in the countries of the region, with their various forms and characteristics.
For the past decade, moreover, the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) has posited the centrality of equality as the guiding principle and strategic objective of development and as an inescapable ethical imperative (ECLAC, 2010).
The notion of equality developed by ECLAC refers not only to equality of means (income, productive and financial assets and ownership), but also of capacities, autonomies and reciprocal recognition and, fundamentally, equality of rights.
What is sought is not only equality of opportunity and treatment, but also equality of outcomes.
Inequality is a historical and structural characteristic of Latin American and Caribbean societies, and has been maintained and reproduced even in periods of economic growth and prosperity.
It is an obstacle to the eradication of poverty, to sustainable development and to the safeguarding of people’s rights.
It is rooted in a highly heterogeneous and undiversified production system and in a culture of privilege, which has been a historical hallmark of Latin American societies.
This system is characterized by a complex structure in which inequalities of socioeconomic origin intersect with gender, territorial, ethnic, racial and generational inequalities (ECLAC, 2016c).
The path towards equality requires a change of development model, understood as a progressive structural change, with an environmental big push.
This means diversifying the production mix, i.e. overcoming the dependence on natural resources that still characterizes most of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean and increasing value added.
It will also entail transformation of the production structure, incorporating new technologies and increasing their use, with a sustainable increase in productivity.
Democratic societies are built on the notion of equality and participation, whereby everyone has the right and opportunity to play a role and take responsibility in decisionmaking.
Equal rights are thus fundamental to the exercise of citizenship and the basis for a cohesive society that shares goals and values, with reciprocal recognition and a sense of belonging, and they are therefore crucial for democratic governance.
Conversely, inequality is a direct source of conflict and a risk to democratic coexistence and the sustainability of development.
Accordingly, all members of society, in both the public and private sectors, have a responsibility to promote equality.
This path towards equality requires the State to restore and strengthen its role in regulation, oversight,distribution, orientation of investments and production of goods and services to foster growth and guarantee rights.
The international community has recognized the importance of equality by including it among the core principles of the 2030 Agenda and its Sustainable Development Goals. 15IntroductionSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 2.
Inequality is inefficient In addition to its intrinsic value from a normative perspective, equality also has the role of fostering sustainable development by contributing to innovation, increased productivity and environmental sustainability.
Equality is not only a result of the economic system, but also an explanatory variable for its long-term efficiency.
Economies that are now at the forefront of sustainable development, —development that appropriately conjoins the social, economic and environmental dimensions— are found to combine equality, economic growth, productivity and democracy to a large degree (ECLAC, 2018b).
In other words, reducing inequality is not only an imperative for social development and the safeguarding of people’s rights; it is also a precondition for sustainable economic growth.
The chart shows the opposite, namely, that inequality hinders productivity growth and economic growth and is therefore inefficient.
Productivity is expressed in output per employee in PPP dollars at constant 2011 prices.
Equality, on the other hand, is efficient, first and foremost because it generates more inclusive institutions, which in turn increases opportunities for making better use of the creative and productive capacities of a country’s entire population, and strengthens markets by increasing domestic demand thanks to the expansion of the purchasing power of vast sectors of the population.
Equality also strengthens democracies, which provide the most public goods and positive externalities of the kind required for technological change, economic and political stability and care for the environment.
In the global economy, equality helps to expand aggregate demand by incorporating sectors of the population that were previously excluded even from the consumption of essential goods, thus avoiding the risk of recession (ECLAC, 2018b).
Setbacks regarding poverty and extreme poverty The eradication of poverty and extreme poverty and the reduction of inequality in all its dimensions continue to be central challenges for the countries of Latin America and one of the cruxes of the difficulties facing the region in its quest for sustainable development.
Despite significant progress between the beginning of the last decade and the middle of this one, there have been setbacks since 2015, particularly the increase in the average regional rate of extreme poverty.
In this situation, eradicating poverty and substantially and significantly reducing inequality must be at the centre of the debate and of the countries’ efforts.
It is imperative to develop and strengthen public policies for social protection and the labour market, including measures for social and occupational inclusion and redistributive income policies.
To that end, it is essential to protect and safeguard social spending, strengthen social and labour institutions and pay special attention to the causes that make poverty, inequality and exclusion much more severe among children, adolescents and young people, women, indigenous people and Afrodescendants.
Poverty and extreme poverty were reduced considerably in the region between 2002 and 2014, as were various indicators of social inequality.
The rights agenda has been expanded, State action and social institutions have been strengthened, investment in social areas has been expanded and redistributive policies have been implemented in the social sphere and the labour market.
The end of the commodity export boom and the consequent economic slowdown changed the trend from 2015 onward, a process that was intensified by the reduction in fiscal space and adjustment policies which affected the coverage and continuity of anti-poverty and social and labour inclusion policies (Abramo, Cecchini and Morales, 2019).
In this new context, labour indicators deteriorated: unemployment rose and the tendency towards greater formalization of employment was curbed. 17IntroductionSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 This has been reflected in trends in poverty and extreme poverty rates.
At the same time, the extreme poverty rate decreased from 12.2% to 7.8%.
However, from 2015 onward the levels of poverty and especially extreme poverty increased.
In 2018, about 30.1% of the regional population was below the poverty line, while 10.7% was below the extreme poverty line.
This meant that about 185 million people were living in poverty, 66 million of them in extreme poverty.
Although the rising poverty trend eased between 2017 and 2018, total poverty in 2018 was 2.3 percentage points higher than in 2014, an increase of about 21 million people, of whom 20 million were living in extreme poverty (see figure 2).
The increase in the overall regional rate between 2015 and 2018 is mainly explained by the rise in poverty in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Brazil, while in the rest of the countries the trend was for poverty to decline, albeit at a slower pace than between 2008 and 2014.
The percentage of poor people in South America (excluding the countries mentioned) fell between 2014 and 2017 before rising slightly in 2018 as a result of the increase in Argentina that year.
In turn, poverty in the group comprising Central America and Mexico fell from 45% Regional aggregates for poverty and extreme poverty are projected to increase to 30.8% and 11.5%, respectively, in 2019.
If these estimates are borne out, there will be 27 million more poor people than in 2014; worse still, 26 million of them will be extremely poor.
Poverty does not affect the different subgroups of the Latin American population alike.
For example, ECLAC (2019a), going by data from around 2017, indicated that the regional aggregates for the incidence of poverty and extreme poverty were higher among persons living in rural areas, children and adolescents, women, indigenous persons and Afrodescendants, among other groups.
These inequalities, which are clear manifestations of social inequality and the effects of the culture of privilege and abuse, remained unchanged in 2018.
The incidence of poverty was over 40% among those living in rural areas, children and adolescents aged 0–14, unemployed persons and indigenous persons.
Changes in the incidence of income poverty over time are linked to changes in average household income and in the distribution of income among households.
The significant gains in reducing both poverty and improving income distribution are linked to two main factors: income growth in the lower-resource deciles thanks to increases in labour income, which makes up 72% of all household income (ECLAC, 2019a), and public transfers under social protection systems, with expanded and diversified entitlements.
In some countries, especially in Central America and the Caribbean, migrant remittances also have an important impact.
In all the countries that substantially reduced poverty (by 5% or more) between 2014 and 2018, and in almost all the countries with moderate declines in poverty, the increase in labour income was the main reason for the rise in the income of low-income households (see figure 4).
Differences in the continuous national household survey (PNAD Continua) with respect to the national household survey (PNAD) used before 2016 prevent a more detailed comparison of income sources.
Income from public and private transfers also had an impact, but to a lesser degree than labour income.2 In 7 of the 10 countries with marked or moderate reductions in poverty, income from public or private transfers was the second-ranked income stream in terms of contributions to the increase in income for low-income households.
In Costa Rica in particular, transfers were the topmost driver of the rise in incomes of such households.
In Costa Rica, Panama and Paraguay, the rise in transfer income was the result of growth in social protection income (especially conditional cash transfer programmes for poverty reduction and non-contributory transfers); meanwhile, in two of the five countries, (Dominican Republic and El Salvador), the higher transfer income was due entirely to growth in remittances.
Conversely, contributory retirement and pension payments made no contribution to income transfer gains in the great majority of the countries, which could be accounted for by the low level of affiliation to contributory pension systems among low-income households.
In summary, the best outcomes in terms of reductions in poverty were recorded in countries that experienced increases in public and private transfers in addition to rises in labour income.
Redistribution has been fundamental in poverty reduction, complementing economic growth in boom periods and staving off rises in poverty and distributive deteriorations in most of the countries at times of slower economic growth.
Between 2014 and 2018, in 7 of the 13 countries in the region where poverty fell, there was a marked distribution effect. 2 Income from public and private transfers is broken down into pensions and retirement pensions, non-contributory transfers and other transfers, including remittances. 21IntroductionSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 C.
Slow reduction in income inequality Latin America has the unfortunate distinction of being the most unequal region in the world.
Income inequality is one of the most obvious facets of that inequality, representing an obstacle to development and to the guarantee of rights and well-being, as well as standing in the way of innovation, productivity gains and economic growth (ECLAC, 2017a and 2018b).
The region’s inequality is also a stubborn trait, having persisted even through periods of economic growth.
The factors driving this dynamic are similar to those that underlie trends in poverty and extreme poverty.
Income inequality, measured by the Gini index (average of 15 countries in Latin Thus, this indicator declined by 13.6% in 16 years, or 0.9% per year on average.
However, these averages mask very uneven patterns from one country to another, in relation both to inequality and to the intensity and direction of the changes in these different periods.
Brazil was the only country to record an increase of more than 3% in the Gini index.5 Income inequality is usually analysed and quantified in terms of averages.
For inequality to decline, the income of the poorest households must grow at a faster rate than that of the wealthiest.
This trend is reflected in all the countries that recorded a decrease in income inequality between 2014 and 2018.
In some cases, such as the Dominican Republic and Panama, the faster growth at the low end of the distribution scale was accompanied by considerable increases in income throughout the entire scale.
In other countries, including Colombia, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, household surveys show a decline in income in the wealthiest households in real terms, while the purchasing power of the poorest households increased.
Meanwhile, in Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador and Honduras, where income inequality increased over the period, the income of the poorest households fell in real terms, while that of the wealthiest households grew or posted smaller decreases.
As with poverty and extreme poverty, rising income at the lower end of the distribution was linked to improvements in the labour market (until 2014, these included falling unemployment, a rising proportion of wage work, increasing labour formalization and, in some countries, gains in minimum wages and stronger collective bargaining) and the expansion of social protection systems.
Income inequality can also be analysed in absolute terms, in which case achieving a decline in inequality is more demanding than in the relative analysis, as the incomes of the poorest households must grow by a larger amount than those of the wealthiest.
Thus, a decline in relative inequality does not guarantee a reduction in absolute inequality.6 Between 2014 and 2018,7 the gap between the first and tenth income deciles increased in 10 countries in absolute terms, even though several of these countries recorded declines in inequality indices.
In these countries, although the income of the first decile did not grow significantly (barely 0.01 times the poverty line per year) or even decreased, the tenth decile lost income in absolute terms, of up to 0.33 times the poverty line per year.10 4 Data between 2014 and 2018 for Brazil and the Dominican Republic are not totally comparable.
In previous editions of the Social Panorama of Latin America, ECLAC improved measurement methods and expanded its analysis of inequalities in the distribution of income and wealth.
Moving beyond inequalities in current income between households and individuals, the analysis focused on the functional distribution of income and inequalities in the distribution of physical and financial assets.
One of the most salient findings was that the concentration of ownership of physical and financial assets is higher, more acute and more persistent than the concentration of current income (ECLAC, 2019a).
As figure 6 shows, tax registers and financial surveys provide information on the share of income and wealth of the wealthiest population, which is much higher than when estimated with the usual instruments.
This edition of Social Panorama takes the analysis of this issue further, based on the results of recent studies that estimate the share of the highest-income percentile in net national income,11 complementing information from household surveys with distributional data derived from tax records.
The percentage of income received by the highest-income percentile varies widely from one country to the next, from a minimum of around 13% for Argentina in 2001 to a maximum of 29% for Brazil in 2011.
The average difference between the adjusted index and the household survey estimate is 3 percentage points in Colombia, 4 percentage points in Uruguay, 7 percentage points in Argentina, 8 percentage points in Brazil and 10 percentage points in Chile.
The combined use of tax and household survey data moderates —but does not reverse— the downward trend in inequality seen in several of these countries when only household surveys are considered.
The biggest differences are evident in the case of Chile, for which surveys indicate a decline of 0.06 in the Gini index from 2000–2015, compared with a decrease of 0.01 when a combination of data sources is used.
In order to produce more comprehensive income distribution measurements, progress is required on two fronts.
First, in evaluating the accuracy of estimates corresponding to the different sources of income deriving from household income accounts within national accounts, as they are the general reference on total amounts of income received by households.
Second, in encouraging tax data disclosure, along with the production of better records to be used together with household surveys and national accounts. 13 The methodological details are set out in chapter I. 14 A more recent estimate of the Gini index for Argentina (Jiménez and Rossignolo, 2019) shows a higher value, 0.58 on average for 2004–2015.
The difference stems mainly from the fact that this study considers income before tax and contributions in the Permanent Household Survey. 25IntroductionSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 E.
Middle-income strata: expansion, exclusion and vulnerability Following the substantial reduction in poverty and income inequality achieved in the region, it is increasingly thought that most Latin American countries are on trend to become middle-class countries (or societies).
However, that view is dominated by an over-hasty definition of middle class as the automatic result of exceeding the monetary poverty threshold defined for each country.
This edition of Social Panorama contributes to this discussion through an analysis of the middle-income strata.
There is currently little knowledge or statistics on Latin American middle classes, their professions, income and education profiles, cultural and sociopolitical leanings and other characteristics, this despite recurring mention thereto.
The “middle class” seems to have become a kind of grey area of Latin America’s social structure, frequently referred to without there being any greater clarity or accuracy in the identification of its particular defining features (Sémbler, 2006).
ECLAC has addressed the issue of social stratification on various occasions, but the significant transformations that have occurred in Latin American societies have rendered this an increasingly complex and multi-faceted task, both in terms of the composition of strata and the dynamics and analysis thereof (see, for example, Marinho and Quiroz, 2018).
It is essential to recognize that a segment of the Latin American population, despite having passed the monetary poverty threshold, is highly vulnerable and at risk of returning to poverty as a result of unemployment or precarious working conditions, spikes in inflation, natural disasters or catastrophic social, personal and family events.
It is therefore important to identify a sector of the population in the non-poor low-income strata lying between those classified as poor and the middle-income strata.
This stratum is made up of those whose per capita household income is between 1 and 1.8 times the poverty line.
In 2017, this was the case for one in four people in Latin America (25.8% of the total population, or 157 million people in absolute terms).
Fourth, this study analyses stratification by income in relation to other axes of the social inequality matrix (territorial inequalities, age, gender, and ethnicity and race), with a particular focus on the changes in middle-income strata.
The results of this analysis show that the middle-income strata expanded as a proportion of the total population, from 26.9% in 2002 to 41.1% in 2017.17 At the same time, the share of the low-income strata (the sum of those living in poverty and extreme poverty and the low-income population vulnerable to poverty) shrank from 70.9% to 55.9%.
The size of the population in the high-income strata (individuals whose per capita income exceeds 10 poverty lines) also increased slightly, from 2.2% to 3.0% (see figure 8).
Despite these improvements, the social structure (from the point of view of per capita income) is still highly pyramidal.
Data for 2017 show that persons living in poverty (including in situations of extreme poverty), still account for the largest share of the population (30.1%), followed by the low-income non-poor strata (25.8%).
There has been significant decrease in and reconfiguration of the low-income strata and growth in the middle-income strata.
The share of the low-income strata as a percentage of the total fell by 15 percentage points (from 359 million to 341 million people).
The intermediate-middle stratum grew most rapidly —by almost 65% over the period— followed by the upper-middle stratum (45.9%) and the lower-middle stratum (45.8%); however, the poor stratum contracted by 40.9% and the extremely poor stratum by 13.6%.
Also, increases in per capita income in the region, with the consequent “upward mobility” across strata, were more significant in the period 2002–2008, coinciding with the commodities boom and the expansion of social and labour policies.
Subsequently, the pace of increase in per capita income and growth in the middle sectors slowed, and poverty levels began to rise again in some countries from 2015.
The significant increase in the size of middle-income strata has also increased the purchasing power of large sectors of the population, which is also associated with wider use of banking services by these sectors of the population.
Families in the middle-income strata are still vulnerable to adverse economic circumstances or other negative situations that pose risks to their well-being and can severely compromise their disposable income, in a context in which, despite the significant expansion of social protection systems in the region, large gaps remain in coverage, quality and sufficiency (ECLAC, 2019b).
The poor and lower-middle strata make up 46.7% of the population, with a high risk of falling into poverty or severe destabilization of well-being as a result of unemployment or precarious working conditions, catastrophic illness, accidents or natural disasters.
The middle-income strata also have vulnerabilities to various factors other than poverty.
For example, in 2017, 52% of those aged 25 or over in the middle-income strata had not completed secondary education, considered the minimum level of schooling for breaking the cycle of intergenerational poverty transmission and accessing decent work.
Accordingly, even in this last category, almost one in three economic active people were not affiliated or paying into a pension system.
Although this coverage rises to 67.2% in the lower-middle-income strata, the average amount of these pensions was US$ 295 per month (at 2018 prices), representing 43% of the average amount received by retirees in the upper-middle strata.
Retirees in high-income strata received, on average, pensions that were twice the amount received by those in upper-middle-income strata and six times more than those in the low-income strata (see figure 10B).
Refers to contributory pensions except where it is impossible to fully distinguish between contributory and non-contributory pensions (Chile and Costa Rica). d The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not included owing to a lack of data for currency conversion.
This must include universal, comprehensive social protection systems to help protect 31IntroductionSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 purchasing power and access to quality public services (pensions, health, education, transport, housing, basic infrastructure) for the Latin American population —including the middle-income strata— and the provision of adequate tools for adapting to present and future work, economic and environmental scenarios.
Migration: challenges for inclusion and social protection International migration has gained increasing prominence on the region’s political and social agenda.
Migration is high on the agenda today not only because of its effect on international police and on cultural and economic exchanges between countries of origin and destination, but because of the humanitarian, social and economic challenges it brings.
Although in the medium to long term, migration flows generally contribute positively to the economy, increase diversity and enrich culture, in the near term they pose numerous policy challenges at the local, national and regional levels.
The migrant population of Latin America and the Caribbean is estimated at 40.5 million, representing about 15% of the world’s migrant population of nearly 272 million (United Nations, 2019).
The three most salient patterns of international migration in Latin America and the Caribbean since the second half of the twentieth century have been outward migration from the region, historical overseas immigration and intraregional exchanges.
A fourth pattern is return to the countries of origin, either planned or forced (Martínez Pizarro, Cano and Soffia, 2014).
In the first case, extraregional outmigration, especially from Mexico to the United States, has recently been showing an unstable trend, with signs of a slowdown, unlike emigration from Central America.
Exchanges within the region are the flows that have intensified the most: a large part of immigration flows today come from other countries within the region.
In addition, the number of countries of origin has increased, and new destinations have emerged in the region.
Negative net migration —that is, the predominance of emigration over immigration— continues to be a defining feature of the region’s exchanges with the rest of the world, with current estimates reporting six emigrants for every two immigrants.
It is essential to adopt an approach that takes into account the different vulnerabilities of migrants at the various stages of the migration cycle (see diagram 1), and that is based on awareness of gender, rights and the life cycle.
Migration is the product of serious problems of poverty, inequality, deficits of decent work, racism, various forms of violence and economic, political and environmental crises.
Migration can also be a new vector of inequality, especially when it intersects with other axes of the social inequality matrix, such as inequalities relating to gender, territory, age, ethnicity and race.
Although the relationship between poverty and migration is an uneven one (migrants are not necessarily poor in the countries for which data are available), remittances place a key role in alleviating poverty for numerous families in several of the region’s countries, particularly in Central America and the Caribbean.
For example, without remittances, poverty rates among the total population would be between 1.5% and 2.4% higher in the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras (see table 1).
What is more, in some cases, remittances are significant as a percentage of GDP or exports and import, particularly in Central America and some Caribbean countries.
Migration poses a major challenge of inclusion and social protection, and there are gaps in access to basic services, decent work and social protection in destination countries, as well as multiple unmet needs in countries of origin or return.
In turn, addressing migration-related issues in transit scenarios has particular challenges of its own.
The response requires a national institutional framework with mechanisms for social and labour inclusion (especially access to social protection and decent work) and international cooperation (regional and subregional) to guarantee the rights and well-being of migrants —particularly the most vulnerable— during transit and return, if these journeys are not made by choice but by force.
Advances should begin by adapting national regulatory frameworks to international standards and implementing such standards effectively, as well as achieving effective intersectoral coordination at the central level, resulting in national and systemic strategies for social and labour inclusion of migrants and the protection of their rights, affording due importance to the mainstreaming of a gender perspective.
With regard to the effective incorporation of a gender perspective, progress has been made, as reflected by the repository of regulations on international migration of the Gender Equality Observatory for Latin America and the Caribbean of ECLAC, which contains 95 laws from 21 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Of this total, 31 legal instruments (including constitutions) refer centrally to migration, its regulation and the protection of migrant populations; 19 refer to matters relating to prevention of trafficking and smuggling of persons, punishment of such acts and assistance for victims; 45 refer to miscellaneous related issues.
Also, given the role played by civil society organizations in the very different migration scenarios, the space for collaboration and complementarity between authorities and civil society must be defined, without this resulting in policies that fail to fulfil national and international commitments in relation to migrants.
Lastly, one area where more work is needed in the medium term is the portability of contributory social protection rights.
As migration flows have become more complex and a person’s working life is likely to include fluctuations between episodes of formality and informality, possibly in two or more countries, it is crucial to build access channels and guarantee pension entitlements.
New social compacts for equality Poverty and inequality remain structural phenomena in the region, and are taking worrying directions.
A sustained effort must be made to reduce and eradicate them, in keeping with the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and with regional instruments, such as the regional agenda for inclusive social development.
Migrations, with all their multiple dimensions, contributions, expressions and vulnerabilities, place new demands and requirements on States, which must be met amid global and regional tensions surrounding economies, multilateralism and the capacity to process cultural diversity.
At the beginning of the last decade, ECLAC underscored the need to promote a social and fiscal compact in the region in order to move towards a new a new State-market-society equation with an approach based on equality and sustainable development (ECLAC, 2010 and 2014, Hopenhayn and others, 2014).
It was argued that a firm commit to equality urgently needed a social compact to crystallize agreements among different stakeholders in order to confer legitimacy and solidity on transformative policies and structural reforms.
A social compact for equality was defined as an agreement aimed at redistributing income and other assets, and at correcting structural heterogeneity.
Among other elements, it required a fiscal covenant to improve distributive equity, and consensus-building to consolidate national political agreements, accepting the existence of conflicting interests and the fundamental mediating role of the political system (ECLAC, 2010, p. 245).
The social compact therefore “involves discussions and agreements on long-term coexistence projects, sacrifice of immediate interests for the sake of the common good and the development dynamic, and a general commitment to a better society and better-quality political action” (ECLAC, 2010, p. 266).
To move towards equal and sustainable development, ECLAC also identified several key policy areas in which broad social accords are required.
In the fiscal sphere, to provide States with the resources required to advance policies on the strategic goals of equality, sustainability and structural change.
In the social and labour sphere, to strengthen the redistributive capacity of the State and reduce gaps in relation to gender, productivity, quality employment and appropriation between capital and labour.
Likewise, a compact for greater social well-being is imperative, giving public policy the right tools to improve the quality of public services —such as transport, education, health and environmental services— and widen access to them, thereby increasing the population’s sense of belonging and reducing well-being gaps.
Other areas involved in the compact are investment and industrial policy, environmental sustainability and governance of natural resources (ECLAC, 2014).
This call to action is all the more relevant today given the complex challenges Latin American countries are facing at the current juncture.
The levels of inequality now being seen are not only socially unjust, they are also highly inefficient in economic terms and acutely constrain democratic governance (ECLAC, 2018b).
Social compacts must encompass all these elements, by opening discussions and addressing issues that have been pushed back or even disregarded by major political and economic shareholders, despite mounting demands for change.
In order to move towards full social and labour inclusion and towards sustainable development, the deep inequalities between the people of the region in the exercise of economic, social and cultural rights must be addressed once and for all.
The perspective offered by the social inequality matrix can contribute considerably to such analysis and to identifying gaps to address and close.
Progress in this direction would enable the consolidation of the broad consensuses needed to underpin major transformations and contribute to the construction and expansion of welfare States.
This will require a social policy geared towards universalism that is sensitive to difference, a firm commitment to social investment, proactive engagement of the State and the eradication of the culture of privilege.
Vigorito (2014), “Desigualdad y sectores de altos ingresos en Uruguay: un análisis en base a registros tributarios y encuestas de hogares para el periodo 2009–2011”, Documentos de Trabajo series, No. 06/2014, Montevideo, Institute of Economics, University of the Republic.
Esquivel (2014), “Los ingresos altos, la tributación óptima y la recaudación posible”, Finanzas Públicas, vol. 6, No. 18.
Vargas (2017), “La evolución de la desigualdad en México: viejos y nuevos resultados”, Revista de Economía Mexicana.
Morgan, M. (2017), “Falling inequality beneath extreme and persistent concentration: new evidence for Brazil combining national accounts, surveys and fiscal data, 2001–2015”, WID. world Working Paper, No. 2017/12.
Against this backdrop, inequality is inefficient and constitutes an obstacle to sustainable development (ECLAC, 2018).
Social inequality in Latin America is the result of a complex matrix of determinants, and is rooted in the structural heterogeneity of production systems and the culture of privilege.
Social stratum or class is one of the structural axes of the social inequality matrix, along with gender, age (life cycle), ethnicity, race and territory, among other factors.
This chapter of Social Panorama of Latin America presents the latest information on income inequality among people and households in the region.
It also shows that the traditional method for estimating inequality, based on data gathered from household surveys, is insufficient.
Household survey data combined with tax data and national accounts provide more comprehensive measurements of inequality.
This chapter also includes a section on the social inequality matrix, using income to define and analyse socioeconomic stratification in the region in the present day, with a focus on middle-income strata.
Recent trends in household income inequality The income inequality revealed in household surveys has continued to trend downwards but is declining more slowly than over the previous decade.
Between 2014 and 2018, the Gini index of per capita income fell in six countries.
However, in some countries the decline in this indicator did not prevent the widening of the gap, in absolute terms, between the groups at the lowest and highest ends of the distribution scale.
Historically, Latin America has been characterized by high levels of inequality and several countries in the region reflect some of the highest levels of income inequality in the world.
According to the most recent household survey data available, the Gini index averages 0.4651 for Latin America as a whole.
Argentina, El Salvador and Uruguay recorded the lowest levels, below 0.400, while Brazil and Colombia recorded levels higher than 0.520.
This decrease reflects a slowdown: the average between 2014 and 2018 was 0.6% per year, compared with 1.0% per year between 2 The annual average is based on the data available for the nearest year for each of the 15 countries, even though figures are not necessarily comparable for the entire period analysed.
Between 2014 and 2018,3 four countries reduced their levels of inequality based on the Gini index.
El Salvador, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia recorded cumulative declines of 7% or more, while Chile posted a decrease of 2%.
Brazil was the only country to record an increase of more than 3% in the Gini index.
The use of complementary inequality indicators, such as the Theil index and the Atkinson index (with two inequality aversion parameters, 1.0 and 1.5), strengthens the evidence of a decline in inequality in the region, on average.
Moreover, these complementary indices show some situations that the Gini index does not.
In particular, they include two additional countries that recorded a deterioration in income distribution: Argentina and Honduras (see figure I.2 and table I.A.1 in the annex). 3 Data between 2014 and 2018 for Brazil and the Dominican Republic are not totally comparable.
Atkinson index (e = 1.5) c Latin America a Average based on the data available for the nearest year for 15 countries.
In this case, for inequality to decline the income of the poorest households must grow at a faster rate than that of the wealthiest.
In some cases, such as Chile, the Dominican Republic and Panama, the faster growth at the low end of the distribution scale was accompanied by considerable increases in income throughout the entire scale.
Countries with the highest relative growth in the first income decile B.
Countries with the lowest relative growth in the first income decile Argentina Brazil Ecuador Honduras Inequality can also be analysed in absolute terms.
In this case, for inequality to decline the requirement is stricter than that of the analysis in relative terms: the incomes of the poorest households must grow more than those of the wealthiest.
In these countries, although the income of the first decile did not grow significantly (barely 0.01 times the poverty line per year) or even decreased, the tenth decile lost income in absolute terms, to the tune of up to 0.33 times the poverty line per year.
These results may have been influenced, at least in part, by the fact that it is difficult for household surveys to consistently reflect the incomes of the wealthiest households, which will be examined in the next section.
Countries with the highest absolute growth in the tenth income decile B.
Countries with the lowest absolute growth in the tenth income decile Bolivia (Plur.
State of) Colombia Honduras Mexico Paraguay 5 To analyse changes in absolute inequality, income must be expressed in comparable units, eliminating the impact of inflation (comparison over time) and of monetary units (comparison of different countries).
Expressing household income in multiples of the poverty line of each country is one way of fulfilling both requirements. 44 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I B.
Income inequality re-evaluated: estimates based on combined data sources Household surveys are not enough to quantify income inequality levels and trends.
The combination of data gathered from these surveys with tax data and national accounts facilitates more comprehensive measurements of inequality levels, which are much higher than those based solely on surveys.
Therefore, in recent years various studies have been carried out in Latin American countries to estimate the highest income percentile’s share of total income by complementing household survey data with distributive data from tax records.
These percentages vary widely from one country to the next, from a minimum of around 13% for Argentina in 2001 to a maximum of 29% for Brazil in 2011.
Although the series are not long enough, all the countries except Uruguay reflect a slight upward trend, with some fluctuations. 6 Refers to the share of net national income, before tax, including retirement income but excluding other types of cash transfer.
Morgan, “Falling inequality beneath extreme and persistent concentration: new evidence for Brazil combining national accounts, surveys and fiscal data, 2001-2015”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/12, 2017; J.
Income derives from wages, assets, pension system transfers and imputed rent, and excludes other transfers and income.
There are differences in the methodologies used to determine income in the surveys of the different countries.
Income before tax is used in Brazil, while income after tax is used in the other countries.
The difference stems mainly from the fact that this study considers income before tax and contributions in the Permanent Household Survey.
Brasil Gini index (total population) Gini index (adults)Gini index, adjusted (adults) C.
Limitations of data sources and new methodologies to estimate inequality The problems linked to obtaining complete and comparable inequality estimates from household surveys have been acknowledged for decades now.
As regards the measurement of inequality, the relative absence of respondents from the wealthiest income groups is particularly relevant, given the low probability of them being included in the sample, their greater tendency to not complete the survey and their refusal to disclose full information on their different sources of income.
This factor remained constant throughout the distribution scale, except for property income, in which case the income gap was attributed to the wealthiest income quintile, resulting in a higher estimate of inequality.
This methodology is based on various assumptions which, given the evidence examined, are not fully justified (ECLAC, 2018).
For example, the data from the household income and expenditure account of the System of National Accounts is assumed to provide suitable estimates of the total amounts of each source of household income and therefore, any difference between these figures and those obtained from surveys stem from errors in survey measurement.
Although national accounts are based on a solid conceptual framework and reconciliation processes that aim to guarantee consistency, in practice, household account estimation often lacks the basic statistics required, which limits the capacity to produce correct estimates.
Thus, on a number of occasions the trends conveyed by surveys have been considered more reliable than those obtained from household accounts for the adjustment process (ECLAC, 2018).
Moreover, less than half of the countries in Latin America regularly prepare household accounts.
A second disadvantage of this methodology is the lack of information about the distribution of income reported in household accounts but not measured in surveys.
The fact that the failure to adequately capture information is more evident at the top of the distribution scale derives from both underreporting of income received and the lack of high-income respondents in the survey sample (truncation).
Various authors have proposed mechanisms to deduce the distribution of high incomes based on different assumptions.
These assumptions, including the degree to which the failure to adequately capture information stems from underreporting or truncation, directly affect inequality estimates, so results are not conclusive (Cortés and Vargas, 2017).
In this context, the use of tax administration data provides an opportunity to better understand how income is distributed at the top of the distribution scale.
This information helps to better identify the nature and level of missing data relating to high incomes in household surveys, and to reduce the sensitivity of results to assumptions about distribution parameters.
However, tax records also present limitations.9 Therefore, in order to produce more comprehensive income distribution measurements, the two aforementioned issues must be addressed.
First, the preparation of household income accounts must be analysed in detail, to evaluate the accuracy of estimates corresponding to the different sources of income and to 9 Generally, incomes lower than the minimum taxable amount and the recipients of this income are not included, unlike in surveys and national accounts.
This data source is also subject to possible underestimation bias, given the very clear incentives for tax avoidance and evasion.
This instrument allows the study of growth and inequality together, based on microdata consistent with internationally comparable macroeconomic statistics (Alvaredo and others, 2017) and the intensive use of statistical information from different sources.11 To sum up, the emergence of new methodological guidance has led to a re-evaluation of the extent of inequality in the region.
Mexico is one of the countries in which income inequality has been the subject of most studies that draw upon data sources other than household surveys.
These works came about because of the recognition of the growing gap between the income estimates deriving from household surveys and those from national accounts.
Meanwhile, Fesseau, Wolff and Mattonetti (2013) calculated that the gap recorded in 2010, of around 70%, was the largest seen among countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
Various studies have focused on adjusting the income measured in surveys, taking into account the possible lack of responses, underreporting of income and truncation (relative absence of wealthiest respondents in the sample).
Estimations address the problem from different angles, ranging from the examination of information from surveys exclusively, to the adjustment of income amounts or distribution recorded in surveys based on external information from national accounts or rich lists such as those produced by Forbes.
All these studies agree that income inequality in Mexico considerably exceeds the figures recorded by the National Household Income and Expenditure Survey (ENIGH), albeit they differ in the actual levels found.
On the basis of the studies considered in figure 1, in 2014, the adjusted Gini index included values ranging from less than 0.54 to more than 0.75 (as a reference, the index based on the survey is 0.50).
This indicates the extreme sensitivity of inequality levels based on the methodology used.
Additionally, trends in the series analysed differ, both in terms of variations on a biennial basis and over the entire period between 2008 and 2014.
Of the five series with data between 2008 and 2012, inequality grew in two series during the period, decreased in two others and remained unchanged in one.
Moreover, the direction of change does not coincide across all the estimates in any of the possible two-yearly variations.
As seen in the data from the studies carried out in Mexico, the final result depends heavily on the methodology used.
Esquivel, “Los ingresos altos, la tributación óptima y la recaudación posible”, Finanzas Públicas, vol. 6, No. 18, 2014; F.
Vargas, “La evolución de la desigualdad en México: viejos y nuevos resultados”, Revista de Economía Mexicana.
Mattonetti, “A cross-country comparison of household income, consumption and wealth between micro sources and national accounts aggregates”, Statistics Working Papers, No. 2013/03, Paris, OECD/Publishing, 2013; and J.
Mattonetti, “A cross-country comparison of household income, consumption and wealth between micro sources and national accounts aggregates”, Statistics Working Papers, No. 2013/03, Paris, OECD/ Publishing, 2013; and J.
Between 2002 and 2017, the proportion of the overall population in the low-income strata shrunk significantly, from 70.9% to 55.9%, while the proportion in the middle-income strata grew from 26.9% to 41.1%.
Within this category, the lower-middle-income stratum accounted for more than 50% of the population compared with only 11% for the upper-middle-income stratum.
In 2017, the consumption capacity of all middle-income strata —expressed in constant dollars at 2018 prices— amounted to US$ 1.16 trillion.
Sociological reflection on social structure emerged in Latin America in the midtwentieth century in response to development issues in the countries of the region, with a view to modernizing socioeconomic structures in order to overcome the economic underdevelopment and inequality inherent in traditional agrarian societies.
Within this framework, State-led import substitution industrialization was the cornerstone of the modernization project of the day.
The prevailing approach aimed, first, to identify the social groups that could play an important role in driving modernization —which is the social foundation of development— and, second, to understand the main transformations seen in traditional social categories and in those born out of the changes the region was experiencing, such as urbanization, industrialization and the expansion of education.
The analysis of middle-income sectors was critical to understanding the dynamics and tensions that marked the Latin American development project.
The crisis in the developmentalist model and the structural adjustment programmes promoted in the region during the 1980s and part of the 1990s caused a significant thematic shift in analytical and research concerns, signalled in part by the decline of studies on stratification, social classes and social mobility.
The “middle class” seems to have become a kind of grey area of Latin America’s social structure, frequently mentioned without there being any greater clarity or accuracy in the identification of its particular constitutive features (Sémbler, 2006).
The present section of this edition of the Social Panorama of Latin America focuses on this structural axis of the social inequality matrix by using income to define and analyse the current socioeconomic stratification in the region —with particular interest in the changes in middle-income strata— and how this relates to the other axes of the matrix. 1.
Trends in socioeconomic stratification in Latin America A strong and prosperous middle class is essential to a successful economy and cohesive society.
The middle class is responsible for a significant share of consumption and investment in education, health and housing and plays a key role in supporting social protection systems through fiscal contributions.
A recent Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) study found that in the last few decades, there has been little growth and even stagnation in the number of middle-income households in some OECD countries.
Other features of such models include the reduced role of the State; privatization of public services such as education, health and social security; labour markets that have high levels of informality and are structurally incapable of absorbing the entire workforce and generating quality employment; and social protection systems that provide low coverage and very limited benefits.
The beginning of the twenty-first century, however, marked a significant 12 The instruments used (multipurpose household surveys) do not usually collect information on pensioners’ occupational history or last occupation (and wages), which means that additional criteria must be used to rank those households in the social structure.
While such information is collected in longitudinal surveys on social protection, they are conducted in but a few countries. 13 See OECD (2019).
In this study, middle-income classes are defined relative to equivalised household disposable income and comprise households with income between 75% and 200% of the national median income (see box I.2). 52 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I change in this situation.
A more favourable economic context, characterized by the commodities boom and expanding fiscal space, and a political context in which a number of regional governments placed greater focus on reducing poverty and inequality and on social inclusion, led to more comprehensive State action and substantial paradigm shifts.
There has been an increase in social spending and programmes to combat poverty and extreme poverty, while public services, mainly in education and health have proliferated; in addition, social protection systems have been strengthened and the topic of universal coverage has once again come to the forefront of the public agenda in a number of countries.
There have also been improvements in labour markets: unemployment and informality rates have fallen and real incomes have risen.
All these elements have led to a relative decline in levels of inequality14 and a significant reduction in poverty (from 45.4% in 2002 to 27.8% in 2014, with 65 million people lifted out of poverty) and also to an overall improvement in the well-being of large swathes of the population and great progress in social and labour inclusion (ECLAC, 2019).
However, there have been standstills and even reversals in some of these trends since 2015, as discussed in previous editions of the Social Panorama (see chapter II).
The question therefore arises as to what transformations Latin American social structure has undergone and whether said changes mirror those that occurred in developed countries.
This has been the result of poverty reduction efforts combined with higher household per capita income related both to improvements in social protection systems and public transfers to low-income households, and to higher wages and greater female participation in the labour force, with the consequent increase in the number of wage earners within households.
There has also been a slight increase in the high-income strata (individuals in households whose per capita income is above 10 poverty lines).18 14 As discussed in the first section of this chapter, income inequality, as measured by the Gini coefficient in household survey data from 17 Latin American countries, fell from 0.54 to 0.46 between 2002 and 2018.
This strategy is largely a reflection of the challenges involved in working with measurement instruments from different countries, which makes it difficult to generate comparable classifications that include a standard set of conventional factors for defining social classes, particularly with regard to occupational categories and branches of activity, and which occasionally lack sufficient information to develop these typologies.
However, the fact that income is a relatively simple representation of levels of individual and family well-being makes it easier to examine the distribution of national income and subsequently determine strata based on income, using various factors to establish the lower and upper thresholds that delimit the groups.
In general, there are three approaches to stratification based on per capita income, and these have sometimes been combined.
Most of them aim first to identify the middle sector(s), which automatically makes it easier to define the low-income and high-income strata.
Typical strategies include: • Measurement [author please confirm] of the position in income distribution, which usually involves the selection of quintiles or deciles that make up the middle stratum, although specific quantiles may be chosen (for example, percentile 95).
Examples of the use of these methods to define the middle-income class can be found in Easterly (2001), where quintiles 2–4 are used, and Solimano (2008), who groups deciles 3–9.
In a comparison over time and based on this definition, the middle-income strata can get richer or poorer but not increase or decrease, and purchasing powers are not comparable, nor are countries. • Definition of thresholds relative to the median of equivalised income, similar to the methodologies on which the measurement of relative poverty is based.
On the basis of this methodology, the middle strata can get richer or poorer, grow or shrink (with smoothed effects), but purchasing power —particularly for individuals close to strata thresholds— is not comparable. • Definition of absolute (and time-bound) thresholds.
López Calva and Ortiz-Juárez (2011), Birdsall (2012), Ferreira and others (2013) and López Calva and Ortiz-Juárez (2014) define the middle class as households living on between $10 and $50 per day in PPP.
Analyses based on this methodology provide an indication over time of the likelihood of the middle class becoming wealthier or poorer, growing or shrinking, and purchasing power is comparable.
While it is possible for households and individuals to move to a higher or lower stratum as a result of cyclical events such as unemployment, it is unlikely that there will be an “impoverished middle class” in literal terms.
The method used in the current edition of the Social Panorama is absolute thresholds, expressed in multiples of poverty lines.
Three middle-income strata were also identified, defined by the empirical boundaries that take into consideration the risks of falling into poverty (see figure I.17), the distribution of these strata by country and discontinuities in a combined index of possession of basic goods and services.
The lower-middle stratum was defined as having an upper threshold of 3 times the poverty line, the intermediate-middle having an upper threshold of 6 times the poverty line, and the upper-middle having an upper threshold of 10 times the poverty line.
It must be borne in mind that poverty lines differ between urban and rural areas within each country.
Latin America (18 countries): application of various methodologies for defining middle-income strata thresholds, Low-income strataMiddle-income strataHigh-income strata A.
Absolute thresholds based on Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) methodology: between 1.8 and 10 times the poverty line B.
Relative thresholds used in Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (2019): between 75% and 200% of the median C.
Easterly, “The middle class consensus and economic development”, Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 6, No. 4, 2001; A.
Bloom, “What is happening to the middle class?”, American Demographics, vol. 7, No. 1, 1985; L.
Ravallion, “The developing world’s bulging (but vulnerable) ’middle class’”, World Development, vol. 38, No. 4, 2010; A.
Duflo, “What is middle class about the middle class around the world?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 22, No. 2, 2008; H.
Birdsall, “The (indispensable) middle class in developing countries; or, the rich and the rest, not the poor and the rest”, Working Paper, No. 207, Washington, D.C., Center for Global Development, 2010; F.
Despite improvements, the social structure —considered from the perspective of per capita income— remains resolutely pyramidal.
Taking into account all persons living in poverty in 2017 (including in situations of extreme poverty), the data show that this lower stratum subgroup still accounts for the largest share of the population (30.1%), followed by the low-income non-poor group (25.8%).
With the lower-middle income strata (1.8 to 3 times the per capita poverty line) representing 20.9% of the population, this means that 76.8% of the total population of Latin America belong to lower- or lower-middle strata.
In turn, those in the highly vulnerable to poverty stratum move up to and swell the ranks of the lower-middle-income stratum.
This raises the question of whether the stratum of non-poor individuals is a transitional one, given that it tends to remain proportionately stable as poverty declines and the middle sectors grow.
In terms of population size, the upper-middle and high-income strata appear to have more barriers to entry,19 as their growth involves a much smaller proportion of the population.
Between 2002 and 2017, the upper and upper-middle strata combined (6 times the per capita poverty line or higher) rose from 5.2% to 7.5% of the overall population, a total of 46 million people.
In addition, high labour income levels are not determined by the level of education attained.
However, the significant decrease in and reconfiguration of the low-income strata between 2002 and 2017 was accompanied by growth in the middle-income strata.
The share of the low-income strata as a percentage of the total fell by 15 percentage points (from 359 million to 341 million people, as seen in figure I.7B).
This figure is the result of a significant drop (by 49 million) in the number of persons in the poor stratum, although the number of persons in the extremely poor stratum increased by 2 million, and an increase in number of persons in the low-income non-poor stratum (28 million).
At the same time, the share of the middle-income sectors increased by 14.1 percentage points (from 136 million to 250 million people, mainly as a result of growth in the lower-middle stratum), while the proportion corresponding to the upper stratum grew by only 0.8 percentage points in the same period (see table I.1).
An analysis of these changes by percentage rate of variation shows that the intermediate-middle stratum grew most rapidly —by almost 65% over the period— followed by the upper-middle stratum (45.9%) and the lower-middle stratum (45.8%); however, the poor stratum contracted by 40.9% and the extremely poor stratum by 13.6%.
Also noteworthy is the fact that increases in per capita income in the region, with the consequent “upward mobility” across strata, were more significant in the period 2002–2008, coinciding with the boom in commodity demand and the expansion of social and labour policies.
Subsequently, the pace of increase in per capita income and growth in the middle sectors slowed, and poverty levels began to rise again in some countries from 2015 (see chapter II of this publication and ECLAC, 2019).
These trends have not been homogenous in all the countries of the region, however.
Apart from the fact that strata sizes may differ significantly, there are exceptions in which the decline in the low-income strata and the growth of the middle-income strata have not been substantial.
For example, around 2017, only in Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Panama, Paraguay, Peru and Uruguay (urban areas) did less than half the population belong to low-income strata (see figure I.8).
Furthermore, between 2002 and 2017, there were no significant changes —or very slight improvements— in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico and the Dominican Republic.
The situation worsened in El Salvador and the Dominican Republic in 2008, resulting in a return to pre-2002 socioeconomic conditions for the population.
However, the other countries had recorded an improvement, albeit moderate, between 2002 and 2008, meaning that the current situation is a step backwards in terms of individual and household economic conditions (see annex tables I.A1.2 and I.AI.3).
The values do not include the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela owing to the lack of updated information on variations in the consumer price index and the exchange rate.
From an economic perspective, middle strata —and, to a lesser extent, lower-income strata— are consumers whose demand patterns tend to focus primarily on products that are produced and/ or sold in the national market (for example, non-tradables such as housing), which is a key behavioural pattern when there is a need to boost a country’s economy through consumption.
The increased consumption capacities that emerging middle sectors acquire can open access to public and private services such as education and health, among others, as well as reproduce and improve their intergenerational socioeconomic position and resilience to adverse economic conditions.
However, if this capacity is not real, or deteriorates over time, it can generate feelings of frustration and disrupt existing electoral trends in the region’s democracies.
In Latin America, the significant increase in the size of middle-income strata has also led to higher average per capita income for large sectors of the population and, therefore, greater consumption capacities.
The existence of middle-income strata comprising individuals with relatively stable income fosters the use of banking services by these sectors of the population.
In consumerist societies, the acquisition of new goods and services that not only improve living standards and quality of life but are also, in some cases, positional in nature (symbols of status or economic success), a level monetary comfort and access to credit —and the consequent disincentive to savings— can sometimes encourage consumption that is unsustainable in the long term.
Such consumption is often the result of poor financial education or loss of income sources, culminating in over-indebtedness and subsequent loss of the acquired goods.
In 2017, the lower-middle stratum accounted for 51% of the middle class, with an absolute consumption capacity of US$ 375 billion annually, which is equivalent to slightly more than 32% of the total volume of resources of all middle-income strata.
Importantly, the annual growth rates in income of the middle-income and high-income strata had picked up between 2002 and 2008 (6.9% and 4.7% respectively).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not included owing to a lack of data for currency conversion.
The question of the sustainability of the middle-class consumption in the medium and long term thus arises, not only because of the high levels of indebtedness of middle-income families (which means that a significant portion of their income is spent on debt repayment) but also because of the weakness of social protection systems.
Families in the middle-income strata thus remain vulnerable to a marked deterioration in quality of life that may result from adverse economic conditions or other negative situations.
The low-income non-poor and lower-middle strata still make up more than 46% of the population, with a high risk of falling into poverty as a result of unemployment or precarious working conditions, catastrophic illness, accidents or natural disasters.
The importance of education and employment in socioeconomic status The rung which the vast majority of Latin American households occupy on the socioeconomic ladder is determined by the participation of one or more family members in the labour market.
Although households may have multiple sources of income, labour income is central: in all the strata included in this study it accounts for a constant share of total income (between 64% and 68%), with the exception of extremely poor households, where labour income represents just under half (47%) of total income.
Among households living in extreme poverty, the lower weight of labour income is associated with its low levels and the greater relative importance of income from public and private transfers and remittances from abroad (together equivalent to almost a third of the total).
This is also true for households in poverty (16% of the total).
In the low-income non-poor stratum, transfers represent a smaller proportion and pensions are beginning to play a greater 60 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I role in addition to labour income.
In middle- and high-income households, the share of pensions in total income increases (17% of the total) while that of transfers and other non-autonomous sources of income decreases.
Capital income (such as profit sharing and property income) accounts for a significant share only in upper-middle-strata and upper-sector households (see figure I.10).
However, labour and pension income account for the lion’s share of income in the vast majority of households, especially among the middle and upper classes, which attests to the importance of employment and the quality thereof in the socioeconomic position of households and the individuals who belong to them.
Data for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not included in figure B owing to a lack of data for currency conversion. b Figures may differ from those published in previous versions of the Social Panorama of Latin America due to recent changes in poverty measurement methods.
Previous versions included, among other things, the adjustment of labour incomes and pensions to aggregates estimated from systems of national accounts.
These factors are addressed in section 3 of this chapter. (a) Education as a necessary, but insufficient, condition of improving entry to the labour market A more educated workforce should bring with it a greater share of knowledge-related jobs in the economy, although this also depends on the characteristics of the production system and the consequent demand for skilled labour.
In a labour market that calls for specialization, a higher education level has a positive impact on the probability of obtaining a job entailing more complex tasks and requiring a high level of qualification, and a negative impact on the probability of being unemployed or of having access only to jobs involving manual and non-manual routine or low-skilled tasks.
Education provides an even greater advantage for workers who have gone on to tertiary level compared with those who have completed secondary education, the latter being basic requirement for any chance of escaping poverty in the region (ECLAC/OIJ, 2004).
Of the factors usually included in wage level analyses, the level of education is the most important determinant of labour income in most countries (without disregarding the influence of factors such as occupational segmentation and discrimination based on gender, race and ethnicity and territory).
However, the strength of this correlation also differs significantly across countries and sectors of the economy.
There are also significant differences in the wages earned by workers with more experience and technical knowledge.
How much labour markets reward education and experience is determined by the relative conditions of supply and demand (Carlson, 2001).
As previous editions of the Social Panorama have shown, Latin America has made significant progress in education in recent years, with increases in coverage and completion rates and a reduction in school dropout rates and the educational lag.
Primary education is now virtually universal, and there is widespread access to secondary education.
Around 2016, only 59.5% of young people between 20 and 24 years of age had completed secondary school, and substantial socioeconomic inequalities in this respect remained: while 83.5% of young people belonging to the fifth income quintile had completed secondary school, the figure was only 35.4% among young people from the first quintile.
In addition, access to both technical-vocational and university education continues to be insufficient and stratified; the quality of education, especially in compulsory schooling, is also insufficient (ECLAC, 2019).
Analysis of educational attainment by income strata reveals that there have been significant but insufficient reductions in the difficulty of access and dropout rates in primary and secondary education, especially in the lower strata.
According to 2017 data, one third of the population aged 25 and over belonging to the lower-income sector did not complete primary education, which clearly represents a significant drop from the 45% observed for 2002 (see figure I.11).
However, when the percentage of that population that did not complete secondary education is added, it becomes evident that close to 75% of this population group have low levels of educational attainment; this is compounded by the fact that only 8.5% of individuals in this age group have undertaken post-secondary studies.
By contrast, by the early 2000s, the percentage of individuals in the upper-income brackets who had completed post-secondary education was as high as 65 %, reaching around 70 % by 2017; over the same period, the share of individuals who had completed university education increased by 6 percentage points (from 40.4 % to 46.2 %).
This is owed, to a certain extent, to the fact that the rise in income occurred mainly in the lower strata of the middle class (lower-middle and intermediate-middle strata), which saw the inclusion of a group people with lower levels of education, but with higher incomes than in the early 2000s.
Although education is a relatively good predictor of wages, it is less so for overall labour income, since the dynamics of wages for other categories of work, such as employers or own-account workers, rely much more heavily on economic growth.
Likewise, while more schooling helps workers to enter the labour market in higher quality jobs, there are significant variations in the level of education within the same type of entry (combination of occupational group, occupational category and company size).
Thus, the average number of years of schooling among individuals describing themselves as employers (of microenterprises or larger enterprises) varies considerably, as does that of employees in small, medium and large enterprises.
Surprisingly, there are fewer dispersions in the number of years of study of own-account workers, although educational levels are clearly higher among own-account workers describing themselves as professionals.
Along with the latter, public sector employees have the highest average level of education, with relatively small differentials between strata.
Lastly, domestic workers have the lowest average level of education and the smallest differentials, regardless of the socioeconomic stratum to which their families belong (see figure I.12).
In the traditional approaches to social stratification, manual labour was considered to correspond to the lowest-income class; however, some types of manual labour have raised qualification requirements and workers can actually climb the social ladder, for example, when they have a higher level of education.
Naturally, trends are mixed depending on the size of the production unit,22 and this is especially evident among employers (Marinho and Quiroz, 2018).
At the same time, more traditional studies on social stratification focused primarily on occupation, examining the employment status of the head of household; this classification was then extended to include the other members of the household based on the concept of the breadwinner.
The changes mentioned above, in particular the increase in women’s participation in the labour market, together with population ageing, have complicated this analysis.
This is because of the presence of several income earners in the household, as well as the presence of pensioners, who are either heads of household or parents of the head of household, in a significant proportion of households.
However, employees of small, medium and large enterprises or skilled employees of microenterprises (33.6%) tend to be the main wage earners in these strata. • Although there are employers in all strata, the highest proportion is observed in the high-income strata (where they account for 15.9% of the employed and 18.4% of breadwinners).
In the low-income and middle strata, slightly less than 4% of employed persons are microenterprise employers. • In the low-income and middle strata, around 50% of employed heads of household are private sector wage earners, and in the high-income strata this percentage drops to 38%.
There is a greater concentration of unskilled micro-business employees in the low-income strata: from 18.5%, this figure falls to 9.8% in the middle sectors and 1.5% in the high-income strata.
They account for an even higher share among primary wage earners (approximately 29%, 17% and 7%, respectively). • In the high-income strata, just over 10% of employed persons are skilled own-account workers (this proportion is even higher among employed persons who are not the primary wage earners).
These percentages are much lower in the middle and low-income strata. • Conversely, paid domestic work is concentrated mainly in the low-income sectors (where it accounts for 5.9% of employed persons —primarily women— and 8.5% of other household wage earners).
These percentages are also relatively significant in the middle strata (3.9% and 5.7% respectively).
Thus, a specific type of employment —employer, employee or own-account worker, employee in microbusiness or larger production unit, skilled or unskilled— is not the sole determining factor of socioeconomic status.
Data for Nicaragua are not included because the categories of labour market participation cannot be reproduced. 66 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I (c) Labour income and the number of workers in households For a given type of employment, there is a wide dispersion in terms of the financial remuneration received, both between and within strata.
This explains the relatively low differentiation that exists between types of employment by stratum, since stratification is also determined by other factors such as family structure, the number of employed persons in the household, the number and type of dependents, and access to additional sources of income.
One way of illustrating the differences in labour income within socioeconomic strata is to compare the income received by the primary wage earner with that of any other wage earners in the household.
However, within households and or the same type of employment, there is a trend towards a narrowing of the gap between primary wage earners and other earners (in favour of the latter) in the middle strata.
As mentioned above, the effect of the income of each employed person on the per capita household income and, therefore, on the position on the socioeconomic ladder is determined by other factors, some of which are presented in figure I.15.
Primary wage earner Extremely poor Poor Low-income non-poor Lower-middle Intermediate-middle Upper-middle High-income Employers of small, medium and large enterprises Employers of microenterprises Public sector employees Employees of small, medium and large enterprises or skilled employees of microenterprises Unskilled micro-business employees Domestic workers Skilled own-account workers Unskilled own-account workers B.
It should be noted that a significant proportion of households have only one wage earner. 68 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I These characteristics point to a gradual drop in dependency ratios (expressed as number of employed persons in the household: total number of household members).
In the low-income strata, households in extreme poverty have an average ratio that is lower than 1:4; this ratio approaches 1:3 in households in poverty and increases to just over 2:5 in low-income non-poor households.
In the middle segment, the lower-middle stratum registers a dependency ratio of 1:2, which rises to 3:5 in the intermediate-middle stratum and slightly higher in the upper-middle stratum.
In the high-income strata, the ratio between employed persons and the total number of household members is 2:3.
Furthermore, it should be borne in mind that more than 30% of these households are single-person and less than 15% of them are single-parent.
However, these are not the ones with the highest average number of wage earners —it is precisely in middle class households that, on average, the most household members are mobilized to participate in the labour market.
Average household size and average number of wage earners (number of persons) B.
Intersecting inequalities Latin America’s social inequality matrix is heavily conditioned by its production systems, which are characterized in turn by great structural heterogeneity and a culture of privilege.
For ECLAC, the multiple causes and characteristics of social inequality and the mechanisms that perpetuate it can be conceived as a “social inequality matrix”, consisting of various factors that structure inequality and its multiple expressions.
The first and most basic determinant of inequality is social class (or, simply, socioeconomic stratum).
The axes structuring the social inequality matrix intersect, reinforcing and linking up with one another throughout the life cycle and giving rise to a multiplicity of inequality or discrimination factors that operate simultaneously or cumulatively over time.
The confluence of multiple types of inequality characterizes the “hard cores” of poverty, vulnerability and social exclusion, entrenching and reproducing them (ECLAC, 2016b).
It also facilitates the reproduction of other socioeconomic positions and makes upward mobility more difficult, especially into higher social classes.
Social class crystallizes the link between these factors and all the inequalities they produce.
This section seeks to illustrate with empirical evidence the intersection between the different structural axes of social inequality, each of which acts as a differentiating factor, if not a discriminating factor, beyond the capacities and potentialities of each individual.
The intertwining of these axes therefore reinforces and multiplies inequality throughout individual and family history, allowing it to be perpetuated from one generation to the next.
The life cycle is represented by the age structures within the different strata.
The comparison between the indigenous population and the rest of the population excludes Afrodescendants; the comparison between the Afrodescendent population and the rest of the population excludes indigenous peoples.
For this reason, the sum of the bars is not equivalent to 100%.
In a comparison of 15 countries,24 in urban areas the high-income strata represent 4% of the population, the upper-middle income segment accounts for 5.5% and the intermediate-middle and lower-middle income strata represent 40.4%.
Meanwhile, in rural areas, the lower strata dominate (almost 72% combined), with 21.2% of this population being extremely poor, 25.6% poor and 24.8% low-income non-poor, while the high- and medium-income strata account for just 3% of the rural population (see figure I.16B).
Geographic location is also related at least partly to another structural axis of inequality: ethnicity and race, especially with respect to indigenous populations.
A similar trend was reflected in five countries with respect to the Afrodescendent population (see figure I.16D).
Lastly, gender inequalities notably cut across all levels of the social structure.
This is reflected in the wage gap between men and women wage earners aged 25–59 years who work 20 hours or more per week: women earn less than men, regardless of socioeconomic strata.
Although the absolute differences in the low-income strata are slight, women earn wages accounting for around 75% of the amount earned by men.
In high-income strata, where top managerial or professional positions are predominant, these differences are larger: wages earned by women represent, on average, slightly more than 70% of the amount earned by men (the famous “glass ceiling”).
These differences diminish notably in the middle-income strata (particularly with respect to intermediate-middle and upper-middle income), although not significantly (women’s wages are equivalent to roughly 80% of those earned by men), as shown in figure I.16E. 4.
The risk of falling into poverty owing to loss of labour income One of the important processes included in the analysis of social structure relates to upward or downward social mobility, which was mentioned in previous sections.
As underscored, in light of the overall improvements in the socioeconomic situation of the Latin American population, the information obtained from household surveys is not enough to conclude a massive upward mobility trend.
Although all evidence points in this direction, estimation is impossible because it is not clear whether a large share of households (and people) saw their situation improve or whether a proportion of the population experienced a deterioration in position, offset by a larger percentage of households benefiting from upward mobility.
Meanwhile, the same methodology —using per capita income thresholds expressed as multiples of a country’s poverty line— places certain limitations on determining the impoverishment or enrichment of the different strata, because if the shifts are significant (in terms of per capita income), the strata of households and people change.
The information is only indirect as it shows increases or decreases in the different strata at various points in time.
In light of the analytical difficulties related to the type of measurement instrument and methodology used, an alternative is to use counterfactual microsimulation that measures, for example, the risk of deterioration in socioeconomic status.
The middle-income strata represent a significant share of the population in Argentina and Uruguay. 73Chapter ISocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 effect of the job loss of one or more members of a household on changes in households’ per capita income.
Naturally, any situation involving the loss of paid employment results in a deterioration in socioeconomic situation, so the focus is on the probability of maintaining the same socioeconomic position and the risk (at least temporary) of falling below the poverty line, in light of unemployment (or inactivity for various reasons).
As highlighted in the second part of section C, work is a crucial determinant of socioeconomic stratum for most households (in both the quantitative and qualitative dimensions, not limited solely to access to employment, but also including the conditions under which it is carried out, especially in terms of income and social protection).
Hence, the better the job (and wages) and the larger the number of household members in paid employment, the more likely it is to have a better social position, assuming that family structure and size and other sources of income remain constant.
People living in middle- and high-income households face a 1.7% risk, on average, of falling into poverty for the abovementioned reason, and 60% probability of maintaining their original socioeconomic position (see figure I.17A).
Clearly, people living in households that are low-income but non-poor, or in the lower-middle-income strata, face a greater risk of falling into poverty, while those in high-income strata are the most likely to maintain their position.
The relatively low risk of falling into poverty in this scenario is related to the fact that only 44% of Latin American households have additional recipients of labour income (and 14% have no members in paid employment).
The scenario changes with the elimination of labour income for the main breadwinner (41% of households are made up of a single person): there is only 20% probability of maintaining the same position and the risk of falling into poverty increases to 30%.
Low-income non-poor households are at the greatest risk in the event that their main breadwinner loses their job, more than 80%, which decreases to 35% for lowermiddle-income households.
For intermediate-middle-income households, this risk decreases to 15% and is lower than 10% in higher-income strata (see figure I.17B).
Lastly, in a scenario of no labour income whatsoever, the probability of maintaining socioeconomic status is low: just 14% of people would maintain their original position (with no major differences between strata, except for people belonging to high-income strata) and the risk of falling into poverty increases to 55%.
As could be expected, this risk increases more and more as one moves down the socioeconomic scale (see figure I.17C).
However, deterioration in socioeconomic status is still significant for all groups, as it would leave about 89% of the population in the lower strata, in other words, in poverty or close to poverty,25 which indicates the importance of employment in socioeconomic stratification for the majority of households in Latin America.
In 2017, just 23.8% of the region’s economically active population in the lower-income strata were affiliated with or contributed to a pension system, while the corresponding figures for the middle-income and high-income strata were 55% and 76%, respectively.
The relationship between access to contributory social protection and socioeconomic stratification indicates, in turn, a link between job formality and adequacy of labour income.
Retirees in high-income strata received, on average, pensions that were twice the amount received by those in upper-middle-income strata and six times more than those in the low-income strata (see figure I.18B).
This indicates the importance of work and labour income in obtaining and maintaining a specific socioeconomic position, and the vulnerability to poverty of a large percentage of Latin American families facing situations that affect sources of work.
Pension system contribution or affiliation among the active population aged 15 years and older a b Middle-income strataLow-income strata Extremely poor Poor Low-income Lowermiddle-income Intermediatemiddleincome Upper-middleincome strataMiddle-income strata rc B.
Refers to contributory pensions except where it is impossible to fully distinguish between contributory and non-contributory pensions (Chile and Costa Rica). d The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is not included owing to a lack of data for currency conversion. 77Chapter ISocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 5.
Conclusions and research agenda As discussed in the previous pages, the socioeconomic strata of most households and people depend heavily on paid employment and job quality (measured by remuneration) and the number of household members able to participate in the labour force.
The strengthening of social protection policies includes the development of instruments that can benefit the low- and middle-income strata, by focusing on reducing the effects of unemployment (e.g., through unemployment insurance or basic citizen’s income) and the excessive debt levels to which mainly middle-income strata are susceptible.
This could facilitate economic mobility and improve the prospects of the middle-income strata.
However, other factors require more complex, long-term measures, such as the transformation of the production structure, elimination of discrimination and fostering of gender equality or ethno-racial equality (including cultural change), or the strengthening of development of more depressed or less economically dynamic territories and geographic areas.
This poses major challenges: • Gaining access to instruments to analyse social mobility, either through panel surveys or instruments that examine people’s professional and economic background.
In light of the foreseeable growth in consumption in the middle-income strata, it is important to reconsider which consumer patterns are sustainable in the context of the climate crisis, and the obstacles to fostering them. • Developing research that reveals the relationship between changes in social structure and changes in the production structure.
This also helps to anticipate the possible impacts of changes in the world of work associated with automation and robotization, and the changes needed in the production structure to ensure that it is more respectful of the environment.
Leigh (2010), “The distribution of top incomes in five Anglo-Saxon countries over the twentieth century”, Discussion Paper, No. 4937.
Saez (2011), “Top incomes in the long-run of history,” Journal of Economic Literature, vol. 49, No. 1.
Duflo (2008), “What is middle class about the middle class around the world?”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 22, No. 2.
Bloom (1985), “What is happening to the middle class?”, American Demographics, vol. 7, No. 1.
Atkinson (2001), “Promise and pitfalls in the use of ‹secondary› data-sets: income inequality in OECD countries as a case study”, Journal of Economic Literature, Bravo, D. and J.
Valderrama (2011), “El impacto de los ajustes de ingresos realizados en la Encuesta CASEN sobre la medición de la desigualdad en Chile”, Estudios de Economía, vol. 38, No. 1, Santiago, University of Chile, June.
Vigorito (2014), “Desigualdad y sectores de altos ingresos en Uruguay: un análisis en base a registros tributarios y encuestas de hogares para el periodo 2009-2011”, Documentos de Trabajo series, No. 06/2014, Montevideo, Institute of Economics, University of the Republic.
Jenkins (2009), “Using the P90/P10 index to measure U.S. inequality trends with current population survey data: a view from inside the census bureau vaults”, The Review of Income and Wealth, vol. 55, No. 1, March.
Huston (1992), “The shrinking middle-income class: a multivariate analysis”, Eastern Economic Journal, vol. 18, No. 3.
Torrado (1976), Teoría y método para el estudio de la estructura de clases sociales, Santiago, Programa de Actividades Conjuntas ELAS/CELADE (PROELCE).
Easterly, W. (2001), “The middle class consensus and economic development”, Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 6, No. 4.
León (1992), “Métodos y procedimientos para medir la pobreza en América Latina con el método de LP”, América Latina: el reto de la pobreza.
Mattonetti (2013), “A cross-country comparison of household income, consumption and wealth between micro sources and national accounts aggregates”, Statistics Working Papers, No. 2013/03, Paris, OECD/Publishing.
Germani, G. (1968), Política y sociedad en una época de transición: de la sociedad tradicional a la sociedad de masas, Buenos Aires, Paidós.
Ortiz-Juárez (2014), “A vulnerability approach to the definition of the middle class”, Journal of Economic Inequality, vol. 12, No. 1. (2011), “A vulnerability approach to the definition of the middle class”, Policy Research Working Paper, No. 5902, Washington, D.C., World Bank.
Morgan, M. (2017), “Falling inequality beneath extreme and persistent concentration: new evidence for Brazil combining national accounts, surveys and fiscal data, 2001-2015”, WID.world Working Paper, No. 2017/12.
Weeks (2002), “How does income underreporting affect inequality measures?: a simulation approach”, paper prepared for the seventh annual meeting of the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association (LACEA), Madrid, 11–13 October.
Ravallion, M. (2010), “The developing world’s bulging (but vulnerable) ‘middle class’”, World Development, vol. 38, No. 4.
This chapter examines the extent of poverty in the region and its recent patterns, analyses trends in some related factors, and explores the possibilities countries have of eradicating extreme poverty by 2030 in order to fulfil the first Sustainable Development Goal (SDG).
It also describes changes in incidence and rates of poverty in each of the countries of Latin America.
The approach used by ECLAC to estimate poverty consists of classifying a person as “poor” when the per capita income of his or her household is below the poverty line.
The poverty lines represent the level of income that enables each household to meet the basic needs of all its members.
The basic basket for measuring poverty is formed from a selection of food, including the goods required to meet the nutritional needs of the population, taking into account their level of physical activity, consumption habits, effective availability of food and food prices in each country and geographical area.
To the value of this basic food basket, known as the “extreme poverty line”, is added the amount required by households to satisfy basic non-food needs, in order to calculate the total value of the poverty line.
To do this, the extreme poverty line is multiplied by a factor (called the Orshansky coefficient), which is the ratio of total spending to food spending for a reference population, and which has different values in each country and for urban and rural areas.
The extreme poverty and poverty lines are updated annually according to the cumulative variation in the consumer price index (CPI): the extreme poverty line is updated according to the variation in the CPI for food, while the part of the poverty line corresponding to spending on non-food is updated according to the variation in the CPI for non-food goods.
The percentages of households and of the population living in extreme poverty and poverty were obtained by contrasting the value of both poverty lines with the total per capita income of each household.
Total household income is obtained by calculating the total income of household members (in cash and in kind) and includes income from work, income from retirement, pensions and other transfers, income from ownership of assets and other income (which includes imputed rent as part of total income).
First, there is an analysis of the impact on poverty rates of variations in income averages and distribution, followed by an examination and comparison of the effect on poverty rates from changes in the various streams that make up household income (such as labour income, pensions and public and private transfers).
This is followed by a continuation of the analysis presented in Social Panorama of Latin America 2018 (ECLAC, 2019b) on the viability of eradicating extreme poverty and halving all poverty by 2030, as proposed in SDG 1.
This exercise is performed for all the countries of the region, considering the variations in average income and income distribution between 2008 and 2018.
Income poverty trends Since 2015 there has been an increase in levels of poverty in the region, and especially extreme poverty, although this trend waned between 2017 and 2018.
Despite the sombre panorama offered by the regional average, poverty declined in most countries between 2017 and 2018.
For 2019, total poverty and extreme poverty are both expected to rise in the regional aggregate figures. 1.
Poverty and extreme poverty at the regional level and by subgroups of countries In 2018, around 30.1% of the population of Latin America was below the poverty line, while 10.7% was below the extreme poverty line (see figure II.1).
This means that, in that year, around 185 million people were living in poverty and 66 million people belonged to households with per capita incomes below the extreme poverty line.
Since 2015 there has been an increase in levels of poverty in the region, and especially extreme poverty, although this trend waned between 2017 and 2018.
Regional aggregates for poverty and extreme poverty are projected to increase to 30.8% and 11.5%, respectively, in 2019 (see figure II.1).
Since 2014, however, there has been a decline in the incidence of total and extreme poverty in Central America.
As a result, in 2018 the rate of overall poverty in the subregion was around 6.5 percentage points lower than in 2012 (see figure II.2).
However, the decrease, in percentage point terms, was smaller than that in Central America.
Does not include the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, owing to the lack of data after 2014. b Values between 2016 and 2018 correspond to the Permanent National Household Survey (PNAD Continua).
Poverty and extreme poverty by country There is a broad heterogeneity among the countries of the region in the incidence of poverty and extreme poverty (see table II.1).
In 2018, the best positioned countries were Uruguay and Chile, with overall poverty rates under 15% and incidences of extreme poverty under 5%.
In the first two, total poverty rates were between 15% and 20%, and extreme poverty did not surpass 5%, while Panama’s total poverty was less than 15% and its extreme poverty was between 5% and 10%.
Looking at changes in the incidence of total and extreme poverty between 2014 and 2018, the situation improved in seven countries (Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Panama, Paraguay and Peru), and worsened in Brazil and the Dominican Republic (see table II.2).
In Peru, the largest fall was in extreme poverty, and in El Salvador there were marked declines in both total and extreme poverty.
In Brazil the deterioration is the result of a rise in extreme poverty, although the data series are not entirely comparable between 2014 and 2018.
As regards variations in the incidence of total poverty between 2017 and 2018, available information shows reductions in seven countries and increases in one country.
There were no substantial changes in five countries (variations of less than one percentage point).
In absolute terms, the main decreases in total poverty were recorded in El Salvador (3.3 percentage points), the Dominican Republic (3 percentage points), Mexico (2.3 percentage points, since 2016) and Panama (2.2 percentage points).
The official estimates refer to the second half of each year. c From 2016 onward, the ECLAC estimates refer to the Permanent National Household Survey (PNAD-Continua) and are not comparable with those of previous years.
The reported official data refer to estimates from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) (2019), based on the lines used by the World Bank for low- and medium-high-income countries. d The ECLAC figures are based on the national labour force survey and refer to September of each year until 2015.
From 2016 onward they are based on the continuous national labour force survey and are annual. e The official poverty measurement is multidimensional.
The most significant declines occurred in the Plurinational State of Bolivia (1.7 percentage points), the Dominican Republic (1.5 percentage points), Panama (1.4 percentage points) and Peru (1.3 percentage points).
In the remaining countries, there were no substantial absolute changes in the incidence of extreme poverty.
ECLAC and national official measurements generally coincide as regards the direction of estimated changes in poverty and extreme poverty between 2017 and 2018 (see table II.3).
In the case of extreme poverty in Ecuador, however, is there a discrepancy between the two estimates, since the ECLAC measurement shows a drop of 0.5 percentage points, while the national data indicate an increase of the same magnitude.
In Brazil, the estimate from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics (IBGE) (2019), which is not an official measurement of poverty, shows a rise in extreme poverty of 0.1 percentage points, while the ECLAC estimate indicates that extreme poverty declined by the same amount.
In the remaining countries for which ECLAC measurements and official national measurements are available, the direction of the changes estimated by the two sources is the same, for both total and extreme poverty.
Figures II.3 and II.4 show the relative and absolute rates at which poverty and extreme poverty declined or increased in each country, considering two periods: 2008–2014 and 2014–2018.
The absolute rate is the difference between the initial and final measurements of incidence of poverty.
In seven of the nine countries, this was related to a faster reduction in poverty in the first period than in the second, and in two countries poverty declined between 2008 and 2014 and increased between 2014 and 2018 (the increase in poverty was much larger in Brazil than in Ecuador).
The tendency towards better performance in the 2008–2014 period than in 2014–2018 was more marked in the case of extreme poverty, as 10 countries performed better in the earlier period (see figure II.4).
Considering only 2014–2018, the countries with the largest relative reductions in extreme poverty were Uruguay, the Dominican Republic and El Salvador.
In absolute terms, between 2014 and 2018, extreme poverty decreased the most in the Dominican Republic and El Salvador. 5 For example, if in country “x” the poverty rate in the final measurement is 20% and the poverty rate in the initial measurement is 25%, the relative change in poverty is (20-25)/25.
Absolute variation (percentage points) a The relative variation refers to the percentage variation in the poverty rate between the initial and end year.
Poverty and extreme poverty by population subgroups Poverty does not affect the different subgroups of the Latin American population equally.
For example, ECLAC (2019b), based on data from around 2017, indicates that the regional aggregates for incidence of poverty and extreme poverty were higher among persons living in rural areas, the younger population, those with the least schooling, women of working age, indigenous persons and Afrodescendants, among other groups.
These disparities in incidence of poverty according to different sociodemographic characteristics were observed in previous studies of the region (ECLAC, 2014, 2016, 2018).
In contrast, poverty levels were lower among the urban population, older persons, wage earners, and among persons who are neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent.
Although the incidence of poverty and especially extreme poverty is much higher in rural areas (for example, in 2018 the rate of extreme poverty in rural areas was more than double that in urban areas), the trends between 2014 and 2018 were worse for urban areas (see figure II.5).
Between 2014 and 2018, poverty and extreme poverty grew by 2.7 and 3.2 percentage points in urban areas, respectively, while in rural areas poverty and extreme poverty rose by 0.1 and 1.3 percentage points, respectively.
In relative terms, in urban areas extreme poverty increased significantly more than poverty.
In terms of age groups, between 2014 and 2018, poverty and especially extreme poverty grew most in the younger population, particularly in the 0–14 age group (see figure II.6).
In the case of indigenous persons, despite a slight narrowing of the gaps in the period in question, in 2018 the poverty rate was 48.8% and the extreme poverty rate 17.9%, twice (2.2 times) and more than three times (3.4 times) the respective rates for the population that is neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent (see figure II.10).
In four of the five Latin American countries that have information through household surveys, the incidence of poverty by ethnicity was significantly higher among the Afrodescendent population than among the population that is neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent both in 2014 and around 2018 (see figure II.9).
In Peru, poverty among Afrodescendants increased by 0.5 percentage points. while among persons that are neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent it decreased by 3 percentage points.
In Uruguay, the 2018 poverty rate for the Afrodescendent population was 2.8 times that of the population that is neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent, while in Brazil and Peru, the ratios were 2.2 and 2, respectively.
The only country in which the rates of poverty and extreme poverty (as measured in household surveys) for Afrodescendants are lower than those for persons who are neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent is Panama.
Indigenous persons and Afrodescendants tend to be poorer than persons who are neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent in both rural and urban areas (see table II.4).
The main difference is that in rural areas, the disparities are greater for the indigenous population, while in urban areas they affect Afrodescendants more.
Around 2018, in rural areas the incidence of poverty among indigenous persons was on average 1.62 times that of non-indigenous and non-Afrodescendent persons, while for Afrodescendants it was 1.32 times that of non-indigenous and non-Afrodescendent persons.
In urban areas, on average Afrodescendants are 1.94 times poorer than persons who are neither indigenous nor Afrodescendent, a higher ratio than for indigenous people (1.79 times).
Factors related to the recent poverty variations The role of redistribution has been fundamental, complementing economic growth and reductions in poverty during periods of prosperity, as well as preventing increases in poverty in phases of economic decline.
Between 2014 and 2018, in 7 of the 13 countries in the region where poverty fell, there was a marked distribution effect.
In terms of sources of income, between 2014 and 2018, labour income was the item of income that had the greatest impact on changes in poverty rates.
However, the best results in terms of reductions in poverty were seen in countries that experienced increases in public and private transfers in addition to rises in labour income. 1.
Level and distribution of household income Changes in the incidence of income poverty over time are linked to changes in average household income and in the distribution of income among households.
A contraction in average household income, coupled with an increase in income concentration, produces a greater increase in the poverty rate than an equivalent fall in average household income that is not accompanied by a deterioration in distribution.
Changes in poverty rates are generally analysed by breaking them down into two elements: the effect of variations in average income (also known as the “growth effect”) and the distribution effect (see box II.2).
This is followed by an examination of impact of the income and distribution effects on changes in poverty rates in countries, using as a reference the subperiods 2008–2014 and 2014–2018.
Hence, if the poverty line is kept constant in real terms, changes in the poverty indicator can be analysed from the perspective of variations in average income and in income distribution.
According to Datt and Ravallion (1992), a poverty indicator can be calculated using the initial-period income distribution and the average income level of the end period.
The difference between this indicator and the initial-period poverty rate can be interpreted as a growth effect on average income.
It is also possible to calculate the poverty rate that corresponds to the average income of the initial period, but with an income distribution similar to that of the end period.
The difference between this indicator and the initial poverty rate is the distribution effect.
Both effects can also be calculated by exchanging the initial and end periods.
Both obstacles can be overcome by averaging the calculated effects using each of the two base years respectively (Kakwani,1997).
The link between growth, distributive change and poverty can be used to simulate the trajectory of poverty rates in the future.
Ravallion, “Growth and redistribution components of changes in poverty measures”, Journal of Development Economics, vol. 38, No. 2, Amsterdam, Elsevier, 1992, and N.
The results of this exercise confirm what has been observed in previous editions of the Social Panorama (ECLAC, 2018 and 2019b), that is to say that as the rate of reduction in poverty slows, the income effect weakens, and the distributive component acquires greater importance.
This means that, even when the distribution effect has had a smaller impact on the trend in absolute poverty than the income effect, its role has been crucial, either by complementing the income effect on the reduction of poverty during periods of prosperity, or by preventing increases in poverty in situations of economic deterioration.
Between 2014 and 2018, when the pace of poverty reduction slowed, the distribution effect predominated in 5 of the 12 countries where poverty fell.
Conversely, between 2008 and 2014, when poverty declined more rapidly, the distribution effect was greater in just 2 of the 13 countries with falls in poverty rates (see figure II.11).
In the countries with the largest relative reductions in poverty (5% to 10%) between 2014 and 2018, the income effect was more marked than the distribution effect (averages of 6.3% and 2.5%, respectively).8 In contrast, in countries with more moderate decreases in poverty (2% to 3%) the average distribution effect was -2.4% and the average income effect was -0.4%.
The countries where poverty declined the most in in relative terms between 2014 and 2018 were, in order, Uruguay, Chile, the Dominican Republic and Panama.
In the last three countries, the income effect was much more significant, while in Uruguay the distribution effect had a greater impact.
In Colombia, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, changes in distribution counteracted the contraction in average household incomes, thereby reducing poverty.
In Brazil, the increase in poverty was mainly caused by a worsening of distribution, as opposed to average incomes, which were almost unchanged.
With a longer-term perspective, the data for Uruguay and Chile, the countries with the largest relative reductions in poverty between 2008 and 2018, show two different stories.
In Chile, the income effect is predominant, while in Uruguay, although the income effect was the larger of the two, the distribution effect contributed significantly to reducing poverty.
Peru is the country with the second largest relative impact on poverty reduction from the distribution effect between 2008 and 2018.
Trends in the income sources of lower-income households Monetary poverty inflows and outflows come from expansions or contractions in household income at the bottom end of the income distribution structure.
Ideally, to identify the income flows that determine whether households emerge from or fall into poverty, the income of the same households must be assessed over different periods of time.
As there are still few longitudinal surveys in the region that can capture variations in the income of the same households over time, this document analyses the changes in the different income streams in the same proportion of households from the bottom end of the income distribution structure, between 2014 and 2018.
To set the threshold in income distribution, for each country the poverty rate for the year in which the rate was highest was used —either the initial or end year— and 5 percentage points were added, to include households that are just above the poverty line.
Household income from different sources varies according to changes in the number of recipients and the average income per recipient from each source.
Labour income, including wages and income from self-employment, was the item of household income that had the greatest impact on variations in poverty rates between 2014 and 2018.
In all the countries that were able to substantially reduce poverty (by 5% or more), and in almost all the countries with moderate declines in poverty, the increase in labour income was the main reason for growth in the income of low-income households.
In Brazil, a country that experienced an increase in poverty, the drop in labour income was main driver of the contraction in income for low-income households (see figure II.12).
Income from public and private transfers also had an impact on changes in poverty rates between 2014 and 2018, but to a lesser degree than labour income.
In 7 of the 10 countries with marked or moderate reductions in poverty, income from public or private transfers was second-ranked income stream in terms of contributions to the increase in income for low-income households.
In one of these countries (Costa Rica), transfers were the topmost driver of the rise in incomes of low-income households.
The contribution of other income (mainly imputed rent and asset ownership) to changes in the total income of low-income households was generally smaller than that of labour income and transfers.
The largest contributions from this income stream to increases in the income of low-income households were seen in Chile, Paraguay, Honduras and the Dominican Republic.
In this group of countries, imputed rent accounted for 87% or more of the growth in the “other income” stream.10 9 If in a given country poverty fell from 20% to 16% between 2014 and 2018, the threshold would be 20% plus an additional 5% of households.
If in another country poverty increased from 14% to 20% in the same period, the cut-off point would be the same.
Thus, in both countries the analysis would be of the changes in different income streams for the 25% of households with the lowest per capita income. 10 Imputed rent is the income in kind allocated to households that own the dwelling in which they live.
Public and private transfers are therefore presented in the “other income” stream.
Thus, although changes in labour income contribute very significantly to variations in total household income at the bottom of the income distribution structure, they do not in themselves explain the differences between countries in the rates at which poverty increased or declined.
For example, in countries with marked or moderate decreases in poverty, increases in labour income were accompanied by increases in other sources of income, especially public and private transfers.
In Panama and Uruguay, the rise in income from self-employment contributed most to the growth in labour income, while in the Dominican Republic and El Salvador the increase in wage income was more important (see figure II.13).
Within the group of countries with moderate decreases in poverty, the predominant situation was a somewhat larger increase in income from self-employment as compared to the rise in wage income (Colombia, Paraguay and Peru).
In Mexico, the increase in labour income was primarily driven by the increase in wage income.
In three of the four countries with no changes in poverty (Argentina, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia), there was a fall in the wage income of low-income households.
As a counterbalance, in Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, income from self-employment increased.
Changes in labour income can come both from a variation in average income per recipient and from the number of recipients.
In countries with sharp reductions in poverty between 2014 and 2018, the rise in labour income was attributable to a substantial increase in labour income per recipient, which was, on average, considerably higher than the number of recipients.
The only exception to this pattern was Panama, where there was an almost equivalent increase in the number of recipients and in the average income per recipient.
In countries with moderate reductions in poverty, growth in labour income was related both to the increase in labour income per recipient and to the increase in the number of recipients.
In turn, in Brazil, labour income per recipient fell sharply, and it was the only country in which the number of recipients of labour income fell. 11 In countries with annualized poverty declines of 5% or more, labour income per recipient grew by 3.2% (simple average) and the number of recipients rose by 1.5%.
In three of the five countries with large reductions in poverty (Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Chile, in that order), the increase in transfer income for low-income households was essentially the result of a rise in income from “other transfers”.
In El Salvador, the annualized variation in remittances was 0.52%, while growth in all public and private transfers was 0.45%.
Data refer to 2014–2018, except for Chile (2013–2017). 115Chapter IISocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 Non-contributory public transfers include cash benefits that do not depend on participation in the formal labour market, and that are provided by States to alleviate poverty and reduce vulnerability.13 Generally, non-contributory transfer programmes include conditional transfers and social pensions provided by States.
The growth in income through this stream was the main factor behind the rise in the transfer income of poor households in Panama, Costa Rica and Paraguay, in that order.
There has also been a decline in this income stream in Colombia, Mexico (countries with a moderate reduction in poverty), Argentina and Honduras (countries with no substantial changes in poverty rates).
In the vast majority of countries, income from retirement pensions and contributory pensions did not contribute to the increase in the income of low-income households through transfers.
This may be explained by low levels of affiliation to contributory pension systems among such households.
In low-income households in Uruguay, pension and retirement pension income contributed more to the increase in households’ total transfer income from the bottom end of the income distribution structure than non-contributory transfers and other transfers. 3.
Possibility of achieving the Sustainable Development Goal of no poverty The countries of the region must redouble their efforts to concurrently improve their performance in terms of economic growth and reductions in inequality, enabling them to meet the targets of reducing total poverty and eradicating extreme poverty by 2030.
In September 2015, 193 Member States of the United Nations pledged to advance an agenda to jointly work to end poverty, reduce inequality, preserve the environment and ensure the greatest possible well-being for all.
This agenda was expressed in a set of SDGs, targets and indicators for monitoring the commitments made.
This section analyses the possibilities for the region as a whole to meet the targets of halving total poverty and eradicating extreme poverty by 2030, considering different scenarios of change in the economic growth rate and in levels of distributive concentration between now and 2030.
This growth rate would produce an extreme poverty rate of 8.9% in 2030, also well above the 3% target for extreme poverty (see figure II.16).
In this case, not only would the regional averages be far from the targets, but just 1 of 18 countries would manage to halve total poverty by 2030 (from 2015 levels) and only 3 countries would succeed in bringing the extreme poverty rate to 3% or less.
Policies that improve income distribution can crucially increase the chances of meeting poverty reduction targets.
Assuming the same annual per capita GDP growth rate (1%), but also projecting a decline in inequality equivalent to a reduction in the Gini coefficient of 1% per year, the incidence of poverty would reach 20.1%.
Although this is still above the target, it would represent an improvement in the region’s performance of 5.2 percentage points compared to a scenario with no changes in distribution.
In this scenario, the incidence of extreme poverty would be 7% in 2030, five countries would halve poverty and six countries would reduce extreme poverty to around 3%.
A more optimistic projection, with annual per capita GDP growth of 2% and a reduction in income distribution inequality of 1.5% per year through to 2030, would bring the region’s poverty rate to 14.5%, meaning that the region as a whole would meet the target, as would 15 countries.
However, the extreme poverty rate in 2030 would be 5.1%, indicating that even in this case the region as a whole would not meet the target.
Estimated resources needed to close the poverty and extreme poverty income gap in Latin America by 2030 C.
World trade growth has slowed significantly and turned negative in the year-on-year figures in early 2019, for the first time since the global financial crisis of 2008–2009.
The developed economies will see the heaviest slowdowns in 2019, with growth projected at 1.2% in the eurozone and 2.5% in the United States, down 7 and 4 tenths of a percentage point, respectively, on 2018.
Among the emerging economies, China is continuing to see gradual deceleration, with a rate of 6.2% expected for 2019, 4 tenths of a point less than in 2018 and the lowest rate for almost 30 years, owing to weak manufacturing activity and lower trade volumes, mainly relating to disputes with the United States.
In this context, it is estimated that global growth will be 2.6% in 2019, 4 tenths of a point below the 2018 rate, and that commodity prices (on which many of the region’s economies depend for exports and even tax revenues) will fall by 5% from 2018, as a result of slacker economic activity (ECLAC, 2019b, p. 15).
For the Latin American and Caribbean region, growth is projected at 0.5%, continuing the sustained downward path of the past five years (ECLAC, 2019b, p. 97).
In the labour market, the urban open unemployment rate held stable in the first quarter of 2019, year-on-year; nevertheless, most new jobs were generated in the informal sector, which signals a deterioration in average employment quality (ECLAC, 2019b, p. 17).
Gross central government debt in Latin America increased in 2018, to 42.3% of GDP.
In the Caribbean, this debt category remained significantly higher (at 72.4% of GDP), despite dropping by almost 2 GDP percentage points over the past year (ECLAC 2019c, pp. 16 and 17).
By contrast, public revenues in Latin America overall remained constant from the previous year, but with differences between subregions, as they rose in South America but fell in Central America.
In addition, the cost of tax evasion and avoidance in Latin America, estimated at US$ 335 billion in 2017, or 6.3% of regional GDP (ECLAC, 2019c, p. 34), adds to the challenges faced by the countries in achieving social public spending levels capable of achieving their social policy goals and fulfilling the commitments of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
This chapter analyses the volume and distribution of the public resources devoted to financing social policies in Latin America and in five countries of the English-speaking Caribbean.
The first part reviews the evolution of social public spending, at both regional and subregional levels, using the Classification of the Functions of Government (COFOG).
Social public spending in 2000–2018 Investment in social policies in the region has slowed in relation to GDP and has slipped back to levels seen in earlier years.
Social spending in the South American countries peaked in GDP terms in 2017, but fell in 2018.
Meanwhile, the average for the group comprising the Central American countries, the Dominican Republic and Mexico has returned to pre-2011 levels, and for five English-speaking Caribbean countries, to 2014 levels.
The instability of financing presents significant risks to the implementation of social policies and the achievement of the targets of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
This is particularly significant in the five countries of the Caribbean, which show a drop in the level of expenditure per capita, and in countries with a lower level of economic development, as these experience the greatest social challenges and have the lowest levels of social spending, with annual per capita outlays averaging less than US$ 230.
As detailed in previous editions of Social Panorama of Latin America, the volume of resources that countries allocate to social policy funding can be analysed by level of government or institutional coverage.
As indicated in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Government Finance Statistics Manual 2001 and Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (IMF, 2001 and 2014), central government coverage comprises a group of ministries, secretariats and administrative units that act under the authority of the central government, although they may have their own autonomous legal authority.
As in the 2016 and 2018 editions of (ECLAC, 2017b and 2019a), this section presents data on social expenditure by central government for the years between 2000 and 2018, including the most recent information available in each country for the whole period.
In specific cases where information is available, the analysis is supplemented by wider institutional coverage.
The database has been constructed using the information available each year for the whole period under analysis, according to the methodology described in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) Government Finance Statistics Manual 2014 (IMF, 2014), which allows public expenditure on specific functions or policy areas to be analysed over time and across different countries.
The analysis of recent trends in social spending in the region is performed at the central government level in each country in order to maintain consistency with the averages published over time in other ECLAC documents.a It is important to note that the total social spending effort of the region’s governments is not necessarily captured by central government figures.
In federal countries or countries with a high level of decentralization in particular, subnational government expenditures can be considerable.
The figures can be consulted in both the CEPALSTAT database and the ECLAC portal on social investment in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The data for Peru are general government figures and those for the Plurinational State of Bolivia refer to the central administration.
Significant changes in the 2017–2018 biennium include a larger share of social functions in total public expenditure (around 53%).
The higher public social spending in relation to GDP in the average for the countries in 2017 reflects stability in spending on the other functions that make up total government expenditure.
Meanwhile, in 2018, public spending on both social and non-social functions decreased on average.
In the English-speaking Caribbean (see figure III.2), the average social expenditure of the central governments of five countries (Bahamas, Barbados, Guyana, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago), was 12.4% of GDP in 2017.
Analysis of the changes over the biennium in social public spending as a share of total central government spending shows that while, in the average figures for 2017 spending fell on social functions but rose slightly on the other functions of government, in 2018 it appears to have fallen on both social and non-social functions.
Analysis of the relative weight of central government social spending in 2018 in the various countries and subregions of Latin America (see figure III.3) shows that the average for the nine countries in South America was 13.2% of GDP.
It was thus the subregion with the highest level of expenditure, although this was highly uneven between countries.
Two countries (Ecuador and Paraguay) spend less than 10% of GDP on social functions, while Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay spend between 13.5% and 17.7% of GDP.
Among these, Costa Rica devotes the largest share of resources to social functions (12.1% of GDP), followed by Nicaragua and El Salvador (11.1% and 9.0% of GDP, respectively).
The data for Uruguay do not include figures for the Social Security Bank. b For the purposes of comparison, the public social spending levels in 2016, published in the 2018 edition of Social Panorama of Latin America (ECLAC, 2019a), are included as a reference.
The data presented here show that in Latin America, the proportion of resources allocated to social functions is still lower in countries with lower levels of wealth and greater poverty and vulnerability, as well as larger gaps in various areas of social development (ECLAC, 2019a).
The decrease of 0.2 GDP points in the average for Latin America and the Caribbean is due to significant falls in expenditure in relation to GDP in four countries: Trinidad and Tobago, Mexico, Honduras and El Salvador (by 2.8, 1.2, 0.9 and 0.8 percentage points, respectively).
Relative to 2016, the values reported here show growth of 9.5% in a single year in Guyana.
It is followed by Uruguay and Peru, with rises of over 8% and nearly 7%, respectively, in a biennium, as well as Nicaragua, with 4% over the same period.
Per capita social spending Continuing the uptrend observed until 2016, average per capita social spending by the central government doubled between 2000 and 2018 in the Latin American countries, in terms of dollars at constant 2010 prices (see figure III.4).
The trend shows a steady increase since 2003, with average growth of 5.2% per year, decreasing to 4.5% in the group comprising Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico and rising to 5.2% in the South American countries.
In 2017, the regional average was US$ 941 per person, but with a great deal of heterogeneity between subregions and countries.
While the average for South America was US$ 1,254 per capita, that for the group formed by the countries of Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico was only US$ 589.
However, the trend for Latin America overall was broken in 2018, with a slight fall in the average.
This was due mainly to a decline in the countries of Central America, Mexico and the Dominican Republic and stabilization in the South American average.
As shown in figure III.4, the five English-speaking Caribbean countries included in the analysis show growth that is lower on average (1.4% per year) and less stable, with a drop of 7% on average over the past four years.
However, the average amount per capita is almost 1.7 times that of the Latin American countries.
The analysis by country shows that over the past two years, Chile and Uruguay allocated most resources per capita to social policy financing (US$ 2,538 and US$ 2,504, respectively), followed by Brazil (US$ 1,924), Argentina (US$ 1,924) and Costa Rica (US$ 1,209).
Ecuador and Paraguay come next with less than US$ 500 per person (US$ 472 and US$ 470, respectively), followed by El Salvador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia with US$ 320 each, and lastly Guatemala, Nicaragua and Honduras with less than US$ 230 each5 (see annex III.A1).
As indicated in previous editions of Social Panorama of Latin America (2015, 2016 and 2018), the region is still a long way behind the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the European Union in terms of the availability of resources for social spending, in both absolute and relative terms.
Social spending by function in the region Analysis of the evolution of central government spending on social functions shows a similar distribution to that described in the 2018 edition of Social Panorama of Latin America (ECLAC, 2019a), with social protection, education and health standing out as the functions with most resources allocated.
On average, spending on these functions represented 4.3%, 4.0% and 2.2% of GDP, respectively, in the Latin American countries in 2017 (see figure III.5).
Between 2000 and 2017, these functions show the strongest spending growth in terms of GDP percentage points: growth of 1.1 GDP points in spending on social protection, 0.9 GDP points in education, and by 0.7 points in health, representing a 49% increase over the period. 5 Haiti spent just US$ 38 per capita social policies in 2014.
Meanwhile, spending on education and health remained at the same levels in GDP terms, on average, as in the preceding three years.
The functional distribution described is strongly influenced by the nine South American countries analysed, especially in the case of social protection spending, which reached an average of 6.3% of GDP in 2017, but fell to 6.1% of GDP in 2018.
By contrast, in the group comprising Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico, social protection represented 2.0% of GDP on average, falling to 1.8% of GDP in 2018.
In other words, the priority afforded to this function in this group of countries is, on average, less than a third of that of South America.
Meanwhile, in Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico, this function represented 1.9% of GDP on average in 2017, edging down In the case of spending on housing and community amenities, the observations made in the previous version of Social Panorama of Latin America (ECLAC, 2019a) still hold.
In 2017 and 2018, the group comprising Central America, the Dominican Republic and Mexico spent, on average, more than twice the share of GDP spent by the South American countries.
The information for the five countries of the English-speaking Caribbean shows a relatively different functional distribution from that of the Latin American countries in 2017 and 2018.
Education is the function allocated most resources (4.5% and 4.4% of GDP in 2017 and 2018, respectively), and has maintained a stable position in the past 10 years.
The second function by resource allocation is health, which shows an upward trend since 2011, reaching 3.5% of GDP in 2017.
Meanwhile, spending on social protection showed a downward trend until 2017, to 2.8% of GDP, and a slight upturn in 2018, to 2.9%, with a fall of 0.2 percentage points over the past four years.
The function of housing and community amenities showed an expenditure level equivalent to 1.0% of GDP over the last two years of the analysis in the average for this group of countries, with an overall downtrend since 2015. 4.
The distribution of functional social spending in the countries The distribution of central government social spending by function gives a picture of the priorities and commitments in each of the countries, in terms of the allocation of public resources.
The data for Peru refer to general government figures and those for the Plurinational State of Bolivia refer to the central administration.
The description given here focuses on central government data for 2018.6 These amounts may vary significantly if broader coverages are analysed, such as general government or the non-financial public sector.
This is particularly relevant in the case of countries with a federal structure or whose subnational governments have high levels of autonomy, such as Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Mexico.
Data on broader coverages of public social expenditure are available for some countries only (see box III.1).
In those cases, complementary factors are included on the social spending situation observed in the 2017–2018 biennium.
This function encompasses policies and programmes designed to cover risks that may affect the whole population (related to disasters, sickness, old age and unemployment), as well as those aimed at facilitating inclusion and protecting against the consequences of poverty and inequality (such as conditional cash transfer programmes and social pensions).
Brazil and Argentina allocated the most resources to this function (over 13.1% and 11.0% of GDP, respectively).
At the other extreme, Honduras, Jamaica and Nicaragua allocated the fewest resources (less than 1% of GDP).
In several countries the figures on social security spending may be higher than indicated here, owing to the different institutional models and forms of resource administration in each country; some models have management and accounting autonomy and others are privately administered.
This situation is strongly influenced by expenditure associated with old age, which accounts for over half of spending on social protection.
This is also the case in Cuba, which allocates a significant share of social spending to this function.
Consistently with the analysis in the previous paragraph, Uruguay is also among the countries that most prioritize this function within social spending.
As indicated earlier, among the Latin American countries this is the second most important social function in terms of central government resources, but slightly exceeds the level of the social protection function in the average for the 23 Latin American and Caribbean countries analysed (equivalent to 4.0% of GDP).
At the central government level, Costa Rica stands out as the country that allocates the largest share of its GDP to education (7%), followed by Barbados, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Guyana, Chile, Jamaica, Honduras, Ecuador and Uruguay (all with around 5% of GDP).
The latest data show that education is the function to which most resources are allocated in 15 of the 23 countries analysed.
Central government health funding averages 2.4% of GDP in the 23 countries analysed.
This stands in contrast to the provisions of the Sustainable Health Agenda for the Americas 2018–2030,10 which established that moving towards universal health11 requires achieving “a level of public expenditure on health of at least 6% of GDP” (PAHO/WHO, 2017, p. 33, target 4.1).
The magnitude of the resource gap to be closed to achieve this target is evident.
Public social spending by the central government is not currently sufficient to meet this target in any country in the region.
However, the expanded coverage analysis shows three countries meeting the target, with public spending on health standing at over 6% of GDP: Cuba (11% of GDP), Argentina (7% of GDP)12 and Costa Rica (6.5% of GDP).
The Bahamas stands out for the proportion of resources devoted by the central government to social spending on health vis-à-vis other social functions; proportionally, it is the country that commits the most resources (36%).
Another six countries allocate over 30% to this function: Jamaica (35%), Nicaragua (31%), and Guyana (31%), followed by Chile, Ecuador, Chile and Honduras (each with 30%).
At the opposite extreme, the countries whose central governments allocate the smallest shares of social spending to health policies are Argentina, Costa Rica and Cuba, all with 8% or less, followed by Mexico, Brazil, Guatemala and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, all with under 16%.
It is also necessary to consider the weight of social protection spending in some of these countries and how it interacts with the health function.
As noted in the 2018 edition of Social Panorama, the institutions involved in contributory social protection are often both providers and insurers of some health services.
In view of this, more disaggregated data would be required to support an in-depth analysis.
Yet another consideration is the effect of resource management at the subnational level, particularly in countries with autonomous state and subnational governments.
Indeed, expenditure on the health function is significant in all cases where data are available with a broader coverage.
The countries of the region spend an average of 0.7% of GDP on this function.
The highest level of expenditure is seen in Nicaragua (2.5% of GDP), followed by Trinidad and Tobago, Panama and Barbados (1.8% of GDP in each case).
Accordingly, Nicaragua devotes the largest proportion of central government social spending to this function (22%), followed by Panama and Guatemala (21% and 19%, respectively).
Fifteen of the 23 countries analysed devote less than 5% of all total central government social spending to this function. (e) Recreation, culture and religion Financing for recreation, culture and religion includes resources allocated to leisure (sports and cultural activities, radio and television) and religious services.
Although their central governments are far from fulfilling this commitment, Peru, Barbados and Cuba lead the way in resource allocation to this function (around 0.5% of GDP each).
In four countries, central government public expenditure information makes no mention of funding for this function. (f) Environmental protection As part of the social functions, environmental protection includes spending on waste and wastewater management, pollution reduction, biodiversity and landscape protection, and research related to environmental protection.
At the central government level, expenditure on this function averaged 0.26% of GDP in the 23 countries analysed in 2018.
Barbados and Peru allocate resources equivalent to 1.6% and 1.2% of GDP, respectively, followed by Panama (0.39%), Guatemala (0.2%) and Jamaica (0.17%).
However, these values may vary significantly when broader institutional coverage is considered, including subnational levels of government, given their role in waste management, and public wastewater treatment companies.
Public social spending in broader institutional coverage than central government: selected countries The data and analysis presented thus far refer to central government, which is the only level of institutional coverage available for all the countries in the region, and hence the level at which comparisons can be made regionwide.
However, given that some countries’ institutional structures include subsectors outside the central government (IMF, 2014) that have significant impacts on the execution of public social policies, this section complements the information using reports from nine countries on broader institutional coverage:14Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, El Salvador, Paraguay, Peru15 and Plurinational State of Bolivia (see annex).
The most relevant elements for comparing data from the two levels of coverage are set forth below.
The level of public social spending as a proportion of GDP in each country changes significantly when data from the various levels of government are compared.
The largest variation occurs in Argentina, where this level rises from 14.1% of GDP under central government coverage in 2015 to 30% in the figure for overall public spending, reaching US$ 3,175 per capita per year.
Argentina is followed by Cuba and Brazil, whose expenditures rise to 28.5% and 27% of GDP (in 2018 and 2017, respectively) close to the average levels of social spending in OECD countries, where the average The distribution of public social spending by function also changes significantly in the broader institutional coverage compared to central government coverage.
In the case of Argentina, the broader coverage in 2015 shows significant changes in relation to health and education spending, which account for 23.3% and 20.7% of public sector social spending, respectively, far above the 7% and 12% corresponding to central government social spending that year.
This brings spending on social protection to 46.3% of social spending by the public sector, still the function to which most resources are allocated, but proportionally much less than the 76% it represents in the social expenditure of the central government.
In turn, the weight of broader public spending on housing and community amenities is 4 percentage points higher than central government spending on this function.
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, education is the priority function in general government spending, as it is in central administration spending, in 2016.
A change occurs in the distribution of resources, however, as health moves to second place, with 24.8% of social spending, followed by social protection with 21% (versus 15% and 37%, respectively, in the central government distribution).
In Costa Rica, education remains the function attracting the most resources in public sector coverage in 2018, although its overall share falls to 31%, from 58% in the central government coverage.
The opposite occurs with the health function, which accounts for 7% of central government social public spending as against 27% of consolidated public sector social spending.
In turn, the weight of housing and community amenities rises from 0.5% in the narrower coverage to 9.9% in the broader coverage.
Social protection shows virtually no difference between the two categories of coverage.
For Cuba, in the general government coverage in 2018, health spending is the priority, with 38%, compared to third place for this function, at 8%, in central government coverage.
Health is followed by education, whose allocation in the general government coverage is 11 percentage points higher than in the central government public social spending.
By contrast, social protection moves from first place at the level of central government expenditure to third place at the general government level (with its allocation falling from 67% to 22%, respectively).
Lastly, expenditure on housing and community amenities gains two percentage points in the allocation in the broader coverage of analysis.
El Salvador is a particular case, with revealing differences in the wider coverage.
Spending on housing and community amenities is the highest in the region in relation to GDP (2.82%) and in relation to total social spending, accounting for 19.3% of the public sector coverage, versus 10% at the central government level, where it is the third priority, ahead of the health function.
This structure is similar to that of Guatemala, Nicaragua and Panama, analysed earlier in relation to central government coverage, which afford priority to housing and community amenities over health (Guatemala and Panama) and social protection (Nicaragua).
In the expanded coverage, social protection has a larger share, up from 21% to 37% of total public social spending.
By contrast, education and health account for a smaller share, down from 42% and 26%, respectively, of central government social spending, to 26% and 17%, respectively, of broader public sector social spending.
Social protection remains the priority, followed by education and health, but the concentration of resources is slightly different in two functions.
Expenditure on social protection is 4 percentage points higher in the general government distribution than in the central government one.
The functions of housing and community amenities and health also have a greater share in the expanded coverage, by around 2 and 3 points, respectively.
The opposite occurs with education, which shows a 9-percentage-point drop in share in the distribution compared to the central government figures. 139Chapter IIISocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 B.
Estimated resources needed to close the poverty and extreme poverty income gap in Latin America by 2030 Ensuring that all households have the necessary resources to close the income gap in extreme and total poverty in the next decade seems an attainable goal for most countries of the region.
However, to that end, progress must be made in addressing the social footprint of the current development model, maintaining adequate levels of economic growth and labour inclusion, and adopting a clear political decision on tax rates and the financing social policies, particularly in those countries that have lower levels of social spending and wider gaps.
Reducing levels of tax evasion appears to be an alternative, which would provide resources for the development of social protection systems including income transfers to universalize adequate levels of well-being, closing gaps and expanding opportunities.
As stated in chapter II, it is estimated that there were 184 million people living in poverty in the region in 2017, of whom 64 million were living in extreme poverty.
In addition, there were 158 million people living above the poverty line but with low incomes, making them highly vulnerable to falling into poverty (with incomes equivalent to between 1 and less than 1.8 times the poverty line).
To achieve Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 1 concering income poverty, these people’s earnings must exceed the poverty line in the next 10 years, and they must achieve a level of income sustainability that minimizes their vulnerability to falling back into poverty.
Regardless of whether the resources are generated by the households themselves in the labour market, come from transfers between households or are the result of public policy actions, the objective is to quantify this amount. 1.
Seven countries have an average gap ranging from US$ 112 to US$ 158 per person (Ecuador, 17 Argentina is not included in this analysis because poverty data is only available for urban areas.
Brazil, Chile and Uruguay have average gaps between US$ 342 and US$ 485 per person.20 20 The differences in the average gaps among countries expressed in 2010 dollars are due to both the extent of poverty (how poor the poor or extremely poor are) and the value of the poverty and extreme poverty lines.
The specific mechanisms used to reduce poverty or extreme poverty in a country may either narrow or widen the average gaps with respect to the poverty line, depending on whether those who are lifted out of poverty (or extreme poverty) are those who are furthest from the poverty line or closest to it.
With regard to total poverty, the gap to be bridged to ensure that all inhabitants’ earnings will exceed the poverty line (including those living in extreme poverty) is an average of US$ 412 per capita per year.
The countries with the lowest average amounts are Paraguay, Peru and Ecuador (between US$ 273 and US$ 279).
The average income gap that would need to be bridged so that the entire population has an annual income equal to or greater than 1.8 times the poverty line is US$ 918.
According to ECLAC data on the gaps and population estimates (2019 revision), the projected amounts needed to eradicate extreme poverty in the 16 Latin American countries analysed comes to a regional total of US$ 10.667 billion (at constant 2010 prices), rising to US$ 79.696 billion to end poverty.
When these figures are compared with the GDP of the countries studied, they account for 0.4% and 2.9% of GDP,21 respectively.
As figure III.8 shows, the resources needed for the income of all households to exceed the extreme poverty and poverty lines are highly heterogeneous across countries.
The country facing the greatest challenge to eradicate extreme poverty is Nicaragua, with 1.6% of GDP (as of 2014), followed by the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Honduras (more than 1.4% of GDP) and then, some way behind, is Guatemala, with 0.6% of GDP.
Other countries’ needs do not exceed 0.4% of GDP for the year under consideration. 21 To calculate the aggregate annual gaps as a percentage of GDP, the values corresponding to the year of estimation of the annual gap was used, based on household surveys and fiscal statistics for each country.
Heterogeneity is more marked when the challenge of closing monetary poverty gaps in each of the countries is analysed.
Central America is home to four of the five countries facing the greatest challenges.
Data for Honduras from 2016 indicate that the income in poor households in this country need to increase by an aggregate value equivalent to almost 11% of GDP, more than 1.4 times annual national social spending.
It is followed by Nicaragua and Guatemala, which needed the equivalent of 8.7% and 6.1% of GDP, respectively, in 2014.
The incomes of those living in poverty in Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Paraguay and Peru need to increase by around 1% of GDP, while 0.6% is needed in Chile, Panama and Uruguay.
To close poverty and extreme poverty gaps in Uruguay, no more than 0.1% of GDP is needed.
The values indicated here reflect the annual effort the countries of the region need to make in order to attain the Goal of ending poverty by 2030, if the number of poor people remains constant. 2.
As can be seen in table III.1, when analysing the additional requirements together with the current volume of central government social spending, the first thing that stands out is that in several countries the estimated amounts are relatively lower than the resources currently allocated to social policies, while in others they are equivalent to a significant proportion.
On average, bridging the extreme poverty income gap through public policies requires an amount equivalent to 4.5% of central government social spending in 2017 (see table III.1).
The difference is less than 1% in four countries (Chile, Costa Rica, Peru and Uruguay), between 1% and 2% would be required in another four (Brazil, Ecuador, Panama and Paraguay) and between 2% and 4% would be needed in Colombia, Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Mexico.
Meanwhile, in four countries, the difference represents between 8% and 17% of central government social spending in 2017 (Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and the Plurinational State of Bolivia).
The incremental amount needed to bridge the income gap to close the total poverty income gap in all the countries of the region represents 2.9% of GDP on average, equivalent to 30.8% of central government social expenditure of the Latin American countries analysed.
The relative magnitude of the growth needed shows a distribution similar to that required to eradicate extreme poverty.
In Uruguay, this amount is equivalent to less than 1% of central government social spending, while in Honduras it exceeds 125%, in Guatemala it is estimated to be 89% and in Nicaragua it is 81%.
But the magnitude of the growth needed refers not only to the amounts involved, but also to the amount of resources available.
The average increase that would be required in the income of people living in extreme poverty is equivalent to 2.9% of tax revenue in 2017 (see figure III.9).
Uruguay is again the country that needs the lowest proportion (0.2%), followed by Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica and Panama (between 2% and 4%).
In contrast, the income required to bridge the gap is equivalent to almost half of total revenues of Honduras and Guatemala (48%) and to 41% in Nicaragua.
They are followed by the Plurinational State of Bolivia and El Salvador (around 20%), with Mexico and the Dominican Republic bringing up the rear (15% and 12%, respectively).
In order to fully analyse the feasibility of financing the aforementioned incremental resources, it is useful to compare the needs to tax evasion estimates.
The financial requirements needed to bridge the extreme poverty gaps in these 16 countries are equivalent to 4.6% of regional evaded tax income; 34% would be needed to close the total poverty gap.
Thus, improving the efficiency of existing tax systems could be a source of financing to cover both the extreme poverty and total poverty income gaps. 3.
Estimates of the costs of achieving the Goal on poverty over a 10-year period through income transfers SDG 1 of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development is to end poverty in all its forms everywhere by the year 2030.
To achieve this, incomes must be increased, and the aforementioned gaps bridged.
In addition to increases resulting from work and transfers between private individuals (through remittances or donations), subsidies and income transfers from social protection are public policy tools that have been shown to be effective in the region in recent decades (Cecchini, S. and others, 2015).
As shown in figure III.10, this would mean allocating the equivalent of 0.02% of regional GDP in 2020, and progressively increasing this expenditure to reach a total equivalent to 0.13% of regional GDP by 2029. 22 This is a comparison for reference purposes only, assuming perfect coverage and allocation.
It does not include administration costs. 23 This estimate only refers to the population living below the poverty and extreme poverty lines.
The surveys in Mexico and Honduras date from 2016, and in Guatemala and Nicaragua from 2014.
From 2019 to 2030, the trend growth rate is estimated using moving averages of the last five years, based on the projected variation rates in these 10 countries, and on those observed between 2014 and 2018 in the other countries.
These annual growth estimates were used to calculate the total volumes of annual GDP in constant 2010 dollars, based on the most recent estimates available from CEPALSTAT.
In order to obtain annual projections of the population living in poverty and extreme poverty until 2030, the number of people living in poverty was adjusted for the years in which it was measured, using population estimates and projections (the latter were prepared using an average variant of fertility) published in United Nations (2019).
The projected poverty and extreme poverty rates and, therefore, the corresponding population volumes were based on the calculation of the elasticity of extreme poverty and total poverty (variation in percentage points) with respect to GDP variation rates, using linear regression methods by country, taking as a reference the period between 2009 and 2016 or 2017.
In the case of discontinuous series of extreme poverty and total poverty data, linear interpolations were used and then the annual variations were calculated.
The average monthly extreme poverty and total poverty gaps were annualized and, based on the reference (or application) period of each survey, calculated at constant 2010 prices in the local currency according to the official monthly consumer price index (CPI) in CEPALSTAT.
These figures were then converted into 2010 dollars using the average annual exchange rate of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Ensuring that, in the 16 countries of the region analysed, all households have incomes above the poverty line through the progressive expansion of coverage over 10 years, will require an average annual increase of US$ 6.982 billion (at constant 2010 prices), starting with US$ 7.891 billion in 2020 and amounting to US$ 69.825 billion by 2029.
In accordance with the parameters indicated in box III.2, once total coverage has been reached in 10 years, the income transfer resources needed to lock in achievements regarding poverty and total poverty should start to decrease.
Strategies for expanding transfers are highly heterogeneous across the countries, owing to the size of the total gaps to be bridged, population and economic growth projections, and the resulting magnitude of the reductions needed in poverty and extreme poverty linked to these factors.
If the economic conditions in Chile and Uruguay are maintained, these countries should attain SDG 1 before 2030.
Three countries face significant financing challenges, requiring improvements on both the revenue and expenditure sides, namely Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua (between 5% and 9% of GDP).
It must be recalled that the estimates described here are merely a reference for the purposes of analysis.
Both their feasibility and the sustainability of their outcomes are subject to changing circumstances and great variability in the income of the poor population.
Transfer tools have direct impacts on income only, with no guarantee of affecting other dimensions of poverty.
Conclusions As in previous editions of the Social Panorama of Latin America, this chapter analyses social public spending at the central government level, which has been trending upward over the last five years.
However, the last year saw a reversal of that trend, with a return to 2011 levels in the average for Central America, Mexico and Dominican Republic, and 2014 levels among the five countries of the English-speaking Caribbean analysed.
Thus, the heterogeneity iand inadequacy of the allocation of public resources to social policies remains a characteristic of the region, both in terms of total amounts and their distribution, although social protection, education and health remain the priority areas in terms of resources.
As indicated in the Social Panorama of Latin America, 2018, it remains the case that those Latin American countries that will struggle the most to achieve the social goals of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development are the ones that allocate the least resources to policies in this area, both as a percentage of GDP and in amounts per person.
Average spending per person among Latin American countries stabilized between 2017 and 2018, remaining at the highest levels of the last 18 years, double the amounts available per person at the beginning of the twenty-first century.
However, the countries of the region remain far from meeting the intergovernmental commitments they have undertaken in various forums in areas such as health, education and culture, and lag well behind developed countries.
The trend in per capita spending in the five Englishspeaking Caribbean countries for which information is available continues its downward trajectory, even though they spend more than Latin American countries, and they face challenges related to the sustainability of social policy financing and of debt levels.
The incorporation of data on broader government coverage in some countries has made it possible to supplement the information presented here.
The countries for which information is available show increases of between 5 and 10 percentage points of GDP compared to their central government coverage reports, thus reaffirming the importance of increasing the availability of data at the general government level, particularly among countries that have subnational tax collection and public expenditure systems that are independent of the central government.
The data presented in section B reveal that, on average, the estimated volume of resources needed to bridge the extreme poverty gap does not seem as large when compared to the current level of average central government social expenditure in the countries of the region.
Meanwhile, closing the total poverty gap does require a considerable amount of resources.
Heterogeneity once again emerges as a key characteristic, as countries with higher poverty rates, lower levels of social spending and lower tax rates face greater challenges.
The simulation of the extent to which the coverage of income transfer programmes needs to be expanded over a 10-year period shows that it is highly unlikely that some countries will end poverty by 2030 unless they broaden policy efforts to change the current poverty rate trends.
However, the vast majority of countries of the region should be able to attain SDG 1 if steps are taken to make possible financing to support minimum levels of well-being, especially if regional efforts to reduce tax evasion are stepped up. 148 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter III Cecchini, S. and R.
Migration and its problems in the subregions 153Chapter IVSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 IV This chapter presents data on the characteristics of Latin American and Caribbean migration, including recent background information on the trends of flows, and on the changes and continuities in migratory patterns.
It also describes some of the characteristics of migrants and certain national and subregional specifics, drawing on information obtained from different sources.
It is very important to note that the regional analysis presented has shortcomings related to the lack of reliable, timely and adequate information.
This issue is significant given the recent changes that have occurred within the region, because data sources are not comparable between countries.
It is therefore necessary to wait for the 2020 round of censuses, the methodological development of records and improvements to household surveys in the different countries.
Nonetheless, it is possible to discern general migration scenarios by drawing on information sources from the destination countries and data provided by the United Nations Population Division (United Nations, 2019).
The current juncture: a call for multilateral cooperation to protect migrants According to the latest estimates made by the United Nations Population Division, published in July 2019, the migrant population of Latin America and the Caribbean is estimated at 40.5 million, representing about 15% of the world’s migrant population of nearly 272 million (United Nations, 2019).
This figure does not include recent migratory movements, temporary migration, circular or return migration, among other dimensions.
Given the current complex regional migration panorama, and considering both the historical presence of migration in all nations and its current characteristics, the region should take steps to strengthen multilateral cooperation and address the most visible and pressing needs, such as the protection of migrants and the provision of policy instruments and resources to deal with “humanitarian crises”.
In reality, these crises are nothing more than the expression of the heterogeneity of migratory flows that have been present for at least two decades, especially in the case of extraregional emigration.
Today, there is a clear presence of “mixed migrations”, since movements by asylum seekers, economic migrants, unaccompanied children and adolescents, environmental migrants, irregular migrants, trafficked persons, victims of trafficking and stranded migrants,1 among others, are increasingly forced upon them.
The main characteristic of this type of migration is the vulnerability of the individuals involved, as well as their differentiated profile and their specific needs.
In addition, other groups, such as Haitians, suffer dual discrimination based on their national origin and on race.
Young people, women and children, for example, have difficulties in accessing social protection, either because of the forced nature of their migration, its large-scale, or the fact that it raises crosscutting and emerging issues.
The links between migration and crises, climate change and disasters, demographic ageing and the care crisis are permanent; and they are areas that will need further analysis and policy action in the future.
Migration processes contribute to the well-being and development of communities and countries in the region, so they should be encouraged from a long-term perspective.
This should encompass various issues, such as the creation of more inclusive labour markets, the possibility of building more diverse and rejuvenated societies, and the challenges of interculturality.
This is clearly a matter of encouraging a critical, positive and purposeful vision when analysing the many issues that intersect with international migration, rights and development (ECLAC, 2002).
In many of these debates and analyses, it is imperative to adopt gender, ethno-racial, generational, territorial and cross-cutting human rights approaches.
This is an opportunity to study how migration can foster equality and thus contribute towards building fairer societies (see box IV.1).
Changes and continuities in migration International migration in Latin America and the Caribbean is a particularly relevant issue today, since its continuities and changes occupy a prominent place in public opinion and in the political and development agendas of the countries in question.
Migration patterns and corridors reflect long-term continuities (such as the prevalence of Argentina as one of the countries with the highest number of migrants), as well as changes in the volume and direction of flows (for example, intense immigration into Chile and the mixed nature of current Central American and Venezuelan emigration).
These have led to changes in the profile of the migrants (such as the participation of more men and children and adolescents in the migration cycle), which provide the backdrop to the trends in Latin American and Caribbean migration. 1.
Patterns and trends The three most salient patterns of international migration in Latin America and the Caribbean since the second half of the twentieth century have been outward migration from the region, historical overseas immigration and intraregional exchanges.
It recognizes the need to protect the rights of migrants, since migration is a source of prosperity, innovation and sustainable development in our globalized world.
The Compact has 23 objectives, guided by the following principles: people-centred, international cooperation, national sovereignty, rule of law and due process, sustainable development, human rights, gender-responsive, and the best interests of the child, among others.
The Compact is closely related to the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, since both instruments call for protection of the rights and social inclusion of migrants.
In the region, nearly all countries have created institutions and allocated resources to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), which augurs well for the implementation of the Compact.
Its 23 objectives are organized according to the sequence of the migration cycle, from emigration to return and re-emigration, taking into account all age groups, from children to working-age populations.
The various issues addressed are well summarized in the objectives, which call for multilateral cooperation and an international commitment.
While intraregional migration accounted for 50% of the migrant population as early as 1990, by 2010 its share had grown to 63% of the total (see figure IV.1).
Moreover, in recent years, the number of countries of origin has increased, and new destinations have appeared as a result of Venezuelan emigration to several countries in the region —especially Colombia, Chile, Ecuador and Peru— as well as in some Caribbean countries.
A common denominator in the analysis of migratory trends is the insufficiency of reliable, timely information that is appropriate to the complexity of the phenomenon.
Each of these instruments is subject to different measurement and design errors, which impose limitations.
Household surveys in Latin American countries generally have a complex, probabilistic, stratified and multi-stage sample design, with non-uniform probabilities of inclusion.
Hence, the estimates produced from these statistical exercises are subject to sampling error; and their statistical validity needs to be evaluated using various quality indicators that describe their accuracy and reliability.
It is also necessary to warn the user when the accuracy of the estimate is unreliable.
The application of these criteria imposes a constraint on the use of surveys, because it restricts the inferences that can be made from the estimated value of a statistic.
On the other hand, it can also be seen as a contribution, by allowing certain degree of confidence to be established regarding the accuracy with which such an estimate is made.
There is also the problem of out-of-date sampling frameworks, which are usually based on population censuses and may be significantly affected by large-scale migration processes occurring in the intercensal period, as has happened in recent years in the countries of the region.
Similarly, in cases where immigrants initially settle in collective households, or even live at their places of work, they will be outside the normal perimeter of household surveys and are therefore not included in their estimates.
Lastly, underestimation may increase owing to omissions such as the concealment of migrant status for various reasons.
An additional difficulty may arise as a result of a lack of comparability between concepts of “migrant” as defined in some of the surveys.
Although most countries include questions on migration that comply with international recommendations, in some cases this set of questions may not be sufficient.
In 13 of the 16 countries for which information is available from their latest survey, the place of birth of the household members is known; and, in several cases, additional information is available on their place of residence before the survey was undertaken.
In 12 of the 16 countries, information on the place of residence five years earlier is available.
The following table reports an exercise to estimate the proportion of migrants in each of the countries for which information is available, as well as the bounds of the respective confidence interval.
It also includes a warning when the estimate presented does not satisfy any of the established quality criteria.
As table IV.1 shows, 6% of the total population of Latin America and the Caribbean are not living in their country of birth.
The total volume of emigrants consists firstly of the population born in Latin American and Caribbean countries living in other regions of the world, and, secondly, of the native population resident in countries of the region other than that of their birth.
According to national censuses, the total foreign population residing in Latin American and Caribbean countries amounted to 7.6 million people in 2010.
Estimates for 2019 indicate a total of 11.7 million, equivalent to almost a quarter of the number of emigrants and only 1.8% of the region’s total population.
In the first case, extraregional immigration continued to lose ground, retreating from 37.2% of the total immigrant population to 30% in 2019, while in the second case the figure advanced from 62.8% to 70% (see figure IV.1).
In contrast, the ratio of emigrants to national populations is higher and varies more between subregions: the Caribbean and Central America and Mexico have the largest proportion of immigrants relative to the native population (21.1% and 9.3%, respectively).
Mexico has the largest absolute number of emigrants, although the relative share of regional emigration from this country has declined from 40% in 2010 (when some 12 million of its citizens were living abroad) to 29% in 2019 (about 11.8 million).
Colombia, with almost 2.9 million, has the next largest number of emigrants.
The countries with the largest proportion of emigrants in their national population are El Salvador (24.8%), Jamaica (37.7%) and Puerto Rico (68.4%) along with several Caribbean nations (see table IV.1).
The recent emigration from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which is discussed below, is one of the most significant changes to have occurred in recent years.
This particularly affects estimated immigration figures in Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru in absolute terms, and in some Caribbean nations in relative terms.
Bearing in mind the shortcomings mentioned in table IV.1, Argentina continues to report the largest volume of immigration, with its 2.2 million immigrants accounting for 19% of all immigrants registered in the region.
Chile has also reported that it had more than 1 million immigrants in 2018, according to an estimate based on a combination of sources, including data from the 2017 census (INE, 2018) and administrative records.4 3 Apart from Colombia, these countries have recorded high figures on previous occasions.
In Mexico, it is widely recognized that over half of the immigrant population is actually of Mexican origin (children of returnee parents who were born in Mexico), which reflects the dynamics of life on the United States border and the effects of migratory processes.
The United States is the main destination for regional emigration (see figures IV.4 and IV.5) While this does not apply to all countries, it does reflect a long-term trend.
Since the global financial crisis of 2008–2009, migrant flows from the region to the United States have decreased.
Various studies have highlighted the racially biased nature of this occupation, which is performed mostly by women of African descent, and by migrant workers from Latin America and the Caribbean and, to a lesser extent, from Asia.
Paid domestic work is one of the fastest growing occupations in the United States.a A survey of paid domestic employees in 14 metropolitan areas of the United States found that it was an occupation performed almost exclusively by women (97%) and with a very high prevalence of migrants: 78% of paid domestic workers were born abroad.
Of the individuals surveyed, 60% were identified as “Latino”, 23% as white, 9% as black, and 9% as Asian.
Nearly half of the migrant workers (47%) had irregular migratory status (undocumented and, therefore, at risk of being deported).
A large proportion of the paid domestic workers interviewed spoke very poor English or none at all (41%) and had a low level of education (39% had not completed secondary school).
The survey also showed that “Latino” workers of either sex consistently received lower wages, and undocumented workers even less.
They often agreed to perform tasks not included in the contract and without pay, and most did not enjoy any social benefit.
Workers living in their employer’s home experienced higher levels of vulnerability and abuse; and a large proportion had to work longer hours than agreed upon, and had to interrupt their rest breaks without being paid overtime.
This process has caused the number of Mexican immigrants in United States to either decrease or stabilize in recent years —a trend that is still difficult to define, according to the American Community Survey5 and other sources (Passel and Cohn, 2016; González-Barrera, 2015).
Estimates made by the United Nations (see figures IV.6 and IV.7) show that the United States remains the leading migratory destination for countries in the region, and Spain the second.
The growing trend of intraregional migration Intraregional migration has increased sharply in the last five years, represented by flows of Central Americans to Mexico.
This was further encouraged by easier travel, especially between neighbouring countries, in terms of communications and means of transport.
While this continues to be the case, the picture has become more complex, as several countries have experienced significant increases in the volume of immigrants, and immigration from neighbouring countries has tended to combine with immigration from elsewhere.
The need to provide humanitarian and political assistance to Venezuelan emigration, in particular, has given rise to several initiatives, especially in South America (International Organization for Migration (IOM), 2018; R4V, 2019; Organization of American States (OAS), 2019), and estimating the number of emigrants is a central item on the regional agenda.
The increase in Venezuelan emigration has been heavily concentrated in recent years, although emigration from the country had been in evidence for some time (Freitez, 2011 and 2017; Martínez and Orrego, 2016). 6 The data come from various sources and combine different “migrant” concepts.
While the estimates of the United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs (DESA) refer to persons born in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela who are living in other countries, other sources are based on records of legal stays (R4V, 2019), or else refer to former members of a household who are now living abroad (Freitez, 2017), among other alternatives.
At the same time, in recent years the scale and visibility of Central American migration has increased (see figure IV.9), especially towards the United States and during the transit through Mexico.
This includes migration by unaccompanied children and adolescents, as well as movements in caravans, which triggered successive “humanitarian crises” owing to the lack of protocols to deal with massive and unprecedented migration and, subsequently, the massive displacement of entire families caused by deportations.
This subregion also displays new migratory flows to Panama (of extra-continental origin) and two other flows that pose special challenges: firstly, the migration of Nicaraguans to Costa Rica; and secondly, migration in the border region between Mexico and Guatemala.
As the figures reported in table IV.1 suggest, migration plays a very significant role in the Caribbean, given the size of the territories and populations involved.
The proportions of migrants relative to native populations tend to be higher in smaller territories.
Recent Venezuelan migration: imperative cooperation needs Venezuelan migration is a priority issue at the regional, national, and local levels.
Political processes such as the Quito Process,7 R4V,8 OAS working groups, an increasing number of research groups, and the Venezuelan Migration Observatory, are just a sample of the numerous cooperation and knowledge dissemination responses that are emerging.
This migration is expanding rapidly in the region, and the patterns are changing in both immigration and emigration.
Data from the 2010 round of censuses showed that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela remained one of the main recipient countries in terms of absolute numbers, as a consequence of the traditional arrival of Colombian populations and the influx, in past decades, of people from other origins seeking opportunities and refuge.
The situation began to change in the 2000s, however, as Freitez (2011) warned in an analysis of trends, owing to the political, social and economic context in which the country was living through; and it became more pronounced in subsequent years, when emigration started to increase (Martínez and Orrego, 2016).
Faced with the social, political and economic instability of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, emigration from this country has grown vigorously in recent years, posing a challenge for government responses in the recipient countries.
Migration and its problems in the subregions Some specific characteristics of international migration in the region can be analysed by distinguishing subregions consisting of Central America and Mexico, the Caribbean, and South America.
Although these three subregions share the main migration patterns already highlighted, each has specific features, either because of the trends and magnitudes of the migration, or because of their link with places of destination and return processes, or the intensity of intraregional mobility, among other factors.
The following analysis highlights just a few aspects of this complex problem. 1.
Central America and Mexico In this subregion, migration has been one of the key social processes of recent decades.
Emigration is a crucial issue in Mexico, along with immigration, return and transit.
In Central America, the greatest concern is emigration from the north of the subregion, although Costa Rica has received a large contingent of Nicaraguan migrants, and there is a traditional cross-border flow of Guatemalans into Mexico.
The changes resulting from the demographic transition in Central America are less advanced in El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua, where their populations are younger.
All of these situations presage a reality that will become increasingly complex in the coming years, and is becoming the priority issue on the agenda of many countries.
Migration from this subregion to the United States has been increasing for some time, albeit with different phases.
Flows from the countries of northern Central America grew on a sustained basis until early 2007, and until November 2008 in the case of Mexico.
Central American migration slowed initially in the wake of the international economic crisis, and then receded before resuming its growth trend.
In the case of Mexico, the economic crisis brought migration to a halt for a longer period that lasted until early 2014 (Canales and Rojas, 2018).
The number of people born in one of these countries who are living abroad rose to over 3.1 million in 2015.
El Salvador has the highest rate of emigration (22.1%), followed by Honduras (6.9%) and Guatemala (5.8%).
Of these migrants 86.7% are living in the United States; in the case of Guatemala, 5% live in Mexico, while large numbers of migrants from Honduras and El Salvador are living in Europe (see table IV.3).
Transit migration is a distinctive feature of migratory processes in the countries of northern Central America.
Although there are no official figures on the number of migrants from these countries who pass through Mexico on their way to the United States, in 2015 the number was estimated at around 417,000, of whom only 19% completed their journey successfully and managed to reach their destination (Canales and Rojas, 2018, p. 72).
Mexico received a smaller number: 5,400 asylum applications from migrants from El Salvador and Honduras 9 Migrants returned by United States authorities (data from El Colegio de la Frontera Norte and other sources (2013)). 169Chapter IVSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 in 2017.
In recent years, the profile of asylum-seekers in Mexico has changed from single men to whole families, as well as women and unaccompanied children and adolescents (ECLAC, 2019b).
In the countries of northern Central America (El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras), the main factors driving emigration are: firstly, insufficient productive capacity combined with lack of employment; and, secondly, the widespread adverse effects of disasters and climate change.
Social networks facilitate new migrations and refuge seeking, as evidenced by the migrant caravans of recent months.
It is increasingly recognized that the bulk of this migration is driven by the lack of alternatives for remaining in the countries of origin.
The profile of these migratory flows is mainly male, young (28% of migrants are under 20 years of age) and low levels of schooling; and it is clearly job-seeking.
In fact, about 87% of these migrants are of working age, a higher percentage than the other immigrant groups present in the United States (Canales and Rojas, 2018), which enables them to make a special contribution to the economy and society of this country.
Nonetheless, the restrictive policy and large-scale deportations implemented by the United States Government since the second half of the 2000 decade have had serious consequences for migrant communities and families.
A major problem is the response capacity of the authorities of these countries of origin to the needs of returnees, many of whom have spent long periods abroad and no longer have family ties.
Several initiatives have been designed to address this situation; however, new needs are emerging, such as psychosocial support and reintegration into a labour market with few employment opportunities and low wages.
Migrants from northern Central American countries sent back by the United States authorities are mostly men (88.4% on average).
The education level of those from Guatemala is low (53% have primary education or lower), while among Hondurans and Salvadorans it is higher: 38.9% of Honduran migrants have secondary, technical or higher education, and the proportion is 43.7% among migrants from El Salvador.
Nearly one third of returnee migrants from Guatemala belong to an indigenous community or people.
The largest proportion of migrant children under 15 years of age accompanied by non-relatives comes from El Salvador (11%) and Guatemala (8.5%)10 (see box IV.4).
In recent years, there has been an increase in the flow of Central American migrants passing through Mexico (Rodríguez Chávez, 2016) in highly vulnerable conditions and exposed to various dangers, such as organized trafficking gangs.
By 2017 a total of 180,000 unaccompanied children and adolescents from the north of Central America had been detained on the southwestern border of the United States.
If Mexican children and adolescents are added to this figure, the number of detentions totals 244,000.
The situation of Mexico is notable for the fact that it is a country of origin, transit, destination and return of unaccompanied children and adolescents.
According to data from the Ministry of the Interior, between 2015 and 2017, Mexico’s Migration Policy Unit had about 45,000 registered cases of migrants from the countries of northern Central America.
Among the vectors motivating the migration of children and adolescents, empirical data reveal the importance of the search for work, family reunification, the need to escape from situations of domestic or social violence, the consequences of natural disasters and poverty.
The sociodemographic profile indicates that 71.4% are men and 28.6% are women, with average ages of 15.5 and 14.3 years, respectively.
Several studies on migration legislation in Central America and Mexico have encountered major shortcomings in the development of an institutional framework for the protection of migrant rights.
Although the reasons that motivate individuals and families to change their place of residence are multiple, it is possible to identify the main causes that people from the 171Chapter IVSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 countries of northern Central America (El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras) state as the main factors driving them to migrate to the United States.
According to a survey coordinated by the Colegio de la Frontera Norte in 2016, these include lack of employment, economic crisis, low incomes or poor working conditions in their countries of origin (see figure IV.10).
In the case of migrants from El Salvador, violence is ranked second among the reasons for migrating (20% mentioned it as their main reason).
Another factor that motivates the decision to migrate to the United States is the search for work, because of the wage gap that exists between the countries of origin and destination of the migration.
In 2018, the minimum wage in the United States was six times higher than the mean minimum wage across the countries of northern Central America and Mexico.
In the case of the average wage, the difference was even greater: 12 times higher in the United States (see figure IV.11).
While Central American and Mexican migrants in the United States receive less than the average, they still earn more than they would in their countries of origin.
Between 1950 and 1975, the countries of northern Central America experienced high population growth due to a reduction in the mortality rate, and their population increased at an average rate of 2.8% per year.
When a population grows at this rate, it doubles every 25 years: the number of inhabitants in the three countries increased from 6.9 million in 1950 to 13.7 million in 1975.
While the growth rate subsequently slackened as a result of declining fertility, their combined population will reach 34.3 million by 2020.
In the period of high population growth, the public policy challenge was to provide for the growing child population, mainly in the areas of primary education and health.11 11 In 1970, children under 15 years of age represented 45.6% of the total population in El Salvador, 45.8% in Guatemala and 47.4% in Honduras.
The demographic transition has generated the “demographic dividend” in the countries of northern Central America12.
While this means that fewer resources need to be transferred from the economically active to the non-active age group (those under 15 and over 65); it also generates an urgent need to create jobs.
However, the economic growth of these countries has not created enough jobs, and those that exist are precarious, offering offer low wages and poor working conditions.
In the countries of northern Central America, nearly 700,000 young people reach working age (15 years old) every year.
While not everyone wants or needs to work at that point in their life cycle, some are looking for a job; and, at some point most of them can be expected to need work.
In addition, every year roughly 120,000 people reach retirement age in these countries; so, to achieve the labour inclusion demanded by current demographics would require about 580,000 jobs to be created annually, and this is not happening.
Many young people have stopped looking for work because they do not have the education required for the job, or because they have suffered some form of discrimination, or because there is no work available where they live.
Discouraged jobseekers in the countries of northern Central America total 205,000; half of them are young people aged 15–24, and two thirds are women.14 The shortage of jobs in the countries of northern Central America, combined with the robust demand for labour in the United States economy, is one of the key structural drivers migration in the subregion.
In El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, more than two thirds of job seekers are forced either to work in the informal economy or to migrate. 2.
The Caribbean In the Caribbean, migration plays a predominant role owing to the size of the territories in question and the impact it can have on population dynamics and structure.
The combined data on immigrants and emigrants, expressed as a proportion of the total national population of each country, shows that migration in this subregion has major impacts, although there are significant differences according to the population size of the individual countries.
The United States and Canada accounted for 77% of the Caribbean emigrant population in 2019.
There is also a substantial flow of migrants from Haiti to South America, mainly to Brazil and Chile (Mejía, 2018).
Chile quickly became one of the preferred destinations for Haitian emigration, but this trend slowed in 2018 when the requirements for Haitians to enter the country changed.
The increase in migration from Haiti following the 2010 earthquake and other natural disasters (in particular Hurricane Matthew), call for an active and effective cooperation strategy for that country. (a) Main challenges and migration trends in the Caribbean High rates of emigration are not a new challenge for the Caribbean subregion.
Their migratory flows have been determined by historical and cultural links, as well as geographical factors.
However, the traditional socioeconomic motivation to seek better opportunities for education, employment and living standards is now being augmented by migratory forces arising from natural disasters and climate change.
The region has one of the largest diasporas in the world relative to its population: the number of migrants from the Caribbean is estimated at 9 million, which even in 2017 represented 19.8% of the subregion’s total population.15 The largest diasporas are those of Puerto Rico, Cuba, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica, French Guiana and Trinidad and Tobago.
In the smaller islands, the proportion of emigrants is usually very large.
Migration policy must therefore consider how to address this loss of professional skills: provide incentives to encourage people to stay in the Caribbean, and endeavour to take advantage of this emigration, by maintaining links with diaspora communities and facilitating return migration, among other measures.
Migration, and more particularly the emigration of skilled persons, is both a challenge and an opportunity for Caribbean countries.
These countries have one of the highest rates of skilled emigration in the world, and the diaspora has greatly influenced economic, social and political developments in the subregion.
Far from being a short-term phenomenon, it is one of the key trends and one of the patterns that characterize the scenario of population movements in the Caribbean.
The emigration of highly qualified people has been a sensitive issue in several countries of the subregion for decades (Thomas-Hope, 2002).
In Jamaica, for example, large numbers of professionals continually emigrate, particularly skilled women working in the health and education sectors.
This has caused labour shortages in these important sectors, which threaten the sustainability of quality education and health care in the country (IOM, 2018b).
The departure of skilled personnel in search of better economic opportunities hinders the accumulation of institutional knowledge and prevents the transfer and exchange of knowledge with less skilled workers.
In addition to the loss of tax revenue resulting from emigration, the country of origin also suffers indirectly by being unable to benefit from professionals who have received highly subsidized education and training and who could repay this investment by contributing to their nation’s development.
Nonetheless, skilled emigration also has positive effects on the countries of origin, of which the most important for the Caribbean countries is the receipt of remittances.16 These are crucial for financing and facilitating private consumption; and, through a multiplier effect, for enhancing the stability of the financial sector and boosting tax revenues.
Their crucial capacity to reduce poverty and improve the lives of both the migrants themselves and their families has been recognized (IOM, 2017a).
Migrant networks also encourage trade and investment and, when effectively harnessed, can promote human capital formation through the exchange of experiences abroad or upon return to the subregion.
While there is a growing trend of return migration in the form of retirees to the Caribbean, except in Cuba and Haiti (IOM, 2017b), the rate of emigration far outweighs the rate of return; and the highly skilled labour force of Caribbean countries is reduced by an average of 70%.
In the context of Caribbean migration policies, the Government of Jamaica has developed a national policy and action plan on international migration and development, with a view to enhancing the development impact.
While the connection between rural-urban migration and environmental degradation has been demonstrated, migration still needs to be addressed as an extreme adaptation strategy for coping with the impact of climate change.18 In addition, migration, including from rural to urban areas, affects land use, infrastructure, housing and social cohesion, forming complex interrelationships.
Urban population growth continues to take place largely in low-lying, disaster-prone, coastal areas (ECLAC, 2019a).
Well-planned relocation can serve as a means of reducing disaster risk, as well as a way of adapting to climate change.
One possible preventive measure would be to address inequalities related to territorial development —particularly in view of the impacts of climate change— through practical programmes and coordination mechanisms to address the risks in question.
Given the relationship between disasters, poverty and displacement, disaster risk reduction and adaptation plans could include natural disaster preparedness measures and a proactive climate change adjustment strategy that takes migration into account.
Population resettlement or relocation, traditionally more associated with urban development, are adopting new forms that will need to be taken into account in regional development and spatial planning policies.
A large proportion of the Caribbean population lives near the coast, often in low-lying areas, where coastal flooding, storm surges and inland flooding can cause serious problems of population displacement.
Some countries have started to consider the issue of internal migration and population location in the context of preventing natural disasters —Haiti, for example, following the 2010 earthquake— as well as mitigating the effects of climate change.
In 2010, the devastating effects of the earthquake were compounded by the displacement of 2.3 million people; and in 2016 the drought caused by the El Niño weather pattern affected more than 3.5 million.
This was followed by Hurricane Matthew in the same year, which affected 2.1 million people in the country and displaced around 176,000, according to IOM data.
In response, some countries in the region suspended the deportation of Haitians, offered them humanitarian visas to regularize their situation, and provided them with protection and humanitarian assistance.
On the other hand, before Hurricane Matthew made landfall many had tried to take refuge in the Dominican Republic, but they were sent back to Haiti.
The Governments of Panama and Costa Rica have expressed their intention to seek third countries to relocate Haitians from their territory.
It is unclear whether this relocation will be forced or voluntary, which will affect monitoring.
Data gaps and inconsistencies in documentation have been identified throughout this process, in relation to the number of beneficiaries of humanitarian visas and the number of persons in temporary shelters or collective centres, in both transit and host countries.
For example, the lack of systematic documentation of population departures from Haiti makes it difficult to identify which disaster triggered the cross-border movement.
Moreover, media reports on cross-border movements make indiscriminate use of terms such as “migrants”, “refugees” or “asylum seekers”, which complicates the analysis.
The socioeconomic impact of disasters in the Caribbean tends to be particularly severe given the size of their economies: in the 2017 hurricane season, the damage caused by hurricanes Irma and Maria in the British Virgin Islands and Sint Maarten cost more than 100% of their GDP (ECLAC, 2019a).
Governments in the region, together with international agencies, provided shelter and humanitarian assistance to people who had lost their homes.
Hurricane Irma damaged 90% of the structures on the island of Barbuda, leading to its complete evacuation; and roughly 1,500 people were evacuated to Antigua.
The Government handled the reception and registration of these evacuees and provided accommodation, food and psychosocial support.
Natural disasters uprooted more than 6.5 million people (mainly within the subregion) in 2008–2017; most of the displaced 177Chapter IVSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 being Cubans or Haitians (IOM, 2019a).
More recently, many Caribbean countries and territories experienced both internal displacement and migration to nearby countries following Hurricanes Irma and Maria in 2017.
As reported in the review of the implementation of the Montevideo Consensus on Population and Development in the Caribbean subregion, the protection of refugees, asylum-seekers and other vulnerable migrants has been the focus of the Caribbean Migration Consultations (CMC).
The aim of these consultations is to establish a framework for regional cooperation in addressing population movements in response to disasters and climate change.
The consultations will focus on issues such as climate change mitigation, reducing exposure to its effects, planned relocation and enhanced resilience.
According to UNHCR and IOM estimates, 40,000 Venezuelans are currently living in Trinidad and Tobago, of whom 11,512 are registered as asylum-seekers (R4V, 2019).
In response to the Venezuelan immigration crisis, in June 2019 the Government of Trinidad and Tobago launched a two-week regularization process in which 16,523 Venezuelans were registered and granted a work permit exemption —initially valid for six months— to enable them to work and gain access to health and education services. 3.
South America In South America, migratory dynamics predominantly involve movements between countries, although the subregion is also going through transformations in which many of the countries are becoming scenarios of emigration, immigration, transit and return.
In addition, the migration of Venezuelans to various countries, both traditional and new destinations, has intensified.
One of the key features of migration in this subregion is the participation of women, especially the employment of many female migrants in paid domestic work. (a) Paid domestic work and migration in the subregion In Latin America, paid domestic work has traditionally been a major source of employment for women, especially those from poor, indigenous and Afrodescendent households.
Paid domestic work has historical roots linked to slavery, the hacienda tradition and the employment of women in their employers’ homes.
These women performed domestic tasks that were usually paid for in kind; or else they simply worked without pay, since their wage was considered to be included in the pay of their father or husband, as the case may be (Kuznesof, 1989).
Since colonial times and persisting well into the twentieth century, many women from poor families in rural areas moved to the cities in search of a livelihood.
They worked in a variety of trades, predominantly paid domestic work (Hutchinson, 2014).
The increase in the number of women migrating to the city in search of work made it possible to expand paid domestic work into the middle-income sectors.
As a result, in the second half of the twentieth century, the proportion of paid domestic work in total female employment in Latin America was the highest anywhere in the world.
In recent years, the number of women migrating to neighbouring countries in search of work has been increasing; and a large proportion of them find employment in the destination country as paid domestic workers.
This type of work, which is valued lowest on the occupational social scale and carries a stigma, is one of the few alternatives available to a group that already suffers stigmatization —and often a devaluation of qualifications— owing to its migrant status.
Women migrants also tend to remain in this 178 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter IV occupation without being able to develop an occupational mobility project, owing to the lack of networks and recognition of their qualifications, or else because of the negative stamp imposed on their employment history by having worked in domestic service.
Female domestic employees perform household management tasks (cleaning, preparing meals, shopping, caring for pets, among others) as well as child and elderly care, without their contribution to the well-being of the family necessarily being recognized.
Paid domestic work remains socially undervalued and associated with low social status. (b) Global care chains The global care chain concept has been widely used to explain female migration from lower-income countries.
Women migrate to undertake care tasks in the destination countries; but, at the same time, they also assume the burden of economic provision for their home and undertake care tasks at a distance (transnational care) within the framework of a new social organization of family life imposed by their absence.
Female migration thus triggers major changes in households: care work is redistributed among the family members who remain in the country of origin; and transnational households develop whose members maintain frequent relations with each other, despite living separated by national borders, thus linking their societies of origin with those of destination (Acosta, 2015).
The transnational family gives rise to new care practices: distance motherhood being one of the most studied.
Emotional care —which involves listening, talking and counselling— is not interrupted by distance, but takes place through phone calls, emails, and other media based on the new technologies (Gonzálvez, 2013). (c) Formation of migratory corridors for care in Latin America The formation of migratory corridors for care revolves around urban centres that have generated high-paying jobs in specialized services.
The professionals who live in these areas require support for their daily subsistence, so they outsource the tasks of house-cleaning, preparing meals or caring for children and older people, to ensure a certain level of labour productivity.
This demand is met by low-cost labour, which increasingly consists of migrants since local female workers tend not to be available for this type of work.
The effects of this phenomenon include a widening of the inequality gap within and between countries, greater labour market segregation, and the transfer of tasks that are shunned by the local population to women from other countries who are willing to fulfil them for a minimum wage (Soto and others 2016).
The main destination countries for migrant women in care work are Argentina, Chile and Costa Rica.
Geographical proximity is an important factor in the decision to migrate, especially when the migrants leave their family behind in their country of origin.
Various studies (Messina, 2015; Magliano and Barral, 2017; Gonzálvez, 2013; 179Chapter IVSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 Stefoni, 2002) have shown that, while economic motivation prevails over other reasons, the desire for fulfilment and greater economic independence, and the flight from domestic violence and situations of oppression within the family, also act as powerful factors compounding economic difficulties.
Migration can give the worker more independence, as she assumes a provider role that potentially gives her greater authority in making decisions regarding her household.
Female migrant domestic employees come from a variety of social sectors and situations that have motivated their migration project.
In many cases, their previous work histories are not related to paid domestic work.
They tend to be better educated than their national counterparts, and they are younger.
Specific data processed from the latest Household Survey Data Bank (BADEHOG) surveys show that the age difference in Chile is almost 11 years and in Costa Rica it is nearly four.
For many women migrant workers, especially those who have travelled alone and left their children in their country of origin, their first job in paid domestic work involves accommodation in the workplace.
Although this modality is not without its problems —associated, for example, with long working hours— it has the advantage of offering a higher wage and, at the same time, guaranteeing maximum savings, since there are no housing, transport or sustenance expenses.
This enables them to accumulate a larger sum of money to send back to their family or to hasten family reunification.
In addition, some female workers consider that live-in employment affords them greater personal safety in an environment that is alien and unknown to them.
The live-in work modality is generally temporary, and its duration depends on the worker’s migratory project.
If she plans to settle in the destination country more permanently, and especially if there is a family reunification process, she will probably choose to work externally. (i) Peru-Paraguay-Argentina migrant corridor Argentina’s current migration policy is based on Migration Law No. 25.871, which has been in force since January 2004.
This is supplemented by Decree No. 616 of 2010 and the Patria Grande (Greater Homeland) regularization program, which is intended for citizens of countries that are members of the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) and its associate states.
At the end of the two years, they obtain permanent residency by virtue of settled status.
Persons from countries outside MERCOSUR can apply for a one-year temporary residence (renewable) if they satisfy the requirements specified for each category residence.
In Argentina, many Paraguayan and Peruvian women workers are engaged in paid domestic work (69% of Paraguayan and 58% of Peruvian women, according to the latest household surveys), although qualitative studies indicate that some Peruvian women workers see it as a job they hope to move out of (Jaramillo, 2017).
The contingent of female migrant domestic employees in Argentina is heterogeneous and includes women with a variety of migratory and labour histories and different levels of education and vocational training.
In contrast, Paraguayan female domestic employees come mainly from rural areas, are young and tend to have low levels of education.
These workers value not only having more job opportunities than in their country of origin, but also higher wage levels and, especially, easier and lower-cost access to essential public health services (and, when they are able to bring their children, access to an education system they consider to be of good quality).
Peruvians are currently the fourth largest group of migrants in Argentina, and is heavily concentrated in paid domestic work.
Peruvian women workers have higher levels of education, many of them with full secondary schooling and even post-secondary studies (Rosas, 2010).
Before migrating, many had skilled or semi-skilled jobs (such as secretaries, nursing technicians, or occupations in the beauty sector), and a large proportion worked in commerce.
There are also female migrant domestic workers with tertiary and university degrees (such as social workers, graduates in nursing or obstetrics, teachers, among others) who, despite this, were unable to choose other career paths.
Difficulties in gaining recognition for their qualifications appear to be one of the main factors preventing them from practising their profession in the destination country.
Argentina has launched major initiatives to improve the situation of female domestic employees.
This is a new phenomenon, which has caused the number of migrants to more than quadruple in less than 30 years.
The largest groups originally came from neighbouring countries; but migrants from Colombia, the Dominican Republic, Haiti and particularly the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have recently joined the inflow.
In Chile, 13% of employed migrant women are working in domestic service, according to information obtained from special processing of the latest BADEHOG household surveys, compared to 8% of Chilean women.
Chile’s migration law dates from 1975; it was drafted in the context of military dictatorship and conceived under the influence of a national security rationale.
The law grants huge discretion to the border authority and requires special clauses for granting a work visa.
The country is about to approve a reform of the migration law in order to adapt it to the current migration reality.
Since the return to democracy, three migration regularization processes, or “amnesties” have taken place in 1998, 2007 and 2018.
Despite the difficulty in reaching a domestic consensus that would allow migratory legislation to be amended, various administrative programmes and initiatives have been implemented to manage migration in recent years.
A large proportion of migrant women are concentrated in domestic work, an occupation that has a significant degree of labour protection, since Law 20.786 gives them equal rights with any other wage-earner in nearly all respects.
In Chile, a major effort has also been made to formalize domestic work, ensuring that over half of the workers in this sector have employment contracts and social security coverage.
Female migrant domestic employees know that they need an employment contract to obtain the temporary visa.
Obtaining that contract is a key element in the terms of negotiation when entering an employment relationship.
According to the 2002 census, the Peruvian community in Chile represented 20.5% of the total number of migrants and was the second largest after the Argentine community.
The importance of paid domestic work as a source of employment marked the feminized nature of migration from Peru, a situation that persists to this day.
The rate of growth of migration from Peru slowed from the 2010 decade onwards, while the source countries of migration to Chile diversified to include Colombia, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
The pattern of feminized migration (with a larger proportion of women) persisted in these cases, as paid domestic work also became an important source of employment for email migrant workers from these countries.
Stefoni (2002) and Acosta (2015) note that the arrival of Peruvian workers in Chile not only responded to an unsatisfied demand for paid domestic workers in the host country, but also, in some cases, to an attempt to postpone the establishment of more modern and formal labour relations.
Female domestic employees arrive in Chile pursuing circular migration strategies —in other words temporary, repetitive and cyclical migration; they do not intend to settle in Chile permanently.
This is a survival strategy in the face of the need to provide income to the household.
They travel by land from various Bolivian cities, mainly from the departments of La Paz, Oruro and Potosí, located along the 800 km border with Chile; they concentrate in the northern part of Chile close to the Bolivian border.
This is an unusual pattern as most women migrant workers from elsewhere move to the central part of the country, where there are more sources of employment.
The women migrant workers enter the country as tourists, with an identity card issued by the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which allows them to stay in the country for 90 days.
At the end of that period they return to their country, some for a few days and others for longer (a few months or a year), and then return to Chile again to work.
Most of them are not covered by the Residency Agreement for Nationals of the States Parties of MERCOSUR, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Chile, which would allow them to stay for one year; nor do they apply for a work permit.
The explanation for this circularity strategy includes ignorance of the regulations on the circulation of nationals from MERCOSUR and associate countries and the economic costs involved in regularization of their status.
The temporary visa costs US$ 283 and the work permit costs US$ 150.
Another reason for not obtaining the temporary visa is the fear that it will force them to stay in Chile for a year (as a condition for permanent residency), thereby preventing them from returning to their country of origin every three months to visit their children.
As they do not have a work permit, they also do not have a contract, and the work relationship is established under conditions of extreme vulnerability and risk of abuses and rights violations.
Given this situation, they feel unable to complain (Leiva and Ross, 2016).
The wages they receive in Chile are twice what they would receive in their country.
Despite not having a contract, their pay is similar to that of their Chilean peers, and almost their entire wage goes on remittances.
Due to the circular nature of migration, their trajectories are fragmented, and they have to seek work again each time they return to Chile.
They receive significant support from Pastoral Migratoria, a Catholic Church organization which maintains a job bank and provides guidance on their labour rights (Leiva, Mansilla and Comelin, 2017).
Gonzálvez Torralbo, H. (2013), “Los cuidados en el centro de la migración: la organización social de los cuidados transnacionales desde un enfoque de género”, Migraciones.
Gutiérrez, A. and otros (2019), “Criterios de calidad en la estimación de indicadores sociales usando encuestas de hogares: una aplicación a la medición de la migración internacional”, serie Estudios Estadísticos, Santiago, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), in press.
INEI (National Institute of Statistics and Informatics) (2019), Condiciones de vida de la población venezolana que reside en Perú: resultados de la “Encuesta dirigida a la población venezolana que reside en el país” ENPOVE 2018, Lima.
Eguren (eds.) (2018), El éxodo venezolano: entre el exilio y la emigración, Colección OBIMID, vol. 4.
Ross (2016), “Migración circular y trabajo de cuidado: fragmentación de trayectorias laborales de migrantes bolivianas en Tarapacá”, Psicoperspectivas, vol. 15, N° 3, Valparaíso, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Valparaíso (PUCV).
Comelin (2017), “Condiciones laborales de migrantes bolivianas que realizan trabajo de cuidado en Iquique”, Si Somos Americanos.
Yansura (2015), Centroamérica en la mira: la migración en su relación con el desarrollo y las oportunidades para el cambio, Buenos Aires, Teseo.
World Bank (2018), Migración desde Venezuela a Colombia: impactos y estrategia de respuesta en el corto y mediano plazo, Washington, D.
Migration cycle and challenges for inclusion and social protection: some priority policy areas F.
The complex relationship between migration, poverty and international remittance flows The relationship between poverty and migration differs among the different destination countries where it can be examined.
The region’s nine countries where the significant statistical data are available are distributed equally among those where international migrants report lower poverty rates than people born in the country, those where they report higher poverty rates and, finally, those where are no significant differences.
However, controlling for a series of sociodemographic factors (age, sex, education, employment, area of residence, household structure and others), in five countries migrants report higher poverty rates than their native-born counterparts.
Similarly, there are a large number of Latin America and Caribbean countries that receive significant remittance flows from other countries, sent back by emigrants to their families.
Those flows are distributed across all sectors of society and represent a form of protection against poverty in the beneficiary households, particularly in those countries where incoming remittances account for a large share of GDP.
As explained in the previous chapter, migration is a phenomenon of growing complexity that involves economic, political and social factors and, increasingly, personal and family security concerns.
The first part analyses the relationship between migration and poverty in the countries of Latin America, while the second part showcases the role that migrant remittances play in alleviating family poverty and, as is the case of some Central American and Caribbean countries, their increasing participation in the economy as a whole. 1.
Poverty and immigration: unequal relationships from one country to the next An analysis of the relationship between poverty and migration in destination countries based on household survey data indicates, first of all, the existence of different situations.
With respect to the relationship between recent migration (over the past five years) and poverty, the usefulness of the surveys is even lower.
Thus, of the 11 surveys in which this variable can be calculated, in only two is the estimate of the proportion of poverty among migrants significant: Chile and Colombia.
This allows the relationship between migrant status and poverty to be established, once a series of sociodemographic factors —such as age, sex, schooling, nature of employment, area of residence, household characteristics and a set of basic shortcomings associated with housing and employment— have been controlled for.
The estimated marginal effect corresponds to the probability of a migrant person being in conditions of poverty compared to the poverty probability of a non-migrant in the same socioeconomic situation.
In some countries the model performs better because it predicts those people not in poverty, which is reflected in the specificity parameter.
The model correctly identifies a higher percentage of poor people (sensitivity) in countries with higher poverty rates, while its predictive power is lower in countries such as Chile and Uruguay.
Those five include Chile, with a poverty rate that is 5.9 percentage points higher among migrants; Colombia, 4.8 percentage points higher; Costa Rica, 4.6; Ecuador, 3.9; and the Dominican Republic, 5.9.
Those countries are Brazil, where the incidence of poverty among migrants is 3.4 percentage points lower than among non-migrants, and Guatemala, where it is 8.1 percentage points lower.
Finally, Argentina and Panama report no significant differences in the incidence of poverty between migrants and non-migrants.4 2.
International remittance flows and their impact on poverty in the countries of Latin America This section analyses the contribution made by international remittances to household well-being in the region’s countries.
Those funds are generally included as part of households’ non-labour income, although in most cases they are earned through the paid work of emigrants in their destination countries.
This analysis pays particular attention to the contribution those transfers make to household incomes and poverty reduction.
The analysis is based on two different sources of information: The first basically comprises statistics on national accounts and balances of payments, and allows remittance levels and trends —both incoming and outgoing— to be examine for a specific country over a lengthy period.
Of the countries examined, this situation could be particularly dramatic in Mexico, the Dominican Republic and the countries of Central America.
In 2018, those countries received international remittances in an amount equal, on average, to 9.7 points of GDP, with highs of over 20 points of GDP in Honduras and El Salvador and around 12 points in Guatemala and Nicaragua (see table V.3).
Observing the evolution over time of the weight of international remittances in the domestic economies of those four countries reveals that between 1990 and 2018, remittance flows grew by between two- and sixteen-fold.
That result highlights not only the countries’ vulnerability to fluctuations in that source of income, but also the loss of their working-age populations that they have suffered, with the inevitable short-, medium- and long-term impact on the economic system and the social fabric.
In contrast, dependence on international remittances is much lower in South America: on average, remittance flows account for less than 1.5 points of GDP, with results of 3.45 points in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, 2.8 points in Ecuador and between 1 and 2 points in Colombia, Paraguay and Peru.
In most of these countries, remittance flows have remained stable over time, although Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia did report decreases between the start of the century and 2018.
Employees’ earnings means the income of borderland, seasonal and other short-term workers employed in an economy where they are not residents and that of residents employed by non-resident entities.
Calculations based on countries’ balance of payments data from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and on information provided by central banks and the national statistics offices.
International remittances can also be analysed by breaking them down into remittances received in the country from abroad and remittances sent abroad by residents in the country.
That approach reveals patterns in their evolution depending on whether the countries in question are net receivers or remitters of transfers at any given time.
In the latter case, the available information is somewhat more limited, primarily on account of the difficulties in calculating outgoing remittances.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia has been a net recipient since 1995, after being a net sender prior to that year.
Argentina, in contrast, has swapped between the two: it has primarily been a net sender, although the difference between the two flows has been minimal, particularly since 2000.
That situation can be explained by the fact that Argentina was 193Chapter VSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 traditionally a destination for emigrants from its neighbouring countries (primarily the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Paraguay and Uruguay) and from Peru.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela went from being a net sender to a net recipient of remittances, most markedly after 2014 because of the factors already identified that gave rise to the mass emigration of Venezuelans.
Finally, Chile is the only country in the subregion that remained a net sender, probably as a result of the economic growth it has experienced in recent decades, which has made it a final destination for emigrants first from Peru, then from Colombia and Haiti and, more recently, from Venezuela (see figure V.1).
Meanwhile, the Central American countries for which information is available are clearly remittance recipients.
Mexico has also followed a similar pattern, although information is only available about its outgoing remittances for the most recent years.
Panama, which was a net recipient of remittances before 2000, after which both flows stabilized at similar levels, is the sole exception in this group of countries (see figure V.2).
Calculations based on countries’ balance of payments data from the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and on information provided by central banks and the national statistics offices. b A logarithmic scale has been used because of the differences in remittance volumes between the countries.
In this subregion, remittances have on average remained stable at around 6 points of GDP over the past decade, about 2 points higher than in the 1990s and 2000s.
Haiti and Jamaica are the countries where remittances account for the largest shares of GDP: almost 31% in the former, and close to 16% in the latter.
Those shares have both increased over time: in Haiti the figure doubled between 2000 and 2018 to reach almost a third of total GDP, whereas between 1990 and 2018 Jamaica’s incoming remittances tripled (see table V.4).
In the remaining countries, remittances account for high shares of GDP in Dominica (9.22 points), Guyana (7.9), Curaçao (5.1), Saint Vincent and the Grenadines (5.1), Belize (4.81) and Grenada (4.0).
As seen in Latin America, different profiles for incoming and outgoing remittances are found among the countries of the Caribbean.
Three of the countries for which information is available (Aruba, Sint Maarten and Suriname) have been and remain net remittance senders, the first two on a permanent basis and the third alternating at different times between being a sender and a recipient.
With respect to the first two, this could be on account of the high numbers of immigrants in their population: in 2015 immigrants accounted for more than a third of the total population of Aruba and more than 70% of Sint Maarten’s.
Guyana reported a shift in the early 2000s, when it changed from being a sender to become a net recipient.
The region’s remaining countries are net recipients of remittances, on account of the high numbers of individuals born in those countries who decide to emigrate.
That group includes Antigua and Barbuda, whose emigrants represented 40% of the population in 2015; Barbados (28%), Dominica (51%), Jamaica (28%), and Saint Kitts and Nevis (44%), as the countries with the highest proportions of emigrants as a share of the local population (see figure V.3).
The rate is close to 9% in Guatemala and the Dominican Republic, slightly above 6% in the Plurinational State of Bolivia and close to 5% in Mexico (see table V.5).
In turn, the share of the population’s total income for which remittances account reaches its maximum levels in Honduras (5.2%), El Salvador (4.9%) and the Dominican Republic (4.8%) (see table V.6).
Households that receive remittances are distributed across the five per capita income quintiles.
In 7 of the 13 countries examined, the presence of households receiving remittances tends to be higher in the middle- and high-income groups.
In Honduras, for example, the maximum share is found in the fourth quintile, where remittances accounted for 6% of total income in 2016.
The contributions that remittances make to poverty reduction can be analysed from two perspectives: first, with respect to the national population as a whole, and, second, with a focus on the subgroup of households that actually receive remittances from abroad.
Household survey data do not include the employees’ earnings component, because it cannot be clearly distinguished.
In addition, and in the interests of comparability, only remittances in cash are included.
A slightly lower effect can be seen in Guatemala and Ecuador, where the poverty rate among the same group would increase by 17 points.
The remaining countries would also see major increases in poverty among recipient households, with the percentage of people considered poor rising by between 5 and 20 percentage points.
Although remittances help improve the lot of the recipient households, the estimates indicate that they do not contribute to any substantial reductions in poverty in the general population.
A rigorous assessment of the impact of remittances requires the development of strategies to control for a series of factors that affect the estimates of remittances’ impact on well-being.
Progress must be made with improving how remittances are quantified, in light of their importance for the economies of many of the region’s countries and also because of the political relevance they have acquired in recent years.
There are indications that household surveys have a limited ability to detect these revenue flows, and so an approach combining information from those surveys and other records (national accounts or other data sources) could offer better estimates of the contribution of remittances to household well-being (Brown and others, 2014).
The limitations of household surveys notwithstanding (see box IV.1), they can represent a source of information with comparative advantages over censuses and administrative records, in that they provide a more detailed socioeconomic portrait of both the local and migrant populations.
Taking into account the stylized facts on the evolution of migratory flows described in the previous chapter, a distinction can be drawn, where possible, between recent migrants and those of longer standing (less than and more than five years in the destination country, respectively) in order to highlight certain significant gaps in social and labour inclusion. 1.
Differences in the social and labour inclusion of the local population and of recent and long-term migrants The sociodemographic characteristics of migrants, in terms of sex, age and education, differ from those of the local population.
As regards recent immigration, Brazil, the Dominican Republic and Mexico again report mostly male migrants among their recent arrivals, with Mexico’s figures reporting 36% more men than women.
In the remaining countries, recent immigration tends to be relatively balanced in its gender breakdown.
First of all, it confirms the importance of labour migration among the migrant population of the destination countries (ILO, 2017, and ILO/ECLAC, 2017).
Among recent migrants, it can be seen that people of working age account for a relatively higher proportion (by between 8 and 18 percentage points) than among the local-born population.
This pattern remains in place among migrants of 7 This section builds on the findings of Carrasco and Suárez (2018).
Since the information used is from household surveys conducted around 2015, it does not reflect the impact of recent intraregional migration flows, such as the Venezuelan and Haitian migrants now found in several of the region’s countries. 201Chapter VSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 longer standing, except in Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay.
Second, with the exception of Chile, the proportion of children aged under 14 is higher in the local population than among migrants in all the destination countries.
Nevertheless, that age group accounts for a significant proportion of recent migrants, with figures ranging from 12% to 23%.
Third, long-term migrants report a higher proportion of people aged 65 and older, which points to a higher level of ageing than among the local population and recent migrants in Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay.
In Argentina, however, there is a large proportion of recent migrants with higher educations (figure V.6).
Unemployment levels among recent and long-term migrants and the sectors in which they find employment also vary from those of the local population, and there are sex-based differentials as well.
With the exception of Chile, unemployment rates are lower among the local population than recent migrants, which is consistent with ILO/ECLAC (2017) and ILO (2017).
If the figures are broken down by sex, it can be seen that with the exception of Argentina (long-term migrants) and Mexico, women report higher unemployment rates than men.
A worthwhile question would be to ask whether those insertion characteristics arise from differences in the education profiles of the long-term and recent migrant population, or whether certain types of activity are more accessible during the first years after arrival.
As regards employment by area of activity, ILO/ECLAC (2017) indicates that migrants with lower levels of formal schooling tend to concentrate in less qualified occupations.
Finally, an analysis of the population’s concentration in low-productivity jobs —which are characterized by greater informality and precarity and lower wages and social protection— reveals a greater preponderance of such kinds of employment among the migrant population than their local counterparts, with the exceptions of Brazil and Uruguay (see figure V.7).
Two types of activity warrant particular attention because of their weight in the distribution of employment by sex, in line with gender stereotypes that also apply to local workers: construction among men,9 and paid domestic work among women.
Those biases are particularly heavy when the local population is compared with the intraregional migrant population, i.e. migrants from other Latin American and Caribbean countries.
As shown in figure V.8, in the countries under analysis, with the exception of Brazil and Uruguay, migrant men are overrepresented in the construction sector compared to the local population.
The widest gaps are found in the Dominican Republic and Argentina, with differences of 19 and 13 percentage points respectively.
In the paid 9 Includes electricity, gas and water utilities. 204 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter V domestic work sector, gender inequalities and society’s undervaluation of care work combine with the inequalities generally faced by the migrant population.
In Argentina, 32.5% of migrants are employed in paid domestic work, compared to 11.6% of the local population.
In Costa Rica, the high proportion of women migrants employed in paid domestic work is particularly notable, where they more than double the percentage corresponding to local women.
At play here are gender inequalities and society’s undervaluation of care work, intertwined with the inequalities faced by the migrant population in general.
Unpaid work allows many women immigrants to enter the job market, but with scant possibilities of occupational mobility, and, in many cases, they also participate in global care chains.
The characteristics of migrants’ labour insertion help understand the wider gaps in inclusion and access to social protection found in destination countries.
Informal employment among migrant workers is common in the destination countries of Latin America (ILO, 2017), and it leads to a lack of social protection.
No gaps are seen in Uruguay, among men in Brazil and Chile or among women in Mexico, and there is only one case in which occupational overqualification is lower in the migrant population (among women in Brazil).
That result indicates that, as a general rule, even migrants who have tertiary education have a higher probability than local workers of entering employment in low-productivity sectors. 10 The percentage of workers with higher educations employed in the low-productivity sector is used as a proxy for occupational overqualification.
Nevertheless, the dimensions of the gaps between the groups vary greatly from one country to the next.
On the one hand, Brazil and Uruguay’s figures indicate reasonable levels of parity, with narrower gaps between the local population and immigrants.
In contrast, there are pronounced differences in the Dominican Republic and Costa Rica, both between different groups of migrants and between migrants and the local population.
Also, with the exception of Chile, employment rates are slightly lower among recent migrants compared to the local population and long-term migrants, which could be an indication of lower labour inclusion. 11 The first two indicators use the household as the unit of analysis, while the remainder focus on the individual, with the relevant filters for age and employment status.
The indicators in the analysis are ordered positively, with which the data indicate the percentage of people not reporting the absence of the corresponding factor of inclusion: in other words, high results for “employment” and “overcrowding” indicate a high percentage of people in employment and living in conditions that are not overcrowded, respectively (Carrasco and Suárez, 2018).
Racism, discrimination and migration Ethnic and racial origin and migrant status are component axes of the social inequality matrix in Latin America (ECLAC, 2016); racist and xenophobic practices contribute to —and can feed off each other in determining— the levels of inclusion or exclusion faced by migrants with respect to their rights, status and general wellbeing.
Both within the region and in the rest of the world, racism and xenophobia towards migrant populations are frequently found in conjunction.
The culture of privilege that has historically been present in Latin America and the Caribbean and that practices and institutions continue to perpetuate make for fertile ground for feeding those phenomena (ECLAC, 2018).
In light of these challenges to migrants’ social and labour inclusion, the following paragraphs re-examine certain key issues that affect how the topic of racism can be incorporated into analyses of migratory phenomena and, above all, into policy design, before exploring some of the factors behind aversion towards migrants.
Many authors hold that the idea of race arose in the eighteenth century, although others place it much earlier (Banton, 1977) and still others trace its emergence back to the colonization of the Americas as part of the process of European conquest and colonial domination (Quijano, 2005).
Agreement exists, however, that the term “race” arose in several European languages to refer to the populations that the Europeans encountered and dominated (Wade, 2011) and that, in the course of the nineteenth century, it acquired the connotation of physical traits, whereby peoples and individuals were seen as biologically different and humankind was divided into races (Banton, 1977).
The sense of the concept evolved between the end of the nineteenth century and the first half of the twentieth, in particular following the atrocities committed during the Second World War.
As a result, talk of relative superiority between them was inadmissible and was replaced by a discourse involving diversity and, additionally, contradictions and conflicts between distinct cultures, associated in turn with specific population groups, each with their own identity and history (Lévi-Strauss, 1952).
Based on that conclusion and the absolute supremacy of individual human rights, the conceptual apparatus of the United Nations adopted a series of treaties and international rules applicable to racism and discrimination.
But in Latin America and the Caribbean, the idea of race as a social and political marker of inequality, discrimination and differentiation has a historical specificity on account of its roots in colonialism and slavery.
In fact, one of the elements that accompanied the emergence of the notion of race arose from the European domination and colonization of the Americas in the sixteenth century, when this hemisphere was integrated into the global economic system.
That position enabled the Europeans not only to impose their idea of race, but also to create categories that would define new identities (“Indian”, “black”, “white”, “mestizo”).
The idea of race put in place by European colonialism served the interests of the colonial system, was in line with the global division of labour and justified the social stratification of colonial societies.
After science had demonstrated that races did not exist in biological terms, the concept of ethnicity —while not a perfect synonym— began to be used more frequently because it was less value-laden; racial categories were not eliminated, however, and the term “racism” acquired eminently negative connotations (Wade, 2000).
Nevertheless, even the term “ethnicity” has frequently contained connotations of exclusion, discrimination and inferiority, in that “ethnic groups” are invariably seen as “others” by the dominant groups imposing that classification.
In addition, the term is used to classify groups that do not see themselves in that way or use that label, but that instead conceive of themselves as peoples with individual names and whose members feel bound to each other on account of their shared origin.
Neither has the reality of racial discrimination changed with the adoption of the concept of ethnicity, which is less related to physical traits.
Against that backdrop, increasing and diversifying intraregional migration flows have been accompanied by the racialization of migrants (see box V.1) —the classification of human groups in racial terms—12 and heightened xenophobia: fear of what is foreign, of different ethnic or racial groups and of strangers.
This purported fear of differences leads to acts of discrimination based on prejudices (historical, religious, cultural and national) and to the perpetrators’ justification of segregation and discrimination.
Thus, one of the commonest forms of rejection can connect xenophobia with racism towards migrants (or foreigners) and bring into play other grounds for discrimination, such as social status, gender, age or other factors (Kundnani, 2001).
The racialization of migrants has been intimately associated with the process of globalization.
The intersection of the “foreign” and “race” categories bolsters racism and xenophobia by enabling the construction of a “national we” and a group of “others” who, in addition to not being nationals, may have undesired racial origins (Castells, 2004).
Feelings of uncertainty and precarity generally hinder the construction of inclusive and less unequal societies and, at the same time, showcase the importance of expanding access to social protection and decent work for the population as a whole as a factor in building inclusion, social cohesion and development.
Investing in social protection, which would provide the entire population with greater certainty and stability, could at the same time have a positive effect by helping instil a climate of greater acceptance towards immigration.
The challenge is therefore to design social protection systems that include new migratory flows and that, at the same time, are defined in such a way that does not make the local population feel that they are facing competition from migrants.
According to Halpern (2010), immigrants from the region were included, albeit precariously, in economic activities but were excluded from —or restricted in their access to— civil, political and social rights.
In the Dominican Republic, the ethnic and racial dimension is intertwined with issues of nationality and migration on account of the proximity of Haiti, a country with a predominantly Afro-descendent population that sends significant flows of migrants (both seasonal and permanent) into the Dominican Republic.
However, the issue of ethnicity and race is rendered invisible, which hampers efforts against the discrimination faced not only by Haitians but also by darker-skinned Dominicans, who are often confused with Haitians and, on occasions, arrested on suspicion.c There is evidence of acts of racial discrimination in the country.
Tijoux, Racismo en Chile: la piel como marca de la inmigración, Santiago, Editorial Universitaria, 2016; “Negando al ‘otro’: el constante sufrimiento de los inmigrantes peruanos en Chile”, Mujeres inmigrantes en Chile: ¿mano de obra o trabajadoras con derechos?, C.
Palominos, “Aproximaciones teóricas para el estudio de procesos de racialización y sexualización en los fenómenos migratorios de Chile”, Polis: Revista Latinoamericana, vol. 14, No. 42, Santiago, University of Los Lagos, 2015. a For example, in 1992, the press began to “Bolivianize” and “indigenize” migration.
Bolivian people were portrayed in the media as being synonymous with disease.
It took almost one month for some of the papers to begin publishing stories blaming the Argentine State for an outbreak of cholera.
In addition, an opinion survey conducted by Cadem (2018) revealed that 38% of the respondents considered the arrival of immigrants to be something negative; 80% thought that the current number of immigrants was high and that more restrictive policies should be adopted; and 66% were in favour of the expulsion of those immigrants without legal permits.
Irrespective of the foregoing, 84% of respondents were in favour of encouraging the arrival of foreigners and more than 60% said that immigrants offered an opportunity for development and contributed to the country’s cultural enrichment (Cadem, 2018).
A range of very different movements are involved: people seeking better standards of living, either individually or in groups, forced displacements (due to armed conflicts, violence, human rights violations or natural disasters) and relocations driven by political, economic or environmental factors.
Regardless of the reasons behind these movements of people, the constant problems they face include maintaining ties with their communities of origin and the sociocultural continuation of their peoples in their final destinations, processes that are supported by family networks and by organizations that promote ethnic identity (Del Popolo, 2018).
In absolute terms, Mexico (47,979) and Costa Rica (12,962) reported the largest numbers of indigenous international immigrants, while the lowest figures were recorded in Uruguay (2,442) and Panama (1,807).
The institutional framework for migrants in the region The institutional public policy framework plays an important role in determining how effective, efficient and successful policies in this area will be in promoting inclusion and upholding people’s rights (ECLAC, 2018 and 2019a; Martínez, 2017).
The following discussion will deal with the social institutions in the region that work with migrants and will explore how they have changed over the years.
The objective of this analysis is to identify some of the institutional challenges faced by the countries of the region as they seek to safeguard the rights of all and to address problems faced by the population as a whole, including migrants.
To this end, an overview of the juridical/normative and organizational dimensions (the two aspects on which the most official information is available) of the institutional framework for migration issues will be presented here.15 1.
The international and national juridical/normative dimension of migration-related issues (a) The international normative framework The various treaties on this subject, together with constitutional provisions, general laws and regulations, play a part in determining States’ objectives and commitments regarding migrants, particularly with regard to the guarantees they provide for the exercise of certain rights.
The general international human rights treaties and conventions and those that deal specifically with migrants’ labour rights and the portablity of social security benefits are of particular interest in this respect.
At the national level, laws that shape migration policies —and especially policies on migrants’ labour rights and the regularization of their status— are of special significance, as are laws and policies on human trafficking, since migrants are exceedingly vulnerable to abuse at all the various points along the migration cycle.
The eight treaties known as the “fundamental conventions” of ILO are also of central importance. 14 The other two dimensions are the technical/operational aspect (the management systems and tools in place for enforcing laws and implementing policies and programmes) and financial considerations (the available resources for funding public action in each sector or on each issue).
These four dimensions are interdependent, so all of them will have to be developed and consolidated in order to strengthen policy impacts on each sector or issue. 15 Sources include the official information published by the countries concerned and by various international agencies.
The number of countries that have ratified conventions dealing with specific population groups is much lower, however, with the treaty of this type with the largest number of ratifications by countries in the region —18— being the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families.
It is followed by the ILO Migration for Employment Convention (Revised), 1949 (No. 97), with 16 ratifications, and the ILO Domestic Workers Convention, 2011 (No. 189), which has been ratified by fewer than half of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean (13 countries).
The ILO Equality of Treatment (Social Security) Convention, 1962 (No. 118) has been ratified by only nine countries.
The mission of achieving decent work for all clearly includes migrant workers, whose rights ILO has been defending since the conclusion of the Treaty of Versailles in 1919.
That treaty called for the creation of ILO and for the economic equality of all legal residents in any given country.
The goal of labour equality is also reflected in the ILO charter, the 1944 Declaration of Philadelphia, which incorporates a rights-based perspective and places the utmost emphasis on the equality of treatment of migrant workers.
Taken together, these instruments establish the normative foundation for migrant workers’ rights.
The first of these instruments guarantees equality of treatment for migrant workers having a regular migration status in the country where they are located and sets out a number of guarantees for labour rights, benefits and social protection, but it does not cover the cases of workers whose migration status is irregular.
Accordingly, the ILO Convention on Migrations in Abusive Conditions and the Promotion of Equality of Opportunity and Treatment of Migrant Workers went a step further to include all migrants, regardless of their legal migration status, and addresses crucial issues such as abusive or forced labour, discrimination and a lack of opportunity.
Other ILO conventions and recommendations also deal, implicitly and explicitly, with migrant workers, with examples being the Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 (No. 169), the Equality of Treatment (Accident Compensation) Convention, 1925 (No. 19) and the Maintenance of Social Security Rights Convention, 1982 (No. 157).
ILO has developed a body of standards that, in line with its basic principles, are designed to promote equal rights for all migrant workers and enjoins States parties to protect those rights.
The case of irregular and clandestine migrants continues to be the area in which the greatest difficulty in achieving the full implementation of these standards is being encountered.
López, “La protección de los trabajadores migrantes basada en derechos: la respuesta normativa de la OIT”, Temas Socio-Jurídicos, vol. 38, No. 76, Bucaramanga, Autonomous University of Bucaramanga, 2019.
But as migration issues have become increasingly important in the region, policy and regulatory frameworks have begun to be developed with a view to ensuring the social inclusion of migrants and their protection from abuses and rights violations.
Some countries have framed legislation that covers the entire range of situations (those of emigrants, immigrants, migrants in transit, returning migrants), and some have developed instruments specifically for their emigrant population.
Because migrants are so vulnerable to human traffickers, the various policy and regulatory frameworks dealing with trafficking are also an important factor.
Changes in the national migration laws of the 31 countries for which information is available reflect a shift towards stronger safeguards for some types of rights.
The migration laws of 10 of the countries (9 of which are in the Caribbean) are over 40 years old.
These laws have been amended over the years with the introduction of a number of revised provisions and the repeal of other articles but, generally speaking, their main thrust is to safeguard national security and ensure border controls that will allow those governments to monitor the entry of members of certain groups.
Yet even in more recent legislation and more recent amendments to earlier laws, little mention is made of the civil, political and social rights of migrants, as is shown in table V.9.
Of the available migration laws that have been analysed, those of Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Chile, Cuba, El Salvador, Grenada, Guyana and Jamaica contain no explicit reference to any specific right for migrants.
In the case of Guatemala, however, the Migration Code of 2016 does specify the social rights to which migrants are entitled (the rights to social security and protection, education, health, work, access to justice and due process, housing and family reunification).
These laws are thus at an intermediate stage in terms of the recognition of migrants’ fundamental, economic and social rights.
The migration laws enacted since 2000 by 16 countries reflect a growing tendency to include and explicitly mention the social rights of migrants, but this is still done in only some of the countries’ laws, such as those of Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Ecuador, Guatemala, Mexico, Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay.
The laws of the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Panama make only a general reference to the human rights of migrants, while those of Belize, Colombia, and Saint Kitts and Nevis do not specifically refer to rights and reflect an approach focusing on security rather than human rights.
In the laws that do take a rights-based approach, the rights that are mentioned most often are those of access to justice and due process, followed by family reunification, health and education.
This group of nations is made up of two Caribbean countries from which a large number of people have emigrated and whose laws in this area pre-date their independence (Antigua and Barbuda and Trinidad and Tobago) and seven that have large emigrant populations and emigration laws enacted after the 2000s (Colombia, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Paraguay and Peru).
In the four remaining cases, regulations, decrees or other such instruments are used.
One cause of concern, however, is that many of the legislative provisions and legislated rights are contingent on the person’s migration status, with mention being made of the rights of migrants whose migration status is irregular only in rare cases.
Another important consideration is the presence or mainstreaming of a gender perspective in migration laws, as the laws of only 12 countries systematically address the specific needs, rights and vulnerabilities of women migrants (see box V.4).
Economic, social and cultural rights —understood as the right to economic and social well-being— are also of importance in order for migrants to be included in the economy and society, to prevent their marginalization and to protect them from discrimination.
Because of the links between migration and human trafficking, many Latin American countries have developed an institutional structure for combating human trafficking and assisting the victims of traffickers.
Human trafficking and migrant smuggling are international crimes involving very serious violations of migrants’ human rights.
The inclusion of laws on human trafficking in the countries’ legislative frameworks is a relatively recent development, with the first countries to do so being the Dominican Republic and Paraguay, in 2003, and Uruguay being the country to have most recently followed in their footsteps (in 2018).
What is more, until a few decades ago, theoretical approaches to migration issues entirely overlooked the part played by women or, if they dealt with the subject at all, did so in inappropriate ways when viewed from a gender perspective (ECLAC/CELADE, 2006, p. 240).
This has inevitably changed, however, as the presence of women migrants has grown in recent decades.
At the global level, women have come to play an important part in international migration, as their numbers have been growing steadily since 1960, although they are still in the minority.
However, they have indeed been in the majority, strictly speaking, in the main destination areas for immigrants since 1990 (ECLAC/CELADE/UNFPA, 2003, p. 19 in Friés Monleon, 2019).
The parallel development of international and national laws on the protection of migrants and women’s rights has contributed to a progressively greater mainstreaming of the gender perspective in the identification of the needs of the female migrant population.
At the same time, quantitative and qualitative changes in women’s participation in migration have led to their explicit inclusion in international, regional and subregional conferences and consultative mechanisms dealing with women’s issues and with migration.
The repository of regulations on international migration of the ECLAC Gender Equality Observatory for Latin America and the Caribbean contains a total of 95 laws from 21 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
By cross-referencing the hierarchical rank of the legal instruments contained in the repository, by country, with the areas that they govern, it can be seen that 12 countries have laws on migration that refer to women migrants.
This is of interest because these instruments are framework laws and, as such, govern entries and departures, the bodies responsible for migration issues, and migrants’ rights and protection.
In effect, the higher the position in the legal hierarchy of a law or regulatory instrument that refers either explicitly or tacitly to women migrants, the greater the degree of protection that is afforded to them.
One of the reasons why this is true is because the higher-ranking laws determine the content of lower-ranking ones.
In addition to those 12 countries, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, the Dominican Republic and Peru also include references to women migrants but do so in lower-ranking migration laws and regulations.
Cuba, Haiti, Paraguay and Puerto Rico refer to women migrants only in statutes concerning related matters (Fries, 2019).
While the countries have developed bilateral mechanisms for coordinating efforts with other countries’ embassies and consulates to identify and assist trafficking victims, there is as yet no regional forum or agency for multilateral discussions and coordination in this area.
Meeting this challenge is a matter of urgency, given that the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC) has estimated that 93 of every 100 trafficking victims in Latin America and the Caribbean are still located somewhere in the region itself.
The development of regional coordination mechanisms and plans of action would make it possible to combat this kind of crime more effectively and to get help to trafficking victims more swiftly.
Given the serious human rights violations associated with the smuggling and trafficking of girls, adolescents and women, 14 countries have adopted legal instruments for the protection of women migrants; in 12 of those cases, these instruments take the form of actual laws, while, in the other 2, they are regulations governing some operational aspect of other legislation (see table V.10).
Most of them are special-purpose laws, although others are embedded in framework laws on migration, as in the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador.
The soundness and alignment of the laws on this subject reflect the efforts made by governments around the world to combat human trafficking since 2003, which was the year of the entry into force of the Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime.
This is why all the laws and lower-ranking legal instruments on the prevention of trafficking, the punishment of traffickers and victim assistance make specific reference to women.
The institutional and organizational dimension of migration and human trafficking issues The organizational dimension of these issues encompasses the governmental structure, mandates and coordination mechanisms of the various agencies concerned.
It involves the distribution of tasks and the formation of a hierarchical structure, along with, in certain cases, the designation of an overarching social policy authority or a sectoral social policy authority to deal with specific issues or segments of the population.
Their decisions are not binding, but they do provide a way of sharing experiences and information concerning the various aspects of migration that then inform new standards, agreements and principles, most of which are declarative in nature.
These forums may also develop shared agendas concerning such social issues as the situation of women, child and adolescent migrants, for example, and sectoral issues relating to health, education and food security, or the impact of climate change and natural disasters on migration, among many others.
It recognizes the substantial contributions that migrants make to their home and host countries and calls attention to concerns regarding their living conditions, their integration and the increasing complexity of migrants’ journeys when they are in transit, crossing national borders and returning to their home countries.
It also voices the countries’ concern in the face of the evident and systematic human rights violations suffered by migrants as a result of racism, xenophobia and homophobia, as well as the lack of due process guarantees and the specific problems of different groups, especially women, children and adolescents, that are targets of discrimination, abuse, human trafficking, exploitation and violence.
In the light of these concerns, the countries agreed to do the following: 66.
Ensure that international migration issues, including migration regularization policies are fully incorporated into global, regional and national post-2015 development agendas and strategies; 67.
Prepare comprehensive global and regional strategies to prevent infringement of the human rights of migrants, as well as to take advantage of the benefits and face the challenges arising from migration, including those relating to remittances and skilled migration in high-demand sectors, as well as the differential participation of men and women and the transnationalization of care; 69.
Promote the signing of bilateral and multilateral social security conventions to enable migrant workers to accumulate years of service; 70.
Incorporate principles of consistency and reciprocity in dealing with the various situations faced by emigrants from the countries in the region, at all stages of the migration process, whether at the intraregional level or outside the region; 71.
Achieve concrete results through dialogue and international cooperation relating to migration, human rights and development in regional forums as well as in forums linked to other regions of the world, in particular North America and the European Union, with a view to reducing existing asymmetries in this area and asserting the interests of Latin American and Caribbean countries; 72.
Give priority, in each country, to strengthening coordination channels between sectors and between countries, to reinforcing intergovernmental cooperation mechanisms in order to guarantee the exercise of the human rights of all migrants, regardless of their migration status, from a gender-based perspective; 74.
Historically, the main area of emphasis has been internal governance and security, and, in fact, in 20 of the 29 countries, the institution in charge of migrationrelated matters is either the Ministry of Internal Affairs (17 countries) or the Ministry of Public Security (3 countries) (see figure V.15).
It should be pointed out, however, that there is no direct correlation between the nature of the institution concerned and whether the country’s migration laws are based on a human rights approach or not or what that approach will look like when it is translated into actual practice.
In five cases, the institution in charge of migration is also the one responsible for conducting the country’s foreign affairs.
Belize has a dedicated institution, the Department of Immigration and Nationality Services, to serve its large immigrant population, which represents around 16% of the total population —one of the highest percentages in all of Latin America and the Caribbean.
In addition to the lead government agency serving the migrant population, many of the countries of the region have set up inter-agency coordination mechanisms mainly since 2000, as in the 17 countries shown in figure V.16.
This reflects a shift towards a more integrated and inclusive legislative approach whereby the lead agency works with other ministries and offices responsible for other sectors that make up part of the social agenda.
The ministry that is most often in charge of intersectoral coordination is the Ministry of Foreign Affairs or its equivalent (six countries) (see annex table V.A1.6).
In the rest of the countries, the nature of the coordinating office varies a great deal, with this function being performed by the Ministry of Labour in some countries and the Ministry of Justice or the Ministry of Internal Affairs in others.
The ministries or agencies that make use of these coordination services also vary a great deal.
Nonetheless, they include the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in 15 cases, the Ministry of Labour or its equivalent in 13 countries and the Ministry of Internal Affairs or its equivalent in 8.
Other ministries in the social sector that make use of these intersectoral coordination services in fewer than half the countries include the Ministry of Social Development (6), Ministry of Health (5), Ministry of Education (5) and Ministry of Justice (2).
This is a significant development, given the challenges that migrants face in terms of social inclusion.
In addition to putting inter-agency coordination mechanisms in place, the move towards working in tandem with social agencies in the areas of health, education, housing, discrimination and gender equality is surely a step in the right direction.
It would also be a positive step for these intersectoral mechanisms to involve civil society, since, in many cases, civil society organizations play an important role in helping to meet the needs of the most vulnerable migrants and to address the difficulties that they face, as well as raising awareness of those needs and difficulties.
Another crucial factor is coordination between different levels of the government apparatus, especially given the pivotal role that local governments can play in assisting migrants.
The first such mechanism was created in 2005 in Brazil and the most recent was established in 2017 in Peru (see figure V.17).
The operationalization of the nation’s migration policy has, however, led to the duplication of measures at the different levels of government and the fragmentation of government responses to the needs that arise.
It has also resulted in an almost total lack of government support for some of the civil society organizations that serve the migrant population.
Against this backdrop, the City of São Paulo, which has a long-standing tradition of hosting migrant populations, has taken on a leading role in constructing a policy designed for, and together with, immigrants and refugees.
The Coordinating Office for Migration Policy was founded by local government and civil society representatives in 2013.
The values and guiding principles of the Office are based on the mainstreaming of rights, intersectorality and participation.
One of the Office’s first participatory initiatives was the creation of a seat for a special immigrant representative on the Participatory Municipal Council (Decree No. 54.645/2013), where civil society oversees municipal planning activities, government action and government expenditures and makes suggestions concerning public actions and policies.
In all cases, at least 50% of these seats are held by women.
The Participatory Municipal Planning and Budget Council has also had the assistance of an immigrant representative in developing and implementing its planning cycle.
The Coordinating Office for Migration Policy has held conferences on municipal policies for immigrants, conducted awareness-raising and anti-xenophobia campaigns and provided support for cultural fairs and events, as well as offering ongoing training and Portuguese-language courses for immigrants.
The Coordinating Office partners with the municipal government to implement the Municipal Policy for the Immigrant Population, which was launched in 2016 (Municipal Act No. 16.478/16).
The framework for this policy is provided by international human rights instruments, the Federal Constitution and the Foreign Nationals Statute.
The policy’s priority areas include guaranteed right of access to social assistance, health care and education; the promotion of the right to decent work; recognition of the value of cultural diversity; promotion of the right to decent housing; and promotion of access to sports and recreation.
One of the major developments in this policy has been the inclusion of targets and goals for specific groups (older adults, the homeless, marginalized youth), although more disaggregated data are needed in order to fine-tune various aspects of the policy.
Some of the more recent policy actions have focused on promoting the regularization of people’s migration status, decent work and access to financial and banking services; raising awareness about the value of immigrants’ cultures; and the establishment of the Immigrant Referral and Welcome Centre.
Initially, the Coordinating Office had no permanent staff, a situation which demanded extraordinary efforts in order to carry out the proposed actions.
It is difficult to determine the size of the Office’s budget, but it is clear that it is no more than a fraction of the budget of its parent organization, the Municipal Human Rights and Citizenship Department (2.6% in 2018), and an even smaller portion of the budget of the Municipality of São Paulo as a whole (0.005% in 2018).
Strengthening this social institutional structure would increase the likelihood that the Municipal Policy for the Immigrant Population will prove to be an effective, efficient, sustainable and transparent instrument.
The Municipal Policy has been consolidated and its continuity has been assured thanks to the work of successive municipal government administrations, even though the arrival of an unexpectedly large and growing number of immigrants has posed a challenge, as well as opening up an opportunity to strengthen this pioneering policy.
This policy has succeeded in opening the way for a horizontal, cross-cutting intersectoral dialogue within and outside the government and in gaining the trust and fostering the engagement of all the various individuals and groups concerned.
The Municipal Policy for the Immigrant Population has thus become a model for other local governments in Brazil and around the world, thanks to the approaches that it promotes, the results it has achieved and the central role it assigns to local government in an area of policy (migration) that has traditionally been the purview of national governments.
The challenge now is to continue to work to develop quality social policies and to consolidate them in a way that makes any future policy discontinuity unlikely by virtue of an awareness and appreciation of the valuable contributions to the social fabric that migrants make.
The ministries that preside over these intersectoral boards or councils vary across countries, but the Ministry of Internal Affairs heads them up in seven of the countries and the Ministry of Justice and Public Security does so in five others (see figure V.18 and annex table V.A1.5).
The position of civil society organizations within these mechanisms differs from country to country, however.
In some cases, they have a consultative role; in others, they are included at the behest of one authority or another; and in still others, they participate on an equal footing with the ministerial bodies concerned.
The national police force or its equivalent is an independent participant in eight countries, which is to be expected, since human trafficking is such a serious crime.
The Ministry of Social Development is involved in these mechanisms in nine of the countries of the region, along with other social ministries such as the Ministry of Labour (13 countries), the Ministry of Education (11) and the Ministry of Health (10).
The Ministry of Women’s Affairs or its equivalent is involved in these mechanisms in 11 of the countries, which points up the degree to which human trafficking is associated with human rights violations and gender-based discrimination in the countries of the region.
A greater number of ministries, other bodies and civil society organizations and stakeholders are involved in the intersectoral coordination mechanisms for government efforts to combat human trafficking than is the case in the corresponding mechanisms for migrant services.
Migration cycle and challenges for inclusion and social protection: some priority policy areas Public policies and institutions are faced not only with the urgent need to provide protection to the many recent forced migrants in the region, but also long-term responses to international migration, within and towards Latin America and the Caribbean.
The great challenge regarding the social protection of migrants is dealing with mobile populations, whose needs extend beyond nation-State borders because they maintain responsibilities on both sides of these borders (Serra and Mazzucato, 2017), whereas most institutions are national in nature and designed to cater to sedentary populations.
However, in the absence of national policies and strategies to address this challenge, civil society organizations and some local governments fill the policy gap by providing legal, social and even medical attention to foreign residents who need it (de las Heras, 2016, p. 11).
There follows a description of some social protection instruments that are particularly important for migrants. 1.
Social protection instruments in the migration cycle Historically speaking, social protection systems have not been designed with the migrant population in mind, be it regular or irregular, much less those forced to migrate by disasters or economic or political crises.
As a result, fully integrating this ever-growing group into social protection poses major institutional and coverage challenges today.
Given these developments, ECLAC (2017b) has proposed advancing towards universal social protection systems, seeking to integrate the contributory and non-contributory components, along with labour market regulation and the establishment of care systems, as the necessary bases for achieving greater social inclusion, reducing inequality and providing stronger guarantees of exercise of rights.
For this, both the overarching institutional framework and social protection frameworks in particular must recognize migrants as bearers of the same human and civil rights as the national population, at least as regards access to essential services, with a view to ensuring their economic, social and cultural rights.
Achieving such progress is a highly complex proposition, given that in most of the countries in the region social protection coverage is not universal even for non-migrant citizens and humanitarian crises put pressure 230 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter V on already scarce resources.
Much depends on the specific components of social protection in discussion: for example, the importance of ensuring universal access to basic education and health care for the whole child population and other groups vulnerable to poverty is obvious.
A number of priority areas of action in this regard are described later in this section.
Be this as it may, given the panorama of the institutional framework in relation to migration, it is essential to build and deepen intersectoral spaces in which the complex issues facing migrants can be addressed.
Following Sabates-Wheeler and Koettl (2010) and Sabates-Wheeler and Waite (2003), several types of specific social protection instruments for migrants may be identified.
First are promotion measures aimed at improving people’s income and capacities in destination countries.
These include labour market policies, for example, which are aimed at ensuring decent work for the population in general, including migrants, regulating access to employment, job quality and working conditions and combating discrimination.
In relation to the points above, these instruments safeguard egalitarian access to social services such as education and health, while also promoting initiatives in areas where migrants need specific support, such as access to housing and help for transport.
In this regard, measures to provide support for transport feature throughout the migration cycle.
Second are instruments to protect migrants’ rights and safeguard against discrimination and abuse.
Here, the countries’ legal and normative frameworks and the effective application of these are especially important; hence the importance of international conventions on the protection of migrants being in force and of awareness-raising of the rights and contributions associated with migration in the destination country.
Third are preventive instruments which help to avoid the disadvantages and deprivations associated with different risks and vulnerabilities.
Lastly, there are instruments for alleviating deprivations after they have already arisen.
An example is housing subsidy for migrants, so that they can turn to this additional support to realize that right.
Information campaigns and legal (especially consular) advice are also widely used at different stages of the migration cycle and help to foster informed, safe, orderly and regular migration.
Some instruments are important at all stages of the cycle, such as labour market policies to promote decent work and the adaptation of national normative frameworks to international standards to ensure the human rights of migrants, as discussed in chapter IV. 2.
Areas of priority attention to protect migrants and foster their social and labour inclusion This section identifies some priority areas for government action to promote the inclusion and social protection of migrants.
These areas are largely associated with social protection and have to do with aspects that have an impact on migrants’ well-being and their power vis-à-vis acts of discrimination and breaches of their rights.
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development captures this priority in target 16.9 of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), “By 2030, provide legal identity for all, including birth registration”.
Registration of the birth of a child is an official record of his or her existence and recognition by the law.
Non-registration of the birth of a child is a violation that child’s rights, because it leads to statelessness and prevents social participation, later inclusion in economic life and access to education, health, social protection and care, among other basic satisfiers.
Access to identity is closely bound up with social inclusion policies for combating discrimination and enabling people to enjoy their social, economic, civil and cultural rights.
However, Latin America and the Caribbean still suffers from a high level of birth underregistration.
Importantly, registration procedures need to be free of charge, to contribute to universality and opportunity and, precisely, to remove entry barriers for those without resources.
Children must be registered immediately after birth, or within the period established by the law.
However, the risk of non-registration is very high among some population groups, one of these being the children of regular and —especially— irregular migrants.
Parents with irregular status often leave their children unregistered, despite their right to be registered and to take the nationality of the place of destination, mainly because of fear of identification and punishment by the authorities (AECID/UNICEF, 2012).
Non-registration and, thus, lack of documentation leads to a series of disadvantages, such as deportation or being statelessness, that is, having no nationality.
Above all, however, lacking a birth certificate or documentation, irregular migrants are barred from enjoyment of their human rights, which jeopardizes their future development.
Indeed, a birth certificate is still a requirement for access to a range of social entitlements, such as registering for school and for health services.
It is a matter of concern that, because it is treated as a requirement, it becomes a factor of exclusion.
Some countries that take a universalist stance on education may allow the children of irregular migrants to enrol in school; however, these children may be at risk of not receiving a certificate of primary school completion at the end of this stage, which prevents their progress to secondary school.
With regard to health access, unregistered persons can often aspire only to emergency care.
Lack of identification is also a barrier to owning property and exercising the civic right to vote in elections, among other disadvantages and flagrant rights violations.
SDG 16 thus recognizes that official identity has a dual benefit: on the one hand, it allows people to interact with the authorities, and on the other, it enables the authorities to plan and budget for basic services more effectively.
Broadening and facilitating routes towards regularization and adapting these to the profile of migrants is crucial to expand the battery of policies, especially social protection policies, without the need for special arrangements or exceptions with respect to the rest of the population. (b) Access to decent work Work is a core axis in the link between migration and social protection.
First, because one of the main reasons why people migrate is precisely in search of better employment opportunities.
Even where work is not the main driver of the decision to migrate, it is the principal vehicle by which migrants acquire social rights and access to multiple services in their destination country.
Work and employment quality determine, to a great extent, migrants’ integration into the country they arrive in: people who are integrated into the formal job market are able to earn wages, pay into the social security system, take out medical insurance and obtain coverage to protect their dependants.
Formal work brings entitlements and offers a quick route to social inclusion. 232 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter V Access to work is related to local regulations regarding entry and permitted length of stay.
In some of the region’s countries, a contract of employment is a necessary condition to remain there legally, unless the purpose of entry is other than work, i.e. as a partner, student or other non-labour-related status.
However, most of the Latin American and Caribbean labour markets are characterized by high levels of informality.
An unavoidable challenge is to improve legislation in order to broaden coverage and bring informal migrant workers into social protection systems, as well as sensitizing employers to these workers’ rights (ILO, 2015).
In this regard, it is necessary to place the employment conditions of migrants on the agendas of trade union organizations with a view to integrating the immigrant population.
A more active role in this area on the part of labour inspection bodies is also needed, and abuse by employers must be reduced.
In order to plan these policies, the specific features of sectors where migrants tend to work need to be taken into account.
If migrant women enter paid domestic work, it must be borne in mind that unionization in this sector tends to be limited and policies should engage employer families.
Patriarchal cultural patterns have naturalized the idea that women have innate aptitudes for domestic and care work; this prevents this work from being socially valued and the household being recognized as a place of work.
The failure to recognize that paid domestic work should —like any other work— be protected by employment law, leaves paid domestic workers more exposed to violence and harassment (ECLAC, 2019a).
Stronger channels of communication are needed between countries to coordinate social security systems to achieve genuine portability of rights for migrants.
Labour inspection to ensure decent employment conditions also contributes to changing employers’ practices, because discrimination against migrants —by disregarding social and labour rights— also makes migrants cheaper to employ, at the expense of local workers (Sabates-Wheeler and Koettl, 2010, p. 153).
This is a key factor contributing to sentiments of rejection or even xenophobia towards the migrant population. (c) Access to health in general and sexual and reproductive health, in particular Health care is a basic human right which should be guaranteed for migrants in all circumstances.
However, it is an unfulfilled right at all stages of the migration cycle, especially for women and children.
Migrants are particularly vulnerable in terms of health, owing, among other things, to the emotional turmoil of leaving one’s place of origin, changes in diet or difficulties in eating properly, uncertainty during the journey and threats against physical integrity along the route, especially in the case of journeys undertaken in inhumane conditions under difficult climate conditions or through hostile territory.
Some groups of migrants warrant priority treatment in the health system of countries of transit, destination or return; for example, unaccompanied children seeking to join family or other adults, who are exposed to abuse and the health effects of undernourishment, which is especially worrying given that are still developing physically.
However, continuity of education tends to be compromised in the case of children and adolescents of school age who have undergone irregular migration experiences, whether they have migrated alone or with family or other adults.
Universal access for all children and adolescents to education systems should be a less controversial topic, owing to the benefits that fulfilling the right to education brings in terms of inclusion and social adaptation to the destination country, and in terms of future productivity.
What is more, migrant workers should not have limitations placed on their possibilities of training in order to facilitate their entry to decent work.
This also applies to migrants who, having trained in their country of origin, need to validate their studies to improve their work prospects.
Recognition of studies often encounters barriers and institutional failings (slow and complicated processes).
Multilateral agreements on education matters facilitate this process, which can be crucial for the well-being of individuals and their dependants.
With a sound dwelling, understood in terms of the quality of materials, space and location, comes access to basic services, such as drinking water, electricity and removal of waste, among others, in both rural and urban areas.
However, overcrowding and lack of access to housing and basic services are areas where migrants tend to be worse affected, even when they have networks of family and friends who provide them with accommodation.
People arriving in a new country do not usually invest in property right away, but seek out rental accommodation in line with their needs and financial resources.
Migrants come up against a whole range of difficulties and abuses in this process, from discrimination and overpricing to overcrowding and lack of services in the dwelling.
In practice, they are often forced to resort to strategies involving severe overcrowding and sublets in poor conditions.
There are also several factors that make care one of the social, family and individual needs that is growing fastest in importance.
From the perspective of social protection, care has ceased to be seen as a private matter with which policy should not interfere, given that it is something that family members (especially women) perform on an unpaid basis, sometimes at the expense of their own well-being, autonomy and enjoyment of rights.
In Latin America, work in the domestic sector and care represented 27.2% of employment for women and 5.6% for men around 2017.
Of these figures, 11.2% and 3.2%, respectively, consisted of direct provision of care services (ECLAC, 2019a).
The female migrant labour force plays a large role in this sector, since many migrant women have specialized in this work, often in precarious and informal conditions.
The global care chains formed by migrant women transfer care tasks from households in countries of origin to households in the host country, leading to the formation of transnational families in which motherhood is exercised remotely.
However, not only migrants, but some of the native population as well, find it difficult to access this system.
Here, the region also suffers from large access gaps between individuals and between large and small firms, as well as from phenomena such as informality, where access barriers in the formal financial system lead people to seek often costly and precarious informal alternatives (Pérez and Titelman, 2018).
The fact that migrants cannot access credit, save and then send remittances to meet needs at home at a low cost is an additional disadvantage.
Generally speaking, the first requirement to enter the banking system is to have a valid legal identity, so migrants who remain in irregular conditions cannot access the financial system.
This also affects their chances of starting up an enterprise or saving resources to generate a wealth stock that could serve as a source of income and assets for the family in the medium and long terms.
Many migrants have the ability to make real contributions to the production process by performing an economic activity, creating sources of employment and paying taxes.
However, this is hard to materialize if they face barriers to entering the financial system.
Hence the importance of creating routes into this system and considering the potential of migrants to contribute to the economy of their host country. 3.
Institutional challenges in relation to migrants and social protection (a) Bilateral and multilateral coordination Because migrants are often employed in the informal economy, they tend to face lower levels of social protection than the average (ECLAC/ILO, 2017).
To address this situation, the governments of destination countries may adjust their legislations to regulate and broaden the benefits to which migrants are entitled.
Governments can also sign bilateral and multilateral agreements to ensure continuity of the coverage that migrants have in their respective country of origin.
This does not mean exchanging 235Chapter VSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 money between countries, but rather recognizing periods of affiliation or contribution that enable migrants to meet entitlement requirements (Arellano, 2013, p.120).
Bilateral social security agreements pursue two aims: (i) to help ensure continuity of coverage for those whose working life has spanned two countries, so that they can access benefits in either country, and (ii) to eliminate the double contribution to social security that can arise when a worker from one country works in another.
However, as well as migrants and remittances, in the future, entitlements, benefits and rights of access to services acquired in countries of origin or destination should be brought within formal and predictable channels.
Portability concerns the situation in which many migrant workers find themselves: after paying into the social security system in their host country they find upon return to their country of origin that the entitlements they have built up are not recognized.
In this scenario, the fact of migration leaves migrants and their families unprotected, and entails a loss for those who otherwise have a legitimate right to return to their country of origin.
Portability of rights is no small challenge for countries with large flows of migrants, since they must not only adjust legal frameworks but also create the institutional structure to make them operational.
Bilateral or multilateral agreements between countries and their effective implementation through active strategies are the route towards recouping these rights.
It thus offers a long-term solution for migrants in the Ibero-American sphere, insofar as it addresses the needs of a highly dynamic intra- and interregional migration flow which, in the first case, is increasing rapidly.
The main virtue of this Convention is that it seeks to coordinate national legislations in relation to pensions, without altering them, as a way of ensuring economic security in old age between States with very different social security models.
Of these countries, all but one has also signed the respective Agreement for Application.
The step from formal portability to subrogation or enforceability requires active strategies and policies to materialize access to the benefits, entitlements, services and, in general, the rights acquired by migrants. 236 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter V F.
In this context, the 2030 Agenda and Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration adopted by States represent a commitment to safeguard the rights and wellbeing of migrants (Guterres, 2018).
All public policies, and particularly social policies, must “facilitate orderly, safe, regular and responsible migration and mobility of people” (target 10.7 of the Sustainable Development Goals).
Guaranteeing the human rights of migrants at all stages of the migration cycle is closely linked to addressing the multiple vulnerabilities at each point in the cycle.
Significant changes are occurring in the three foremost patterns of international migration in the Latin America and the Caribbean, which have been apparent since the second half of the twentieth century: emigration outside the region, historical immigration from overseas and intraregional flows.
A fourth, often less prominent pattern is planned or forced repatriation (Martínez, Cano and Soffia, 2014).
In the case of emigration outside the region, there appear to be recent indications of an unstable trend in flows to the main extraregional destinations, especially from Mexico to the United States, which seems to have slowed, but not from Central America.
The relative importance of immigration of people from other regions has declined, but this remains part of the migratory reality of the region.
Flows within the region have intensified the most, since the bulk of the current immigrant population originated from other countries in the region.
However, in recent years the number of countries of origin has increased and new destination countries have emerged, examples being the wave of Venezuelan emigration and the presence of Venezuelan migrants in a number of countries in the region, including Colombia, Peru, Chile and some Caribbean countries.
The negative net migration in the region, that is to say a predominance of emigration, remains a defining feature of movements.
Current estimates put the ratio at six emigrants for every two immigrants.
One of the great difficulties the region faces in addressing all of the complexities of these migration trends is the lack of reliable, timely and suitable information.
The intervals between population censuses —the most comprehensive sources of data— are very long, hindering their use in analysis of prevailing conditions, and other valuable sources of information, such as household surveys, still only allow for limited use.
Other national instruments (such as national registers or national surveys focusing on migration) are very useful, but they are difficult to compare between countries.
In short, migration is a topic that merits generation of better statistical information, given its complexity and the number of related social and economic issues.
Faced with this great diversity of situations and scenarios, this section has underscored the great importance of adopting a perspective that takes into account the different vulnerabilities of migrants in the different stages of the migration cycle, and of guaranteeing an approach that is sensitive to gender and peoples’ life cycles.
In the 237Chapter VSocial Panorama of Latin America • 2019 current situation, this is a particularly pressing issue in the migration corridors of people originating from Central America and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Migration poses a challenge with regard to social inclusion, and there are signs of numerous gaps in access to basic services, decent work and social protection mechanisms in countries of destination, while in countries of origin or return there are multiple unmet needs; in turn, in transit scenarios, addressing the needs of migrants pose challenges of their own.
Moreover, there are countries that are simultaneously countries of origin, transit, destination and return, with very diverse needs that must be met.
In addition to the issues related to social inclusion, migration poses challenges regarding the fight against discrimination, whether against foreigners per se of on ethnic and racial grounds, as in the case of migrants who are Afrodescendants or indigenous persons.
With respect to this, there are indications that the greater precariousness people are perceiving in their environment (precarious income or job uncertainty, for example) can feed feelings of rejection of migrants.
For all these reasons, progress towards higher levels of well-being, enjoyment of rights and access to social protection for the population as a whole is another front in the battle against discrimination of migrants.
Although there is a heterogeneous relationship between poverty and migration (migrants are not necessarily poorer, in the different countries that have information available), remittances play an important role in alleviating the poverty of many families in several countries in the region.
In some cases, remittances are important in macroeconomic terms (as a percentage of GDP or of exports and imports), particularly in Central America and several Caribbean countries.
This underscores the need to facilitate access to remittances and lower their cost, as stated in SDG target 10.c: “By 2030, reduce to less than 3 per cent the transaction costs of migrant remittances and eliminate remittance corridors with costs higher than 5 per cent” (ECLAC, 2016).
Advances in this area should begin by adapting national regulatory frameworks to international standards and implementing such standards effectively, as well as achieving effective intersectoral coordination at the central level, resulting in national and systemic strategies for social and labour inclusion of migrants and the protection of their rights (Maldonado, Martínez and Martínez, 2018; Martínez, 2017).
As previously mentioned, the most recent migration legislation shows significant progress, in terms of adopting a rights-based approach rather than an approach centred solely on national security or control.
In particular, the principles of this legislation need to be put into practice, avoiding at all costs discretionary measures resulting from administrative decisions.
In addition to coordination at the central level, another important dimension is territorial coordination between levels of government.
The emergence in recent years of multisectoral coordination bodies, for example in the form of National Migration Councils, is an important step forward.
Of this total, 31 legal systems (including constitutions) refer centrally to migration, its regulation and the protection of migrant populations; 19 refer to matters relating to prevention of trafficking and smuggling of persons, punishment of such acts and assistance for victims; 45 refer to miscellaneous related issues.
As migration flows have become more complex and a person’s working life is likely to include fluctuations between episodes of formality and informality, possibly in two or more countries, it is crucial to build access channels and guarantee pension benefits.
Arellano, P. (2013), “Propiedad sobre los fondos de pensiones y continuidad de las prestaciones para los trabajadores técnicos extranjeros”, Ius et Praxis, vol. 19, No. 2, Talca, University of Talca.
Belvedere, C. and others (2007), “Racismo y discurso: una semblanza de la situación argentina”, Racismo y discurso en América Latina, T. van Dijk (coord.), Barcelona, Gedisa.
Brown, R. and others (2014), “Measuring remittances through surveys: methodological and conceptual issues for survey designers and data analysts”, Demographic Research, vol. 31, Rostock, Max Planck Institute for Demographic Research.
Grimson, A. (2006), “Nuevas xenofobias, nuevas políticas étnicas en la Argentina”, Migraciones regionales hacia la Argentina: diferencia, desigualdad y derechos, A.
Belvedere (1998), “La ‘racialización’ de las relaciones de clase en Buenos Aires: genealogía de la discriminación”, La segregación negada: cultura y discriminación social, M.
Koettl (2010), “Protección social para los migrantes: los desafíos de la prestación en el contexto del cambio en los flujos migratorios”, Revista Internacional de Seguridad Social, vol. 63, No. 3-4, Hoboken, Wiley.
Waite (2003), “Migration and social protection: a concept paper”, Working Paper, No.
Mazzucato (2017), “Mobile populations in immobile welfare systems: a typology of institutions providing social welfare and protection within a mobility framework”, The European Journal of Development Research, vol. 29, No. 4, Berlin, Springer.
Tijoux, M. (2016), Racismo en Chile: la piel como marca de la inmigración, Santiago, Editorial Universitaria. (2011), “Negando al ‘otro’: el constante sufrimiento de los inmigrantes peruanos en Chile”, Mujeres inmigrantes en Chile: ¿mano de obra o trabajadoras con derechos?, C.
Palominos (2015), “Aproximaciones teóricas para el estudio de procesos de racialización y sexualización en los fenómenos migratorios de Chile”, Polis: Revista Latinoamericana, vol. 14, No. 42, Santiago, University of Los Lagos.
Sensitivity measures the percentage of poor people that the model predicts correctly.
Specificity measures the percentage of non-poor people correctly predicted by the model.
The area under the ROC curve allows for evaluation of the predictive power of the model through a balance between sensitivity and specificity.
In aggregate terms, achieving this goal would entail attaining per capita GDP growth rates of around 2.9% per annum (4.5% of GDP) for the next 15 years.
A similar growth rate would be required for the relatively more developed countries, while the rest of the region’s economies, which are clearly subject to greater demographic pressure, would need to achieve per capita GDP growth of nearly 4% per year.
Trends in income distribution s of 1999, the inequality of income distribution continued to be one of the conspicuous features of Latin America’s economic and social structure, earning it the dubious distinction of being regarded as the most inequitable region in the world.
What is more, the latest estimates indicate that in most of the countries this situation did not improve to any significant degree during the 1990s, and in some countries it actually worsened.
Latin America’s income distribution stands out within an international context due, in particular, to the large share of total income held by the richest 10% of households.
This stratum has more than 30% of total income in all the countries of the region except Costa Rica and Uruguay,1 and in most of them the figure is over 35%.
In contrast, the share of total income corresponding to the poorest 40% of households is very small –between 9% and 15% of total income in almost all the countries– with the exception of Uruguay, where the figure is nearly 22% (see figure 2).
A simple comparison between the mean incomes of the different groups of households shows just how inequitable distribution is in Latin America.
In such countries as Bolivia, Brazil and Nicaragua, the per capita incomes of the richest quintile (20% of the total number of households) are more than 30 times higher than those of the poorest quintile.
If the ratio between the top decile and the four lowest deciles is calculated, the greatest gap is in Brazil, where the richest decile’s mean income is 32 times higher than the total for the four poorest deciles.
The simple average for the region as a whole amounts to 19.3 times.
At the end of the 1990s, a country ranking based on the Gini coefficient (calculated using the per capita income distribution for individuals) shows that the highest concentration is found in Brazil, which has a Gini coefficient of 0.64.
Uruguay and Costa Rica again have the least inequality, with indices below 0.48 (see figure 3).
An analysis of variations in Gini coefficients and in the percentages of total income received by the various groups of the population in the different countries in 1997–1999 appears to corroborate the existence of a deterioration in distribution.
This index rose in seven countries (for which figures having a comparable coverage are available) and declined in four.
In addition, in most cases the increases were larger than the decreases.
The trend in income distribution for the decade as a whole also reflects the concentrative pattern which Latin American economies have exhibited for many years now.
Of the 13 countries for which nationwide figures are available for the starting and ending years of the decade, eight saw an increase in the income ratio between the top decile and the bottom 40%, whereas only four registered a reduction and in one there was no change.
The results are similar when the percentage of the population having per capita incomes lower than 50% of the average level is examined.
Only two countries registered a significant reduction, while in the rest this figure rose, either steeply or moderately, or remained constant.
For the great majority of the Latin American countries, this indicator falls within an intermediate range (between 40% and 50% of the population has incomes equivalent to less than one half of the average income level).
Uruguay, Costa Rica, Venezuela and the Dominican Republic have the lowest income concentration, with an index of less than 40%.
Brazil is the only case in which more than half of the population has an income of less than 50% of the mean (see figure 4).
The variations exhibited by the intermediate strata –i.e., the 50% of all households between the poorest 40% and the richest 10%– generally do not follow a pattern similar to the trend seen in the case of the top and bottom strata.
In at least seven countries, changes in income share –increases and decreases alike– amounted to two percentage points or less, and losses of over three percentage points occurred in only two cases.
The trend in the income share of intermediate groups thus indicates that in various countries these groups have more powerful means of defending their share of total income than poor groups do.
In summary, even though many countries managed to expand their economies and significantly increase their social expenditure, and despite a continuing and justified concern about distributional issues, the fact is that for the most part Latin America has not succeeded in making any substantial improvement in income distribution.
Furthermore, the general consensus is that no promising signals are in evidence at the present time that would provide reason to believe that this situation will change significantly in the short or medium term.
In fact, of the 17 countries analysed, only two closed out the decade with results that show progress in reducing distributional inequality.
Even in those countries that achieved high growth rates and maintained them over time (such as Chile), the evidence shows that income distribution was extremely recalcitrant in the face of efforts to reduce its high degree of concentration, and income disparities remained one of the prevailing economic and social structure’s unwanted features.
Employment and unemployment n a demographic context marked by a sharp increase (2.4% per year) in the working– age population and a rising female labour participation rate, the economically active population has been expanding even more swiftly (by an average annual rate of 2.6%).
The region’s labour force, consisting of nearly 212 million people by the end of the 1990s, grew by 44 million during that decade and represented 42% of the total population as of 1999 (three percentage points more than in 1990) (see figure 5).
In absolute terms, the growth of the labour supply was concentrated in urban areas.
Of the 44 million persons who joined the economically active population in the 1990s, 93% of them lived in urban areas.
As a result, over three fourths of the region’s labour force (76.3%) is now located in the cities, as compared to 72% in 1990.
Some of the characteristics of Latin America’s employed population also changed during the 1990s.
These changes have been reflected, for example, in increases in the relative size of certain age groups and educational categories, in such groups’ positions within different production sectors and in the growing participation of women in certain types of occupations.
Changes in the occupational structure have also influenced job quality and the size of the economy’s informal sector.
As suggested by the growing proportion of low–productivity jobs, occupational instability increased in the 1990s.
Since 1990, the percentage of informal employment in urban areas has climbed by over five percentage points (nearly 20 million individuals).
The steady increase in the economically active population has generated a great deal of pressure for more job creation.
The demand for labour has not, however, increased enough to absorb the rapidly expanding labour force.
As a result, in the 1990s the number of unemployed persons rose considerably (by an annual rate of 10.1%, with much of this increase being concentrated in 1997–1999).
Thus, during the decade more than 10 million people joined the ranks of the unemployed, who represented 8.6% of the labour force at the national level (slightly over 18 million people) by 1999, as compared to 4.6% in 1990.
The increase in unemployment during the 1990s was not spread evenly across the region but was instead seen mainly in South America.
In Mexico and most of the Central American and Caribbean countries, on the other hand, unemployment trended downward.
In the Central American countries, unemployment either declined (El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua) or remained at fairly moderate levels (Costa Rica).
This trend also predominated in the Caribbean island countries (Barbados, Cuba, Dominican Republic, and Trinidad and Tobago), although unemployment levels in these nations (with the exception of Cuba) held steady at higher levels –around 10% or more– than was the case in Central America.
The labour market’s lack of dynamism is partially attributable to the reduction of the State’s role in direct job creation and to the restructuring of the production system, particularly in the primary and secondary sectors.
These sectors’ share in total employment has shrunk, with job creation tending to become concentrated in tertiary activities.
The progressive technology–intensive modernization of these service activities would appear to portend an increasingly limited job creation capacity for the structured or formal sector.
In addition, wage reductions are beginning to decline in importance as a primary adjustment factor for the labour market, as economic slumps increasingly tend to be manifested in job destruction and sagging labour demand rather than in real wage reductions.
In 1999, the urban unemployment rate for the poorest 20% of households in the region (22.3%) was more than twice the overall rate (10.6%).
Hence, unemployment continues to be one of the main determinants of poverty and inequality.
The increase in unemployment seen in the late 1990s also had an increasingly strong impact on middle–income sectors.
In the third and fourth household income quintiles, unemployment levels climbed by over three percentage points, and in the countries having the most serious unemployment problems in the late 1990s, nearly one out of every 10 members of the economically active population in those quintiles was out of work.
The available data for six countries of the region in which unemployment rose during the second half of the 1990s indicate that the average duration of unemployment lengthened from 4.4 to 5.3 months.
There is also some evidence that wage levels may have declined for persons finding employment after having been out of work.
These income reductions may be functioning as a secondary adjustment mechanisms in labour markets where regulations and procedures regarding the contracting and dismissal of workers are increasingly being loosened.
Estimates for Uruguay indicate that these reductions amounted to between 23% and 34% of the previous wage and became larger in the second half of the decade as urban unemployment rose.
The current high unemployment levels in the region may remain fairly constant, since the projected growth rate of around 2% for 2001 represents a substantial drop from the rate of somewhat more than 4% registered for 2000.
In addition, there are some indications of the persistence of a structural factor in unemployment, as well as signs that employment levels may be slower to recover following downswings in growth.
The greater volatility of growth, together with the vulnerability of middle– and low–income strata during periods of job destruction, followed by slowly recovering employment levels, underscores the need for protective mechanisms to cover this risk.
Social expenditure in latin america in the 1990s T to social sectors in the 1990s resulted in a sizeable increase (around 50%) in per he greater effort made by Latin American countries to allocate more public resources capita social spending.
From an average of US$ 360 per capita at the start of the decade, social expenditure climbed to US$ 540 per capita by its end (see figure 7).
Most of the countries raised their per capita levels of social spending as a consequence of both a reactivation of economic growth and a decision to place greater fiscal priority on social expenditure (i.e., the percentage of total public expenditure allocated to social sectors).
As a result, the percentage of GDP devoted to social sectors climbed from 10.4% to In a majority of the countries, social spending rose more steeply during the first half of the decade (30%).
Although it did continue to climb in the second half, it did so more slowly (16%).
This trend was related to economic growth trends, since the annual growth rate posted by Latin America was 4.1% of GDP up to 1995 but then dropped to 2.5% in the second half of the decade.
The increase in social spending in the 1990s was not only an outcome of buoyant economic growth, however.
It was also associated with an increasing effort on the part of these countries to raise spending levels by boosting government revenues and allocating a larger portion of them to social sectors.
The fiscal priority of social spending climbed from nearly 42% to almost 48% of total public expenditure during the decade.
Although the countries that raised their social expenditure included several which had low social spending levels, the differences among the 17 countries that were analysed did not diminish very much, and the enormous heterogeneity that existed in this respect at the start of the decade therefore persisted.
One group of countries, which includes those with the highest per capita social expenditure levels (Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Panama and Uruguay), continued to allocate a larger percentage of their GDP to social sectors than would be expected, given their per capita income levels.
Another group, composed of countries with low or very low levels of per capita social expenditure (El Salvador, Guatemala, Paraguay, Peru and the Dominican Republic) devoted a much smaller share of their GDP to social sectors than the regional average.
The exception here is Colombia, which more than doubled its per capita social expenditure between 1992–1993 and 1996–1997, thereby greatly increasing its macroeconomic priority and going from being one of the countries with spending levels far below the regional average, in terms of its per capita income level, to one of the countries that exceeds it.
Even though social expenditure was raised considerably during the decade, its current levels are still too low to meet the needs of large segments of the population.
Most of the countries also have a great deal of room for expanding their public revenue base and redirecting allocations for social purposes.
Yet, in a number of countries, the limited public revenue base is the chief factor that is hindering them from allocating a larger proportion of public revenues for social spending.
Nonetheless, there are countries in the region that devote a large proportion of their GDP to social sectors –percentages comparable to those allocated by a number of industrialized countries– and in their cases, the main challenge is to protect those spending levels when economic conditions deteriorate and to enhance their effectiveness and efficiency.
Hence, one of the priority public policy objectives is to forestall or curtail this type of behaviour under adverse economic conditions in order, in particular, to safeguard spending allocations that benefit the poorest segments of the population and to strengthen practices that consolidate those allocations and give them greater stability.
In fact, an analysis of trends in total public expenditure and social public expenditure in six countries in which GDP contracted in 1999 (Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Honduras, Uruguay and Venezuela) shows that allocations to social sectors were shielded from the effects of that downturn.
In all of these countries except Venezuela, total public expenditure rose in 1998–1999 despite the decrease in GDP, and in Venezuela expenditure levels quickly bounced back in 1999–2000, rising at what were virtually pre–crisis rates.
Expenditure on housing, water and sanitation continued to have a lower priority and rose on average from 1.2% to 1.4% of GDP (see table 3).
Data on eight countries in the region indicate that the most progressive types of expenditure –those that provide relatively greater benefits to the poorest households– are spending on primary and secondary education, followed by spending on health care and nutrition and then by spending on housing and basic services (water and sanitation).
In contrast to the findings of similar studies conducted in the 1970s and early 1980s, expenditure on secondary education appears to have a fairly strong progressive impact; this difference can be accounted for by the notable expansion in the coverage of secondary education since that time (see figure 8).
Taken as a whole, social expenditure is highly redistributive in all the countries and even more so if spending on social security is not included in this category.
If social security is not included, then the 20% of households having the lowest incomes receive 28% of total public revenues, whereas the richest 20% of households only receive 12% of those resources.
This means that –not counting expenditure on social security– the poorest 20% of households receive, on average, a portion of the funds devoted to social expenditure that is six times greater than their share of primary income (28.2% of funds devoted to social expenditure, versus 4.8% of total primary income).
For the richest 20% of households, this ratio is inverted, with such expenditure representing just one fourth of their income share (12.4% of social expenditure versus 50.7% of total primary income).
The net redistributive effect of public social expenditure can also be seen by determining how much of total household income in each stratum corresponds to monetary transfers and the provision of goods and services free of charge or at subsidized prices.
This percentage is much higher in lower–income strata, where it amounts to 43%.
In upper–income sectors (the fourth and fifth quintiles), the figure is between 13% and 7%, respectively (see figure 9).
Despite the small percentage of social expenditure relative to the incomes of the richest stratum, the actual sums that those households receive are quite high.
In fact, in a number of the countries analysed, these transfers are as much as twice the amount that goes to the poorest households.
This can be accounted for by the level of social security transfers.
During the 1990s the increase in social expenditure had a relatively greater redistributive effect In countries with lower per capita incomes thanks to the sharp upswing in public spending on education and health care.
In the countries with higher per capita incomes, on the other hand, the redistributive impact was less, since nearly 50% of the increase in public social spending was accounted for by expenditure on social security, which is the lest progressive component in this category.
Social agenda: latin american families I playing a key role in accounting for individuals’ behaviour and in measures for n a majority of policy proposals and analyses, the family, as an institution, is seen as addressing such varied issues as unemployment, drug addiction and violence.
Special emphasis has also been placed on the changes occurring in traditional family structures, which are seen as being associated with social disintegration.
It is striking, however, that although such great importance is attributed to the family by government officials, civil and religious institutions, and individuals, it receives so little attention within the context of public policy.
In view of these considerations, the chapter on the social agenda in this edition offers a baseline analysis of families in the region.
The study’s various findings all indicate that families in the region have been confronted with sweeping changes, including far–reaching demographic shifts, the growing number of households headed by women and the increasing number of women entering the labour market.
There have also been changes in symbolic aspects of the family which are being reflected in new types of families and family relationships.
Nuclear families do, however, continue to predominate in both urban and rural areas.
One of the major demographic changes being observed is a reduction in average family size due to a reduction in the number of children and greater birth spacing.
In addition, the number of multi–generational families is on the decline and single–person households are on the rise.
Migration, which may be undertaken for a variety of reasons (economic considerations, armed conflicts, etc.), is another factor.
Between the 1980s and the 1990s, average household size decreased in all the countries of the region.
The heterogeneity of the trends in the various countries can be attributed to the fact that they are at different stages in the demographic transition.
Uruguay has the smallest average household size (3.2 persons as of 1999); Guatemala and Honduras, with 4.8, and Nicaragua, with 4.9 persons per household on average, are at the opposite extreme.
Another aspect of this situation is that women have continued to join the labour market in increasing numbers.
Various studies have shown that in the last decade the largest proportion of new female entrants have been women of reproductive age (women with small children).
The economic contributions of working women are what keeps many households above the poverty line. 3 The categories of households used in this study include single person households (a single person) and non–nuclear households (those in which there is no conjugal nucleus or a father/mother–son/daughter relationship, although there may be other kinship relationships).
Families are classified as nuclear families (father or mother or both, with or without children), extended families (father or mother or both, with or without children, and other relatives) and composite families (father or mother or both, with or without children, with or without other relatives, and non–relatives).
Families may also be single–parent families (one parent only, usually the mother) or two–parent families (both parents) and may, further, be classified according to whether or not they have children.
The contribution to household income made by an additional income–earner marks the difference between households in the poorest and richest quintiles (see figure 10).
Households with more than one breadwinner are most often composed of two–parent families, extended families or composite families.
In the 1990s, almost all the countries saw an increase in the number of households with more than one breadwinner in both poorer households and those that were better off.
The social institutions in charge of designing and implementing family policies in the region vary widely, ranging from government ministries, departments and divisions to councils which are attached to various agencies; in some instances, they are lacking altogether.
Government agencies and other types of State institutions also differ as to how they define the concept of “family”.
One of the main changes that government authorities responsible for family issues in the region have witnessed is the transformation of women’s role in the home, either because of their entry into the labour market or because of the increase in the number of households headed by women.
Demographic changes and those arising out of cultural and modernization processes have also been striking.
The authorities’ responses to these situations reflect the differences between more traditional or more modern concepts of what constitutes a family.
Policy–makers concerned with family issues are largely in agreement as to the chief problems they face.
In 16 out of 18 countries, the authorities identify domestic violence as one of the most serious issues to be addressed.
In second place, the authorities in 12 of the 18 countries that were surveyed mentioned unemployment, which is also associated with poverty, economic crises and a deterioration in material living conditions, along with a lack of health care and education services.
The disintegration of the family was also mentioned as an important factor.
As this new century begins, family–oriented policies still lack a specific direction, a well demarcated sphere of action and a clearly defined basis of legitimacy.
In designing such policy measures, policy–makers have to deal with a variety of stumbling blocks, including the trade–offs existing between family and individual interests and the difficulties involved in balancing individual autonomy and liberty with family responsibilities.
Emphasis on the legal dimension of programmes in this area appear to be leading towards a new concept of the family within a context of human rights.
Most of the countries in the region, rather than having explicitly designed family policies, engage in scattered, uncoordinated activities that are included as part of programmes and projects dealing with health care, education, poverty reduction, the prevention and elimination of violence, and many other issues.
The wide range of family–oriented policies in existence include a number of very interesting initiatives and projects, however, including efforts to cope with the changes being experienced by the region’s families and the changing social roles of men and women in the home.
The great variety of family situations to be found in the region and the differences existing across countries make it difficult to establish common guidelines.
It is important, however, to emphasize that the fundamental requirement for policy–making in this field is to have a suitable baseline study covering the wide range of situations and recent changes affecting Latin American families.
In addition, given the cross–cutting nature of family–related issues, it is important for family–oriented policies and programmes to be closely coordinated.
The international social agenda As in past editions, this chapter reviews the main meetings and agreements on social issues that have taken place within the United Nations system.
In this year’s edition, the chapter is devoted to the meeting of the General Assembly held in New York from 6 to 8 September 2000, at which the world’s leading statesmen issued the Millennium Declaration.
The economic growth requirements needed to meet this objective are analysed in chapter I of this edition of the Social Panorama.
Poverty trends in the During the second half of the 1990s, Mexico, the Dominican Republic and most Central American countries experienced sustained economic growth, and several of them made strides in the fight against poverty.
In South America, meanwhile, there was a process of slowing growth, stagnation and subsequent recovery, which in some cases translated into the preservation or deterioration of living conditions.
Overall, while the number of people living in Latin America grew from 204 million to 211 million in the 1997–1999 period, the percentage of poor households and poor people remained relatively constant.
More markedly than in other periods, however, this overall pattern actually reflected a wide range of performances among the various countries and groups of countries in the region.
It should be kept in mind, however, that for some of the aforementioned countries, the 1995 crisis entailed a reversal of the achievements of the early 1990s.
Thus, the results for the decade as a whole do not always show a similar level of accomplishment.
Mexico and the Dominican Republic recorded high and persistent growth in those years, as did most of the Central American countries, although the rate was more modest in the latter.
Such growth was a continuation of the trend evident in 1996–1997, thus giving rise to a five–year period of uninterrupted economic expansion.
This growth, in turn, caused unemployment to fall, mitigating somewhat the economic difficulties of the poorest families, even though the prevailing development strategies did not increase employment to any significant degree.
The South American countries underwent a different experience during the 1998–2000 period.
In general, many of them experienced a downturn, stagnation or recession, followed by recovery.
The increase was more moderate in Brazil and Uruguay (slightly under two percentage points), as well as in Peru (one percentage point).
Argentina, which had reduced open unemployment by two points in 1998, lost that gain and ended 2000 with open unemployment averaging 15%.
In the countries for which information on real wages is available, there was no appreciable fall in average earnings, and in some of them wage earners even saw a slight improvement.
Such was the case in Chile (see table 1 of the statistical appendix). weight of these countries in the aggregate figures for Latin America, their performance is sometimes attributed to the region as a whole.
A closer look at per capita GDP rather than total output, however, will show that the slowdown of 1998 actually caused some decline in several of the South American countries.
The pattern seen in Chile is perhaps most representative of the regional average.
In a significant number of countries, however, recovery was weak in 2000.
Hence, for example, between 1998 and 2000, Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay posted negative per capita growth.
In Colombia, Ecuador and Venezuela, the 1999 recession was very sharp, with per capita output falling to between -6% and -9%.
In 2000 these three countries experienced a slight recovery, ranging from stagnation (Ecuador) to growth of a little over 1% (Colombia and Venezuela).
In the latter year, therefore, growth was slightly higher than in 1997.
This is significant in terms of the figures for South America as a whole, given Brazil’s greater relative size –in both economic and demographic terms– in the regional context (see table I.1).
By 19991 some 35% of Latin American households were poor and 14% of them were indigent or extremely poor.
In other words, 35 of every 100 households in the region lacked the resources to meet their basic needs, while 14 could not even to afford a basic food basket (see table I.2).
A comparison of these figures with the estimates for 1997 shows a slight drop in the percentages of both poverty and indigence.
The indigence rate fell slightly more, from 14.4% to 13.9% (see table I.2 and figure I.1).
Although these changes can hardly be considered to represent significant progress in the fight against poverty, they are consistent with the annual per capita growth rate of just 0.3% in 1999, which had actually been expected to cause a deterioration in the living conditions of the disadvantaged population.
As a result of the foregoing circumstances, open unemployment rates rose in most South American countries.
As was to be expected, that outcome was particularly marked in Colombia, Ecuador and Vene- 1 This is the most recent year for which detailed estimates of the magnitude of poverty in individual countries are available.
For a description of the methodology used to arrive at these estimates, see box I.1.
The trends in individual poverty rates differ slightly from those registered for households.
Around 1999, 43.8% of the region’s population was living in poverty, or three tenths of a point more than in 1997, while the extreme poverty rate edged downward from 19% to 18.5% during that period.
The differences in the poverty rate –depending on whether individuals or households are used as the unit of analysis– can be sizeable (8.5 percentage points in 1999).
This phenomenon may be explained by the larger average size of poor households relative to the average size of households in general.
Poverty lines represent the minimum income required for members of a household to meet their basic needs.
In urban areas, this value is 2 and in rural areas, it is Indigence–line estimates take into account the differences in food prices between metropolitan areas and other urban and rural areas.
Prices in urban and rural areas are usually 5% and 25% lower, respectively, than those in metropolitan areas.
The data on family incomes were obtained from the household surveys conducted in the different countries.
Income was deemed to consist of earnings from paid work (in cash and in kind), from independent work (including self–supply and consumption of products produced by the household), property rents, pensions and allowances and other transfers received by households.
In most countries, household income also includes an amount for the imputed rental value of the home when it is owner–occupied.
The percentages of poor and indigent households and individuals were estimated by comparing the monthly per capita value of the poverty and indigence lines with total household income, also expressed in per capita terms.
In this case, use was made of the new indigence lines estimated for different subnational geographical areas in the context of a joint study by the Brazilian Geographical and Statistical Institute (IBGE), the Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA) of Brazil and the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
Poverty trends in Latin America as a whole have been strongly influenced by the trends in a few individual countries, either because those countries have very large populations or because their poverty rates have undergone sizeable changes.
The situation with respect to indigence is quite different, inasmuch as the size of the population living in extreme poverty is slightly smaller in urban areas (43 million) than in rural areas (46 million), reflecting the greater severity of rural poverty (see table I.3).
Preliminary projections for Latin America as of the year 2000, based largely on the various countries’ macroeconomic performance, indicate that poverty in the region may be edging downward thanks to improved growth last year, particularly in Mexico and Brazil, which account for more than half the population of the region.
For 2000, the percentage of poor households is estimated at around 34%, although the figure for indigent households appears to have remained at around 14% of the total.
In the 1997–1999 period, variations in urban and rural poverty were less pronounced, not only as regards the percentages of households and individuals living in poverty and indigence –where most variations were under 0.4 percentage points– but also in terms of the number of people who were in one or the other of those circumstances.
The number of poor people in urban areas was the exception, inasmuch as that population increased by about 8.5 million during the two–year period.
If this proves to be the case, then this decade will have begun with a smaller number of poor people than there were in 1999 and will therefore have broken away from the upward trend that predominated during the 1990s.
It is estimated that the poor population fell by 1.9 million, which would put the number of poor people as of the year 2000 at about 210 million.
The projection also points to a further decline (of about 2 million) in the number of people living in extreme poverty, so that at the start of this decade, the indigent population stood at about 87 million.
In the projections for 2000 mentioned above, the expected decline at the household level should be largely apparent in a lower rate (0.8 percentage points) of urban poverty, since in the other cases the decline in the share of households would be below 0.5 percentage points.
Hence, urban poverty could be expected to reach 29%, while rural poverty, urban indigence and rural indigence would remain at about 54%, 9% and 30%, in that order.
In terms of individuals, urban and rural poverty, as well as rural indigence, could fall by one percentage point.
The percentage of urban indigents would be 0.5 percentage points below the 1999 level.
In terms of magnitude, intensity and characteristics, poverty and indigence are evidenced in different ways in urban and rural areas.
Hence the crucial need to identify these differences, since the growing prevalence of urban poverty over rural poverty in Latin America has direct implications for the assignment of resources for poverty reduction.
Relative poverty rates continue to be far higher in the region’s rural areas than in its urban centres b.
Poverty in the 1990s The 1990s saw a decline in the percentage of households and individuals living in poverty, as well as a reduction in the severity of poverty.
In aggregate terms, this decrease helped offset the deterioration of the 1980s.
Nevertheless, urban poverty and rural indigence rates are still considerably higher than they were 20 years ago.
A positive development in the 1990s was the fact that poverty levels fell by more than 10 percentage points in Brazil, Chile and Panama, against a background of very different per capita growth rates.
This is not the case with the figures for individuals, however; although the percentage of poor people in the population did decline in the 1990s, it would have had to fall a further three percentage points to reach its 1980 level (44% versus 41%).
As noted above, this stems from the fact that the size of poor households decreased less than the size of non–poor households.
The estimated percentage of poor households in Latin America as of 1999 was nearly six percentage points below the 1990 figure.
A downward trend was also seen in extreme poverty, which gradually declined from 18% of all households in 1990 to 14% in 1999.
A comparison with the figures for 1980 shows that the overall percentages of poor and indigent households in 1999 are much the same as they were in that year (see table I.2).
Since it is linked to people’s well–being, there is no one definition of the phenomenon nor a universal method of measuring it.
It is generally agreed, however, that poverty measurement involves at least two stages: (i) identifying the poor and (ii) aggregating poverty by means of a synthetic measurement.
The first stage entails defining a threshold called the poverty line (z).This is used to identify the population whose per capita income (ypc) is lower than the cost of a basket of goods that satisfy their basic needs (ypc < z) (see box I.1).
Aggregation is effected by selecting an indicator based on people’s income deficit relative to the poverty line.
A "good" poverty indicator should fulfil certain axioms, including the following: i) Monotonicity.
Other things being equal, a fall in the income of a poor household would raise the poverty index. ii) Transfer.
Other things being equal, a transfer of income from a poor household to a richer household would increase the value of the poverty indicator. iii) Additive decomposition.
It should be possible to estimate a population’s poverty index as the weighted sum of the indices for the different subgroups that belong to it.
When α = 0, expression (1) represents what is termed the poverty rate (H) which shows the percentage of persons whose incomes are below the poverty line (z): H=q/n Because this indicator is easy to estimate and interpret, it is the one that is most widely used.
However, although it can be decomposed additively, it does not satisfy the first two axioms mentioned earlier, and therefore its usefulness in measuring poverty is somewhat limited.
Hence this indicator does not address inequality in the distribution of income among the poor.
Finally, an index that considers both the poverty gap and income distribution is obtained when α = 2: n q z - yi z Although this indicator is less intuitive than the others, it is particularly useful for policy design and evaluation.
These aggregate figures reflect changes in the urban–rural distribution of poor households which are particularly important in view of the differences between urban and rural poverty.
The percentage of poor households declined in both urban areas (a reduction of five percentage points) and rural areas (four percentage points) during the 1990s.
By the same token, household indigence rates fell from 12% to 9% in urban areas and from 34% to 31% in rural areas.
When measured in terms of the number of individuals, however, urban/rural trends were not parallel.
Urban poverty climbed by 12.5 million persons, whereas in rural areas the number of poor people was down by 1.3 million.
The trend with respect to extreme poverty is more moderate: the pattern of indigence by area changed markedly in the 1980s but was fairly stable over the last 10 years, at about 48% in urban areas and 52% in the countryside.
Thus, the fight against indigence now calls for similar efforts to be made in both urban and rural areas.
An analysis of poverty at the country level shows that, although trends were uneven in 1997–1999 period, the decade as a whole was marked by a widespread downturn in the percentage of poor households.
Thus, in 1990–1999, most countries of the region saw a substantial decline in poverty rates.
By the end of the decade, in fact, at least 11 countries, which together account for a majority of the region’s poor, had managed to push their relative poverty rates below their 1990 levels.
In four cases, the percentage of poor households increased (see tables I.4 Moreover, an analysis of the current state of poverty in urban areas shows that it is still considerably higher than it was in 1980 (30% compared to 25%); the figures for rural indigence are similar (31% compared to 28%).
This means that despite the progress made in the last decade, much remains to be done with regard to poverty reduction in certain specific areas, just to return to poverty levels similar to those of 20 years ago.
Among the countries that succeeded in lowering their poverty rates, Brazil, Chile and Panama managed to reduce the percentage of poor households by over 10 percentage points.
These figures highlight the fact that, although all the countries have embarked on liberal reforms, the attendant economic and social changes have varied in effect and intensity, thanks in part to the nature and timeliness of the policies applied and the differences in the circumstances prevailing at the beginning.
Although such programmes only bear fruit in the long term, they usually have a marked impact on the capacity of the poorest segments to generate income and on easing structural inequalities.
Alternative poverty measures and the use of "equivalence scales" It is helpful to supplement the foregoing analysis of changes in the situation with respect to poverty in the region by referring to more comprehensive indices than those used to measure the percentage of poor households or individuals in the population.
In particular, the poverty gap (PG) index is a useful tool for measuring the "depth" of poverty, as it allows for an assessment to be made of the difference between the average income of poor households and the poverty line.
By using a similar method but assigning greater weight to the differences among the poorest households, the index of the severity of poverty, or FGT2 reflects distribution–related criteria as well (see box I.2).
Costa Rica, Guatemala and Uruguay also turned in a strong performance, with reductions in the percentage of poor households ranging from 5 to 10 points.
Disturbing trends were seen in some countries, however, with poverty indicators either coming to a standstill or actually worsening during the 1990s; as a result, they are two decades behind in their efforts to move towards greater social equity.
One of the most conspicuous cases in this respect is Venezuela, where the percentage of poor households jumped from 22% in 1981 to 34% in 1990 and has since then climbed to 44%.
Ecuador, Colombia and Paraguay have also failed to make any significant progress in easing poverty during the past decade.
To the extent that increases in the income of poor households do not fundamentally change income distribution, there should be a simultaneous improvement in the poverty rate and in indicators of its depth (PG) and severity (FTG2).
Similarly, during times of widespread decline in the income of poor households, all three indicators are likely to deteriorate.
In fact, between 1990 and 1999, all the Latin American countries saw their poverty indicators follow these parallel trends (see table I.4).
As regards the Caribbean countries, there is a scarcity of data this makes it hard to determine whether the situation with regard to poverty has changed recently.
Nonetheless, the few data available for the 1990s paint a very mixed picture of the extent of poverty in the subregion, as poverty rates range from under 10% to over 50% of the population in the different Caribbean countries (see box I.3).
When well–being is measured in monetary terms, it is advisable to consider the differences in needs of different households, bearing in mind not only size but also demographic structure.
The poverty measurements normally used in Social Panorama implicitly reflect these differences through the nutritional standards applied in defining poverty lines, which do not represent adult requirements but rather reflect the average composition of households by sex, age and employment status of members.
It should be noted, however, that any assessment of trends in regard to poverty must take into account the fact that some crucial components of public spending policies have medium– and long–term effects.
This is particularly important in the case of programmes that are intended to strengthen the human and social capital of lower–income groups.
In some of these countries, however, recent studies of poverty and its impact at the national level have been produced either by the governments themselves or by international organizations.
Overall, however, only a few statistical summaries have been drawn up in the Caribbean, and no comparative measurements are available for the entire region.
In the case of Jamaica, for example, estimates of poverty rates vary by more than 15 percentage points, even though the same method is used to define the poverty line.
A review of recent studies of poverty in the Caribbean shows that although all the countries have certain shared characteristics, the situation with respect to poverty is not uniform throughout the region, especially as regards the percentages of the population that are affected by it.
In general, poor households tend to be much larger than non–poor households, their educational levels are relatively low (even in countries like Barbados, where literacy stands at 98%), they are overcrowded, and they have limited access to drinking water, health services and electricity.
Although in some cases poverty is concentrated in rural areas, urban poverty is growing quickly.
Following are some estimates drawn from a variety of sources which provide an overview of the situation with respect to poverty in the Caribbean.
It should be noted that these estimates reflect a wide range of methodologies and reference years, and therefore the data are not directly comparable with the figures for Latin America presented in this document; in several cases, in fact, they are not comparable even with the data for other countries included in the table.
In any case, the figures bring to light significant differences in living conditions from one country to another.They also show that the country with the highest poverty rate is Haiti, while those with the lowest rates are the Bahamas and Barbados.
In recent years, so–called equivalence scales have been widely used outside the region as tools for taking into account the different needs of households.
In general, equivalence scales tend to be more "discriminating" than those that are implicit in calorie requirements, since they assign less weight to consumption by minors and assume greater economies of scale for large households.
As a supplement to this analysis, box I.4 shows poverty estimates obtained by using three different equivalence scales. same token, a classification of countries by poverty rates shows that there are a few minor changes with regard to the use of equivalence scales.
In particular, all the estimates for 1999 show that Honduras and Nicaragua have the highest poverty rates, while Uruguay has the lowest.
The above analysis leads to the conclusion that the poverty trends identified earlier in this chapter are valid, and that they do not change significantly when other equivalence scales are used.
However, the use of such scales does have a significant effect on estimated poverty levels.
This is a crucial issue when it comes to choosing an equivalence scale for measuring poverty in Latin America, given that no theoretical basis has been developed for making such a choice.
It seems therefore that until such time as there is wider agreement on the application of specific equivalence scales, poverty measurements should continue to be based mainly on per capita indicators, these being defined in terms of needs in such a way as to take into account the average composition of households in the country concerned.
In the first place, the data show that the poverty rates estimated with these scales –which are preferred in some developed countries– are always lower than per capita values and that the differences cover a wide range.
In the more extreme cases, "adult–equivalent" poverty levels may be as low as 25% of the levels obtained with per capita estimates.
With the sole exception of Mexico, however, poverty trends throughout the 1990s (in per capita terms) followed a pattern similar to that of the estimates arrived at by using equivalence scales.
It is particularly important to take into account the type of measurement indicator to be used, the validity of the findings and the demographic characteristics of the households.
In any case, the FGT2 index is deemed preferable for comparative purposes, since it better reflects poverty in the various countries.
The statistical reliability of poverty measurements is also an important factor in the analysis and comparison of results.
In such a case, it can be said that there is less poverty in A, a finding that is consistent with that obtained with other more comprehensive indices (such as PG or FGT2).
If no conclusive results can be derived from H, the analysis should proceed using the PG index (second–order stochastic dominance) or, if this fails, with the FGT2 index (third–order stochastic dominance).
A third consideration in measuring poverty is that of the demographic composition of households.
The income required to satisfy a household’s needs differs according to its composition.
Consequently, variables such as total household income (or expenditure) or per capita income are inadequate as indicators of well–being, since the former disregards any demographic characteristic of the household’s members, and the latter only takes into account the number of members.
Consequently, "income per adult–equivalent" (that is, total income divided by the number of "adult–equivalents") will always be some figure between the household’s per capita income and its total income.
Equivalence scale estimates can be obtained by a variety of methods that differ in both their theoretical basis and in the mechanisms used.
For several years, considerable attention has been paid to parametric scales, which explicitly posit degrees of economies of scale and of consumption equivalences in a generic, functional manner.
Most parametric scales can be summarized in the expression (A + pN)F, where the parameter p is the consumption equivalence of a child in terms of that of an adult, parameter F represents economies of scale, and the variables A and N represent the number of adults and the number of children, respectively.
Despite the foregoing, it should be noted that there is still no consensus as to which type of scale is most appropriate for poverty studies, nor as to the value of the parameters in question.
Finally, the "LIS scale", proposed by the Luxembourg Income Study and used widely in some developed countries, is equal to the square root of the number of members in the household.
Firstly, when equivalence scales are used, poverty rates are lowered to the extent that economies of scale increase and consumer–unit equivalences decline.These reductions can be substantial, indicating that choosing an equivalence scale is no small matter when it comes to estimating poverty.
In order to enable the reader to properly interpret and compare the ECLAC findings, we shall discuss certain poverty–measurement techniques other than those used by ECLAC in Social Panorama of Latin America.The following description of the procedure followed by the World Bank to compare poverty levels internationally provides an example of an alternative methodology for calculating poverty lines.
To assess poverty comparatively between countries or over time, the World Bank uses a single poverty line.This line, which is designed to reflect the standards of poverty prevailing in lower–income countries, is calculated as the mean value of the 10 lowest national per capita poverty lines worldwide.
For 2000, this value is equivalent to US$ 32.74 PPP (purchasing power parity) per month, or US$ 1.08 per day.Thus the "dollar–a–day" line reflects an income level that is low enough for anyone to be considered poor anywhere in the world.
In addition, the World Bank usually includes in its tables a higher poverty line, which is obtained by multiplying the above value by two, and which reflects slightly higher poverty standards.
Setting a common poverty line for all countries inevitably creates problems of comparability, given the different price levels prevailing in each country.
In an effort to resolve this problem, at least in part, the Bank applies exchange rates that reflect "purchasing power parity" (PPP) –that is, exchange rates that are adjusted so that a dollar has the same purchasing power anywhere in the world.
In the case of the World Bank, the poverty line published in the World Development Report 2000–2001: The Fight against Poverty is expressed in "PPP dollars" at 1993 prices.* The final step in the poverty–measurement procedure consists of taking data from surveys conducted in the same reference year as the poverty line.
This is done by deflating the values in keeping with trends in the consumer price index (CPI) for the period in question.
It should be stressed that the poverty line described above is intended to establish a common basis for international comparisons.When the aim is to evaluate and design policy or to make a detailed analysis of the situation with respect to poverty, the World Bank itself recommends the use of poverty lines that reflect the special circumstances of each country.
Indeed, this is the type of poverty line ECLAC applies, since it takes into account calorie requirements and the demographic composition of each country.
The following table shows the estimated poverty rates for the Latin American countries provided by the World Bank in World Development Report, using international poverty lines equivalent to US$ 32.74 and US$ 65.48 per month (1993 PPP).
It should be noted that the first figure produces rather low estimates which in almost all cases are below the indigence rates shown by ECLAC.
The second figure gives rise to poverty rates which, with one exception, are lower than the estimates based on national lines. (Percentages of the population) National lines Dominican Rep.
The PPP exchange rates used here were estimated by the World Bank in the context of the International Comparison Project (ICP) 1993, covering 110 countries.These estimates are not comparable with the PPP values used in previous years (which were taken from Penn World Tables) and may vary considerably depending on the methodology followed.
The profile of poor households Most of the poor in Latin America reside in housing where they do not have access to drinking water and, to a somewhat lesser extent, in dwellings where there are more than three persons to a room.
These households also exhibit high demographic dependency rates and low employment densities.
In addition, the heads of household generally have completed fewer than three years of schooling and are unemployed in some instances.
The children and young people belonging to poor households often have deficient educational environments, begin working at an early age and, in many cases, neither study nor work.
By contrast, among the non–poor, 45 million people have incomes that are no more than 25% above the poverty line and are at risk of falling into poverty.
This population is highly vulnerable to fluctuations in the Another approach to the analysis of the living conditions of the poor, also based on income levels, entails adopting a common reference value for all countries to reflect serious monetary privation.
An income level of "one dollar a day", which has traditionally been used by the World Bank as an international poverty line, is very revealing in this respect (see box I.5).
In very general terms, it can be said that Latin America’s poor population consists of at least 190 million persons, since it is unlikely that any acceptable change in methodology would reduce the value of the poverty lines in individual countries by more than 10%.
If higher lines were used, e.g., 25% above the current values, the number of the poor would rise to 256 million, or 53% of the total population.
The estimates indicate that in 1999, 76 million people subsisted on an income of less than one dollar a day, an amount that is insufficient to meet even their minimum food needs (a capita income equivalent to one dollar a day is even lower than the average indigence line).
In the same year, about 175 million persons, or 36% of the total population, had a per capita income of less than two dollars a day.
Although these reference lines are not intended to measure indigence and poverty, they clearly reveal the vulnerability of more than a third of the Latin American population.
The above analysis may be supplemented by an examination of certain other elements of poverty that go hand in hand with lack of income and shed further light on the conditions in which the poor of the region live.
Other factors in poverty, for example, are crowded housing conditions, unemployment among heads of households and a deficient educational environment.
Households in which these conditions are present are very likely to be poor.6 vely), the latter is more widespread in the region and affects a third of poor people.
The likelihood of being poor is also related, among other factors, to the employment status and educational level of the head of household, who is usually the main breadwinner.
One of the highest probabilities of poverty (71%) is accounted for by the head of household being unemployed.
Nonetheless, the share of the poor population who are in this situation is very low (5.3%), and hence this factor has a low quantitative impact on the aggregate characterization of poverty.
Consequently, it can be inferred that no matter how well job–creation programmes target poor groups, they have only a limited capacity to make a significant impact on overall poverty.
Instead, this objective can better be achieved through actions designed to increase the income of workers, such as wage policies or training and specialization programmes.
The need for training programmes is attested to by the fact that 39% of the poor live in a household headed by a person who has completed fewer than three years of schooling, although this is also true of 18% of the non–poor.
Slightly fewer than 77 million people in the region live in overcrowded conditions (three or more people per room), with an 80% probability of being poor and 46% probability of being indigent.
Of all the characteristics analysed, this is the one that most clearly establishes the distinction between poor and non–poor groups, since overcrowding is a significant indication that incomes are too low to meet basic needs.
Some 29% of the poor live in crowded housing, while only 6% of the non–poor are in a similar situation.
Another housing indicator that reflects inadequate resources, although it is less likely to indicate poverty, is the lack of access to drinking water.
However, not only 52% of the poor but also 20% of the non–poor do not have ready access to drinking water.
One is the fact that the probability of the almost 91 million people living in households headed by women being poor is similar to the overall average; this suggests that this factor is not of itself a particular determinant of poverty.
Similarly, members of households headed by agricultural workers –who typically have low incomes– are no more likely to be poor than they are simply as a result of living in rural areas.
There is also a close correlation between the demographic composition of households and poverty, especially as regards the capacity of members to generate income.
A high rate of demographic dependency is an important factor, since the fewer the members of working age relative to the number of children and older persons in the household, the more difficult it will be to acquire the resources needed.
Similarly, low employment density, understood as the presence of one employed person for every four or more household members, is also associated with an above–average probability of being poor.
Although both factors are an indication of poverty (with probabilities of 68.1% and 65.1%, respecti- Poverty does, however, have serious implications in terms of the educational deficiencies of minors, such as the absence of schooling and dropping out of school in order to join the labour market.
The data show that children who do not attend school are very likely to be poor (76.5%).
Nevertheless, the absence of schooling is increasingly uncommon among both poor and non–poor groups, and currently 6 The "probability of poverty" is the proportion of poor people in a given category.
Among children under 15, a deficient educational environment among the adults is a further symptom of poverty. affects only 1.2% of the population and 7.9% of children aged between 6 and 12.
On the other hand, 74% of the over 83 million people under the age of 15 whose households have a deficient educational environment –where the adults average fewer than six years of schooling– are poor (56% of all children that age).
The educational environment of the household plays a major role in determining whether children and youth continue in school and improve their educational level.
Moreover, the presence in the household of young people who work or who neither study nor work is also associated with a higher–than–average probability of poverty.
In the region, slightly over 18 million young people between the ages of 15 and 19 work.
Among those aged 15 to 24, almost 22 million neither study nor work, i.e., about one fourth of the population in that age group (see table I.6).
Future scenarios in the fight against poverty Halving the current rates of extreme poverty by 2015 –one of the prime objectives of the Millennium Declaration– will call for a significant, yet feasible, effort on the part of many Latin American countries.
Given existing development patterns, economic growth will necessarily play a key role in the fulfilment of this goal, since mean per capita GDP growth of no less than 2.3% per year will be required in order to do so.
For the region as a whole, during the 1990s each percentage point of growth lowered the rate of extreme poverty by 1.21%.
In Argentina, where per capita income grew on average by 3.3% during the 1990s, poverty was reduced by a modest 0.8%, while Colom- 1.Economic growth and poverty reduction E unstable, undoubtedly played a key role in Latin conomic recovery, albeit somewhat weak and American poverty trends in the 1990s.
The statistics confirm that in periods of growth, poverty rates tended to fall in most countries, while periods of contraction or economic stagnation led to a deterioration in the living conditions of the population, especially among those with fewer resources.
Notwithstanding the clear link between economic growth and poverty reduction, it was also clear, as noted in previous editions of Social Panorama, that These differences in national circumstances during the 1990s were reflected in a broad range of values of the elasticity coefficient linking changes in per capita GDP with poverty.
In some countries, this elasticity –calculated in specific terms– reached a value of almost -1 (Chile, Costa Rica and Guatemala) or was somewhat more marked, ranging between -1 and -1.5 (Panama).
This means that each percentage point of growth was reflected in an equivalent change in poverty or a reduction of slightly more than one point in the poverty rate, depending on the situation; in other countries, however, there were mar- bia’s growth of only 0.6% allowed for poverty to be reduced just slightly less than in Argentina (0.3%).
Among the countries in which GDP remained more or less at a standstill, Honduras nonetheless managed to avert an increase in poverty and to attenuate the growth of indigence to about 0.7% a year, while Venezuela did not manage to prevent some deterioration of social conditions, with poverty rising by 2.4% and indigence by 4.5%.
The same was true of Ecuador, where poverty and indigence grew by 0.2% and 2.0%, in that order (see table I.7).
Taking this dispersion into account, the coefficient for Latin America as a whole stood at about -0.70 for poverty and -1.30 for indigence or extreme poverty. lies, and the greater or lesser stability of growth –this latter by virtue of the well–known asymmetry in the different stages of the economic cycle with respect to poverty trends (see figure I.2).
The above considerations confirm that although economic growth is important, it is not the only determinant of poverty reduction.
It also shows the different effect of growth in different geographical contexts.
Moreover, the sensitivity of the indigence indicator is not uniform throughout the region.
Those economies that traditionally have been able to keep levels of extreme poverty below the Latin American average (18.5%) –Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Panama and Uruguay– are in a better position to promote positive changes in the living standards of households as a result of growth in per capita GDP.
In this group of countries, every point of growth in output has a 27% greater impact in reducing indigence than in the group of countries whose poverty levels were above the regional average during the last decade.
Nevertheless, the recent experience of the region suggests that caution is required in applying the fin- 8 Although it is widely recognized that econometric analysis is a useful tool for studying relationships between different economic variables, it should be borne in mind that the lack of systematic information on other dimensions limits the modelling exercise.
It is therefore very difficult to use these models to determine exactly how different circumstances interact to explain the behaviour of a phenomenon as multidimensional and complex as poverty.
In particular, recent studies (de Javry and Sadoulet, 2000 and ECLAC, 2000) show that there is an inverse relationship between per capita gross domestic product (GDP) and the incidence of poverty.The higher the rate of economic growth, the greater the decline in poverty, especially in those countries where the growth of per capita output has been significant.
In periods of economic contraction or stagnation, moreover, poverty levels rise quickly, evidencing the sensitivity of this indicator to declines in real household incomes.As several studies show (Fields, 1982; Morley, 1992 and Psacharopoulos et al, 1997), poverty rises faster during crises than it falls in periods of economic recovery and expansion.
While growth evidently helps reduce poverty, there are a number of different factors that affect the value of the elasticity coefficient (ε).
For all the countries, in the period 1990–1999, every percentage point of increase in per capita output led to a 1.21% decline in the national poverty rate.
In urban areas the coefficient was -1.65, while in rural areas it was -0.61.This reflects the differences in the effect of growth in the two areas and shows that efforts to improve living standards have had less impact in rural areas.
It also appears that the values of ε differ from country to country; the contrast is especially striking when countries are grouped according to relative levels of development.
Economies with lower rates of extreme poverty (H ≤ 18%) benefited more from increases in output, while those with average or high poverty levels showed less improvement because their economic recovery was slow or, in some cases, because they had experienced periods of stagnation and crisis.
It also appears that economic progress is more effective in lowering extreme poverty (H) than in reducing overall poverty (indigence plus moderate poverty).
Finally, it is evident that the poverty severity index (FGT2) is more sensitive, since the estimated elasticity coefficients are higher than in the case of the H index.
This confirms the differences in the performance of households in different geographical contexts.
The low levels of well–being that are evident in different regions of the world, as well as the rapid deterioration in the quality of life in some countries, have intensified concerns about the increase in poverty and exclusion, which undermine stability and social order.
The matter has been taken up increasingly by the international community, and there is now broad consensus regarding the urgent need to make a concerted effort to alleviate poverty, reduce inequality and improve living standards among the people of the developing world.
In the case of Latin America, the challenge means that initiatives undertaken over the next 15 years must be geared towards promoting and coordinating economic and social development policies that will give millions of people access to a basic consumption threshold that provides them with minimum conditions of health and productive participation in the economy.
At this historic event, rulers from all over the world undertook to participate actively in meeting the new development goals established for the coming decades, as summarized in the Millennium Declaration.
The goals and commitments set forth in the Millennium Declaration are based on certain values that are considered to be essential to international relations, such as freedom, equality, solidarity, tolerance, respect for nature and shared responsibility.
In this context, the duties of the global community include seeking solutions to problems relating to world peace and disarmament, development and poverty eradication, protection of the environment, human rights and democracy, protection of the vulnerable, special attention to the needs of Africa and strengthening of the United Nations.
The fact that the countries explicitly decided to meet certain shared development objectives and set new goals makes the Millennium Declaration an historic document.
Given the great diversity of economic performance between and within countries and as the different results obtained in the area of poverty reduction, each situation will call for different actions, since, as mentioned above, a given growth rate has different effects in different countries and varying impacts in urban and rural areas.
Among the more backward countries –in which the average indigence rate is about 25%– per capita income would have to grow by about 2.7% a year over a 15–year period, requiring a GDP growth rate of nearly 4.5% per year.
This is more than 60% higher than the rate required to meet the same goal in urban areas (1.9%) (see table I.8).
At the start of the new millennium, it is estimated that 18% of the Latin American population lives in extreme poverty.
This means that overall economic activity will have to increase at a minimum annual rate of 3.8%.
Overall, the scenarios outlined above suggest that Latin America will have to make a major effort (although in a context of relative viability) if it is to make satisfactory progress towards meeting the United Nations goal of reducing poverty over the next 15 years.
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that some countries are in a better position than others to achieve this, given the disparities mentioned above.
Meeting this goal unquestionably represents a tremendous challenge given the present development context, coming after the sharp recession of the 1980s and the moderate growth rates of the 1990s.
Nevertheless, the growth required to cut poverty in half is not beyond the reach of the region’s economies.
It is worth recalling that average rates similar to or higher than those mentioned were achieved and sustained during the 1950s, 1960s and 1970s.
Consequently, if the necessary changes take place to enable Latin America to recover its historical growth rate, 15 years might be enough not only to meet the goal of the Millennium Declaration, but also to cut overall poverty in half.
An even more ambitious goal for the region, which would be consistent with the relative progress made by the region in the international arena, would be to halve not only extreme poverty but also the percentage of non–indigent poor.
In aggregate terms, achieving this goal would entail attaining per capita GDP Chapter II Income distribution: characteristics and trends In the late 1990s, the income distribution profile of most of the Latin American countries continued to be one of sharp inequalities.
This was reflected, among other things, in the fact that a substantial share of total income was in the hands of the wealthiest 10% of households, whose income was 19 times higher than the average income of the poorest 40% of households.
What is more, the latest estimates indicate that in most of the countries this situation did not improve to any significant degree during the 1990s, and in some countries it actually worsened, despite the relative pickup in economic growth and the increase in social spending.
During the 3 years from 1997 to 1999, the situation tended to worsen, despite the increase in average household income in several Latin American countries during that period.
In the six cases in which the share of the highest decile rose significantly, the increases were higher than one percentage point, and in one case, four points (Ecuador).
At the same time, among the five countries in which this group saw its share of total income decline, only in one (Bolivia) did this decline amount to more than two percentage points.
The high degree of income concentration prevailing in the region becomes evident when an analysis is made of the share of overall income that is received by the various groups of households, classified in terms of their per capita income.
This In contrast to the relative share of the wealthiest decile, the share of total income corresponding to the poorest 40% of households is very small –between 9% and 15% of total income– in almost all the countries except Uruguay, where the figure is nearly 22%.
In other words, the combined income of two reveals a high concentration.
At the same time, over the past three years, only four of the countries studied (Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Panama) saw an increase in the percentage of income received by the poorest 40% of households.
In the other cases, even those with a more equitable distribution, the share of the first four deciles shrank or underwent only minor changes (see table II.1).
The high income concentration prevailing in Latin America can also be inferred from the value of a number of synthetic indices, such as the inequality index or Gini coefficient, which make it possible to compare overall income distribution in different countries or different periods.
At the end of the 1990s, a country ranking based on the Gini coefficient (calculated using the per capita income distribution for individuals),3 showed the highest concentration to be in Brazil, with a Gini coefficient of 0.64, and in Bolivia, Nicaragua, and Guatemala, in that order, which had values close to 0.60.
Uruguay and Costa Rica again had the least inequality, with indices below 0.48 (see box II.2).
The trend was somewhat more uneven among the fifth, sixth, and seventh deciles, whose share fell in seven countries and rose in six.
Interestingly, the share of the first seven deciles posted declined simultaneously in quite a few cases, which in and of itself suggests a further concentration of income distribution.1 Thus, in most countries the percentage of income received by the lower–income groups shrank while the share of the richest decile rose considerably.
It is therefore obvious that in the three–year period from 1997 to 1999, income distribution worsened throughout the region, just as it did during the 1990s as a whole, as we shall see later on.
Inequality nationwide does not necessarily follow the same pattern in urban and rural areas.4 In most countries, the former tend to be less equitable than the latter.
Thus, in 7 of 13 cases, the Gini coefficient for urban areas is higher than for rural areas; the most striking cases are those of Brazil, Chile, and Colombia, where the differences between the indices around 1999 were 0.049 point in Brazil and 0.042 point in the other two.
Nonetheless, the situation is quite different in some countries, where income concentration is much higher in rural areas than in urban areas.
Among the countries that are in the latter situation, the largest gaps between urban and rural Gini coefficients are found in Bolivia and Moreover, a simple comparison of the average income of the various household groups reveals a high degree of inequity in Latin America.
In countries such as Bolivia, Brazil and Nicaragua, the per capita income of the richest quintile (20% of households) is more than 30 times greater than the income of the poorest quintile.
The case of Bolivia is particularly striking, as there the income of the top quintile is almost 50 times greater than the income of the bottom quintile, whereas the average in the other countries is 23 times.
The ratio of the income of the wealthiest decile to the income of the four poorest deciles also 1 The most striking exception in this regard is Panama.
In this connection, see box II.1. 4 As is well known, average income levels are different in the two areas and are always higher in urban zones.Although in some cases, these differences are relatively small (in Costa Rica, for example), in others, significant disparities are evident.
In Bolivia, average income in urban areas is more than double the average income in rural areas (see table 22 of the Statistical Appendix).
Another form of the above indicator is the percentage of persons with per capita incomes below half of the mean; this option is particularly appropriate to illustrate the heterogeneity of income distribution in the region, inasmuch as it describes a more irregular pattern of distribution.
For example, although Uruguay and Costa Rica have practically the same percentage of persons with incomes below the mean, they are shown to be four percentage points apart when 50% of this level is used as a threshold.
An analysis of variations in Gini coefficients appears to corroborate the existence of a deterioration in distribution over the last three years.
The index rose in seven countries (for which figures having a comparable coverage are available) and declined in four.
Uruguay, Costa Rica, Venezuela and the Dominican Republic make up the group with the least concentration, since the share in question is under 40%, while Brazil is the only case in which more than half of the population has less than 50% of the mean income (see table II.2).
Another indicator that confirms the above mentioned income concentration is the percentage of persons whose per capita income is below the overall average.
Average per capita income in Latin America falls between the seventh and eighth decile, with the share of the population whose incomes are below that threshold ranging from 67% to 77%, depending on the country.
This means that at present, around three fourths of all households receive less than the average income, and as a result any increases in per capita GDP are captured to a much greater extent by the 25% of households with the highest incomes than by all the rest.
Consequently, Uruguay and Costa Rica are the countries with the lowest percentage of individuals receiving less than the average per capita income, while Brazil and Guatemala are at the opposite end of the scale (see table II.2).
Indeed, this method has been used in other countries to gauge "relative poverty," this being understood as a situation in which income is insufficient to afford a level of consumption commensurate with the standards prevailing in a given society.
In this case, the indicator is used somewhat like a traditional poverty line, except that it moves together with fluctuations in average income (see box II.2). 5 Another trait that is common to much of the region is that nationwide inequality is greater than inequality in urban and rural areas taken separately.
The only exceptions are Bolivia and Paraguay (where the rural coefficient is higher than the national one).The fact that inequality nationwide is sometimes greater than inequality in the urban and rural subgroups is an indication that the disparities in income distribution between areas can play an extremely important role in shaping the pattern of income distribution.
Its popularity stems from the ease with which it can be represented graphically based on the Lorenz curve, even though it does not meet all the usual criteria for measuring inequality (for a summary of these criteria, see box II.3).
The Gini coefficient is different from other indicators of inequality, among other things, because of the many methodological options that are available for calculating it.
A wide range of formulas can be used that are not necessarily equivalent to each other, given that there is no explicit algebraic formulation for the Lorenz curve.
Another range of options has to do with the process of gathering and organizing data prior to calculating the index.
In this regard, the options are either to use the same variable for both processes or to use different variables, depending on the analytical purpose of the exercise.
Traditionally, the Gini coefficients presented in the Social Panorama series have been based on a ranking of households by per capita income and total cumulative income.
Nevertheless, some degree of consensus has been emerging recently favoring the use of a single analytical variable, preferably per capita income of individuals.
Beginning with this edition, therefore, in order to make it easier to compare these findings with other measures of inequality, both the ranking of individuals and the aggregation of their income are based on per capita income.
The clarification should be made, however, that in the great majority of cases, this change in methodology only affects the level of Gini coefficients, which turns out to be higher than in previous editions.
However, both the comparisons of degrees of inequality between countries and the trends in concentration over time in individual countries remain practically unchanged.
One simple method is to estimate the percentage of the population whose income is below the average or is a fraction of the average.The higher this percentage, the greater is the difference between the higher and lower values for distribution or, in other words, the greater is the inequality of distribution.
Some countries, particularly in Western Europe, regularly use this type of indicator to gauge "relative poverty." The term "relative poverty" refers to the notion that people are disadvantaged when they are unable to fit into society because they cannot afford certain items that are considered basic in that society.
Bearing this in mind, some fraction of average income might reasonably be used as a "relative poverty line." This figure typically ranges between 40% and 60% of income, represented as either the mean or the median distribution.
Nevertheless, there are several practical drawbacks to this method of measuring "relative poverty." One is the highly arbitrary choice involved in defining the income–level indicator (mean or median) and the respective cut–off fraction, or the fact that the poverty line has an elasticity of one with regard to mean income.
Nevertheless, these difficulties aside, this approach underscores the strong interrelationship that exists between definitions and measurements of poverty and income distribution and the advantages of integrating the analysis of the two dimensions.
Income distribution in Latin America tended to worsen over the past decade in the wake of a number of economic crises and did not improve appreciably as growth was restored.
The most severe recessions hurt the poorest 40% of households most of all, while the wealthiest 10% managed to increase their share of total income and to maintain or expand it during booms.
The changes experienced by the intermediate strata were more modest and were not comparable to those of the groups at either end of the scale; in many countries, they had enough bargaining power to be able to benefit, at least partially, from improvements in productivity.
In the 1990s, the share of income received nationwide by households in the top decile increased in eight countries, declined in five (although the decline was significant in only two, Honduras6 and Uruguay) and held steady in one (Mexico).
Prominent among the countries in which this group’s share increased are several that had been characterized by a better income distribution, relatively speaking, during the post–war period.
In Chile, it remained at slightly above 40%, and in Uruguay, it rose from 26% to he pattern of income distribution for the decade as a whole also reflects the trend towards concentration, which has characterized the Latin American economies for many years now.
Indeed, although over the past decade most countries have managed to boost average household income, marked inequality persists and in several cases the huge gaps between rich and poor have even widened.
The share of total income received by this group was very similar at the beginning and the end of the decade in Chile, Colombia (between 1994 and 1999), Guatemala, Mexico and Venezuela.
The most interesting case is that of Venezuela, where the intermediate groups maintained their share in spite of the serious crisis that hit the country in the last half of the 1990s.
Only El Salvador (from 1995 to 1999), Honduras and Uruguay posted major gains in the relative income received by the intermediate strata, which, in the latter two cases, came at the expense of the top decile.
Brazil and Ecuador are the only countries in which relative incomes in this group fell by more than three percentage points, as a result of the strong relative gains made by the upper–income strata.
In Argentina, the intermediate groups saw their share of income drop steadily throughout the decade (2.6 percentage points), and in Chile, this group’s share shrank by 0.8 percentage point from 1996 to 2000, thus undoing the cumulative gains of the first half of the 1990s.
In Uruguay, however, although the share of intermediate groups also fell by 0.8 percentage point between 1997 and 1999, this decline did not reverse the strong improvement of previous years.
In any event, despite these fluctuations, the trend in the income share of intermediate groups indicates that in some countries these groups have more powerful means of defending their share of total income than poor groups do. 27% between 1997 and 1999, even though it had declined at the beginning and the end of the decade.
The share of the highest decile also increased in Brazil, Ecuador, Nicaragua and Panama, from 44% to that order.
In contrast, in some countries, such as Colombia (between 1994 and 1999), El Salvador and Honduras, the share of the highest–income group declined, less than two percentage points in Colombia and El Salvador, but more than that in Honduras (see table II.1).
Over the past decade, the share in total income of the top 10% of households continued to increase in most countries.
This in itself is highly significant, not only because it supports the assertion that income distribution in Latin America has shown a tendency to worsen, but also because, as mentioned earlier, this group’s already large share is considered decisive in the categorization of the region as the one with the worst income distribution worldwide.
Trends differed with regard to the percentage of income received by the poorest 40% of households, which fell during the decade in five countries, rose in eight and held steady in one (Nicaragua).
Some of the steepest declines were in the countries that experienced major crises (Ecuador and Venezuela), but El Salvador, Costa Rica and Mexico also fell back somewhat.
Moreover, where there were improvements, they were relatively minor, as they surpassed two percentage points in just one case (Colombia between 1994 and 1997, followed, however, by a slight deterioration from 1997 to 1999); they amounted to one percentage point in three others (Honduras, Uruguay and Guatemala); and only around 0.5% in the rest (Brazil, Chile, Argentina and Panama).
As a result of the above trends, most of the countries have experienced a widening of the gap between the two groups of households in terms of average income, which strengthens the impression that income distribution has worsened.
Among 13 countries in which nationwide data were available for the beginning and end of the decade, eight saw an increase in the ratio between the incomes of the highest decile and that of the poorest 40%, while only four saw a decline and one showed no change.
The countries in which this disparity increased most notably were Ecuador (urban area), Costa Rica, Venezuela and Argentina, while the sharpest declines occurred in Colombia (between 1994 and 1997) and probably in Honduras as well (see figure II.1).
In at least seven countries, changes in income share –increases and decreases alike– amounted to two percentage points or less.
As for the Gini coefficient, the largest increases nationwide in the 1990s were seen in Costa Rica (where conditions also worsened from 1997 to 1999) and Venezuela.
Although to a lesser extent, inequality in income distribution was also somewhat greater at the end than at the beginning of the decade in Brazil and El Salvador (between 1995 and 1999), while in Chile, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua and Panama, the situation remained relatively unchanged.
Uruguay (urban area) and Honduras, as well as Colombia (from 1994 to 1999), were the only countries of the region that managed to reduce income concentration, as gauged by the Gini index, during this period (see figure II.2).
Another group of countries that succeeded in lowering inequality indicators in urban areas over the past decade was that made up of Honduras, Bolivia, Mexico, Guatemala and Panama.
In some of these, however, the 1999 levels are still among the highest in the region.
At the same time, rural inequality, in the countries in which it could be measured, increased in six cases (especially in Costa Rica and Mexico and, to a lesser extent, in Brazil, Nicaragua, Guatemala and Panama) and decreased in three, namely, Chile, Honduras and Colombia (see figure II.2).
Among the countries mentioned, Brazil, in particular, is faced with the serious challenge of attempting to reverse the moderate but rising trend in respect of 7 It should be borne in mind that this index can also be used to measure "relative poverty", as noted in box II.1.
In the case of Argentina, the figures refer to Greater Buenos Aires, while for Ecuador and Uruguay they refer to the urban areas.
For urban areas, in Argentina the figure refer to Greater Buenos Aires, while for Bolivia (1990) and Paraguay (1990 and 1997), they refer to the eight main cities and the Asunción metropolitan area, respectively.
For specific years covered by estimates, see tables 23 and 24 in the Statistical Appendix.
In summary, even though many countries managed to expand their economies and significantly increase their social expenditure in the 1990s, and despite a continuing and justified concern about distributional issues, the fact is that for the most part Latin America has not succeeded in making any substantial improvement in income distribution in recent years.
Consequently, although economic growth over the past decade has, as expected, been translated into relative progress in reducing absolute poverty, the growth of output has not had the same effect (either in the direction or the intensity of the changes) on how the fruits of such growth are distributed.
Furthermore, the consensus is that no promising signals are in evidence at the present time that would provide reason to believe that this situation will change significantly in the short or medium term.
A comprehensive analysis makes it possible to round out the description of income trends among upper–, middle– and low–income groups with additional data that confirm the assessments made earlier in Social Panorama regarding certain unique aspects of Latin American economies and societies.
In general, income distribution is not clearly related to level of development in the countries.
For example, Argentina and Uruguay, which stand out for their high income levels in the regional context, currently have very different distribution structures and trends.
The situation is similar in the case of the economies with lower average incomes, in which inequalities may be high, intermediate or low (see tables II.3 and II.4).
It should also be noted that in the 1980s and 1990s, some countries maintained the status quo in terms of distribution, while in others, the situation changed substantially.
Argentina and Chile, which in the 1960s stood out among the Latin American countries for their relatively good income distribution patterns, are currently close to the regional average and some of their indicators are even higher.
In contrast, Uruguay and Costa Rica have maintained a social and political structure that tends to protect income distribution, above and beyond the changes in the domestic economy and in external economic relations that have occurred in recent years.
Also noteworthy in this regard is Venezuela; although it experienced a serious crisis in the second half of the 1990s and its income distribution worsened considerably over the decade, it is still less inequitable than most of the other countries in the region.
In fact, of the 17 countries analyzed, only two (Honduras8 and Uruguay) closed out the decade with results that show progress in reducing distributional inequality.
It is encouraging, nevertheless, that over the past decade, some Central American countries made some progress –albeit to different degrees and with different scope– with regard to income distribution in urban areas, notwithstanding the high levels of concentration that still exists in the region.
It is therefore advisable to use other types of indices to supplement analyses based on the values obtained with this indicator or any other specific measurement.
Accordingly, table II.2 also shows estimates obtained with the log–variance, Theil and Atkinson indices, all three being indicators that are particularly sensitive to what occurs at the lower end of the distribution scale, independently of income categories.
Although the magnitudes of these indicators are not comparable to each other, a final conclusion as to the direction of changes in the situation with respect to inequality should be supported, to the extent possible, by all of them (see box II.4).
Alternative measures of income concentration and the use of "equivalence scales" As indicated in the previous chapter with regard to poverty measurement, a single indicator to gauge distributional inequality may not be sufficient to fully describe the characteristics and evolution of the phenomenon over time.
In general, they can be classified as: (i) traditional statistical indicators (absolute and relative range, statistical indicators of order, average relative deviation, variance, variation coefficient, and log variance); (ii) entropy measures (Theil index); (iii) Gini coefficient; (iv) social welfare functions (Dalton and Atkinson indices), and (v) Lorenz curve.
Given the importance of these criteria and in light of certain practical considerations, certain indices that are normally used to analyse income distribution have been chosen.
Thus, the Lorenz curve is a basic statistical tool, since it shows the pattern of income distribution and the share held by the different groups in the population.
In addition, given the ease with which it can be calculated and interpreted, the Gini coefficient (derived from the Lorenz curve) has become one of the most widely used indicators despite its limitations with regard to additive decomposition.
In addition, the Theil and Atkinson indices are highly recommended, given their usefulness for theoretical purposes and their emphasis on lower incomes in the measurement of inequality.
As far as the comparability of findings among these indicators is concerned, it should be noted that they are all ordinal in nature, they show different ranges of variation, and they meet different criteria; hence, the values obtained are not comparable.
Moreover, since they all measure only partial aspects of inequality, the results they generate are normally organized differently.
Consequently, a definitive ranking for a given group of distributions can only be established if the group is kept constant regardless of the index used.
Inequality indices should therefore be used to complement each other and an overall analysis should be made of all the results.
Lastly, it should be noted that the values of a single index are comparable between different populations, but only as ordinal figures; in other words, they only show where greater or lesser inequality exists, but not the magnitude of the differences.
Thus, the following inequality indices are commonly used for empirical studies: i) Variation coefficient squared: µ where µ represents the average income in the distribution and V the variance.
With the exception of the Gini and Atkinson indices, which range from 0 to 1, the values of the other indicators do not have an upper limit.
In all instances, however, values equal to zero are interpreted as the absence of inequality (when all individuals have the same income).
The values of these indices are strictly ordinal in nature and cannot be compared to each other, inasmuch as each one could lead to a different ranking.
In any event, the results yielded by a single indicator can be compared over time.
Moreover, it is important to bear in mind certain relationships between the above indicators that also justify analysing them jointly.
For example, IAε, with parameter ε= 1, is ordinally equivalent to IT.There is also a relationship between VL and IAε, with ε = 2, while CV2 belongs to the same family of indices as IT.
Given that each indicator analyses only one aspect of the inequality problem, the indices will not necessarily generate the same value or display a uniform trend over time.
Hence the importance of simultaneously using a number of different indicators, in order to broaden the opportunities for analysis.
The estimated values of these indices allow two major conclusions to be drawn about trends in inequality and, in the case of some countries, qualify the above comments on Gini index results.
Firstly, the Gini coefficient, despite its limitations, yields conclusive findings regarding recent changes in inequality in about six countries of the region.
As noted above in connection with poverty estimates, the economic literature recommends the use of "equivalence scales" to take into account the different needs of households that are attributable to the specific characteristics of their members.
In this regard, the high levels of distributional inequality in the region and the trends noted in recent years would not be substantially altered if these scales were added to calculations of income–concentration indicators.
In Brazil, for example, the Gini coefficient and the Theil index show a deterioration in income distribution, in contrast to the findings obtained with the variance of logarithms and the Atkinson index.
In this case, the apparent contradiction might suggest that whereas the lowest–income groups improved their share during the decade, other low–income groups that are in a relatively better position saw theirs shrink.
A similar interpretation might be applied in the case of Guatemala, where the levelling off of inequality shown by the Gini coefficient is not consistent with the declines shown by the log variance and the Atkinson index or with the rise in the Theil index.
In general, the value of this income–concentration index, as estimated with the aforementioned scales, tends to be lower than the value obtained when the per capita criterion is used, but the differences between this and any of the others are quite small (the maximum difference noted was 0.04 in the value of the Gini coefficient).
Only in two of the cases analysed was there an increase (albeit minimal) rather than a decrease in inequality (Guatemala in The trends reflected by this indicator when equivalence scales are used are practically the same as the ones noted previously.
Except in one case (Guatemala), all the countries that show increased concentration, as gauged by per capita income, display the same trend when the OECD and USA scales are used, and all but two (Guatemala and Panama) display the same trend with the LIS scale.
Furthermore, using equivalences does not produce any significant changes in the ranking of countries by degree of inequality, compared to the ranking by per capita income.
The usual indicators, total income (or expenditure) and per capita income (or expenditure) are inadequate for this purpose, since the former makes no distinction between households, while the latter ignores the possible differences in needs that are attributable to the characteristics of the members of the household.
The USA scale, which is recommended for determining the United States poverty line, follows the formula (A + 0.7 C)0.7.
Lastly, the LIS (Luxembourg Income Study) scale, used extensively in some developed countries, is equivalent to the square root of the number of members in the household.
Trends in employment and changes in the occupational structure During the 1990s, the job supply rose in Latin America at an average annual rate of 2.6%, while the demand for workers increased at 2.2%.
As a result of inadequate job creation, unemployment rose significantly in that period to around 8.6% (over 18 million persons) by the end of the decade.
At the same time, there was a decline in the quality of employment –measured in terms of the degree of informality of the economy– given that 7 out of every 10 new jobs in urban areas were generated in the informal or low–productivity sectors.
Over the last ten years, the female labour force participation rate increased from 37.9% to 42.0% and there was a trend towards the feminization of some occupations; however, the male/female unemployment gap has widened further.
T 1990s underwent significant changes owing to he employment market in Latin America in the the fertility rate.
The number of persons under age 15, which had been growing very slowly during the first half of the decade (at an annual rate of 0.4%), rose just 0.2% in the latter part of the decade.
Also, the population aged over 64 years, which still represents just over 5% of the total, increased at a relatively constant rate during the decade (3.1%) (see table III.1 and figure III.1). the interaction between trends in labour supply and demand.
The increase in the supply of labour was accentuated by certain demographic changes that occurred during the period, especially the marked growth in the working–age population and, in the case of urban areas, the continuing process of migration to the towns.
Also, labour demand maintained a lower growth rate than labour supply, leaving an increasing share of the population without jobs, particularly in urban areas.
Owing to the gradual decrease in the under–15 age group’s share of the total population and to the over–64 age group’s continuing small share, population growth in the decade was concentrated in the intermediate age group (persons aged between 15 and 64 years).
As a result, the working–age population (WAP) grew at an average annual rate of 2.4% during the decade.
In addition to causing a marked reduction in the demographic dependency rate of more than nine percentage points (from 68.8% to 59.6%), this allowed for a significant increase in the economically active population (EAP) (see figure III.2).
The series of phenomena described above are referred to as the "demographic bonus" of the 1990s, a terms which alludes to the potential increase in regional production that could have been generated as a result of the new demographic structure.
However, as has been pointed out by ECLAC (ECLAC, 2000, chapter 2), the benefits of this "bonus" are not necessarily a given.
The opportunity of raising per capita output based on an increase in the available labour force was in fact wasted during the decade. 1990).
The extent of the growth of the active population is particularly evident in the rise in the labour force participation rate (the ratio of EAP to WAP), which increased from 61.0% to 62.4% during the 1990s.
This phenomenon was noticeable especially in the urban areas, where the ratio rose by two percentage points (from 59.6% to 61.6%), while in rural areas both the EAP and the WAP increased at a similar rate (0.8% per annum), with the participation rate remaining relatively constant (around 64.9%).
Changes in this rate at the aggregate level stem essentially from the rapid growth in the female EAP.
As described in detail below, the female participation rate rose significantly between 1990 and 1999, in contrast with the gradual reduction that occurred in the male participation rate (see table III.2).
In that demographic context, the EAP grew at an average annual average rate of 2.6%.
While the urban population increased at an average annual rate of 2.3%, the rural population remained fairly stable, rising by just 0.1% per annum.
In 1999, urban dwellers accounted for 75% of the total population of Latin America, a share that is four percentage points higher than it was in 1990.
This phenomenon had a significant effect on the change in labour supply, which was concentrated in urban areas.
Of the 44 million persons who joined the economically active population in the 1990s, 93% live in urban areas.
As a result, more than three fourths of the region’s labour force (76.3%) is now located in the cities, as compared to 72% in 1990. growing labour force.
New jobs were created at an average annual rate of 2.2%, enabling 34 million people to find work, raising the total number of employed workers to 194 million in 1999.
As a result, the number of unemployed persons rose considerably during the 1990s (by an annual rate of 10.1%, with much of this increase being concentrated in 1997–1999).
Thus, during the decade more than 10 million people joined the ranks of the unemployed, who represented 8.6% of the labour force (slightly over 18 million people), as compared to 4.6% in 1990 (for an explanation of certain differences between the regional unemployment figures presented here and others included further on in this chapter, see box III.1).
As was to be expected, this marked and steady increase in the economically active population has generated a great deal of pressure for more job creation.
In particular, the urban unemployment levels shown here tend to be somewhat higher than those published in other sources.
These discrepancies arise from a number of factors that have to do with how household surveys –the primary sources of information used in measuring unemployment– are conducted.
A first point to be considered is the fact that in some cases (such as in Brazil, Chile and Mexico) different surveys were used, and the sampling designs and data–gathering tools (questionnaires) were also different.
For example, the unemployment estimates for Bolivia that appear in this section cover all the urban areas of the country and not just the departmental capitals, as is the case with the official statistics.
Lastly, the reference periods used also play an important role in explaining the discrepancies in unemployment estimates.
Although in some cases this may give rise to discrepancies with most published unemployment statistics, it was decided that for the sake of consistency, the national surveys used in preparing chapters I and II of this edition of Social Panorama should also be used for this chapter.
Using a single source of information allows for direct comparisons to be made between the figures on poverty, income concentration and unemployment, thus facilitating the analysis of the interrelationship between these phenomena.
Finally, it should be stressed that both sets of figures show similar trends, in particular as they both indicate that unemployment rose in the region during the 1990s.Thus, the main conclusions on employment put forward in this chapter are consistent with either source.
During the 1990s, the growth rates of both employment and overall output fell steadily in the region, and this decline was accentuated during the last three years of the decade.
Between 1990 and 1994, employment grew at an average annual rate of 2.4%, while output increased at an annual rate of 4.1%.
During the next period (1994–1997), the rate of increase in employment fell slightly (from 2.4% to 2.3%), while the rate of increase in output dropped by eight tenths of a point (from 4.1% to 3.3%).
Between 1997 and 1999, however, the growth rate of both variables fell sharply; thus, the annual growth rates fell to 1.6% in the case of employment and 1.3% in the case of GDP.
In addition to reflecting the slowdown of the economy during the 1990s, these figures bring to light a gradual decline in average labour productivity, which has become more serious in recent years (see figure III.3).
By the end of the decade, half the jobs in the region were held by persons in the intermediate age group (aged between 25 and 44 years), who totalled 96 million, while nearly all the remaining 50% of jobs were held by young persons (aged between 15 and 24 years).
In the over–45 age group, the under–60s were the largest group; even so, just over 14 million people of near–retirement age were still active participants in the labour force (see table III.3).
These changes are reflected, for example, in increases in the relative size of certain age groups and educational categories, in such groups’ position within different production sectors and in the growing participation of women in certain types of occupations.
The slow growth (0.7% per annum) in demand for workers in agriculture (a sector which was unable to absorb the increased supply of labour in rural areas and thus encouraged migration) led to a steady fall in its share, to the benefit of other, faster–growing sectors of employment.
The most noticeable of these is the sector comprising financial, insurance, real estate and business services, which practically doubled in size between 1990 and 1999, thanks to a growth of 12.6% per annum in the first four years of the decade, followed by increases of around 4% per annum in subsequent periods.
Commerce, transport and communications are also among the sectors that generated the most jobs during the decade, providing work for 35% of newly employed persons in that period.
Although the structure of employment by age group was characterized by a predominance of young persons throughout the decade, the upward trend in the average age of the workforce is clearly noticeable.
This phenomenon is most evident in the increasing participation of employed persons aged between 45 and 59 years and in the steady decline in those between the ages of 15 and 24, whose number declined by almost 200,000 from 1997 to 1999.
As regards the educational level of the labour force, in 1999 over one third of the region’s employed population –approximately 73 million people– had fewer than six years of schooling.
A significant but slightly smaller group (31% of the employed population) was made up of persons who had completed between six and nine years of education.
Thus, nearly 7 out of every 10 employed persons had fewer than 10 years of schooling and only 13% had gone on to higher education (more than 12 years).
By contrast, employment in the agricultural sector came to a virtual standstill in the 1990s, as it grew at an average annual rate of less than 1%.
The limited ability of agriculture to create new jobs largely explains the gradual abandonment of rural areas –mainly farmland– and the migration to urban areas, a phenomenon already noted as one of the demographic characteristics of the decade.
The increase in this latter group was particularly marked in the second half of the decade.
All other occupations, including those concerned with the provision of social, personal and domestic services, showed more or less average growth, maintaining relatively stable participation rates.
In urban areas, where these sectors are most prominent, the service industry displayed slightly stronger growth in recent years, particularly in the case of domestic service, which increased on average by 2.4% per annum.
With regard to the sectoral structure of employment, by 1999 agriculture, commerce and the social services were the branches of economic activity in which the largest numbers of employed persons were concentrated, with each one accounting for approximately one fifth of all jobs.
Of the three, agriculture continues to be the predominant activity, providing work for almost 40 million persons throughout the region.
At the other end of the scale, financial, domestic and personal services are the sectors with the lowest participation; these three categories together account for approximately 15% of the employed population, a percentage similar to that of industry.
About 66 million urban dwellers currently work in the informal or low–productivity sector, which accounts for around 48% of urban employment in Latin America.
Some 52% of the urban employed labour force –around 70 million people– are engaged in activities that fall within the scope of the informal sector (see table The breakdown of the employed population among establishments of different sizes is relatively even.
Each of the categories (micro–, medium–sized and large enterprises) provides work for about 30% of the employed labour force.
The remaining 11% are employed at small establishments comprising between 6 and 10 persons.
Over the decade, the largest increases occurred in establishments with fewer than 6 workers and in those employing more than 50.
Between them, the two categories generated about 15 As suggested by the growing proportion of low–productivity jobs, occupational instability increased in the 1990s.
While the female EAP grew at an annual rate of 3.6%, women’s employment increased at only 2.8%.
Female unemployment thus rose from 5.1% to 11.2% during the decade, and the spread of 0.8 percentage point between female and male unemployment rates in 1990 turned into a gap of 4 percentage points nine years later.
Another interesting feature of the region’s occupational structure is that four out of every 10 employed persons (over 82 million individuals) are secondary workers, i.e., persons whose income is less than that of the main breadwinner in the household.
This means that a significant share of households manage to increase their occupational density by having more than one member participating in the labour market.
Nevertheless, although the number of secondary workers rose by almost 11 million persons during the decade, they represent an increasingly small share of the total employed labour force, having fallen by a little over two percentage points.
The breakdown of female employment by category shows some variations, although in many cases they are not significant.
There are, however, some major differences, as for example with regard to educational levels, where the figures show that the female employed population had more years of schooling than the male employed population.
In fact, 39% of employed women had completed more than 10 years of schooling while only 29% of employed men had.
Also noteworthy in this connection is the rapid growth in the female share of the employed labour force with 13 or more years of schooling (see table In regard to the goal of gender equity in the labour market, some notable advances were made during the decade, while some disparities remain which still pose a major challenge.
The growing share of women seeking to enter the labour market is a sign of their increased determination to participate as well as of society’s recognition of the importance of affording both sexes the same opportunities for work.
In 1990, female participation in the labour force stood at 38%, which meant that of a total of 140 million women of working age, only 53 million had entered or intended to enter the labour market.
By contrast, in 1999, the economically active population included almost 73 million women, representing a participation rate of 42% (see table III.2).
This is the case in the construction, transport and telecommunications sectors, where the male labour force share accounts for 90% of all jobs.
Although to a lesser extent, men hold 80% of jobs in agriculture and 71% in industry.
The only predominantly female occupation is domestic service, where just under 8 million out of almost 10 million people working in that sector are women.
Nevertheless, this increase in the female labour force in the 1990s was not a clear–cut gain, given that some positive aspects were accompanied by a relative decline in gender equity.
The female employment rate (measured as a percentage of the working–age population) increased by 1.3 percentage points between 1990 and 1999, while the male employment rate fell by 3.6 percentage points.
Thus, the percentage of women of working age who enter the labour market rose steadily.
However, the rise in female employment was insufficient to accommoda- However, some occupations showed a trend towards feminization during the 1990s.
Such is the case with agriculture, where the participation of the female labour force increased by more than five percentage points between 1990 and 1994, and in commerce, where the share of women in 1999 was almost three points higher than in 1990.
Both this latter category and the social services category play a major role in women’s employment, since they each employ around one fourth of the region’s female labour force.
Unemployment in Latin America during the 1990s: scale, trends and patterns The growth of open unemployment in Latin America during the 1990s is one of the most disturbing results of the current performance of the labour market, given its serious effect on the situation with regard to poverty and inequality in income distribution.
The ever–increasing dissociation between economic growth and unemployment levels in the countries suggests that unemployment is caused not only by circumstantial factors but also by structural factors linked to the rapid adoption of new technologies.
The adverse effect of unemployment on well–being has been aggravated owing to the growth of the population strata affected, the increased duration of episodes of unemployment –with the resulting decrease in household assets– and the loss of wages suffered by workers who find jobs after a period of unemployment.
In Equity, Development and Citizenship, ECLAC points out that the creation of productive employment is in itself a goal and a prerequisite for growth with equity (ECLAC, 2000).
A significant element of social inequality, which is reflected in the inequitable distribution of income that characterizes the region, is transmitted through the organization and functioning of the labour market, where levels of employment, unemployment and underemployment of the labour force, as well as the pay and income that people receive, are determined.
High and stable economic growth is crucial, although not sufficient in itself, to the improvement of the level and quality of employment.
ECLAC has estimated that sustained rates of GDP growth of around 6% per annum are required in order to achieve simultaneous and sustainable advances in employment, technology absorption and equity.
By the year 2000, just under 9% of the economically active population were unemployed. 1.Trends in unemployment and its relationship with economic growth Open urban unemployment has shown a clearly upward trend throughout the region.
This section provides information on the scale, trends and pattern of the high rate of unemployment which in most of the countries has hit the lower–income strata the hardest and is also increasingly affecting the middle–income strata as well.
More and more, unemployment has affected social well–being and has influenced the chronic inequality in income distribution in the region.
This trend highlights the persistent structural mismatch between labour supply and demand with which the Latin American countries are faced.
Overall, this led to an absolute increase of 10.5 million unemployed persons (from 7.6 to 18.1 million).
Practically all of this increase was related to the loss of jobs (lay–offs), since the share of unemployed persons seeking work for the first time within total unemployment figures was small.
Of the 18.1 persons who were unemployed in 1999, 2.7 million were seeking work for the first time (see table III.6). the countries, as economic slumps increasingly tend to be manifested in job destruction and sagging labour demand rather than in real wage reductions.
It has also been argued that the persistence of high unemployment rates after the crisis is due to asymmetry in the processes of job destruction and creation in the recessionary and recovery phases of the economic cycle.
Several explanations have been put forward to explain the high level of unemployment in most countries of the region and its persistence despite the recovery in economic growth in the year 2000. pre–crisis GDP levels are restored more rapidly, so that the resulting lag in job creation keeps unemployment rates up for a longer period of time.
If the growth rate of GDP in the economies most affected by the recession picks up, unemployment rates would revert to pre–crisis levels.
In the first place, it has been argued that a large part, if not all, of the unemployment recorded in 1999 stems from the impact of the crisis that began in 1998 and from the downturn in economic activity in the countries that were hit the hardest.
As shown in figure III.4, the unemployment rate has tended to increase since 1991, even in periods of higher growth.
This indicates that, in most of the countries, the supply of jobs has proved to be insufficient to absorb the economically active population (EAP).
A simple estimate for recent years shows that, if the same annual employment growth tries.
Given that unemployment in 1999 stood at 8.8%, only about half the increase for the period analysed can be attributed primarily to the slowdown in growth in the region since 1998.
In Mexico and most of the Central American countries, on the other hand, unemployment trended downward.
Mexico posted a marked reduction in urban unemployment in the wake of the 1995 crisis, reverting to rates of around 2.5%.
This trend also predominated in the Caribbean island countries (Barbados, Cuba, Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago), although unemployment levels in these nations (with the exception of Cuba) held steady at higher levels –around 10% or more– than was the case in Central America.
Only in Jamaica did unemployment fail to drop significantly, as it ranged between 15% and 16% throughout the decade (see figure III.5).
This structural mismatch between labour supply and demand is said to be attributable to the reduction of the State’s role in direct job creation and to the restructuring of the production system, which is said to have led to a downward trend in employment–output elasticity in the primary and secondary sectors.
These sectors’ share in total employment has shrunk, with job creation tending to become concentrated in tertiary activities.2 However, the progressive technology–intensive modernization of some subsectors (financial establishments, telecommunications, insurance and business services) would appear to portend an increasingly limited job–creation capacity.
The current high level of unemployment in the region is likely to persist, given that forecasts project a growth rate of around 2% in the year 2001 (ECLAC, 2001a), which represents a substantial decline in relation to the level of just over 4% attained in 2000.
In addition, there are signs of the persistence of a structural factor in unemployment and a slowdown in the recovery of unemployment levels following periods of declining growth.
A look at unemployment over the past decade shows that although the increase was not spread evenly across the region, it affected most of the South American countries.
In Argentina, Brazil and Colombia (the three largest South American countries), unemployment climbed steadily throughout the decade, although unemployment levels in Brazil were equivalent to half those recorded in the other two coun- 2 Of approximately 34 million jobs created between 1900 and 1999, 68% (about 23 million) were in transport and communications, commerce, finance and social services.
The figure rises to around 78% (a little over 26 million jobs) when personal and household services, including domestic service, are included.
The significance of the longer duration of episodes of unemployment and the impact of the resulting wage losses are also discussed. accounted for nearly half the total number of unemployed persons.
Between 1994 and 1999, the level of youth unemployment for the region as a whole increased from 14% to 20%, while in the eight countries most affected by the phenomenon, the figure stood at 24.8%.
In those countries, the share of this group within the total urban unemployed population fell slightly, owing to the increase in lay–offs among the primary labour force as a result of job destruction. overall unemployment rate and rose significantly between 1994 and 1999.
Consequently, this phenomenon remains one of the main determinants of poverty and inequality.
Among the 40% of households (third and fourth quintiles) above the poorest 40%, unemployment levels climbed in the region as a whole, but especially in the eight countries most affected by the crisis, during the second half of the 1990s (see table III.8).
The increase in urban unemployment even touched the population in the richest quintile; by the end of the decade, the middle– and high–income strata posted unemployment rates that were twice –and in some countries three times– the mid–decade levels.
In the urban areas of 17 countries in the region, female unemployment rose from 7.7% to 12.3% on average, while the male unemployment rate rose from 6.7% to 9.4%.
In the eight countries most affected, these differences rose even more, to the detriment of women.
The impact of unemployment on the well–being of the different groups affected is linked not only to the incidence of the phenomenon (unemployment levels) but also to the average duration of episodes of unemployment and to wage losses suffered by those who do find jobs again (see figure III.6).
In economies Unemployment is especially prevalent among young people (aged 15 to 24 years), who account for between a quarter and a fifth of the Latin American workforce.
The fact that the period of joblessness increased to the same extent (around one month) among heads of household as among non–heads of household seems to indicate that their inability to find employment was mainly due to a shortage of jobs.
In periods of rising unemployment, the duration of episodes of unemployment normally tends to lengthen, with the outcomes described above.
The available data for six countries in which unemployment nearly doubled indicate that the average duration of unemployment3 lengthened from 4.4 to 5.3 about the need to minimize the duration of unemployment.
However, the mean duration of episodes of unemployment between 1994 and 1999 increased more among unemployed persons with less than 10 years of schooling. different levels of educational attainment, the greater increase in the duration of joblessness among less skilled workers also seems to reflect the problems of job vacancies and job destruction that currently affect the region’s economies.
Finally, reference should be made to the possible role played by income reductions among workers rejoining the workforce, which may be functioning as a secondary adjustment mechanism in labour markets where regulations and procedures regarding the hiring and firing of workers are increasingly being loosened.
Although the data are incomplete, the findings obtained in a recent ECLAC study on Uruguay are significant because they illustrate what happens in urban markets in which high levels of temporary recruitment and relatively high and persistent rates of unemployment prevail.
The study led to the conclusion that income reductions suffered by private–sector wage earners aged between 23 and 59 years who found jobs after having been out of work represented between 23% and 34% of the previous wage (see box III.2).
Although there is evidence of the longer average duration of periods of joblessness that accompany rises in unemployment, no details are available on the effect of unemployment on the wages received by workers once they re–enter the labour market.
The problems arising from unemployment are therefore not limited to the present situation of unemployed persons but also extend to their prospects for future employment.
Not surprisingly, when unemployment rates are high, people become apprehensive not only about their prospects of finding another job and how long this will take, but also about whether they might have to accept lower–quality employment, possibly including lower hourly wages, longer hours, less job stability or reduced social security coverage.
Secondly, those who do find employment again as wage earners often work fewer hours than they did in their previous jobs, with the resulting reduction in their monthly income.
Finally, even those who find full–time jobs often earn lower hourly wages than they did in their previous jobs, and this income reduction tends to continue over time.
Consequently, episodes of unemployment –aggravated by their duration– can significantly reduce the income and well–being of workers and their families for longer periods than just the period of unemployment.
In the case of the Latin American countries, however, no reliable data are available on the occupational earnings obtained by unemployed persons once they find employment again.
A pioneer study conducted by ECLAC for Uruguay (ECLAC, 2001b) provides evidence of substantial wage losses in situations of rising unemployment.
The results showed the existence of substantial wage losses which were attributable to the occurrence of an episode of unemployment during the previous year and which fluctuated during the decade between 23% and 34% of the wage level.This indicates that persons who rejoined the workforce as wage earners after the episode of unemployment did so at significantly lower real wages.
Moreover, the magnitude of the loss was associated with the increased duration of periods of joblessness that accompanied the rise in open unemployment in Uruguay; this in turn was accentuated by the closing down of businesses, dismissals and lay–offs, especially during the second half of the 1990s.
Chapter IV Social expenditure in Latin America: overview of a decade Introduction E in mind the importance of the distributive effect of public resources allocated to the social sectors, CLAC has often highlighted three general objectives for social expenditure in the region.
As in previous editions of Social Panorama of Latin America, the data discussed in this chapter were taken from official information on the functional classification of public spending provided by 17 countries in the region.
Trends in public social spending during the 1990s The greater efforts made by Latin American countries to allocate more public resources to social sectors in the 1990s resulted in a sizeable increase (around 50%) in per capita social spending.
Although much of this rise was due to the reactivation of economic growth, especially during the first half of the decade, it is significant that around two fifths of it stemmed from the reallocation of public revenues for social purposes and a smaller part, around one fifth, from increased resources for the public budget.
As a result, the percentage of gross domestic product (GDP) devoted to social sectors climbed from 10.4% to 13.1%.
In most of the countries, the per capita The increases were not uniform throughout the region, however, and tended to be greater in countries with moderate or low levels of per capita social expenditure.
Thus, from an average of US$ 360 per capita at the start of the decade, social expenditure climbed to US$ 540 per capita per annum.2 Social expenditure increased throughout the region as a whole, having fallen in real terms in only two countries, Honduras and Venezuela (see table IV.1).
As noted below, the increase in social expenditure in the region was not uniform throughout the decade either.
In most countries, social spending rose more steeply during the first half of the decade and, although it continued to climb in the second half, it did so more slowly.
This trend, which was general throughout the region –the share of public spending earmarked for social purposes fell only in Honduras and, to a lesser extent, in Panama– did not allow for any reduction in the marked differences existing in that respect between countries.
This indicates the existence of a strong linkage between the amount of resources that each country is able to allocate to social sectors and the level and growth rate of its GDP, independently of the governments’ efforts to assign greater priority to the social components of public spending.
The increase in social spending in the 1990s was not only an outcome of buoyant economic growth.
This makes it possible to avoid the considerable underestimation of expenditure levels that occurs when only central government spending is recorded so as to produce figures that are more in line with actual absolute and relative variations in per capita overall and sectoral expenditure.
The case of the Federative Republic of Brazil –where a high percentage of public revenues and social expenditure is obtained and administered on a decentralized basis– illustrates this problem, as well as the differences that occur in the various social expenditure indicators when all levels of the administration are taken into consideration.
However, if the source of the resources is taken into account, and total spending by the three spheres of government (federal, state and municipal) is consolidated, per capita social expenditure in 1998 rises to US$ 1,011, which is about 65% higher than the federal expenditure figure, with the variation being 21.5% over the same period.
Since social expenditure is so highly decentralized in Brazil, there are major differences between sectors (health, education, social security and others), and thus, the differences in spending levels and the corresponding variations from year to year become more significant.
For example, the gradual decentralization of education funding caused federal government spending in this area to fall from 34% of expenditure in all spheres of government in 1990 to 26.1% in 1996.
No systematic compilation of consolidated expenditure levels for the three spheres of government has been developed.
Three studies were used as the basis for estimating the ratio between sectoral increases in federal spending and spending by the three spheres of government.This made it possible to obtain the data on consolidated social expenditure between 1990 and 1998 that are used in this chapter.
Thus, one group of countries, which includes those with the highest per capita social expenditure levels (Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Panama and Uruguay), continued to allocate a larger percentage of their GDP to social sectors than would be expected, given the regional pattern.
Only Bolivia and Nicaragua spent more than would be expected given their income levels, even though they belong to the group of countries with low per capita social expenditure.
Another group, composed of countries with low or very low levels of per capita social expenditure, devoted a much smaller share of their GDP to social sectors than the regional average.
In the region as a whole, this share rose from 10.4% to 13.1% It should be noted that between 1996–1997 and 1998–1999, the share of social spending continued to climb in most countries of the region, since several of those countries made an effort to sustain to some degree their pre–crisis levels of social expenditure.
However, that trend can also be explained by the lag in budgetary adjustments as a result of declining output and consequently, in public revenues.
Although 12 countries substantially increased the macroeconomic priority of social expenditure, and several of them had low spending levels, the differences between the 17 countries that were analysed did not diminish very much, and the considerable disparities that existed in this respect at the start of the decade persisted.
Efforts to raise the share of GDP allocated to the social sectors accounted for approximately 60% (US$ 115) of the total increase in per capita social spending (from US$ 350 in 1990 to US$ 546 in 1999, i.e., around US$ 196 per capita).
However, the restructuring of total public spending so as to increase its social components also played a part: of the US$ 115 rise in per capita social expenditure that was not attributable to economic growth, around US$ 73 stemmed solely from the increased fiscal priority accorded to social expenditure.
Thus, the increase in total public resources arising from increased budgetary pressure would appear to be the least important factor in raising social expenditure in the region during the past decade (see box IV.2).
To identify each of the effects, the following ratio has been used: pcSE = SE/TPS x TPS/GDP x pcGDP, where SE/TPS = fiscal priority of social expenditure (FP), TPS/GDP = budgetary pressure (BP) and SE/GDP = macroeconomic priority.
Countries that have more budgetary flexibility need to make a greater effort to redistribute public resources in such a way as to increase social expenditure.
Nonetheless, there are countries in the region that devote a large proportion of their GDP to social sectors –percentages comparable to those allocated by a number of industrialized countries– and in their cases, the main challenge is to protect those spending levels when economic conditions deteriorate, and to enhance their effectiveness and efficiency.
Following is a classification of Latin American countries according to their social expenditure priorities (fiscal and macroeconomic) and the participation of total public spending (TPS) in the gross domestic product (GDP) during the 1998–1999 biennium.
Even though social expenditure rose considerably during the decade, the per capita levels of resources earmarked for social sector spending are still too low to meet the needs of large segments of the population.
Moreover, it is evident from the above classification that most of the countries also have a great deal of room for expanding their public revenue base and redirecting allocations for social purposes.
This is reflected in the marked disparities in the efforts of different countries: while some countries allocated around 20% of GDP to social sectors, others devote less than 10% to social expenditure.
The main differences in methodology have to do with how expenditure is recorded in the accounts and how social expenditure is defined.
As regards coverage, the disparities have to do with the different characteristics of public institutions and whether or not spending by local governments is included (see box IV.1).
Public spending can be broken down according to the different entities that implement it.
A first distinction is between public spending by the financial public sector (FPS), i.e. the central bank and other State–owned financial institutions, and the non–financial public sector (NFPS), i.e., central government (CG), public enterprises (PE) and local government (LG).
In 11 of the 17 countries analysed, the series refer to central government expenditure.Within this category, a distinction can be made between entities that manage their own budgets (autonomous entities (AE)) and entities that are funded directly by the treasury (central government budget (CGB)).The latter is the expenditure coverage in three countries.
In another case, coverage relates to expenditure of general government (GG), which comprises CG and LGs.
In the case of Mexico, however, the fact that social expenditure at the local level is not included and that there is a degree of decentralization in its funding leads in practice to an underestimation of public social spending, and this limits its comparability.
The indicators of priority (social expenditure/GDP and social expenditure/total public spending) are ratios that are calculated using each year’s current–price figures.
To express it in constant 1997 dollars, the implicit GDP deflator and the average exchange rate for that year were used.
The data in current prices on total public spending and social expenditure, as well as the sectoral breakdown of social expenditure, are official figures provided by the relevant public institutions in each country.
Impact of the crisis and trends in social expenditure during periods of strong or weak economic growth In those years of the past decade in which economic growth was strong, most of the Latin American countries managed to increase social expenditure, both as a share of the public budget and as a percentage of GDP.
Likewise, thanks to the measures taken by a number of countries to protect it, social expenditure did not decline as a result of the economic slowdown and reduced flexibility of the public budget of the last few years.
Thus, priorities for social investment must be identified with a view to breaking the cycles that perpetuate inequality.
This is what is generally known as procyclical behaviour, as opposed to countercyclical behaviour, which would obtain in the opposite situation, i.e. that of increased social expenditure in years of economic recession leading to a reduction in government revenues and expenditures.
That would make it possible to protect Around the mid–1990s, public spending as a share of GDP in the Latin American countries was around nine percentage points below the standard that would apply for their output level (IDB, 1998, p. 200)3, thus limiting the ability of States to promote redistributive policies through social expenditure.
Hence, one of the priority public policy objectives is to forestall or curtail procyclical behaviour under adverse economic conditions in order, in particular, to safeguard spending allocations that benefit the poorest segments of the population and to strengthen practices that consolidate those allocations and give them greater stability.
Since the total amount of public resources tends to co–vary with countries’ GDP levels, social expenditure in the Latin American countries has usually followed trends in the macroeconomic cycle, falling during slowdowns and rising during upturns in economic growth.
Bearing this in mind, a distinction must be made between scenarios of rising and falling GDP, as shown in the charts below.
In the scenario in which economic growth was predominant, between 1990 and 2000 –124 episodes out of a total of 144– those episodes in which GDP growth was accompanied by an increase in total public resources (TPS) stand out (95 episodes).
In those situations, the cases when social expenditure rose at a higher rate than increases in TPS were more frequent, and they led to a rise in the fiscal priority of social expenditure (54 episodes).
In some cases, social expenditure rose (34 out of a total of 88) while its priority declined, given that social expenditure increased less than TPS.
A third and much less frequent situation (7 episodes) was that in which the resources earmarked for social expenditure declined in real terms, marking a sharp drop in its fiscal priority, in circumstances when public resources increased.
In recent years, much attention has been paid to the objective of countering the severe negative impact of recessionary crises on the most vulnerable population groups by protecting resources allocated to social sectors and improving public policies aimed at enhancing their impact (ECLAC, 1998).
This can be explained not only by the limited amount of resources that have traditionally been earmarked for social purposes in most countries in the region but also by the increasing volatility of economic growth.
Although less frequent, the situations arising in years when GDP fell deserve special mention.
Unlike the scenario described above, where rises in social expenditure entailed an increase in its priority in a context of economic growth, it is useful here to highlight those situations in which countries managed to protect the amount of resources allocated to social sectors.
There were only Finally, the "least desirable" situations, which are referred to in stressing the need to protect social sectors under circumstances of highly volatile growth, occurred when resources earmarked for social expenditure fell in absolute terms and so did the fiscal priority of such expenditure.
In the course of the decade, this happened in only six of the 20 episodes of contraction of GDP (see box IV.4).
Figures IV.6a to IV.6d show the trends in social expenditure during the 1990s.
These figures provide a summary of all the episodes involving annual variations in social expenditure, public spending and gross domestic product in 17 Latin American countries.
Decrease in priority (34) Decreases … at a rate lower than that of TPS at a rate higher than that of TPS IV.1.
Moderate protection (4) Decreases… at a rate lower than that of TPS at a rate higher than that of TPS IV.1.
As shown in figure IV.6a, public spending tended to co–vary closely with GDP: the vast majority of the episodes of economic growth were accompanied by an increase in budgetary resources, and those increases were usually greater than the increases in output.
Nevertheless, during the decade there were also episodes of moderate increases in output, which were accompanied by absolute reductions in public sector financial resources, and in some cases, those reductions were greater than the relevant increases in GDP.
There were also situations where moderate drops in output were not accompanied by a decline in public spending. sed, but also, in a very high percentage of cases, the resources allocated to social components rose at a higher rate.
This indicates that during the 1990s, the tendency was to prioritize social expenditure within the government budget.
The question arises as to whether, in cases when total public resources rose, the situations that tended to predominate were those in which social expenditure was maintained or increased, i.e., whether or not there was a propensity to prioritize social components.
As shown in figure IV.6b, not only did social expenditure rise when the government budget increa- To summarize, in a decade when episodes of economic growth prevailed, social expenditure rose, and it usually did so at a higher rate (see figure IV.6d).
But this tendency to give greater priority to social sectors is not sufficient in itself to account for the redistributive effect of social expenditure.
The estimate for ε can be arrived at from the following formula: SEt+1 SEt α TPSt+1 TPSt ε where SEt+1 and SEt represent social expenditure in consecutive years, and TPSt+1 and TPSt represent total public spending.
This demonstrates the inertia and the procyclical nature of social expenditure, given that its growth was in most instances similar to the rate of increase in budgetary resources.
This is the case both for total social expenditure and for social expenditure excluding the amounts allocated by the countries to social security.
In this latter case, the average elasticity for all episodes shows a value of ε = 0.701 (t = 4.61), a figure which is not very different from that estimated for overall spending earmarked for social sectors.
In all these countries, the fall in output followed a period of growth, so that conditions were suitable for an analysis of social expenditure patterns.
The case of Colombia is a special one, since the fall in expenditure excluding social security does not mean that fewer resources were allocated to the components that benefit mostly the middle– and low–income strata, these being the ones who suffer the most during periods of slowing growth.
An analysis of trends in total public spending and public social expenditure in a context of declining GDP in those countries shows that allocations to social sectors were shielded, partly because of the inertia of many of the current expenditure items within social expenditure (see figure IV.7).
In all of these countries except Venezuela, total public spending rose in 1998–1999 despite the decrease in GDP, and in Venezuela, expenditure levels quickly bounced back in 1999 and 2000, rising at what were virtually pre–crisis rates.
Honduras provides an illustration of spending patterns in countries that allocate a relatively small share of their resources to social sectors.
In this case, social expenditure –which does not have a significant social security component– and public spending rose at relatively high rates before and during the 1999 recession.
However, that inertia is due less to an explicit policy of protection and more to the impact of resources from international aid that are channelled through the government budget.
With regard to social expenditure, Argentina, Chile and Uruguay clearly decided to reallocate resources so to benefit the social sectors, albeit with some important differences in each case.
In Argentina, although more resources were allocated to social sectors, this measure worked more to the benefit of the poorest strata in the 1998–1999 biennium, whereas in the following period (1999–2000), the greater increase occurred in the social security component, which accounts for the bulk of social spending in the country.
Overall, the increased priority assigned to the social components in total expenditure –national public administration, Buenos Aires and provincial governments, and local governments– prevented the decline in GDP from leading to a fall in per capita social expenditure.
The substantial rise in public spending and social expenditure in 1996 and 1997, both including and excluding social security, stems from the reactivation brought about by the growth of output following the sharp downturn of 1996.
Nevertheless, the pattern of social expenditure in 1998–1999 indicates that an effort was definitely made to protect the resources earmarked for social purposes, since during that same year, total budgetary resources fell as a result of the contraction of GDP.
In 1999 and 2000, however, all the components of public spending began to rise again at virtually the same rate (around 15%).
Sectoral trends in social expenditure and their impact on income distribution During the 1990s, increases in social expenditure had a relatively greater redistributive effect in countries with lower per capita income levels owing to the marked rise in public spending on education and health.
These data confirm that expenditure on primary education continues to be the most progressive item and has the greatest levelling–out effect on income distribution (see figure IV.8).
It should be noted that, in contrast to the findings of similar studies conducted in the 1970s and early 1980s, expenditure on secondary education seems to have a fairly strong progressive impact, similar to that of spending on health and nutrition.
This difference can be accounted for by the notable expansion in the coverage of secondary education since that time (ECLAC, 2000), especially over the last twenty years.
That led to very significant increases in secondary–school enrolment ratios, which have been of proportionally more benefit to young people from middle– and low–income strata. his section discusses the impact which public social expenditure has had on the distribution of income of Latin American households.
For that purpose, a summary is first given of the results of a series of studies on eight countries that make it possible to assess the impact on different population strata of public spending on the social sectors.
Secondly, sectoral trends during the decade are analysed with a view to ascertaining whether or not the increase in public social spending has had a levelling–out effect on income distribution. 1.The redistributive effect of social expenditure components Data on eight countries in the region show marked differences in the distributive progressiveness of the different components of public social expenditure.
Expenditures on social security and university education are the least progressive components of public spending, especially the latter.
This reflects the fact that medium– and low–income strata still have less access to this level of education. richest 20% of households only receive 12% of those resources.
These differences are evident when these figures are compared with those relating to the distribution of households’ primary income, i.e., income excluding monetary transfers from the State and social expenditure benefits.
Expenditures on housing, the regional average of which indicates an intermediate degree of progressiveness, follow a rather uneven pattern in the countries examined.
This is due to the marked differences among programmes and the extent to which households in the 40% lowest–income category have access to them.
Taken as a whole, social expenditure is highly redistributive in all the countries and even more so if spending on social security is excluded from the figures (see figure IV.9).
If social security is not included, then the 20% of households having the lowest incomes receive 28% of total public revenues, while the The same pattern in the progressiveness of spending is apparent from the Gini coefficient values.
Chile and Colombia, which have made an effort to direct the benefits of social programmes to the lower–income strata, show the highest degree of targeting of expenditure on the poorest 40% of households compared with the share of income they receive.
The indices are 4.9 for Chile and 4.2 for Colombia (see again table IV.5).
Costa Rica and Uruguay, with the lowest levels of relative targeting, have indices of 2.6 and 2.9, in that order.
Both countries have been focused more on comprehensive social programmes that benefit a high percentage of all households to similar degrees.
Argentina, Bolivia and Ecuador show intermediate levels of progressiveness of social expenditure, with targeting for the poorest 40% showing indices of 3.7, 3.8 and 3.5, in that order. tertiary education and social security in all the countries, unlike the other spending components, shows positive values, albeit lower than the primary income–distribution value (see table IV.5).
The fact that the Gini coefficient value for certain specific items of expenditure is greater than zero (0) does not mean that the expenditure has a net regressive impact on the final distribution of households’ income.
For its effect to be progressive, the value of this coefficient must be lower than the autonomous income–distribution value.
As shown in figure IV.9, all the components of social expenditure are, although to different degrees, progressive in relation to primary income distribution.
In upper–income sectors (the fourth and fifth quintiles), the figure is between 13% and 7%.
If social security (mainly retirement and other pensions) is deducted, the effect of social expenditure falls by a far smaller proportion among the poorest strata; in the highest stratum more than 60% of the transfers correspond to social security, whereas in the poorest quintile they represent only about 25% of the total.
It should be noted that, despite the low impact of social expenditure on the incomes of the richest stratum, the actual sums that those households receive are quite high.
In fact, in several of the countries analysed, these transfers are as much as twice the amount that goes to the poorest households.
For the region as a whole, approximately 44% of the growth in spending went to education and health (28% and 16% respectively); 51% to social security, mainly retirement and other pensions; and the remaining 5% to other expenditures, such as housing, drinking water and sanitation.
These variations seem to indicate that, in the region as a whole, the increase in spending was accounted for to similar degrees by the most and the least progressive social sectors.
In countries with lower per capita income levels, spending increases were relatively greater in the more progressive components (education and health), which accounted for 56% of the total, while social security represented only one fifth.
In countries where expenditure was highest, social security accounted for around one half of the total increase (see table IV.7).
The major redistributive effect of all items of social expenditure, excluding social security, is clearly shown in figure IV.9, in which the Lorenz curves for spending, with and without social security, are compared with the curve for distribution of primary income and total income of households.
Although these curves represent the norm for the eight countries on which information is available, the expenditure and income–distribution curves follow the same pattern in every case.
The substantial increase in spending on education was linked to the implementation of reform programmes, especially at the primary and secondary levels, designed to improve quality and equity in education.
These reforms included teacher training and salary increases, with the latter expenditure having a significant impact on the sector’s budget.
The rise in current and capital expenditure items also contributed to this increase, especially in those countries which decided to improve their physical and technological infrastructure, update teaching methods and materials and establish systems for measuring educational output.
As regards trends in expenditure on health, the greatest progress was achieved in Argentina, Chile and Colombia (between US$ 76 and US$ 109 per capita).
This is much higher than the US$ 28 by which the regional average rose. to a constitutional amendment adopted in 1989.
Other factors involved in these increases were the acknowledgement and amortization of liabilities accumulated by the system and increases in the coverage and amount of benefits provided.
Finally, the largest increases in spending on social security occurred precisely in those countries in which that component receives a greater share of public resources (Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay).
In Argentina, Brazil and Chile, the per capita increase ranged between US$ 150 and US$ 200 per capita, and in Uruguay, just over US$ 500.
It is believed that by redirecting existing resources, mobilizing new resources and increasing effective delivery of BSS based on criteria of efficiency and quality, it will be possible, within a relatively short but realistic period of time, to ensure universal access to those services.
As a follow–up to the initiative, the Governments of Norway and the Netherlands convened an international meeting (Oslo,April 1996), which produced the Oslo Consensus on 20/20.A follow–up meeting to exchange information, examine national experiences and evaluate progress in the matter was held in Hanoi in October 1998.
In Oslo, basic social services were defined in greater detail than in Copenhagen.
Such services comprise basic education, primary health care including reproductive health and population programmes, nutrition programmes and safe drinking water and sanitation, as well as the institutional capacity for delivering those services.
The United Nations system decided to support this initiative, being persuaded that the debate on adjustment, reforms and development should focus not only on the macro and global levels but also on the micro and subnational levels and on policy instruments that affect resource allocation and distribution.
They include, inter alia, allocation of public spending, use of foreign aid, assignment of credit, price and income policy and taxation policy.
Among those instruments, the 20/20 initiative emphasises the restructuring of public spending and of aid flows to countries.
Among other findings, those studies showed that although most of the countries had increased social expenditure during the 1990s, none of them had managed to ensure universal access to quality services in the areas of basic education, basic health care and safe drinking water, nor had they met the targets of the initiative.
Spending on basic social services represents only 12.4% of total public spending (just over one third of public social expenditure) and 10% of official development assistance allocated for these services.
Chapter V Families in Latin America: current profile and public policies Introduction T region with regard to a number of emerging social issues with a view to contributing up–to–date he purpose of the social agenda is to provide a baseline analysis of the current situation of the knowledge on these subjects that can help improve social policy.
The assessment should also make it possible to detect new concerns arising in this sphere and share successful experiences.
Earlier editions of Social Panorama have addressed such issues as social integration and governance in the countries of Latin America, emphasizing topics such as citizen security, increased levels of violence, and the production, trafficking and consumption of illicit drugs (ECLAC, 1999; ECLAC, 2000d).
In a majority of policy proposals and analyses, the family, as an institution, is seen as playing a key role in accounting for individuals’ behaviour and in measures for addressing such varied issues as unemployment, drug addiction and violence.
With these two considerations in mind, this report focuses on an analysis of public policy on families.
Social policies, as traditionally designed and implemented, take a sectoral approach, focusing on persons as individuals, not as members of a family.1 They usually lack an integrated, comprehensive approach, which is why family issues continue to be addressed as if they pertained to the private sphere.
The impact of public policy on families and family members becomes very difficult to perceive in such a system.
Thus, the tendency to exalt the family in government discourse and in the public utterances of civil and religious institutions and individuals stands in clear contrast to the scant attention given to families in public policies.
Individuals tend to place great trust in the family, the first institution they turn to in times of crisis or difficulty, and also one of the leading topics of conversation.
The family has been called a field of action where the most basic dimensions of human security are defined: the processes of personal physical reproduction and social integration (UNDP, 1998).
This chapter will take a look at the current situation of families in the region, based on information supplied by official family agencies in response to an ECLAC questionnaire (see appendices 1 and 2).2 It also discusses family service institutions and their role within the bureaucratic structure.
Finally, it attempts to determine whether or not governments in the countries of Latin America are designing and implementing family–oriented policies and highlights a few innovative initiatives in this sphere.
In keeping with usual practice, the chapter also outlines the international social agenda, including major United Nations meetings and agreements on social issues.
The Cambridge Journal of Economics (Humphries, 1999) devoted a special issue just to this topic, and Journal of Marriage and the Family (Milardo, 2000) published an evaluation of the family in the United States covering the past 10 years.
Additionally, Feminist Economics (Folbre and Himmelweit, 2000) released a special issue on policies targeting families and children.
Assessment of families in Latin America: major changes Scholars and policy designers agree that the families in the region have been confronted with sweeping changes, including far–reaching demographic shifts, the growing number of households headed by women and the increasing number of women entering the labour market.
There have also been changes in symbolic aspects of the family which are reflected in new types of families and family relationships.
Studies agree that most of the changes in family structure have been gradual and are greatly influenced by setting (urban versus rural), social class and the diverse experiences that Latin American societies have undergone. 1.Demographic changes Average family size has declined owing to a reduction in the number of children and greater birth spacing.
In addition, the number of multi–generational families is on the decline and one–person households are on the rise.
Migration, which may be undertaken for a variety of reasons (economic considerations, armed conflicts and others), is another factor.
Other transformations have also been decisive, including the highly dynamic evolution of social roles for women inside and outside the family.
On the economic front, women have entered the labour market in fast–growing numbers, while in the family, more and more households are headed by women.
Between the 1980s and the 1990s, average household size decreased in all the countries of the region. 3 Numerous studies have focused on the situation of families in various countries of Latin America from the demographic, psychological, sociological and economic standpoints.
The very small difference in Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic may be attributable to the fact that in both countries, family patterns are similar throughout the culture.
Regardless of their magnitude, these new family structures are beginning to appear more often in As was indicated at the beginning, the structure of families in Latin America is highly variable, depending on income level.
For example, setting up a one–person household requires financial resources not available to everyone who would like to live alone.
Meanwhile, the percentage of extended and composite families is rising steadily at the lower end of the income spectrum.
The number of children marks the difference between nuclear families that fall into the poorest quintile and those that are in the wealthiest (see table V.2).
While no direct temporal cause–effect relationship can be established (Does having more children make a household poor, or does greater poverty tend to cause people to have more children?), there is no denying the existence of a significant correlation between household income and family structure.
The number of households headed by women has continued to grow since the early 1990s, so that this group now makes up between one fourth and one third of all households, depending on the country.
The highest rates of households headed by women were found in Nicaragua (35%) in 1998 and in the Dominican Republic and Uruguay (31%) in 1999.
At the same time, poverty rates continue to be consistently higher among these households: in Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic, more than half of all indigent households were headed by women (see table V.3).
Non–poor almost all the countries saw an increase in the number of households with more than one breadwinner in both the poorer quintiles and in those that were better off. 3.Transformation of the social roles of women The massive entry of women into the labour force has altered traditional patterns of home life in Latin America.
In the region as a whole, female employment rates rose from 39% in 1990 to 44.7% in 1998 (Abramo, Valenzuela and Pollack, 2000), although considerable differences were found by country, area of residence, age and educational level.
The highest levels of employment are to be found among women with more education; even so, as Latin American households grapple with ever–greater financial difficulties, larger number of less–educated women are also entering the labour market.
More and more family members now contribute to household income (including women, teens and children), marking the demise of the single–breadwinner system in households most exposed to social vulnerability.
Since women have been participating more actively in public life, new perceptions of the role of women have begun to take shape, even as women discover the possibility of becoming more self–sufficient with respect to their families.
This cultural change can be seen in delayed first marriages, later motherhood, lower fertility, conflicts in two–career couples6 and the need to balance domestic chores with paid employment.
Rapid social, economic and cultural change has an inevitable impact on family relationships, on attitudes and on social practices.
This occurs when the new patterns (self–sufficiency, lower maternity rates, economic independence for women) continue to coexist with the traditional ones (subjective dependency, gender–based division of labour for domestic chores).
Although demographic changes have been gradual, women have continued to join the labour market in increasing numbers.
A number of studies have shown that in the last decade, the largest proportion of new female entrants have been women of reproductive age (women with small children).
The economic contributions of working women are what keep many households above the poverty line Cultural concepts and images regarding power continue to prevail in the social sphere, as well as patterns of behaviour based on those concepts, which help explain the inconsistencies between the traditional discourse and new practices in the family.
A new and different definition of conjugal roles has emerged in which the principle of equality is gradually gaining acceptance, in step with the growing economic contribution of women and children to the household.
Changing parent–child relationships reflect an increase in the rights of children along with diminished emphasis on relationships of hierarchy and submission.
Still incipient but clearly visible is a greater emphasis on the individual, with personal rights taking precedence over family rights, and individual satisfaction overriding family interests.
In these processes of cultural change, glo- The contribution to household income made by an additional income–earner marks the difference between households in the poorest and richest quintiles (see table V.4).
Because of their characteristics, single–parent families tend to post lower rates of multiple income–earners, as the only possible source of a second income is to have children enter the labour market.
In the 1990s, 6 The two–career couple is a conjugal union in which the husband and wife both carry out professional activities requiring comparable levels of skill and responsibility.
The family and the State 1.State agencies concerned with family issues The government agencies in charge of designing and implementing family policies in the region vary widely, ranging from government ministries, departments and divisions to councils which are attached to various agencies; in some instances, they are lacking altogether.
Government agencies and other types of State institutions also differ as to their definition or concept of what constitutes a family.
T matters operate within a wide range of institu- Several important facts regarding the operation of family bureaus should be stressed.
In the first place, their position in the organization chart reflects the degree of importance they enjoy, while the scope of the tasks they are expected to carry out always outweighs the amount of resources allocated to them.
Ministries and bureaus of family affairs do not always define concepts of social development, family and gender (especially the latter two) in quite the same terms as other government departments, and as a result, theory is more and more distant from actual bureaucratic practice.
Differences are also evident between traditional approaches to the family (inclusion in sectoral offices such as ministries of health and housing, for example) and those that are less traditional (entities concerned with gender and family issues). he government agencies responsible for family tions.
Although very few countries currently have a ministry of the family (one exception being Nicaragua), others have assigned family issues to agencies concerned with women/gender matters, children and youth (as in Panama, which has a Ministry of Youth, Women, Children and the Family).
Some have created a national women’s secretariat or bureau which reports directly to the Presidency of the Republic (Chile, Paraguay, Dominican Republic), while others have assigned the family bureau to the ministry for social development (Argentina, Bolivia) or to sectoral agencies such as the ministry of education and culture (Uruguay) or health (Mexico7 and Colombia).
Some family bureaus operate under the office of the first lady, while others are autonomous or semi–autonomous institutions (Costa Rica, Cuba) (see appendix, table 1). 7 Subsequent to the ECLAC survey, the Government of Mexico transferred its National System for Integral Family Development (DIF) from the health sector to the Secretariat of Social Development (SEDESOL).
Most agencies responsible for family–oriented policies cooperate with other social–sector ministries, especially health, education, housing and labour.
They also interact with ministries of justice and, to a lesser extent, economic affairs, the treasury, and the interior.
In all cases they coordinate their work with non–governmental organizations (especially those dedicated to fighting violence in the family or those that work in education and training), with international agencies of the United Nations system, and with cooperation organizations in general.
By pursuing this type of coordination, family agencies are able to maximize the use of their resources, gain greater legitimacy for their work, widen their coverage, round out their activities and make their achievements more sustainable.
There are also disadvantages: more bureaucracy, difficulty building consensus and jurisdictional disputes with other state bodies.
Family issues are frequently combined with women’s affairs or gender issues, either explicitly or implicitly.
Some countries have set up institutions for the family that also handle women’s and children’s affairs, reinforcing that idea that the family is centred on the mother–child relationship and overlooking the presence of a father altogether.
While it is true that approximately one fourth of all households in the region are headed by women (usually in the absence of a father), this model is inconsistent with the design of other sectoral policies that target men as fathers or heads of families.
The family is usually regarded as accessory to its members and not as an institution on its own merits; this is even more striking in view of the tendency to understand "family" as nearly synonymous with "women".
The authorities’ responses to these situations reflect the differences between more traditional and more modern concepts of what constitutes a family.
In short, the tendency to overstate the prevalence of women as being "in charge" of the family stands in clear contrast to the glaring absence of women’s concerns in the design of policies and programmes that might strengthen their position.
This dichotomy could lend itself to considerable conflict in view of the fact that the opportunity cost of a woman’s family–care activities is rising very fast.
The gradual entry of women –especially married women with children– into the job market calls for public policies that focus on the economics of care giving as a core issue.
Clearly, as women participate increasingly in the public arena, they begin to undertake new projects of their own, becoming more independent from their families. 2.
Changes and problems facing families in Latin America: the official view (a) The main changes Government authorities responsible for family issues have different perceptions of the changes that have occurred in the region (see table V.5).
Values and behaviours within the family have undergone significant changes as the proportion of households headed by women rises and more and more women enter the job market.
Patterns and models of family relationships and gender roles have loosened, women have become more self–sufficient, and male and female identities have changed.
Another factor mentioned by numerous respondents is the declining role of religion and the growing influence of the mass media in all households of Latin America.
Little in–depth knowledge is available on this trend, given the lack of studies on changes in internal family dynamics.
Nevertheless, case studies suggest that the changes within families have occurred very slowly, and are often reflected in increased violence against women, along with the heavier burdens that women shoulder as they attempt to juggle paid work with domestic chores.
Massive entry of women into the job market, accompanied by tensions in connection with traditional assignment of roles.
Changes in family structure: more separations, consensual unions and successive unions, more households headed by women.
Changes in sexual and reproductive behaviour: declining fertility rates and birth rates, earlier start of sexual relations.
Changes in the system of traditional values and in gender relations (woman–provider).
Changes in family composition and size: declining average size, more one–person households and households headed by women.
Earlier marriage, more consensual unions, more participation of older adults in economic production, in the socialization of younger generations and in family life.
In all countries except Chile and Cuba, the authorities identify domestic violence as one of the most serious issues that need to be addressed.
In second place, the authorities in 12 of the 18 countries surveyed mentioned unemployment, which is also associated with poverty, economic crises and a deterioration in material living conditions, along with a lack of health care and education services.
The disintegration of the family was also mentioned as an important factor (Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, Mexico and Panama) (see table V.6). (b) The main problems Authorities in the field agree that the main problems facing families in Latin America are domestic violence, unemployment and family breakdown.
Policy–makers concerned with family issues are largely in agreement as to the chief problems families One of the great achievements of the women’s movement in the 1990s was the recognition of domestic violence as a serious social ill.
This led to the creation of legal mechanisms for place this issue on the institutional agenda (Araujo, Guzmán and Mauro, 2000).
Most of the countries have now enacted legislation on the subject, although it should be noted that less emphasis has been placed on preventive programmes to combat domestic violence.
Greater tension has ensued with the coexistence of two different approaches: the traditional structure, heavily sexist and patriarchal, which is coming under fire, alongside a new view based on democratization and gender equity, which is still incipient.
To a certain point, it seems likely that these tensions lead to an increase in domestic violence, as many men feel threatened when women encroach upon a sphere in which their power was once unchallenged.
They see the new social roles of women as undermining their male identity.
Unemployment has increased over the past decade, hitting certain sectors of the population more than others.
Authorities have identified this as one of the most serious problems facing Latin American families.
The concept of family breakdown seems to embrace violence in general, but even more, the structural problems of poverty, unemployment and limited access to basic housing, health and education services.
The concept is applied to a wide range of situations: families living in extreme poverty, headed by women and abandoned by fathers; children out working instead of in school; children living in the streets; increased drug use and alcoholism; and the spread of domestic violence.
Even though many countries mention family breakdown as a problem, none specifies what exactly is meant by this expression.
In many cases, it seems to be related to rising divorce rates, but in others, it is associated with changing roles of family members.
Other respondents could even be referring to lack of communication in the home.
A typical example is the debate over early childhood education, with the emphasis moving away from the need for broader coverage with public resources and toward considering mothers as the only acceptable caregivers for small children.
If the difficulties now faced by families are examined alongside the major transformations taking place in the family, a number of approaches for solving the problem can be found, running the gamut from the extremely modern to those based on traditional wisdom.
For example, those who prefer to work for the defence of rights emphasize the fight for equality and recognition as a solution.
By contrast, if poverty in all its manifestations is considered the primary problem, the tendency is to look towards traditional social service policies and programmes.
Clearly, even though the emphasis on rights is necessary, it is not enough, in and of itself, to improve the lot of countless needy families in Latin America.
Wider access to the labour market has translated into an overload for women, as domestic chores have not been redistributed.
In some cases, older daughters have had to take over housework and care for their younger siblings.
Lack of support infrastructure for family life, and excessive demand from society.
Tensions resulting from new duties and need to adjust roles of family members.
Declining well–being and deteriorating quality of life due to impoverishment and unemployment.
Domestic violence, daily violence, social and political violence in conflict zones, triggering migration.
Domestic violence. (no order of priority indicated) Increase in households headed by women.
Need for young people to receive more orientation and preparation for marriage and family life.
Family–oriented policies and programmes As this new century begins, family–oriented policies still lack a specific direction, a well demarcated sphere of action and a clearly defined basis of legitimacy.
If the family is seen as belonging to the world of emotions, altruism and solidarity, it is easy to neglect the State’s role in providing the ways and means for families to make these values a reality. 1.Difficulties in the design of family policies ost studies of the family start with the assumption that such a thing exists.
However, there is no clear definition or universal conception of the family, whether as an institution, a system, or a group of social actors.
While explicit definitions of "the family" are hard to find, its complexity, heterogeneity and changing character are much easier to pinpoint (Government of Colombia, 1999).
In the modern view, the "subject" seeks satisfaction of certain rights and a broadening of roles historically attributed to female and male identities. • Tension between the public sphere and the private sphere.
Some believe that the family is a prototype of the private sphere, leading to the view that public policy should not encroach on it.
Universality: rights and obligations are applicable to all families regardless of social class, religion, type, place of residence, sex or identity of the head of household.
Integrality: the needs of families and their members must be considered as a whole.
Family unity: it is the job of the State to promote the stability and cohesion of families by providing services that will guarantee the enjoyment of shared family life.
Las políticas públicas para promoción familiar en Panamá: avances y dificultades", paper presented at the fifth Ibero–American Conference on Family (Madrid, 19–22 September, 2000).
Debates over family policy frequently begin with a discussion of the concept per se, in view of the fact that all public policies have a direct or indirect impact on families (Meil, 1995).
Family–oriented policies can be described as the full array of public policy measures or instruments whose purpose it is to strengthen the roles that families play in society.
Such measures may be either explicit or implicit Accordingly, family policy should be guided by a carefully crafted combination of universal coverage, participation and subsidiarity.
Such an approach is reflected in a proposal drawn up by Panama (see If the idea is to promote equity and lessen social inequality, active intervention is needed by extra–family institutions whose tasks relate to compensation or transformation.
The purpose of such intervention would be to widen the gamut of public guarantees pertaining to the rights of social citizenship, and this in turn means applying an egalitarian, universalist policy (Jelin, 1998).
Families, as agents and beneficiaries, are important in the design of public policies for the following reasons: 2 Absence of family policies and lack of family–oriented programmes and projects Two types of interventions are commonly used to target families: legal action, and economic or compensation programmes.
Instead of implementing explicit family policies, most countries of the region carry out a number of scattered, uncoordinated interventions through programmes and projects in the fields of health care, education, poverty reduction, prevention and eradication of violence, among others.
B policies Since the beginning of the 1990s, the most widespread measures for responding to domestic violence in the region have consisted of legislation aimed at controlling and punishing such behaviour.
Less attention has been given to preventing violence through education (Arriagada, 1998).
In some cases, child–protection laws have been added to the body of family legislation.
Chile, for example, has enacted a filiation law which eliminates the differences between natural, legitimate and illegitimate children, giving them all equal rights and benefits.
Both government institutions and civil–society organizations have adopted approaches revealing a diverse mix of the modern and the traditional.
For example, the debate over sexual violence and domestic abuse includes a wide range of positions.
Some prefer to downplay the problem in order to avoid eroding the institution of the family, instead covering up inequalities that exist within the family.
The more modern approaches envision the family as a place where people find affection, protection and trust, in which democratic methods should rule.
Even though family policies are targeted to certain members of the family, usually women and children, they do not include explicit references to childcare nor do they provide integral support for children.
Sweden’s policy is considered woman–friendly, as its explicit purpose is to reconcile family responsibilities and job demands.
Mothers, whether married or single, are considered workers and are offered a high–quality public childcare system, around 90% of which is financed with tax money.
Only limited public support is provided for childcare, which is still seen as a problem to be dealt with by the families themselves.
Children are placed in the care of extended family members (usually grandmothers) or are cared for informally by friends or neighbour women.The state only finances 2% of childcare expenses for children aged between zero and three years; this is the lowest percentage in all of Europe.
Public support is substantially greater (around 84%) for the care of children between the ages of three and six.
Family policy (when it exists at all) is concerned less with the family per se than with the rights and responsibilities of individual family members.
Indeed, most of the countries focus on issues involving the formation and dissolution of marriage, parental obligations and children’s rights (Bruce, 1998).
In general, the preferred objective of family policy is to regulate internal relations and set the rules for their establishment, development and dissolution.
Much less progress has been made in designing and implementing policies concerning the external relationships of families and the factors that shape a family’s circumstances such as income, housing, infrastructure services, and access to health care, education and social security.
Consequently, programmes are frequently limited to anti–poverty actions, generally consisting of microsocial, short–term interventions involving government assistance, and they tend to be fragmented, having little or no connection to broader social policy.
Most countries define as family policies those policies that are aimed at fighting poverty, drug abuse and child labour.
D ges that have occurred in the functioning and made in the area of domestic violence.
Most of the countries have made major changes in their legislation, since they must bring it in line with international standards.
Objectives: To provide a more efficient, higher quality system for the administration of justice on issues relating to the family.
Deficiencies of the current system: • Problems with coverage. • Slow, cumbersome procedures. • Bureaucratic overload, as each court has only one judge who is responsible for administrative tasks as well as the administration of justice.
Implementation: Initially, the family court system would consist of 35 courts distributed throughout the country.
Under the new organization, the number of judges could vary, and would include a presiding judge (on a revolving basis), a technical council of social workers and psychologists, a professional administrator holding an academic degree, and a secretarial staff.
This system eliminates the position of court secretary and creates the position of administrator, as well as the technical council.
Management processes would be improved, and specialized personnel would be available to help find integrated solutions to cases being considered.
Basic preliminary studies: A cost–benefit analysis shows that although the new family court system would entail higher costs, especially in the first few years, the situation would level out over the long term, once heavy initial investments have been covered.
Under the new system, the user–cost/system–cost ratio would be lower than it is in the juvenile courts and civil courts.
Users of the family court system would also spend less time on each case (indirect costs).
In short, the cost–benefit analysis, taking into account only the monetary value of measurable benefits, shows that the net cost would be 23 billion pesos, an amount which would clearly be exceeded by the net benefits of the system.
Difficulties: Implementation of the new family court system would require highly qualified professionals with expertise in this area.
One of the consequences of this situation is that the children do not grow up with both birth parents.
Such blended groups need clear rules to regulate participation and cooperation among members and thus ensure healthy coexistence.
Laws are also needed to govern the rights and duties of stepmothers or stepfathers regarding children from other unions and, even if on a secondary level, with respect to the role of birth parents as legal guardians or caregivers.
The chief magistrate of the Family Division of the Supreme Court of the State of Sinaloa proposes the following legal measures: Articles on relationships by affinity, or stepparenting, should be amended.
Stepparents should provide support, on either a primary or subsidiary basis, for their stepchildren.
The law should provide stepparents with the authority to socialize their stepchildren, especially in the home and at school.
Stepparents and stepchildren need to have clear rules on child rearing and support.
No biological parent may be exempted from the duty to pay child support when the other parent becomes part of a blended family.
Stepchildren and stepparents must be guaranteed the right to communicate with and visit each other even after dissolution of the marriage.
The law should allow for a stepchild to inherit from a stepparent.
The law should define the power of stepparents to use, administer and dispose of the stepchild’s assets and even to receive some type of compensation for doing so, if it can be demonstrated that these assets have increased thanks to the stepparent’s efforts.
It may be useful to extend to stepparents the rules on suspension, removal, limitation and termination of parental authority over minors, as set forth in articles 283, 444, 445 and 448 of the Civil Code of the State of Sinaloa.
Since 1993, it has been concerned with the issue of masculinity and offers courses that are open to all men in the country.
Cantera seeks to apply a systems approach to the family and understands the need to take a chronological look at the issues, fears, prejudices and goals that usually concern men in connection with gender and masculinity.
The courses discuss such issues as: • Male identity. • Gender, power and violence. • Unlearning machismo: methods for working with men. • Building fair relationships (co–ed workshop).
Cantera takes an innovative view of gender problems and recognizes the need for a process in which both men and women can participate, so that both can take responsibility for any tensions that might arise.
Prevention implies creating options, and this programme can offer an interesting alternative for men and women to work together in building new ways of relating to each other and new identities.
Several experiences and pilot programmes have been designed to adapt male roles to the changing social roles of women.
Most of these initiatives are components of programmes for the prevention of domestic violence.
Several countries of the region have held workshops for men, such as the Paternar programme in Colombia and Cantera in Nicaragua (see box V.5), with a view to addressing paternal and male roles and changing the ways in which maleness is expressed.
Parenting schools for fathers and mothers have also played an important role in Cuba, El Salvador and Mexico. 4.Standards for the design of family–oriented policies The great variety of family situations to be found in the region and the differences existing across countries make it difficult to establish common guidelines.
Guarantee the freedom and right to practice family planning in order to exercise responsible parenting.
Emphasize the importance of adult roles and functions in providing for the family so as to free children and adolescents from having to take on such obligations.
Develop a favourable environment in which individuals can fulfil their family duties and women can balance domestic chores with paid employment, especially in families threatened by poverty. • Respect the pluralism of family structures, so that none comes under discrimination of any kind, and respect the bonds of affection developed in the home.
Adapt family policies to the cultural situations in which they are to be applied; this means respecting individual choices based on a recognition of diverse family forms and structures.
Identify the needs inherent in new family configurations in order to anticipate and provide the best possible mechanisms for meeting these • Support and reinforce the family’s role in socialization through a range of policy measures (walk–in centres, family counselling, promoting • Practice the principle of complementarity among public, private and mixed agents in covering family needs. equal opportunities).
More than supporting families themselves, this means supporting some of their functions, recognizing the heterogeneous nature of families and providing them with assistance so they can fulfil their duties of social protection; as an example, it would be necessary to provide care for the elderly and infirm.
In short, it is essential to strengthen families and recognize that the rights accruing to the family unit need to mesh flexibly with the rights of individual members.
Special care must be taken for those families that have the greatest needs and for family members with the most severe disadvantages. • Introduce family policies based on the principle of universality, bearing in mind the special needs of families that take on extra family burdens, and the personal and financial cost this entails.
Offer public compensation for such family burdens, including built–in provisions for rising costs.
The most important twenty–first century meeting of its kind to date, it was preceded by numerous regional preparatory meetings.
At the Assembly, the heads of State and Government reaffirmed their commitment to strengthen the United Nations and the principles set forth in the Charter.
They also adopted specific decisions relating to peace, development, environmental protection and human rights.
B the General Assembly of the United Nations decided to designate its fifty–fifth session "The Millennium Assembly of the United Nations", being convinced that the change of century constituted a unique and symbolically compelling moment for the 188 Member States to articulate and affirm an animating vision for the United Nations in the new era.
At the same time, plans were set in motion to hold a Millennium Forum closely tied to the agenda of the Millennium Assembly and the Millennium Summit of the United Nations. unable to reach or to afford safe drinking water".
They set the goal, "by 2020, to have achieved a significant improvement in the lives of at least 100 million slum dwellers".
What specific problems face the different members of the family: father/mother/children/ others? 1.
General measures Measures targeting families living in extreme poverty Measures targeting poor families 6.
Advantages Disadvantages Please include all available information on families: types, structure, breakdown by social groups; or provide instructions on how we can search for the information electronically.
A decade review of the State U.S. family policy in the 1990s", Journal of Marriage and the Family, vol. 62, No. 4, November.
De Souza, Marcelo (2000), "A importância de se conhecer melhor as famílias para a elaboração de políticas socias na América Latina", Texto para discussão, No. 699, Institute of Applied Economic Research (IPEA).
Ferriol, Angela (2000), "Apertura externa, mercado laboral y política social", Investigación económica, year 6, No. 1, Cuba, January–March.
Meil, Gerardo (1995), "Presente y futuro de la política familiar en España", Revista española de investigaciones sociológicas, No. 70, April–June.
Moscoso de Young, Ruby (2000), "Incidencia de la globalización en las familias.
Las políticas públicas para promoción familiar en Panamá: avances y dificultades", document presented at the Fifth Iberoamerican Conference on Family (Madrid, 19–22 September).
Ravallion, Martin (1995), "Growth and poverty: evidence for developing countries in the 1980s", Economic Letters, vol. 48, July.
Rico, Ana (1997), "Bases para una conceptualización de familia en el marco de las políticas sociales", document presented at the Fifth Javerian Research Congress (Bogotá, D.C., 6–8 October 1999).
Las trayectorias sociales de las parejas de doble carrera (un estudio de caso colombiano)", document presented at the Fourth Iberoamerican Conference on Family (Cartagena de Indias, Colombia, 8–12 September).
In those cases, wage earners in non-professional non-technical occupations in establishments employing up to 5 workers are included in the figures for establishments employing over 5 workers.
In addition, for Chile (1996), El Salvador, Panama, Dominican Republic, Uruguay (1990) and Venezuela, this includes non-professional, non-technical wage earners in establishments employing up to four workers.
Up to 1992, the survey covered approximately half the urban population, with the exception of 1991, when a nationwide survey was conducted.
Effects of foreign direct investment on employment in Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Latin America and the Caribbean reached a new all-time high in 2013, at US$ 188.101 billion, 6% more than the 2012 figure.
This means that FDI inflows were virtually stable for the third year running, especially measured in nominal terms.
Foreign direct investment in Latin America Global FDI flows rose by 11%, although behind this global figure lie large differences between regions.
Whereas FDI in the European Union recovered strongly (38%), after a heavy fall in 2012 (-56%), flows to the United States slipped 5% and those to developing and transition economies were up by 6% and 45%, respectively.
Growth in the region slowed to 2.5% in 2013, and United States monetary policy sowed uncertainty in the markets, which led to heavy depreciation in the region’s main currencies.
Prices for natural resources, though still at high levels by historical standards, continued to fall owing to uncertainty regarding the economic situation in China and the developed world.
The FDI figures do not include flows into the main financial centres of the Caribbean.
These figures differ from those set out in the 2013 editions of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean because they show the net balance of foreign investment, that is, direct investment in the reporting economy (FDI) minus outward FDI.
The fact that FDI flows overall held steady despite the external conditions was largely a reflection of the US$ 13.249 billion purchase of Modelo, a beer maker, by a European firm.
Without that transaction, flows into the region would have been down on the 2012 figure.
The Modelo acquisition also regained Mexico its position as the second largest recipient of FDI in the region, with total inflows of US$ 38.286 billion, over double the amount received the year before.
Investment was sharply up in other economies in the region, as well, including Suriname (86%), Panama (61%) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (35%).
Overall, FDI in Central America rose considerably (21%), while flows to the Caribbean declined (-31%).
By sector, services received the highest proportion of FDI inflows in 2013, with 38%, followed by manufacturing (36%) and natural resources (26%).
As noted in relation to the global figures, however, these averages mask large differences between countries and subregions.
With the Modelo acquisition, Mexico’s manufacturing sector accounted for around 70% of the country’s investment inflows.
Natural resources capture over 50% of FDI inflows in several countries, and as much as 70% in the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
In fact, in South America (not including Brazil), natural resources receive more FDI than services, and manufacturing only small amounts.
Reinvested profits of transnational corporations are a component of FDI that has increased in the past decade, exceeding capital contributions in the last few years.
In 2013 this trend was broken and capital contributions accounted for 42% of total FDI, reinvested earnings 38%, and inter-company loans 20%.
Even so, in some economies that receive a lot of FDI in mining (such as Chile and Peru) profit reinvestment was heavily down.
The different economies in the region also showed large differences with regard to the countries of origin of the investments.
The United States remains the largest investor in Latin America and the Caribbean generally, with a particularly prominent role in Central America (30% of inflows) and Mexico (32%).
Europe overall is the largest investor in Brazil (46%), Mexico (54%) and Colombia (36%).
In all the countries except Mexico, trans-Latin firms make significant contributions to FDI flows IED.
This is especially true in Ecuador (where FDI by trans-Latins accounts for 46% of inflows), Colombia (30%) and Central America (39%).
Contrasting with inward investment, outward FDI was down by 30% in 2013, at US$ 32.617 billion, one of the lowest figures for the past decade.
The fall may be attributed chiefly to a large drop in outflows from Chile and Mexico, and to the fact that Brazil recorded negative outflows for the third year running.
The only country to buck the trend was Colombia, which made outward investments worth US$ 7.652 billion in 2013, compared with slightly negative outflows in 2012.
Of the 20 largest mergers and acquisitions by trans-Latin firms, seven originated in Mexico, five in Brazil and five in Colombia.
In Latin America, FDI inflows have stabilized at a high level in the past three years, but the impact of these investments on the well-being of the region’s inhabitants is still a matter of debate.
In theory, investments from developed economies should bring technological progress which can spill over to other firms and sectors in the host economy.
On the other hand, FDI is a broad concept which includes both greenfield investments (which create or expand production capacity) and mergers and acquisitions which represent merely a change in the ownership of assets.
The two types of investment have very different impacts on the local economy.
The impact of FDI depends to a great extent on the type of investment.
Investments in technology-intensive sectors have more potential to contribute to development through knowledge transfer and local capacity-building.
But FDI in high-tech manufacturing represents only a small proportion of the total and showed no change in 2013.
It is also important to recall that the capacity the subsidiaries of foreign companies have to form linkages with local firms is just as —if not more— important than the technology intensity of FDI.
FDI flows will remain generally stable over 2014, although trending down slightly.
This year’s economic growth will be only slightly better than last year’s, and the prices of export commodities, especially minerals, seem unlikely to regain the levels they had reached before starting to slip over the past two years.
Accordingly, ECLAC estimates that variation in FDI flows will be between -9% and 1% with respect to 2013, depending on whether a number of large acquisitions go through.
Latin American and Caribbean transnational corporations: strategies and outcomes Over the past decade, the global economic landscape has changed rapidly as emerging economies have taken on a more active and prominent role.
This is a process that has gathered momentum as a result of the international financial crisis, which hit advanced economies hard.
While it is true that larger countries, mainly the BRICs (Brazil, Russian Federation, India and China) have been at the forefront, the trend has gradually spread to include an increasing number of new actors.
Foreign direct investment outflows from developing and transition economies are one indicator of this tendency.
The most active regions were East and South-East Asia, which accounted for more than 50% of these capital flows, and Latin America and the Caribbean, which lagged behind somewhat.
Transnational corporations from developing countries generally venture into international operations because they need to gain access to strategic resources, which allow them to overcome initial obstacles arising from technology gaps and their lack of experience as latecomers to the international markets.
Internationalization has thus become a strategy for strengthening these corporations’ inherent advantages, by accumulating resources and assets that were previously unavailable.
On the one hand, push factors are determinants that are specific to the country of origin and which lead to domestic investment being replaced by foreign investment.
They include the size, saturation and competitive level of the domestic market, the production structure, technology assimilation, production costs, the supply of natural resources and an underdeveloped capital market.
On the other hand, pull factors are those that attract FDI to recipient countries.
They include the investment climate and risk, the legal and tax environment, economic performance, the natural resource supply and the host country’s participation in free trade agreements and other international agreements.
In the largest countries, such as China, there has been significant government interference in foreign investment, while in small countries the primary push factor is the size of the domestic market.
In the sectors where corporations from emerging economies are highly active, it is common for these firms to acquire companies in industrialized countries, or to forge partnerships with them, in order to compete with the dominant transnational corporations.
As regards pull factors, the globalization process is increasing in importance since it offers opportunities for many new players.
Latin America has not remained on the sidelines of this process, and more and more of the region’s enterprises are beginning to invest outside their home countries.
Initially, the vast majority of trans-Latins came from a small group of countries: Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico.
These corporations operated in sectors related to the abundant natural resources available in their home countries, in basic infrastructure services such as power and telecommunications, and mass-market services such as retail trade, air transport and finance.
The first stage of international expansion was focused on nearby markets in the same region, and subsequently —mainly in the case of firms from larger countries— spread to more distant markets, first in North America and later, albeit on a much smaller scale, in the European Union, Asia, Oceania and in some cases, Africa.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, push factors depended on the characteristics and conditions of home countries: size, economic performance, business development, the supply of natural resources, government support and geographical proximity to other markets.
Noteworthy factors in the largest countries included the saturation and in some cases the volatility of their domestic markets; the fact that competitive advantages in the local market, often with State protection, allowed them to explore new markets abroad, and the possibility of meeting the needs of immigrant communities abroad, primarily in the case of Mexico.
Corporations from Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, in which defensive strategies formerly prevailed, thus shifted towards more aggressive strategies, acquiring foreign assets in order to rapidly expand their international operations and footprint.
In medium-sized countries, the main push factors included a high share in small, saturated markets; the need to open new export markets and consolidate existing ones, access to international financing, access to raw materials and early economic reforms sustained over long periods.
Notable pull factors included the progress made by neighbouring countries on economic reforms, especially the opening of economies to foreign direct investment, and prolonged periods of stability and economic growth, which had a positive impact on the population’s purchasing power.
On the other hand, the international financial crisis, which severely affected developed countries and their corporations, provided the trans-Latins with interesting opportunities to access new assets in advanced economies, or to strengthen their position in Latin American markets.
In recent years, this process has seen the participation of new actors, beginning with Colombian corporations and more recently those from Peru, Central America and the Caribbean.
The push and pull factors are similar to those observed in the first wave of foreign direct investment by Latin American corporations.
However, other factors are involved and are beginning to take on importance.
First, the abundance of foreign capital and the existence of productive sectors with a growing inclination to export have brought local enterprises into closer direct contact with the dynamics of international markets.
Undertaking new challenges abroad is now less complex and less of an unknown than it was some years ago.
Second, Latin American transnational corporations were already operating in the home countries of the new trans-Latins, which gave them the awareness that it was possible to venture into new overseas markets.
Growing familiarity with such trends will undoubtedly contribute to further expansion into other markets and countries.
Moreover, as subregional integration is strengthened and deepened, opportunities for such undertakings will become more numerous and the expansion process will become simpler.
Effects of foreign direct investment on employment in Latin America In recent decades, the belief has taken hold in various spheres of decision-making that FDI is a driver of development in recipient economies, since it makes a significant contribution to modernization, increased production and, consequently, job creation.
In keeping with this view, attracting FDI has been a cornerstone of many countries’ development strategies, with the magnitude of the inward investment in local economies sometimes even regarded as being more important than the type of investment received.
There is also a widespread consensus as to the importance of creating quality jobs in order to share the fruits of economic growth and increased productivity with a greater proportion of the population.
Capital accumulation, technological change and an increasingly qualified labour force, encouraged by an appropriate regulatory framework, have a positive influence on labour productivity and contribute to high and sustainable growth trends.
This in turn helps create quality jobs, making the process socially sustainable, while the rise in consumption stimulates aggregate demand, feeding a virtuous circle of growth.
Strong investment inflows into Latin American and Caribbean countries exert enormous influence over these economies, while also raising a number of concerns over the characteristics that such investments imprint on these countries’ productive specialization profiles and, especially, on their domestic labour markets.
Based on the available information, an analysis was performed on some of the employment impacts of investment by transnational corporations, in terms of the number of jobs created and their quality.
The goal was to contribute inputs to the debate over the extent to which this type of social stakeholder helps improve working conditions in the region.
An initial finding of the study is that transnational corporations are a secondary source of job creation.
During the 1990s, the most significant FDI processes were privatizations, mergers and acquisitions, especially in South America.
During this period, most investment did not create new productive capacities to spur the recruitment of additional workers, but instead was associated with companies’ restructuring processes, which implied rationalization measures and labour shedding.
Nevertheless, this initial stage, dominated by changes in ownership, also witnessed sustained growth in the proportion of investments in different sectors and regions.
The jobs content of these greenfield investments varies extensively according to the sectors and subregions in which they are made, and depends on the profile of the projects implemented.
One factor that explains the low impact of FDI on job creation is that much investment is channelled into primary activities and the initial stages of industrial processing, sectors that are more capital intensive.
For every US$ 1 million invested, only one job is created in extractive activities, while the same investment creates two jobs in natural-resource-intensive manufacturing.
These sectors accounted for about 47% of investment amounts and 25% of new jobs announced in investment projects during the 10-year study period.
Extractive activities thus have a limited impact on direct job creation, and even though the wages paid to these workers tend to be high, the labour market cannot fulfil its role in the primary income distribution.
Investment resulting from fragmentation and offshoring strategies in the manufacturing and services sectors involves separating productive processes into labour-intensive stages and skills-intensive stages.
This tends to bring about a dual structure of wages and benefits, divided between developed and developing countries.
Although a large proportion of new jobs are created in labour-intensive sectors (9% of jobs announced in manufacturing and 13% of jobs announced in services), it is observed that projects in manufacturing and labour-intensive services (textiles, clothing and call centres, for example) are seeing their share of job creation decline at the expense of higher growth in more complex activities.
In Argentina, Chile and Ecuador, it was possible to develop a second approach to the measurement of transnational corporations’ impact on employment in the region, which was more structural since it reflected foreign investment accumulation processes over the long term.
In these countries, transnational corporations accounted for between 12% and 17% of formal private employment, with a higher share of up to 50% in extractive activities.
Transnationals also had a substantially greater impact on employment when considering the countries’ largest firms, a group in which transnational corporations tend to be overrepresented.
While no estimates of indirect job creation attributable to transnational corporations have been produced at this juncture, previous research indicates that there are few linkages between these firms and local suppliers and customers, meaning that indirect impacts on local employment are expected to be limited.
The study demonstrated that transnational corporations tend to promote better paid jobs (20%) in the Latin American and Caribbean countries that were studied.
Wage gaps varied in size depending on the type of estimate produced, but significant positive results were found in all cases, associated with higher levels of labour productivity.
Prior studies also detected that subsidiaries carrying on knowledge-intensive economic activities were responsible for indirect effects as a result of knowledge spillover to the local production system.
However, these findings have more to do with the technological complexity of the sector than they do with the firms’ foreign ownership.
No evidence was found to confirm impacts on other aspects of employment quality, such as greater job stability or a greater participation of women in the workforce.
The findings of different research studies on labour-relations models in Argentina and Mexico, while highlighting the existence of a wide variety of behaviours, tended to offer greater support for the theory that transnational corporations adapt to local contexts.1 There effects of the interactions between transnational corporations and the labour institutions of host countries are fiercely debated.
The convergence theory suggests that transnational corporations transfer the prevailing labour practices in their countries of origin to the host countries, so that the institutional frameworks in the host countries must adapt.
The opposing point of view holds that the success of transnational corporations depends on their capacity to adapt to the institutional framework of the host country, which is not significantly altered in their favour.
In Argentina, the evidence indicates that the country’s labour institutions generally have an important presence, and that European companies tend to adapt to the local labour-relations system to a greater extent than US-based firms, which is confirmed by lower union membership among workers in the latter.
In Mexico, it was noted that firms of European origin are not transferring best practices in collective representation, which are assuming greater importance in their home countries, to their Mexican operations.
The study of labour relations, not just in the region’s large countries but also in its smaller ones, is especially important given that foreign direct investment is a highly concentrated economic phenomenon.
For the period between 2003 and 2013, some 250 economic groups (5% of total foreign investors) accounted for 68% of announced investment amounts and 55% of the direct jobs that were created.
In view of the evidence analysed and considering the complexity and heterogeneity of the globalization process, it was noted that transnational corporations have adopted a range of strategies and obtained various results, depending on the countries, sectors and regions in which investments were made and taking into account the differences in markets, institutions and cultures.
This means that while it is useful to reach conclusions at an aggregate level regarding the actual contribution of foreign direct investment to the different dimensions of recipient countries’ development, this level of analysis is insufficient.
It is important to consider the growing heterogeneity of the phenomenon, and to generate an increasing volume of information that will enable an assessment of the investment types with the most favourable impacts on recipient economies.
Patterns of origin and destination of foreign direct investment Distribution of FDI by sector Technology intensity and research and development by transnational firms Largest investor countries E.
Introduction Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Latin America and the Caribbean remained stable in 2013.
Total inflows reached US$ 188.101 billion, an increase of 6% in nominal terms compared with the previous year.
Conditions remained conducive to FDI in the region, and transnational corporations made slightly higher profits than in 2012.
Although FDI inflows in nominal terms reached all-time highs during the past three years, FDI represents a smaller proportion of GDP of the Latin American economies than it did at the turn of the century (see figure I.1), when privatization programmes and liberalization were at their peak in many of the region’s economies.
For the past two years, FDI has remained at 3% of GDP.
The determining factors attracting FDI to Latin America still hold, even though GDP growth slowed and key export commodity prices dropped slightly in 2013.
This chapter examines the distribution of FDI inflows among countries and industries and attempts to identify the potential contribution of FDI inflows to the economies of the region.
FDI outflows from Latin America and the Caribbean remain very volatile and fell heavily in 2013.
However, the longterm trend is for continued international expansion of trans-Latin corporations, as will be discussed in depth in chapter II.
Overview of foreign direct investment worldwide In 2013, global FDI rose by 11% to approximately US$ 1.46 trillion.
This increase was somewhat larger than expected and should be considered a signal of economic recovery.
Once again, developing economies accounted for more than 50% of total FDI inflows.
Developed, developing and transition economies all saw substantial growth in FDI inflows.
Transition economies enjoyed a particularly strong year, with a 44.8% increase bringing flows into these economies to their highest ever figure.
This surge was primarily due to the Russian Federation’s 83% jump in inflows, to US$ 94 billion.
After the 40% drop in FDI into developed economies in 2012, it should come as no surprise that inflows increased during 2013, although the 11.6% expansion, to US$ 576 billion, is not very strong in that light.
The European Union, which suffered a particularly sharp drop during 2012 (with inflows down by 56%) recovered significantly, with a 38.2% increase to US$ 286 billion.
The reason why FDI in developed economies did not grow faster —despite the European Union’s impressive rebound— lies primarily in Australia and the United States.
Inflows to Australia slumped by 28% to US$ 40 billion and to the United States by 5% to US$ 159 billion.
Notwithstanding, the United States continues to be the world’s largest single recipient of FDI.
Although the developing economies’ share of global FDI has decreased slightly, they continued to receive over half (52%) of global inflows in 2013, at US$ 759 billion, which was 7% up on 2012.
This figure is somewhat distorted by the 53% jump in flows to Caribbean financial centres, which may be attributed primarily to the involvement of a British Virgin Islands-based holding company (TNK-BP) in a huge deal between BP of the United Kingdom and Rosneft of the Russian Federation.
Other developing regions showed smaller growth rates, such as Africa’s 5.7% to US$ 56 billion and Latin America and the Caribbean’s growth of 6% to US$ 188.101 billion.
Developing Asia, on the other hand, saw a small drop in FDI inflows from US$ 409 billion to US$ 406 billion.
Of the Asian subregions, the largest drop was observed in West Asia, where FDI inflows went down by 20% to US$ 38 billion.
Global cross-border mergers and acquisitions (M&A) edged up by just 5% over the 2012 figure, to stand at US$ 337 billion in 2013.
The trends diverged strongly between developing and developed economies, with growth rates particularly robust in developing Asia.
Overall, developing economies saw an increase of 64% to US$ 88 billion in M&A.
In Europe and the United States, M&A activity was down by approximately 10% during the year, but has shown some signs of recovering in 2014.
Greenfield investments, on the other hand, were fairly constant between 2012 and 2013.
According to data from Bloomberg, the number of M&A announcements decreased by 6.5% worldwide in 2013.
While developed Asia-Pacific and Eastern Europe showed small increases, most other regions saw fewer announcements in 2013 than in 2012.
The largest decrease occurred in Latin America and the Caribbean, where M&A announcements dropped by 21%.
Inward foreign direct investment in FDI inflows in Latin America and the Caribbean reached US$ 188.101 billion in 2013, 6% more than the previous year.
Annual growth was modest in 2012 and 2013, especially considering that FDI is measured in nominal terms.
Over the past decade, the two main factors behind the rise of FDI were economic growth in the region and high international demand for export commodities.
Both of these variables slackened in 2013, but not to an extent that represented a substantial change for investors.
The region’s GDP growth decreased to 2.5% in 2013 (ECLAC, 2014b), the lowest rate since the global financial crisis made itself felt in 2009.
Nevertheless, private consumption, the key determining factor of market-seeking FDI, was up by 3.4% and, in the context of an uncertain recovery in developed economies, transnational corporations still see investment opportunities in Latin America and the Caribbean markets.
The price of export commodities, especially gold and copper, declined in 2013 for the second year running, but still remained at levels that may be considered high from a historical perspective.
Financial market volatility and uncertainty in 2013 stemmed from the United States, particularly the Federal Reserve’s May announcement of its intention to begin withdrawing quantitative easing, which has depressed yields in the United States and pushed investors towards emerging markets over the past few years.
This immediately raised risk perceptions of Latin American economies, especially those that receive most FDI (Brazil, Colombia, Chile, Mexico, Panama, Peru and Uruguay) (ECLAC, 2013a), causing stock market losses and currency devaluations.
Portfolio inflows decreased slightly to US$ 110 billion, while other capital inflows increased to US$ 30 billion (see figure I.3).
Moreover, portfolio flows in the main recipient countries dropped only during the second and third quarters and recovered quickly thereafter, boosted by an increase in bond issuance by corporate and quasi-government institutions (see section H).
The Brazilian real depreciated by 20% in three months and local currencies depreciated by approximately 10% in Chile, Colombia and Peru, partially reversing the appreciation of previous years (see figure I.4).
Mexico’s currency, which had not risen as much as those of some other Latin American countries in the preceding years, showed no substantial movement in 2013.
On the up side, they make foreign-currency acquisitions cheaper and export-oriented activities more competitive; on the down side they push down the value of assets in the local economy and reduce their earnings measured in foreign currency.
Telefónica of Spain reported that successive devaluations in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela over the past four years had lost it 4.6 billion Euros (El País, 2014), while Ford attributed costs of US$ 310 million in the first quarter of 2014 to the devaluation of the Venezuelan bolívar (Foy, 2014).
Despite the increase in country risk mentioned earlier, investment decisions have not been affected by short-term concerns and the region is still receiving large flows of foreign capital.
Nevertheless, these have been declining slowly since 2010 and international reserve accumulation in 2013 was consequently the lowest for a decade (ECLAC, 2013a).
The largest recipient of FDI inflows in Latin America and the Caribbean continues to be Brazil, with US$ 64.046 billion in 2013, slightly less than in 2012.
Mexico, the region’s second largest economy, was again the second largest recipient of FDI, with US$ 38.286 billion, a record figure thanks to the acquisition of Grupo Modelo mentioned earlier.
Central America received 21% more inflows in 2013, while FDI in the Caribbean was 31% down on 2012 owing to the fall in Trinidad and Tobago and to the fact that the 2012 figures used for comparison purposes were abnormally high owing to a large acquisition in the Dominican Republic.
This is why around the year 2000, a very large majority of FDI inflows into the region were in the form of capital contributions.
As the stock of FDI in the region grew and the operations of transnational corporations became more important for the local economies, their reinvested profits came to form a larger part of FDI flows.
In 2013 the trend reversed partially and reinvested earnings dropped to 38% of FDI inflows, mainly because of the large acquisition in Mexico mentioned earlier.
For a detailed description of FDI by component in each economy, see table I.A.4 in the annex.
Despite this drop in reinvested earnings in the countries that register them (which does not include Brazil), FDI income (or the profits that transnational corporations can claim on their operations in the region) in Latin America and the Caribbean increased by 2% in 2013, to US$ 111.662 billion.
Brazil does not include reinvested earnings in its calculation of FDI and is excluded for that reason.
A detailed discussion on FDI income in Latin America by country and sector can be found in chapter II of ECLAC (2013b).
The drop in average profitability in 2012 and 2013 was particularly marked in countries with large FDI stocks in metallic mining, such as Peru, Chile and the Dominican Republic, and where profits in the previous years had been extraordinarily high (see figure I.8).
In Jamaica this indicator fell from 3% to 1%, reflecting the impact of low economic growth and a fiscal crisis on the operations of transnational corporations in some Caribbean economies.
On the other hand, transnational corporation subsidiaries became more profitable in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Honduras, Panama and Mexico.
The long-term growth in FDI income generated in the region means that transnational corporations get back almost as much capital from Latin America and the Caribbean in profits as they invest.
In 2013 outflows of FDI income from the region reached a level equivalent to 81% of the value of FDI inflows.
State of) For the first time, this edition of Foreign Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean also collects data on the stock of FDI.
While this information is not available for all countries, there are some interesting patterns.
Of the countries with data available, Chile has the highest FDI stock in Latin America, at 77% of GDP.
Figures for Caribbean economies are likely to be higher, but only Jamaica (84% of GDP) has data.
Other small economies with large stocks include Nicaragua (64% of GDP), Honduras (52% of GDP) and Costa Rica (44%) (see annex table A.1-5).
Brazil’s stock of FDI in 2013, at 33% of GDP, was somewhat below the regional average of 35%, but 50% higher than in 2005 and much higher than the figure for other large developing countries.
The Russian Federation, India and China all have much lower stocks, at 25%, 12% and 10% of GDP, respectively.
Distribution of FDI by sector The distribution of FDI between natural resources, manufacturing and services across the region changes little from year to year.
In 2013, services received an estimated 38% of the total, manufacturing 36%, and natural resources 26%.
This fairly stable sector distribution reflects the fact that almost half of total FDI consists of reinvested earnings, which remain in the same sector.
Besides, investors have a natural tendency to focus on those sectors in which host countries have comparative advantages, which are slow to evolve.
On the other hand, conditions can change faster in individual countries, for instance, through regulatory changes or because of the entry or withdrawal of a large company, generating increases or decreases of FDI in certain industries (see section F).
The services sector receives a large share of FDI in almost all economies in the region, but the relative importance of natural resources and manufacturing depends on local conditions.
Since the 1990s, FDI in the manufacturing sector has been more significant in Mexico and some of the countries in Central America and the Caribbean, which produce goods for export to the United States.
On the other hand, FDI in natural resources was concentrated in South American countries.
Brazil has shown a more diversified pattern, as a large and relatively closed economy with a significant manufacturing sector producing for the domestic market.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia and Ecuador and, especially, in Mexico, national (State-owned) companies carry out the majority of extraction while foreign companies play a support role.
FDI in mining rose during the last decade, notably in Chile, Peru, Colombia, Brazil, the Dominican Republic and Mexico, on the back of high prices for metals and other minerals.
This trend may have started to reverse in 2013, under pressure from two fronts.
On the one hand, prices of metals have dropped for the past two years, although they have remained high by historical standards.
On the other, extraction costs have risen substantially, mainly because of declining ore grades and higher costs for certain key inputs, such as energy.
Average worldwide costs of extracting a pound of copper rose from US$ 1.37 in 2009 to US$ 2.11 in 2012.6 These two factors pushed the largest international mining companies into a restructuring process, which included selling some non-core assets and re-evaluating the feasibility of certain projects.
Besides pressure from shareholders to raise their return on capital, mining companies worldwide are also facing increased demands from governments, communities and civil society regarding the social and environmental impacts of their activities.
Responding to these demands can raise operational costs and cast doubt on the feasibility of certain projects (see box I.1).
While FDI in natural resources in large countries may be stationary or even declining, some Central American and Caribbean countries, such as Guatemala, Panama, Guyana, Suriname and Barbados, are only now beginning to play host to large mining and hydrocarbon projects.
As a result, these economies are likely to become much more dependent on natural resources in the coming years (see section E).
FDI in forestry, fishing and agriculture has been growing and is important in a few countries, but the figures invested do not compare with those in oil and mining, which are much more capital-intensive.
See chapter III of ECLAC (2013b) for a detailed description of FDI in agriculture in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Data for FDI in the oil sector in Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela were not available for 2013.
This decision was no doubt influenced by falling gold prices and rising costs, but a more immediate cause was a court ruling ordering the construction of the mine to cease following legal action brought by indigenous communities which had accused the company of reducing their access to water.
This freeze has caused Barrick to take an asset write-down of US$ 5 billion, which gives some idea of the magnitude of the project.
Pascua-Lama is perhaps the largest mining project to be suspended by a socio-environmental conflict in Latin America, but it is not the only one.
Mining companies operating in the region (most of them transnational) are beset by ever-increasing numbers of such conflicts (Saade Hazin, 2013).
The most common causes of contention are environmental (pollution, water use and the accrual of environmental liabilities) but complaints have also been made of human rights abuses, the displacement of communities, unfulfilled expectations of shared mining royalties and negative impacts on traditional production activities.
In Colombia the government halted coal exports by the Drummond Corporation, again from the United States, for reasons of marine pollution, and protests have delayed several major projects such as those run by AngloGold Ashanti in Tolima department and Eco Oro in Santander department (The Economist, 2014).
In Uruguay, the Zamin mining company plans to invest more than US$ 1 billion to develop the Aratirí iron mine, but the determined opposition to the project from society could make it difficult to implement.
In the Dominican Republic another legal claim has been lodged against Barrick Gold for use of public spaces in its Pueblo Viejo project.
The mining boom that has raged in Latin America over the past decade has given rise to many conflicts.
In Colombia the amount of land granted for mining operations rose from 1 million to 8.5 million hectares in the first decade of the century, but less than a quarter of licences were subject to any form of environmental authorization.
What is more, the number of licence applications increased at such a rate that the procedure had to be suspended to process the backlog of requests.
Some countries with little tradition of mining have become host to large-scale projects that have also caused social conflict, as has been the case in Panama and in Costa Rica, where in 2010 the government declared a moratorium on all metal mining projects.
Quite apart from the growth of investment in mining, the number of complaints has risen because the affected communities are increasingly well informed and have more and more avenues open to them to make their voices heard.
Governments are also taking steps to improve access to information and justice and to increase participation in environmental issues by undertaking institutional reforms, such as Chile’s General Environment Framework Law of 2010 (ECLAC, 2013d).
Provisions on rights of access to information may also be included in international agreements, such as the bilateral treaty on investment signed between Uruguay and the United States.
Another legal instrument that has facilitated citizen participation is International Labour Organization (ILO) Convention No. 169 concerning indigenous and tribal peoples, which stipulates that consultations with indigenous communities must be held before mining projects affecting them can be carried out.
A third element that has fuelled citizen demands is the perception that mining companies have reaped exceptionally high profits over the past decade.
Indeed, the profits of transnational corporations grew most strongly in countries in which foreign direct investment (FDI) was most concentrated in metal mining (ECLAC, 2013).
Citizen demands are not isolated measures and are not expected to subside any time soon.
Companies will need to incorporate civil society’s requirements for better management of social and environmental impacts into their projects as soon as possible, to minimize the possibility of conflict.
Firms can also call for an institutional and regulatory framework that will deal with these demands in a manner that is both predictable and in accordance with the law.
The goal should be to encourage responsible mining investments and to punish those that do not meet the expectations of sustainable development in the region.
FDI in manufacturing was pushed up in 2013 by the large acquisition of the Mexican beer maker Grupo Modelo, for US$ 13.249 billion.
This was the latest of a series of major acquisitions in the beer industry, which is undergoing a wave of consolidation across the region and worldwide.7 Other manufacturing sectors going through similar processes are the food and cement industries and, to some extent, steel and some segments of the chemical industry.
These are important manufacturing sectors present in most countries in the region, which normally produce for the local market and form national oligopolies.
The merger between the world’s two largest cement makers (Lafarge from France and Holcim, which is from Switzerland but has many subsidiaries in Latin America), announced in March 2014, signals that the trend towards consolidation will continue in the coming years.
Export-oriented manufacturing, on the other hand, is concentrated in Mexico and a few other Central American and Caribbean countries, and transnational corporations almost always enter the sector via greenfield investments rather than acquisitions.
As far as it can be measured, this type of FDI has neither grown nor decreased over the past decade, despite the intensified global competition in many of these industries.
Over the past two years, investments in export-oriented manufacturing have increased in the Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Nicaragua and have remained stable in Mexico, the largest recipient of this type of FDI, where the automotive sector has expanded notably (see box I.4).
FDI in services declined slightly in 2013, but still accounts for 38% of all flows into the region.
During the past decade, most FDI in these sectors has been driven by growth in consumer spending.
As millions of Latin Americans saw their incomes rise, they started to own mobile telephones, open bank accounts or shop in supermarkets, and most of these services were provided by transnational corporations.
At the same time, some regulatory and technological changes occurring in the region are opening up new areas for FDI.
This has been the case in recent years for investments in renewable electricity generation, which attracted new FDI in many countries.
A similar effect could be seen in Mexico if the proposed reforms in telecommunications and energy prove successful.
Most FDI in services goes to a few capital-intensive sectors, such as finance, telecommunications and electricity.
FDI in tourism is key in some small economies (see the part on the Caribbean under section E) but the level of inflows across the region is not comparable to the sectors mentioned above.
Real estate activities are also registered under the services sector and attract large FDI inflows in some small economies, sometimes related to the development of tourism projects.
With the exception of the telecoms and electricity sectors, FDI in infrastructure development has been modest in the region and concentrated in a few countries and subsectors in which the regulatory conditions are conducive to foreign investment, such as the motorway concessions in Chile,8 and port operations in Panama.
Many Latin American governments are explicitly targeting FDI in infrastructure through new programmes and regulatory changes,9 but so far investments are materializing only in certain segments, such as airport management.
Brazil has privatized five large airports in the past two years, most of which went to international companies.
Finally, services for export, such as business processing outsourcing (BPO), are not capital-intensive and do not attract large inflows of FDI, but they are becoming increasingly important for certain small economies and have been growing consistently in recent years.
Their operations range from very basic call centres to sophisticated operations such as medical, software, legal and financial services and the value added in the country varies accordingly.
In all cases, they require a relatively skilled labour force and have a large capacity for creating jobs (see chapter III for a full discussion on the impact of FDI on employment).
This is why governments across Central America and the Caribbean offer generous incentives for companies in this industry, often through tax waivers but also in other forms.
The Government of El Salvador, for example, provides English language lessons to 650 persons a year in order to enable them to become proficient enough to work in call centres.
Under its National Infrastructure Programme for 2014-2018, Mexico plans to spend US$ 586 billion, 40% of which should come from private investors.
Paraguay adopted a public-private partnership (PPP) law in 2013 which could generate investment opportunities in infrastructure totalling US$ 30 billion.
In June 2013, the Government of Brazil adopted new regulations to facilitate private investment in ports.
Technology intensity and research and development by transnational firms As well as the distribution by sector, it is important to analyse the technology intensity of the investment.
This is an important topic, because if macroeconomic theories are correct, technology spillovers should be the driving force behind the beneficial effects of FDI (Dries and Swinnen, 2004; Havranek and Irsova, 2011).
We then use the OECD (2009) categorization to group manufacturing projects in high, medium-high, medium-low and low technology categories.
At the same time, however, 2013 also saw a lower percentage of low-tech projects than the preceding periods.
Rates have been even lower in individual years in the past (in 2010, only 5.5% of projects were considered low-tech).
The general trend is clear, however: fewer projects in manufacturing are low-tech.
If high- and low-tech projects have both decreased in importance, medium-low and medium-high must have benefited.
Even if the data are not entirely clean and there is significant variation between years, both those categories still appear to show a long-term uptrend.
Since 2008, medium-low technology manufacturing appears to have lost ground steadily, while high-technology manufacturing has increased relatively rapidly.
In the short run, the picture was reversed between 2012 and 2013: medium-low technology projects saw a significant jump during 2013, while medium-high technology projects dropped from 38.3% to 34.6% of all manufacturing projects announced.
However, since this is only a single observation and the data concern only announcements, it would not appear to be a significant problem.
Another variable that reveals the quality of FDI in the region is the percentage of announced projects in research and development (R&D) activities (in any sector).
First, 2011 was a special year in which a single project announcement The data for this section comes from fDi Markets, a database on FDI projects as they are announced by companies.
It is important to note that the projects included in the database may not have been implemented, or may be implemented over a number of years.
However, the data allows trends to be observed over time. (British Gas Group’s announcement of a US$ 1.9 billion Brazilian R&D facility) affected even the global R&D figures.
But even without taking that year into account, there is a small but distinct upward trend in Latin America’s share of global investment in R&D.
The primary change that can be observed is that Asia as a whole (including China) has been becoming more attractive as a location for R&D investment.
The United States, on the other hand, retains its 13% share in international R&D investment.
Transition economies, while coming from a very low base, also increase their share of this category of FDI.
The exceptional performance of the Latin American and Caribbean region in 2011, which is clearly reflected in figure I.11B, masks the slight overall uptrend in its share of R&D investment over the past decade.
Largest investor countries As a group, Europe was the largest source of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2013 (see figure I.12).
Europe provided about half of all inflows in both Brazil and Mexico, in the latter case driven primarily by the Grupo Modelo takeover, itself accounting for over 7% of the region’s entire FDI inflows in 2013.
The Netherlands is the largest single European investor in Brazil and the second largest after Belgium in Mexico.
In Colombia, Switzerland is responsible for about one third of European inflows.
Flows from Spain were much lower in 2013 than in previous years, except in the Plurinational State of Bolivia where they made up 33% of all inflows.
The United States continues to be the single largest investing country, although its share dropped precipitously in both Brazil (from 21% to 14%) and Mexico (from 49% to 32%).
In Central America, on the other hand, the United States share of FDI inflows edged up from 26% to 30%.
Together with Colombia, the Central American subregion is also among the most popular for trans-Latin companies.
In Colombia, 30% of inflows originate elsewhere in Latin America and the Caribbean (down from 53% in 2012), while the figure is 39% for Central America.
The regional figure, however, is strongly affected by the jump in regional-origin FDI flowing into Brazil, given that it is the region’s largest recipient of FDI.
FDI from Asian countries was virtually unchanged in 2013, with stable shares across the board except in Mexico, where Asian FDI dropped to 5% of the total, down from 12% in 2012.
Japan has traditionally been the largest investor in the region, followed by the Republic of Korea.
Both countries have large manufacturing investments in Brazil and Mexico (mainly in the automobile and electronics sectors) and more recently have been increasing their investments in natural resources, usually as minority stakeholders in mining and oil operations.
Chinese FDI is particularly difficult to track in the official statistics, but has been estimated to represent around US$ 10 billion annually for the whole region since 2010 (Perez Ludeña and Chen, 2014).
This trend appears to be holding steady, with Chinese FDI focusing on mining in Peru and oil extraction in Brazil, where there are also significant investments in manufacturing (see box I.2).
Tracking the origin of FDI is complicated by the fact that a significant share originates from economies considered transition destinations, such as the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands and Luxembourg.
Interestingly, trans-Latin firms also play a significant role in these large M&As, with two investments from Colombian firms and one from a Mexican firm.
Anheuser-Busch InBev’s purchase of Grupo Modelo is reported in table I.2 as being worth US$ 19.763 billion, although only US$ 13.249 billion were included as FDI into Mexico.
The difference is explained mainly by subsequent sales of assets that belonged to Modelo.
It is still one of the largest company acquisitions ever registered in the region.
FDI inflows by country About half of the countries in Latin America and the Caribbean saw FDI inflows decline, despite a rise in the aggregate figure (see table I.3).
A third of FDI flowing into the region comes to Brazil, and 80% of flows are concentrated in the six largest economies, but the impact of transnational corporations is larger in smaller economies.
The ratio of FDI inflows to GDP shows the relevance of FDI across the region in 2013 (see figure I.13).
The ratio is, generally speaking, much higher in smaller economies, but there are some medium-size economies, such as Panama, Chile or the Plurinational State of Bolivia, where FDI inflows were very significant last year— in excess of 6% of GDP.
A very similar pattern is observed in the ratio between FDI and total investment, or gross fixed capital formation (GFCF).
The average for Latin America and the Caribbean is 20%, rising to over 30% in the smaller economies and some exceptional cases like Chile and Panama, and falling to around 10% in other, larger economies, such as Mexico or Argentina.
Although the two variables are not directly comparable (FDI includes cross-border acquisitions, which are not included under GFCF), they are closely related because much of FDI is also part of GFCF and both respond to similar stimuli.
First, the correlation appears to be stronger in countries that are more dependent on natural resources.
Chile and Peru received a great deal of FDI in natural-resource extraction, which led to significant increases in capital formation.
Brazil does not receive large FDI inflows into natural resources but still shows the highest correlation during the past decade.
Conversely, Mexico and Central American economies, where FDI focuses on export-oriented manufacturing and services, show a much lower correlation between FDI inflows and GFCF.
The ratio is especially low or even negative in countries with very low levels of FDI, such as Guatemala and Haiti, or the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, where nationalizations caused much of the variations in FDI inflows during the past decade.
Although many of the large FDI projects implemented across the region will significantly boost GFCF, the correlation between the two variables does not necessarily imply causation, but rather that both are driven by the same factors.
In other words, years in which FDI is strong will, by and large, also see strong capital formation.
The opposite effect was observed very clearly in 2009, the only recent year in which GFCF and FDI fell across the region.
Accordingly, including 2009 in the sample raises the correlation between the two variables, notably for some countries like Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Mexico. 1.
Brazil Inflows in Brazil remained practically stable for the second year running, reaching US$ 64.046 billion.
This represents more than a third of the total inflows into the region, despite the fact that Brazil does not include reinvested earnings in the figures, which represented around 45% of total inflows in other countries in previous years.
The uptick in economic growth in 2013 (2.3% against 1% in 2012) was reflected in a 12% year-on-year rise in the profits of transnational corporations in Brazil, with FDI income reaching US$ 27.536 billion, although this was still short of the record high of 2011.
As in previous years, the natural resources sector reported very little profit.
The sectors yielding most profits in 2013 were the automotive sector (US$ 3.29 billion, 35% higher than in 2012), beverages (US$ 2.84 billion), financial services (US$ 1.90 billion), retail (US$ 1.68 billon) and telecommunications Devaluation did not seem to have an impact on FDI flows, although it lowered the value of assets.
The FDI stock in Brazil rose during the year, but despite substantial inflows was lower in December than in March because of the real’s depreciation against the dollar in the second and third quarters.
Almost all sectors of the economy are open to FDI, and Brazil receives large inflows into many different industries.
During 2013 there was a recovery of FDI into natural resources, mainly driven by an expansion in the oil industry, which received US$ 10.892 billion, more than double the value of the previous year.
In October, a consortium led by Anglo-Dutch oil major Shell, France’s Total and China’s CNPC, with shares of 20% each, won the bid to develop the Libra deepwater oilfield in partnership with Petrobras.
The foreign companies will pay a signing bonus of US$ 7 billion, large by international standards.
This was the first auction of oilfields in Brazil under new rules, and the results confirm the interest of foreign investors in the country.
The Libra field will have an expected capacity of up to 1 million barrels a day of oil equivalent and will require an investment of up to US$ 200 billion over the next 35 years.
Mining received US$ 3.343 billion and FDI in agriculture continued growing but remained below US$ 1 billion.
The services sector received slightly less FDI in 2013 because of substantial drops in telecoms and finance, which had seen large acquisitions in previous years that were not repeated in 2013.
FDI into manufacturing declined in 2013 because of large drops in the steel (where some large projects had been completed in 2012) and food (where there were no large acquisitions) industries.
On the other hand, computer equipment and automotive production received more FDI (see box I.2).
These investments will amount to US$ 225 million and US$ 234 million, respectively. –– Honda is to invest US$ 450 million in building a second plant at Itirapina, São Paulo, with a capacity of 120,000 vehicles per year.
The facility will also include a research In 2013, foreign direct investment in Brazil’s automotive sector rocketed to US$ 2.621 billion: the highest figure on record and double the average of the past five years.
Vehicle production also climbed to an historic high of 3.74 million units, almost 10% up on the previous year, making Brazil the world’s seventh largest producer of motor vehicles, and its fourth largest car market after China, the United States and Japan.
The automotive industry accounts for almost 25% of industrial GDP and 5% of total GDP As of early 2014, investments worth US$ 34 billion (75 billion reais) had been announced for the period up to 2017 in order to build new plants, to expand and modernize existing ones, and to develop new products.
The number of production facilities, for cars and light commercial vehicles only, will rise from 18 in 2013 to 25 in 2015.
Among the companies that announced major investments were vehicle manufacturers with a long tradition in the country, and some new entrants including various Chinese firms as well as premium automakers. –– Fiat Chrysler announced that it would increase its investment in Brazil from US$ 2.70 billion to US$ 6.76 billion between 2013 and 2016.
Located in Tatuí, São Paulo, it is set to enter production in 2014. –– JAC Motors announced the construction of a factory at the Camaçari Industrial Complex in the State of Bahia.
With an investment of US$ 400 million, it will produce 100,000 units (cars and trucks) per year from 2014. –– Amsia Motors is a little-known Chinese company financed by Arab investors.
Originally from the United States, it specializes in vehicles powered by clean energy (electric and hybrid cars) and has announced a US$ 450 million investment to build a plant in the State of Sergipe.
First, the sector is constantly setting new sales and production records, spurred by rising disposable incomes and the expansion of credit.
Brazil has become a very attractive market with high potential for growth: vehicle ownership levels are still relatively low and are below those of Argentina and Mexico.
Similarly, there is plenty of room for growth in the luxury car segment, which is small at present but which will probably double in the next five years.
These policies range from tough restrictions on imports to the measures adopted in 2013 for a five-year period, as part of the industrial, technological and foreign trade policy known as “Plano Brasil Maior” (“Bigger Brazil Plan”).
The Plan aims to upgrade the country’s industrial fabric as a way of regaining international competitiveness, which is under pressure from the strong real.
The objective is to increase Brazil’s share of global vehicle production, moving beyond its current status as a manufacturer to make the country a global centre for the development of new products.
The policy is structured around three key pillars: • Programa Inovar-Auto (Programme to Foster Technological Innovation and Densification of the Production Chain for Automotive Vehicles), which primarily aims to encourage investment in the Brazilian automotive industry.
To do this, the government has introduced discounts of up to 30% on the Industrial Products Tax (IPI) for cars manufactured and sold in the country, provided that automakers commit to a series of targets for the period 2013-2017 These targets are linked to input purchases, technological development and innovation, training for suppliers and basic industrial engineering and technology.
The Plano Brasil Maior has undoubtedly been successful in attracting investments and narrowing the technology gap of the vehicles produced in the country.
However, at least in the short term, it is also true that the risk of excess production capacity is rising at a time when the demand for automobiles may be losing momentum.
In 2013, vehicle sales in Brazil fell for the first time in nine years, even as the value of exports reached a record high of US$ 16.570 billion.
If all the investment announcements come to fruition, the automotive industry’s production capacity will swell from 4.5 million to 5.8 million vehicles in 2017 about 1 million units higher than projected consumption.
This will force automakers to seek new options to double the volume of exports.
Restrictions to access to foreign exchange imposed at the end of 2011 (ECLAC, 2013a) have raised reinvestment of earnings by foreign affiliates.
Capital inflows were down by 24% and intra-company loans were slightly negative in the first half of the year, but figures for 2013 overall had not been released at the time of writing.
Mergers and acquisitions were limited to a few deals between foreign companies in the energy sector.
Compañía General de Combustibles was sold by the fund Southern Cross to an undisclosed private investor for US$ 200 million and Andes Energía PLC also acquired some assets for an undisclosed amount.
During the early months of 2014 the government reached an agreement with Repsol to pay US$ 5 billion in compensation for the 2012 nationalization of 51% of the oil company YPF.
YPF is currently trying to attract other international companies as partners to develop its extensive oil and gas reserves.
Inflows into Chile were US$ 20.258 billion, 29% less than the previous year but still much higher than the average for the previous decade.
Chile is now the third largest recipient (after Brazil and Mexico) of FDI inflows in Latin America and one of the largest in terms of the size of its economy.
There are no data on FDI by sector in Chile in 2013, but in previous years mining was by far the largest recipient of inflows.
The international price of copper declined to 332 ¢/lb from a 2011 high of 400 ¢/lb, while costs (particularly for electricity) in Chile remain high.
Nonetheless, the Chilean Copper Commission (COCHILCO) forecasts some US$ 112 billion of mining investment until 2021, 77% of which is related to copper.
Of the projected investments, 46% are domestic, while Canada accounts for 27% and Japan, 10%.
Among the largest investments, Australia’s BHP Billiton, British-Australian Rio Tinto and their partners are spending US$ 3.8 billion on expanding production at the Escondida mine and building a new copper concentrator.
They also commenced building a US$ 3.4 billion desalinization facility to supply the mine with cooling water.
The Caserones mine started production in 2013 and will reach full production in 2014, after an investment of some US$ 4.2 billion.
Lastly, KGHM International (Poland) and Sumitomo Metal Mining (Japan) are jointly constructing a new open-pit copper mine in Sierra Gorda for an expected outlay of US$ 3.9 billion and which is due to start production in 2015.
In addition to the activities in solar energy (see box I.3), Ireland’s Mainstream Renewable Power combined forces with the United Kingdom venture capital firm Actis to create 600 MW of wind and solar projects in a deal worth US$ 1.4 billion.
Lastly, Italy’s ENEL announced an investment of US$ 600 million to build a hydroelectric dam.
In the services sector, Metlife acquired 90% of AFP Provida for a sum of US$ 1.841 billion.
Most of this was purchased from Banco Bilbao Vizcaya Argentaria (BBVA) of Spain, and thus does not contribute to FDI in Chile, but a smaller stake was held by domestic investors.
In manufacturing, the acquisition of food company Tresmontes Lucchetti by Colombia’s Grupo Nutresa for US$ 758 million was one of the largest takeovers in Latin America during the year and the third largest deal by a trans-Latin multinational.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela received US$ 7.04 billion in 2013, more than double the previous year’s figure.
Almost two thirds of the investments flowing into the country were reinvested earnings and the other third represented inter-company loans, since capital investments were virtually non-existent.
Transnationals had to contend with various restrictions on access to foreign capital, which were stepped towards the end of 2013.
Owing to these restrictions, reinvested earnings were on the rise; in many cases, they were channelled into real estate projects (ECLAC, 2013a).
Furthermore, these restrictions forced automobile plants to halt production in the latter part of the year, while airlines were obliged to scale back their activities in the country.13 Thus the proportion of FDI flowing to the petroleum sector was down to 37% in 2013, less than half the amount observed in previous years.
Petroleum output diminished slightly in 2013 and was 27% lower than the 1997 figure,14 but investments in the sector expanded by 5%.15 The company Petronas de Malasia withdrew from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in 2013 (Grant and Chazan, 2013), as part of the global strategy aimed at shifting the focus to their national operations.
The extractive industries continued to be the largest recipients, with 47% of total inflows between the oil industry (almost US$ 5 billion) and mining (nearly US$ 3 billion).
Manufacturing saw the largest increase in FDI inflows and became the third largest recipient, with US$ 2.659 billion.
The services sector is also receiving record levels of FDI: transport, storage and communications received US$ 1.74 billion, retail and tourism US$ 1.584 billion, and financial services US$ 1.578 billion.
FDI income generated in Colombia was US$ 14.163 billion, lower than in 2012 and 2011, but still much higher than in the previous years.
Chile’s Atacama Desert receives higher levels of solar radiation than any other part of the planet.
It also happens to be an area where mining companies require large amounts of electricity to power their equipment.
Chile’s electricity prices are significantly higher than elsewhere, standing at US$ 0.25 per kWh, compared to US$ 0.10 in the United States.
Both domestic and foreign investors have thus come to the logical conclusion that Chile may be the world’s best-suited location for the operation of solar plants.
Solar projects with a total 9.9 gigawatts (GW) of capacity have been proposed, of which several are under construction (CER, 2014).
Even if not all those projects come to fruition, the capacity they represent is certainly significant in relation to the total installed capacity of 18.3 GW in 2012.
The table below shows a non-exhaustive list of projects that are operating, under construction, scheduled for construction or approved but still pending a construction date.
Both of SunEdison’s plants came online in early 2014, and total solar capacity is expected to reach some 600 MW by the end of the year.
All plants currently under construction are located in Chile’s sun-drenched north, near the mining companies that are their primary clients.
Chile is the first country in Latin America to reach grid parity—meaning that unsubsidized solar photovoltaic energy has become competitive with that of traditional sources.
In this, Chile benefits greatly from globally falling prices for solar cells, which have brought the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) for solar to as little as US$ 60 per MWh.
As a result, new projects are now being developed largely without subsidies, although the government and international development organizations have made loans available.
With regard to medium-term projects, several players (Abengoa and Ibereólica Group of Spain) have invested in thermosolar energy, calculating that it will yield worthwhile returns despite its significantly higher capital outlay.
For the foreseeable future, thermosolar plants will only be worthwhile as investments with significant subsidies.
So far, the total investment has been relatively limited in relation to total Chilean FDI, but in coming years, investments in solar energy will start to contribute more to inward FDI, especially since foreign firms apparently play such a large role in the country’s solar energy market.
This should help Chile to benefit from technology spillovers and to become a leader in solar power generation.
Firms from other countries, particularly Spain and the United States, are using their prior knowledge of solar energy generation to help Chile build up capacity quickly.
Interestingly, part of the solar energy capacity is built to sell electricity not into the grid, but directly to mining companies.
For example, the US$ 80 million photovoltaic plant being constructed by Solarpack will be used exclusively by mining giant Collahuasi.
In fact, some mining companies even generate their own solar energy on a small scale.
One of the reasons for this is that the Chilean energy grid is not very well integrated, so electricity prices vary between different locations.
Etrion of Switzerland recently put on hold an 8.8 MW plant that would have supplied power to an iodine mine owned by Atacama Minerals Chile S.C.M.
The plant was planned when iodine prices surged in the wake of the Fukushima disaster, but new mines in northern Chile coming online caused iodine prices to drop so sharply that the investment was no longer worthwhile.
The Government of Chile has welcomed foreign investors and the country is significantly ahead of its neighbours in the region in solar power development.
If this ultimately helps to reduce dependence on imported oil and gas, the trade balance will benefit.
It would also help Chile to reach its 2025 target of sourcing 20% of power from renewables other than large-scale hydropower.
During the first two months of 2014, new renewables contributed some 7 .07% to total electricity output, a significant increase on the 5.85% average for 2013.
Solar power contributed only 2.5%, but this can be expected to increase rapidly.
All the growth was concentrated in capital contributions, while reinvested earnings and intra-company loans decreased.
Its largest investors from beyond the region are China, Spain and Italy.
FDI in Ecuador is among the lowest in the region in relation to the size of its economy and lower than it was a decade ago, even in nominal terms.
This is despite Ecuador’s solid GDP growth over the past few years, which has not differed much from neighbouring countries which have attracted large FDI inflows.
The government expects private investments, including FDI, to be more forthcoming in the future.
So far, transnational corporations including Kia from the Republic of Korea, Volkswagen from Germany and the autoparts maker Chaidneme from Colombia have announced major investment projects.
Arca from Mexico and Coca Cola from the United States jointly announced large expansion plans in the food and beverages industry, including the acquisition in early 2014 of dairy producer Tonicorp.
The largest project in Ecuador is the Pacific Refinery, still at the planning stage.
The project, with an expected investment of US$ 10 billion, will be led by the State-owned PETROECUADOR with financial support from the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China, but foreign partners, which may include PDVSA of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela or NPC of China, will have 49% share.
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, 2013 saw record inflows of US$ 2.030 billion, 35% more than the year before, of which the bulk was in the exploration and processing of hydrocarbons.
FDI in other sectors has declined over the past few years as a result of nationalizations of foreign subsidiaries, especially in mining and electricity services.
Petrobras of Brazil has been the primary partner of the State-owned oil and gas company Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Bolivia (YPFB), winning a bid that is estimated to require an investment of more than US$ 800 million.
In addition to exploring for oil and gas, there is also significant activity in the processing of natural resources.
Repsol spent a total of US$ 640 million, US$ 373 million of it during 2013, to expand its natural gas processing plant by 60%.
Samsung of the Republic of Korea is spending US$ 843 million on an entire petrochemical complex centred around a fertilizer plant, in its first foray into South America.
As for the future, the Government of the Plurinational State of Bolivia is attempting to interest international firms in its Mutún iron ore deposit, which is thought to be among the richest in the world.
The deposit was originally to be operated by Jindal of India, but arrangements came to a standstill in 2012.
Paraguay does not receive large amounts of FDI, despite economic growth of 13.6% in 2013.
Both services and manufacturing have been important in Paraguay in recent years.
In manufacturing, Portugal’s CIMPOR inaugurated a cement plant in October 2013 after a US$ 50 million expansion.
Japan’s Fujikura announced a US$ 15 million investment in a cable manufacturing plant, which is expected to create 2,500 new jobs.
With regard to M&As, Chilean brewer Compañía Cervecerías Unidas, S.A. (CCU), which is partially controlled by Heineken of the Netherlands, purchased a 50% stake in Bebidas de Paraguay and a distributor for an unknown sum.
Lastly, several companies continue to explore for oil and gas in different parts of the country.
Peru received US$ 10.172 billion in FDI inflows, a 17% drop from 2012 but still its second highest annual inflows ever.
In recent years Peru has registered record FDI inflows, mostly driven by large reinvested earnings from mining companies.
This caused a 41% drop in the reinvested earnings component of FDI inflows.
Peru’s mining exports were down significantly owing to two factors: the drop in prices of both copper and gold and the decline in gold production, mainly because of social unrest in Cajamarca.
Income tax from mining companies decreased by 48% compared with 2012, suggesting that the drop in registered FDI income may have been concentrated in the mining sector.
Still, the large number of mining projects under construction ensured that total investment in mining (by both local and foreign companies) increased during 2013, albeit at the lowest rate for a few years.
The large presence of Chinese companies in the mining industry is set to increase as Minmetals acquired the Las Bambas mine from Swiss Glencore Xstrata for US$ 5.85 billion in early 2014.
There is no official data on FDI by industry, but transnational corporations have a strong presence in many sectors in Peru beyond mining.
FDI in services such as finance, retail and telecoms (all dominated by transnational corporations) is likely to have remained high, given that domestic demand expanded 6.1% in 2013.
In telecoms, Entel of Chile acquired the third largest network, Nextel, for US$ 400 million.
Uruguay’s inflows were very high for the region, at 5% of GDP in 2013.
Capital contributions made up nearly 62% of inflows, 30% were reinvested earnings and the remainder consisted of intra-company loans.
Although the sectoral distribution is not yet available for 2013, the 2012 data show the start of a surge in investment in utilities, which jumped from a medium-term average of US$ 16 million to US$ 117 million that year.
This is consistent with the government’s push for wind energy and the strong inflows of investment in that sector.
France’s Akuo Energy, for example, has two wind farm projects under construction for a total of US$ 205 million, while Spain’s Abengoa is developing a 70 MW wind farm for US$ 165 million and Corporación America of Argentina is scheduled to spend US$ 210 million on another two projects.
In total, 2014 should see the completion of 550 MW of wind energy projects.
At the same time, the first tenders for solar energy projects, which are scheduled to lead to some US$ 300 million in investment, have also been issued.
As well as energy generation, another matter of ongoing discussion —and a great deal of opposition— in Uruguay is the proposed Aritirí iron ore project to be developed by London-based Zamin , with an investment of between US$ 1 billion and US$ 3 billion.
Another factor that may affect future FDI inflows is a draft law currently being discussed in parliament that would limit land ownership by foreigners.
In 2012, the most recent year for which data are available, construction accounted for 38% of all incoming FDI, much of it Argentine investment in real estate. 3.
Mexico FDI inflows to Mexico more than doubled to US$ 38.286 billion, making it once again the second largest recipient in the region.
The growth was partially driven by the US$ 13.249 billion acquisition by Anheuser-Busch of Belgium of the 50% of beer maker Modelo that it did not yet own.
With this operation, coming after the 2010 acquisition by Heineken of the FEMSA breweries for US$ 7.325 billion, the bulk of the beer industry in Mexico is now owned by the largest international groups.
Without this acquisition, FDI in Mexico would have been near the average for the previous decade, at around US$ 23 billion.
The acquisition of Modelo represented most of the capital contributions registered in 2013.
Again, without this investment, capital contributions would have been less than US$ 6 billion, more than last year’s US$ 3.5 billion but low compared to the past decade’s average of almost US$ 11 billion.
On the other hand, reinvested earnings reached an all-time high of US$ 10.652 billion in 2013.
Natural resources accounted for only 8% of total inflows, almost all of them in gold mining.
Services received US$ 5.193 billion, almost the same as in 2012, but much less than in previous years.
Financial services, which in Mexico are largely controlled by foreign groups, saw a divestment (negative inflows) of US$ 841 million, mainly because Spain’s BBVA sold its pension fund business to Banorte for US$ 1.6 billion.
The retail sector received US$ 1.709 billion, slightly less than in previous years, while inflows increased in the tourism (US$ 1.058 billion) and telecommunications (US$ 911 million) sectors.
In the near future, FDI in natural resources and services could increase if the package of reforms proposed by the new government in 2012 (and still under discussion) starts to impact on investment conditions and opportunities in the energy and telecommunications industries (see ECLAC, 2013b, box I.2).
Potentially, they could mean more competition in the telecoms market and the entry of new players into the electricity and oil industries.
So far, only a few announcements have been made in this direction.16 ENEL, the Italian electricity company present in many countries in the region, has signed a deal with the Government of Mexico to cooperate on geothermal generation and smart grids (Financial Times, 2014).
FDI in manufacturing also remained stable, again excluding the large inflow to the food and beverages industry.
Inflows increased in the pharmaceuticals industry (US$ 516 million), plastics (US$ 596 million) and, especially, in the manufacturing of electrical cables (US$ 1.472 billion).
But the largest recipient of FDI among the export-oriented industries in Mexico has been the automotive sector, with US$ 2.933 billion in 2013, 23% more than the previous year (see box I.4).
Investment flows have surged in the past two years, with figures of At just over 3 million units, Mexico posted record production for the fourth consecutive year in 2013, as it consolidated its position as the world’s eighth largest vehicle producer after China, the United States, Japan, Germany, the Republic of Korea, India and Brazil.
This performance suggests that the industry has emerged from the difficult period caused by the international financial crisis in 2009.
Mexico currently has more than 20 production complexes for light vehicles, in which activities range from assembly and armour-plating, to casting and stamping work for vehicles and engines.
In addition, automotive companies operating in Mexico have announced new investments that amply exceed US$ 20 billion.
In late 2013 and early 2014, four new plants were opened which together amounted to US$ 4.270 billion in investment and an increase in capacity of around 1 million units.
The facilities are those of Renault-Nissan in Aguascalientes (US$ 2.0 billion); Honda in Celaya (US$ 800 million); Mazda in Salamanca (US$ 770 million) and Volkswagen in Puebla (US$ 700 million).
Volkswagen is also investing another US$ 1.30 billion in a new Audi plant in Puebla, which will become operational in 2016.
As well as these new plants, some existing operations have been expanded, as is the case with Ford in Hermosillo (investment of US$ 1.30 billion) and General Motors at its complexes in San Luis Potosí and Guanajuato (US$ 420 million).
This positive trend has been supported by solid export growth, encouraged by a sustained recovery in the United States automotive market.
Mexico’s geographical location and its memberships of trade agreements have granted it privileged access to major markets such as the United States, Canada, the European Union and the Common Market of the South (MERCOSUR).
Moreover, Mexico’s supplier base is growing both in the number of enterprises and in technological sophistication, which is good for the industry’s competitiveness.
These factors are helping to attract large investments from the various companies operating in the country, with new plants and expanded production lines turning Mexico into a major manufacturing and export platform.
Eighty-two per cent of manufactured units are exported, with the remaining 18% placed on the domestic market.
Mexico is the world’s fourth largest vehicle exporter, after Japan, Germany and the Republic of Korea, having overtaken Spain in 2012.
In 2013, the main export destination for vehicles assembled in Mexico was the United States (68%), followed by Latin America (13%), Canada (8%) and Europe (6%).
Yet the Mexican domestic market faces a number of disadvantages that limit its appeal to local vehicle manufacturers.
These include the industry’s specialization in the production of models intended for export; imports of used vehicles from the United States; the lack of adequate mechanisms for testing the physical and mechanical conditions and the emissions of cars in circulation; and the financing difficulties faced by consumers.
So, if the recovery is consolidated in external markets and the pace of foreign direct investment is maintained in tandem with infrastructure and logistical improvements, Mexico is set to become a hub of worldwide production, making the most of its proximity to the United States market.
In this scenario, some projections indicate that Mexico could be producing some 4 million units a year by 2017 of which 88% would be for export, making it the world’s second largest vehicle exporter.
However, some uncertainty remains over factors such as the impact of used car imports on sales of new units in the domestic market, and the possible outcomes of the ongoing negotiations for a Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership between the European Union and the United States.
Another question mark is raised by the possible free trade agreement between the United States and 11 Asian and Pacific countries (the Trans-Pacific Partnership), which might be detrimental to Mexico’s competitiveness on the global stage.
Central America FDI in Central American economies continued to grow in 2013, reaching a record US$ 10.691 billion, 21% higher than in the previous year.
Panama is the largest recipient in Central America (see figure I.15), and the largest in Latin America relative to the size of its economy.
Costa Rica and Nicaragua also receive substantial FDI inflows, which have been growing in recent years.
FDI in manufacturing is becoming less prominent, although, with the exception of Panama, all countries host export-oriented manufacturing plants that are locally important in terms of employment and exports.
The Central American countries are now reforming their export processing zones systems, which are becoming illegal under World Trade Organization (WTO) rules on export subsidies (Martinez Piva, 2011), but they will all maintain some form of incentive for this sector.
Similarly, all the governments offer generous tax incentives for business processing outsourcing (BPO), which is growing very rapidly all over Central America.
Another common trend in the past few years has been increased investments in electricity generation, mostly in wind power.
In 2013, Globeleq, from the United Kingdom, inaugurated a 44 MW plant in Nicaragua, at an estimated investment of US$ 219 million.
Gamesa of Spain provided the technology and is contracted to maintain the plant.
Globeleq is also building the 50 MW Orosi project in Costa Rica, at a cost of US$ 253 million, and the 24 MW expansion of the existing 102 MW Cerro de Hula wind farm in Honduras, with an investment of US$ 29 million.
Beyond wind power, in El Salvador a consortium formed by the local company Quantum Energy and Wärtsilä of Finland successfully bid for a contract to supply 355 MW of capacity to the electricity system.
The consortium will build a liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal and a gas-powered plant that should start delivering power in 2018.
The total expected investment (including local and foreign) will be US$ 700 million.
With a price of US$ 120 per Mwh, this project will contribute substantially to reducing the high cost of electricity in El Salvador.
Natural resources received US$ 488 million, more than any other sector, as has been the pattern for the past three years.
Canada’s Goldcorp has been operating the Marlin gold mine since 2005, while Tahoe Resources, also from Canada, started extracting silver from the Escobal mine in San Rafael in late 2013, after total capital spending of US$ 327 million.
Solway Group of the Russian Federation is investing in a large nickel mine project that is still under construction.
As a result, FDI from Canada and the Russian Federation together amounted to US$ 467 million in 2013.
Trading activities, including retail and commerce, were the second largest recipient after natural resources, with US$ 217 million, followed by electricity (US$ 179 million), banking (US$ 172 million) and manufacturing (US$ 156 million).
Although the biggest banks in Guatemala are local, in 2013 Bancolombia acquired a 40% interest in Banco Agromercantil, the third largest, for US$ 217 million.
In El Salvador, FDI inflows totaled US$ 140 million, a 71% drop from the previous year and the lowest level in recent history.
This was only partially offset by an increase of FDI in manufacturing, which reached US$ 283 million, the highest level in recent years.
Oben from Peru is investing US$ 33 million in a plant for polypropylene films, which will be traded across Central America and the Caribbean, but the largest export-oriented manufacturing sector is textiles and garments.
El Salvador’s garment industry received large investments as a result of the Dominican Republic-Central America-United States Free Trade Agreement (DR-CAFTA) and, around 2005, saw various firms adopt the “full-package” system rather than simply assembling imported components.
This resulted in much more strongly linked value chains, especially in certain subsectors such as sports garments (ECLAC, 2013c).
The presence of a complete value chain in El Salvador makes investors less likely to move to a different location and has fostered the development of local suppliers, for example in packaging.
Still, the industry has not grown, and although it has regained pre-2009-crisis production and export levels, employment remains slightly lower.
The Government of El Salvador is pushing for an increase in FDI in infrastructure services.
Apart from the energy project mentioned above, the Government is planning tenders for managing the port of La Unión (constructed with official development assistance support) and the international airport.
Honduras received US$ 1.060 billion of FDI inflows, practically the same amount as last year.
Telecommunications (including transport) received the largest share of FDI, with 34% of the total, followed by the maquila sector with 16%, and other manufacturing (mostly food, beverages and cement), with 14%.
The largest increase occurred in electricity, to US$ 74 million, reflecting investments in wind energy.
Over 60% of FDI inflows were reinvested earnings, a similar proportion to previous years.
This proportion is among the highest in the region, indicating confidence on the part of existing investors but also a lack of new companies entering the country.
One important arrival, however, is International Container Terminal Services (ICTSI) from the Philippines, which in early 2013 won a bid to build and operate the largest port in Honduras.
ICTSI holds a concession for 30 years and has committed to invest US$ 624 million over the next 10 years.
FDI in Nicaragua grew by 5% to US$ 849 million, the second highest ever after 2011.
Relative to the size of its economy, Nicaragua is one of the top FDI receivers in Latin America.
Asian investors dominate the garment industry, which accounts for two thirds of the approximately 82,000 jobs provided in export processing zones.
Nicaragua has benefited in the past few years from special access to the United States market for apparel pieces made with materials imported from third countries (mostly Asian).
The same company owns another mine in Nicaragua and is investing in at least two other exploration sites.
Manufacturing, mostly maquila activities, used to receive the bulk of FDI entering Costa Rica, but a series of reforms in 2011 opened the door to FDI in electricity, insurance and telecoms and shifted the distribution towards services.
In 2013, services (not including financial, trade and tourism services) received US$ 794 million, slightly less than in the previous year.
For the first time, real estate activities received the largest share, at US$ 1.2 billion, on the back of several hotel, shopping mall and office complex developments, mostly by companies from other Central American countries.
There was virtually no FDI in natural resources and manufacturing in 2013: US$ 359 million, substantially less than in 2012.
More importantly, in April 2014 Intel announced the close of its microprocessor manufacturing plant in Costa Rica, which will shed 1,500 jobs by the end of the year.
This was decided in the context of a large restructuring by Intel, which is trying to reduce its dependence on the declining personal computer market and raise its market share in mobile devices, and is concentrating production in fewer plants, mostly in Asia.
Intel’s arrival in 1997 had been a watershed for the Costa Rican economy.
The company invested some US$ 900 million during its 17 years in Costa Rica and accounted for a large percentage of the country’s exports.
It also helped put Costa Rica on the map for other investors.
According to the Costa Rica Investment Promotion Agency (CINDE), more than 250 high-technology multinationals operate in the country today.
Nevertheless, the plant was relatively disconnected from the rest of the Costa Rican economy and in 2012 its imports exceeded exports (i.e. it registered a trade deficit).
Ciarli and Giuliani (2005) found that although the arrival of Intel was a transformational moment for Costa Rica, the linkages between the plant and other high-tech firms were limited.
Lack of linkages in Costa Rica made it easier for Intel to close the plant and will limit the local impact of the decision.
On the other hand, Intel will maintain engineering and design operations as well as centralized services in Costa Rica, preserving 1,200 jobs and adding a further 200.
This could represent another step in the country’s transformation from a manufacturing hub to a business services hub.
A few days after the news from Intel, Bank of America announced the closure of its services centre in Costa Rica, dismissing 1,500 workers.
In contrast, just a week later, American World Clinics (AWC), a United States hospital group, announced plans to develop a new private hospital devoted to medical tourism in Costa Rica, which could create about 250 direct jobs.
These recent events illustrate the volatility of FDI, where it is based on efficiency-seeking.
After 17 years, Intel had developed only weak backward linkages with the local economy and had not attracted key global suppliers.
In the framework of a global restructuring process, Intel decided to relocate its manufacturing operation in Asia, where it has built stronger local linkages.
This offers key lessons to the region’s policymakers, in terms of new strategies to anchor FDI and foster stronger linkages with host economies.
This represents 10% of GDP, which is the highest of all the Latin American countries and most of the Caribbean except for a few very small economies.
Panama has been the fastest-growing economy in the region for the past few years and posted 8.4% expansion in 2013.
Two large infrastructure projects have been the main drivers of this rapid growth: the expansion of the Panama Canal and the construction of the metro in the capital.
Both projects are carried out by foreign companies but are not registered as FDI.
Panama has very limited FDI in manufacturing and natural resources, but this may be about to change in the latter case with the development of the Cobre Panamá mine in the province of Colón.
Cobre Panamá will be one of the largest copper mines in the world (also producing gold and molybdenum), with a total investment requirement of US$ 6.2 billion.
It is expected to start production in 2017 and is 80% owned by First Quantum Minerals of Canada and 20% by a consortium formed by LS-Nikko Copper and Korea Resources Corporation.
In the past few years, 90% of FDI in Panama has been concentrated in services.
Much of this investment is determined by Panama’s role as a transport hub in the region.
For example, US$ 583 million was invested in companies registered in the Colón Free Zone, which specializes in wholesale distribution of manufactured goods to the Caribbean basin.
The Government of Panama aims to attract FDI in high value added services through the provision of infrastructure (Ciudad del Saber and Panamá-Pacífico are two real estate developments targeted at services companies) and specific incentives like the programme to attract regional headquarters.
The programme offers tax incentives and visa facilities in Panama for companies setting up offices that centralize managerial services.
Close to 100 transnational corporations, some of them very large, have their headquarters registered in Panama,18 although there is no data as to the value added that they create in the country. 5.
The Caribbean During 2013, flows of FDI to the Caribbean decreased from US$ 8.413 billion USD to US$ 5.843 billion, mainly reflecting the decline in flows to the Dominican Republic.
For those economies with data, six saw a reduction in inflows during 2013 and eight saw increases.
Barbados does not yet have FDI data available for 2013 and Cuba does not compile FDI data at all.
Cuba is not regularly covered in this publication, but box I.5 provides some anecdotal evidence of FDI in the country.
In Costa Rica the export sector’s contribution to employment generation is highly significant compared with other Latin American countries.
Based on its relatively large population, with more than 11 million inhabitants, and undercapitalized economy, Cuba should be an attractive destination for investment.
Although there are no official FDI figures, FDI in the island is usually estimated to be very low (ECLAC, 2011).
Brazil, for example, has been pivotal in the construction of a new US$ 900 million port and free trade zone (FTZ) in the town of Mariel, close to Havana.
This port was financed with loans from the Government of Brazil and built by Odebrecht, a Brazilian construction company, but will be operated by Singapore’s PSA.a In early 2014, Brazil also signed memorandums of understanding to build a plastic manufacturing facility, upgrade airport structure and possibly build a tobacco plant.
In tourism, Meliá of Spain is a large hotel chain that owns or operates a series of hotels throughout the island.
Recently, the tourism industry has received little investment, however, with the exception of a US$ 350 million luxury golf resort proposed by Esencia Hotels and Resorts of the United Kingdom.
Natural resources have been a larger focus, with firms from Brazil, China and the Russian Federation said to be exploring for oil and gas.
Sherritt International of Canada is another major investor, having invested US$ 400 million in electricity generation over the past 16 years.
To turn things around, the Government of Cuba has announced several major reforms aimed at increasing FDI inflows to between US$ 2 billion and US$ 2.5 billion per year.
In 2014, the Cuban legislature unanimously approved measures to cut corporate tax rates from 30% to 15% and provide foreign investors with an eight-year tax holiday for new investment.
The new investment law also provides much improved legal protection for foreign business-owners.
Furthermore, it changes the existing regulation, which dates back to 1995, that requires the Cuban government to own a 51% stake in all investments, even if most of the capital comes from foreign private sources.
At the same time it will require workers to be hired through State employment agencies charging in hard currency.b The current changes in FDI law are aimed primarily at mining, tourism, renewable energy, foods and construction, but they could be expanded to include other sectors in the future.
It is too early to be able to see the real impact of these reforms, but if they work, they should benefit both foreign investors and Cuban citizens.
The most important feature of FDI in the Caribbean is that there are two partially opposing forces at work (De Groot and Pérez Ludeña, 2014).
On the one hand, there are those economies that are primarily specialized in natural resources, such as Trinidad and Tobago, Suriname and Guyana.
Those resource-intensive economies have seen an increase in FDI in recent years, a trend that largely continued into 2013.
While these are less capital-intensive and the investment projects thus do not affect the overall regional figures as strongly, they can have a major impact on some of the smaller economies.
FDI inflows in tourism-related activities have been decreasing since the financial crisis of 2008, but 2013 saw a resurgence of activity in many economies.
This may be good news for those economies, particularly since investment in tourism tends to have a large impact in, for example, employment creation.
In addition to natural resources and tourism, the Caribbean has also seen a flurry of activity in the field of electricity generation.
Several economies are exploring alternative sources of electricity to reduce their dependence on fossil fuels and different electricity grids have significantly consolidated operations.
If successful, this market consolidation could prove a boon for the region, which is plagued by extreme energy dependency, consistently high electricity prices and ongoing current account deficits, partially owing to the need to import energy.
The Dominican Republic is the subregion’s largest economy and receives correspondingly high inflows of FDI.
Inflows in 2013 amounted to US$ 1.991 billion, somewhat below the average for recent years and a significant drop from the 2012 figure of US$ 3.142 billion (which was, however, heavily influenced by the acquisition of Cervecería Nacional Domincana by Anheuser-Busch Inbev for US$ 1.237 billion).
The most significant development has been the drop in FDI in the mining sector, which was the largest FDI recipient in 2012.
This can be attributed to the maturity of the Pueblo Viejo gold mine, owned by Barrick Gold Corp., which started production in 2013 and therefore reduced its investments in construction.
Germany’s Wirsol is building a 64-MW solar park which is estimated to require a US$ 270 million investment.
Additionally, Southern California Telephone & Energy announced an US$ 800 million investment in a gas-fired power plant as well.
Lastly, investment in export processing zones remained at levels similar to previous years and Dubai World of the United Arab Emirates has started work on a US$ 215 million logistics centre.
Trinidad and Tobago received inflows of US$ 1.713 billion, compared with a 2012 figure of US$ 2.453 billion, which was among the highest inflows ever recorded in the country.
The government continued selling oil and gas exploration rights and several companies committed significant investments in the sector.
BP of the United Kingdom plans to spend some US$ 5 billion in five years, while BHP Billiton will spend some US$ 1 billion and Range Resources will commit around US$ 100 million.
Beyond oil and gas exploration, Mitsubishi Gas Chemical signed an agreement committing US$ 850 million to a petrochemical complex, while Severstal of the Russian Federation withdrew its plans to spend US$ 600 million on an iron plant.
In Suriname and Guyana, the most important developments took place in mining and oil and gas exploration.
FDI inflows to Suriname increased from US$ 61 million to US$ 113 million, while those to Guyana shrank from US$ 294 million to US$ 214 million.
In June, Suriname’s parliament approved the plan of Newmont Mining Corporation of Canada for the development of the Merian gold mine, which should lead to an investment of between US$ 800 million and US$ 1 billion.
In oil and gas exploration, Apache Corporation of the United States announced a US$ 230 million investment in Block 53, in which the Spanish petroleum company CEPSA also acquired a 25% stake.
Tullow Oil (United States) and Statoil (Norway) will invest US$ 35 million in oil exploration.
In alternative energy sources, plans for a large hydroenergy dam as well as an ethanol plant were shelved in Guyana.
While the Barbadian economy has taken a hit in recent years, with a 0.2% contraction of GDP during 2013, some positive signs can be found in the tourism sector.
The long-stalled Four Seasons Hotels project appears to have been reinitiated in 2013.
Sandals Resorts of Jamaica announced an investment of US$ 250 million, purchasing one resort and constructing another.
China Harbour Engineering announced a US$ 1.350 billion project to build a new port on Goats Island, to tap the opportunity afforded by the expansion in the Panama Canal.
A new Courtyard Marriott is also being built at a cost of US$ 22 million.
In the field of BPO, Sutherland Global Services (United States) opened a centre in Jamaica in December, which will ultimately create some 3,000 jobs.
Lastly, Royal Bank of Canada (RBC) withdrew from Jamaica and sold its assets to Sagicor for some US$ 85 million.
The construction of the Baha Mar tourism project continues (see box I.2 in ECLAC, 2012b), while an investor group that includes Cipriani (Luxembourg) and Chinese investors announced the intention to invest upward of US$ 1 billion in a new development: the Blackwood Point Resort & Marina, which should include a 1,500 room resort, casinos and even its own power plant.
Similarly to the Bahamas, Belize saw investment activity mainly in the tourism sector in 2013, with a focus on the cruise segment.
FDI inflows fell from US$ 194 million to US$ 89 million, although this partly reflected particularly large agricultural investments in 2012, amounting to 38% of all inflows that year as against 9% in 2013.
Norwegian Cruise Line will invest US$ 50 million in an eco-friendly private port, while Royal Caribbean and the Feinstein Group propose to invest US$ 100 million.
Finally, TexBel Agricultural Investments (backed by United States-based investors) plans to expand its coconut products business for some US$ 45 million.
Haiti’s territory is currently being prospected for mining opportunities, by Eurasian Mining and Newmont Ventures Ltd. of Canada, for example, so mining could see significant FDI inflows in the future.
Ltd. of the Republic of Korea investing US$ 23 million in a clothing factory and BRF Brasil Foods investing US$ 45 million in a new poultry facility.
Lastly, Heineken of the Netherlands, which bought the Brana brewery in 2011, invested some US$ 20 million during 2013, and will invest a further US$ 80 million to expand production.
The tourism sector received much attention, but some economies saw significant announcements in energy generation, as well.
The biggest recipient in 2013 was Antigua and Barbuda with US$ 138 million (up from US$ 134 million in 2012), which may have partly reflected its new Citizenship by Investment (CbI) programme.
Sandals Resorts International agreed to invest US$ 150 million in a new tourism resort, while the ground was broken on the US$ 253 million project at Pearns Point, to be developed by Orange Ltd of the Netherlands.
Its new airport, to be opened in 2014, is leading to an increase in tourism investment, while a major storm around Christmas caused substantial damage to several properties, which will require investment to recover.
Finally, Reykjavik Geothermal started a US$ 50 million project in geothermal energy during 2013.
Saint Kitts and Nevis saw a 20% increase in FDI inflows to US$ 112 million, with a strong focus on tourism.
Finally, Asia Pacific Investment House has raised the first US$ 50 million for its proposed US$ 250 million property development.
Saint Lucia’s FDI inflows increased from US$ 80 million to US$ 88 million in 2013, with much of it in tourism.
Apart from tourism, French-Singaporean Caribbean Grains Ltd started producing animal feed in the free trade zone (FTZ) and Canada Plastics has opened a factory as well.
Grenada more than doubled its FDI inflow in 2013, from US$ 34 million to US$ 78 million.
It also introduced a new CbI initiative and saw several large announcements in tourism.
Two individual real estate developers have unfolded plans for a US$ 700 million investment to position Grenada on the global luxury travel map, while an Egyptian billionaire businessman is planning to build three new five-star hotels on the island.
Dominica’s investment fell from US$ 23 million in 2012 to US$ 18 million in 2013, but there are some major plans under way on the island.
Although EDF of France has withdrawn from the construction of an export-focused geothermal plant, the government aims to complete the project with other investors.
Chinese investment company ASCG announced in December that it will invest US$ 300 million in the country, in an airport, an international tourism hotel and a hospital.
In 2013, outflows dropped to US$ 32.217 billion, 31% less than in 2012 and one of the lowest figures in the past decade (see figure I.16), but this drop should not be interpreted as a change in the upward trend of the previous years.
The fundamental reasons for the international expansion of trans-Latin corporations are still in place, but this expansion takes place through large acquisitions and investment projects by a relatively small number of large companies from only a handful of countries.
A set of specific circumstances in these countries significantly reduced the outflows in 2013.
Chile’s outflows also reverted to the level of previous years after very high outflows in 2011 and 2012.
Brazil has the largest stock of outward FDI in Latin America, but for the third year running outflows were negative.
Since 2009, Brazilian trans-Latin corporations have been registering a negative outflow of intra-company loans with their subsidiaries abroad, meaning that they are borrowing outside to finance their activities in Brazil, in response to high domestic interest rates.
This negative outflow of US$ 18.256 billion in loans more than offset the positive capital outflow of US$ 14.760 billion.19 Brazil does not record reinvested earnings in its official FDI figures.
Conversely, Colombia resumed outflows in 2013 after registering a small negative figure in 2012.
Colombian companies have been among the fastest-growing trans-Latin of the past five years but, again showing the volatility of these flows, they recorded no large acquisitions in 2012.
The largest M&As reveal the drop in value in relation to 2012, when the largest 20 operations totalled more than US$ 32 billion, but they are broadly in line with previous years.
Colombian companies, which had been inactive in this area in 2012, were responsible for some of the largest acquisitions in 2013.
Trans-Latin corporations continued their strategy of buying European companies’ assets in Latin America, although at a slower pace.
In 2013 there were a few important Mexican investments in Spain, led by the acquisition of food producer Campofrío for US$ 309 million.
FDI outflows from Argentina edged up slightly to US$ 1.225 billion while those from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela dipped slightly to stand at US$ 2.152 billion.
Although there are indications that smaller economies have been generating more outward FDI in recent years, official data are still limited.
A third of the economies do not report outward FDI and those that do often have incomplete estimations.
In 2013 Costa Rica registered US$ 257 million in outflows, lower than the 2012 figure, but still higher than in previous years.
Guatemala reported outflows of US$ 34 million and Peru, US$ 136 million.
Trinidad and Tobago, the largest foreign investor in the Caribbean, registered US$ 742 million.
One of the reasons for the rise in FDI outflows in the past few years is improved access to finance for the region’s companies.
In 2012 and 2013, firms from Latin America issued more corporate bonds abroad (often in the United States) than ever before.
Even more importantly, companies from medium-sized and small economies in the region were also able to raise funds this way.
Issuing bonds in foreign markets enables companies to grow beyond the possibilities offered by the domestic financial markets, and much of this growth is taking place beyond their country of origin.
Despite the drop in outflows in 2013, the general trend in outward FDI will remain upward.
Companies from Latin American countries are accumulating capacities (financial, managerial and technological) that, given the limited domestic markets in most economies, can be fully exploited only through FDI.
The determinants of this trend are analysed at greater length in chapter II.
Conclusions FDI inflows in Latin America and the Caribbean have remained stable for the past three years.
FDI inflows to the region have been rising for a decade now.
FDI has grown steadily since 2003, with the sole exception of 2009, driven by consumption growth in most economies and high global prices for export commodities.
During 2012 and 2013, economic growth in the region slowed and the prices of most commodities declined.
These developments did not radically change investment strategies, however, and FDI continued to flow into the region at the same rate.
The global financial instability experienced in mid-2013 did not alter investment patterns either.
Average profitability of FDI in the region dropped in 2013 to below 6%, but total FDI income edged up slightly because the stock of FDI in the regions keeps growing.
Reinvested profits dropped in 2013 as a proportion of FDI inflows, but are likely to remain at around 45% of total FDI in the region in the near future, which means that almost half of total FDI in the region represents the continuation and expansion of existing business.
Outward FDI is driven mainly by large acquisitions, as trans-Latin corporations continue their rapid expansion into new markets.
High levels of FDI inflows do not necessarily imply large positive impacts on economic growth or development.
In the academic literature, there is an ongoing debate on the impact of FDI on economic growth, and the most solid conclusion is that types of FDI do not all have the same impact (De Groot 2014).
For example, a large percentage of FDI flows are company acquisitions that do not build new capacity in the economy and even greenfield investments may only substitute for domestic investments.
The challenge is to attract the type of FDI that contributes to developing new sectors or has the capacity to boost the productivity and performance of existing industries.
Transnational corporations have immense technology and production capacities that countries could tap into to develop new industries or expand existing ones.
The development of solar energy in Chile and the large expansion in automotive production capacity in Brazil and Mexico are two recent examples.
FDI flows remain stable at the aggregate level, but individual transnational corporations can easily withdraw their operations from a country, as occurred recently in the case of the Intel manufacturing plant in Costa Rica.
This draws attention to need for public policies aimed both at leveraging the presence of international companies to build local capacities, and at anchoring FDI through specific assets, such as highly-qualified human resources and local suppliers.
Introduction Foreign direct investment (FDI) into Latin America surged over the past decade, as discussed in Chapter I, but was far outpaced by FDI outflows from the economies of the region.
Outward FDI from the region’s corporations, which did not top US$ 10 billion until 2004, has since then averaged above US$ 30 billion annually.
Expanding their operations to other countries is a strategy that all of the region’s major companies adopt at some stage of their development.
Rare is the major Latin American company that has no subsidiaries outside its home country.
Almost all of the region’s large companies are therefore trans-Latin ones,1 although the share of their assets they hold in their home countries varies widely.
This chapter will review the foreign investment strategy of these companies and how that strategy changes according to sector and investment source and destination country.
It thus picks up the line of research that began in 2006 with the first in-depth study of this trend (ECLAC, 2006), which focused on companies based in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico.
Those companies began their international expansion in the 1990s or even earlier, with most of them stepping up the pace after 2004.
This chapter will take an especially close look at the spread of this trend to other countries in recent years —Colombia in particular, but smaller economies too, such as those of Central America and the Caribbean.
Limitations of the traditional methodological approach The theoretical framework most often used to examine FDI across the world has been the eclectic paradigm, also known as the OLI (Ownership-Location-Internalization) model, which sees international output as a combination of factors involving location, company-specific advantages and transaction cost elements (Dunning, 1981 and 1993).
This analytical framework makes it possible to group corporate strategies for investing abroad into those that seek natural resources, market access, lower costs for exporting to third markets (efficiency) and strategic assets.
All of these strategies have the same prerequisite: before investing abroad, a company must have some special competitive advantage.
So, instead of investing abroad on the strength of an ownership advantage, they do so in order to gain access to strategic resources and to acquire the expertise that will enable them to overcome initial obstacles arising from technology gaps and the disadvantage of having entered the international markets late (Aulakh, 2007).
This is usually termed unconventional FDI (Moon and Roehl, 2001), that is, strategic investment aimed at enhancing strength instead of capitalizing on a company’s ownership advantages.
There is an alternate analytical framework for thinking about these unexplained aspects: Linkage, Leverage and Learning (LLL).
In this approach, linkages enable emerging-country companies to establish joint ventures and other forms of cooperation in global value chains with transnational corporations, quickly gaining access to new resources that they lack in-house (capital, technology, skills and knowledge).
Once these relationships are established, companies that internationalized late can use their global links to gain access to resources (especially by leveraging their cost advantages) and learn about new sources of competitive advantages and how to operate at the international level (see table II.1).
At an early stage, this process often ties into inward FDI in the country of origin (Li, 2007; Luo and Tung, 2007).
This provides local companies with a unique opportunity to join established international production networks in order to show their capacities and skills.
Transnational corporations in emerging countries should therefore capitalize on inward FDI (by making original products, working through joint ventures or participating in global value chains) while developing their own capacities so as to become more competitive abroad on the strength of the learning and experience gained in their country of origin.
The LLL analytical framework also has limitations when it comes to explaining outward FDI from developing countries.
One such limitation is that it is based almost exclusively on companies in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific countries (Narula, 2006).
Furthermore, some late-internationalizing companies might in fact have certain unique competitive advantages that explain their strategies for expansion abroad (Dunning, 2006; Dunning and Lundan, 2008).
Beyond this discussion, there are a number of internal push factors and external pull factors that are driving transnational corporations in emerging economies to invest abroad (Dunning, 1993; Dunning, 2008). • Push factors are determinants that are specific to the country of origin and lead the company to decide to invest abroad.
Among them are domestic market size, level of development, production structure, technology assimilation and domestic economy performance and stability (Andreff, 2003).
In developing economies, local investment climate constraints such as underdeveloped capital markets, legal insecurity and poor infrastructure can also be push factors that drive companies to diversify in other countries. • Pull factors are those that attract FDI to a given country.
Among them are the investment climate and risk; the legal and tax environment for FDI; government policies (deregulation and privatization); economic performance; the market structure; the quality of institutions; and the host country’s participation in free trade agreements and other international agreements.
The preference of new transnationals to invest in countries that are close to their own is a major factor.
Internationalization is almost always a gradual, tentative process where corporations start by investing in countries that are closest to them for geographical or other reasons.
This preference is clearer among enterprises in developing economies (most of which have only recently started to expand internationally).
Very few transnational corporations in these economies are truly global: most have a regional or subregional presence.
The forces that are driving the internationalization of corporations from emerging economies differ greatly in terms of the relative weight of these factors.
In the largest countries, such as China, there has been significant government interference in foreign investment, while in small countries the primary push factor is the size of the domestic market (Aykut and Ratha, 2004).
Meanwhile, in the sectors where corporations from emerging economies are highly active, such as oil, petrochemicals and pharmaceuticals, it is common for these firms to acquire companies in industrialized countries, or to forge partnerships with them, so that they can compete with the dominant transnational corporations (Fortanier and van Tulder, 2009).
As regards pull factors, the globalization process is increasingly important since it offers opportunities for many new players (Amighini, Sanfilippo and Rabellotti, 2007).
The following sections will examine the factors that determine internationalization in some specific cases in developing countries and regions.
Increased international presence of companies from developing countries In recent years, emerging economies have become an increasingly important component of the world economy.
Many of them have large domestic markets, which are posting growth rates in excess of 6% amid sustained growth in consumers’ disposable incomes.
These economies have aroused the interest of corporations across the globe, not only on account of their GDP growth and economic stability, but also as sources of talent, capital and business development.
In the last five years, more than a thousand enterprises with head offices in emerging markets have reported more than a billion dollars in annual sales (BCG, 2013).
Many of them concentrate on their home markets, while others are expanding abroad.
More and more of these internationalizing companies aspire to be world leaders in their respective sectors.
Until just a decade ago, the vast majority of the world’s transnational corporations were based in the United States, the European Union, Japan and other developed countries.
In 2003, FDI from developing and transition economies accounted for only 10% of the world total and, in absolute terms, was in the area of US$ 50 billion a year.
During the ensuing decade it climbed steadily to exceed US$ 560 billion in 2013 and reach 39% of the total (UNCTAD, 2014) (see figure II.1).
This trend was boosted by the financial crisis that erupted in the second half of 2008, which hit developed economies much harder.
Indeed, while FDI outflows from developing countries have not stopped growing, FDI from developed economies remains 45% below its historical peak reached in 2007.
This new distribution of worldwide FDI outflows can only be a reflection of the growing economic weight of developing countries, and there is every reason to believe that the trend will continue in the coming years.
For some, the increase in FDI from developing countries has been beneficial, since this investment is seen as a new source of capital and knowledge; others view the phenomenon as a potential threat and a source of competition Most of this kind of FDI comes from a small number of emerging economies.
The emergence of these new sources of FDI has been particularly relevant for other developing countries.
Transnational corporations from emerging countries have become major investors in developing economies, both in Asia (where integrated subregional production systems are taking shape) and in Africa and in Latin America and the Caribbean.
South-South FDI has boomed over the past 20 years and tends to be within the same region.
One outcome of this trend is that there are a growing number of transnational corporations from emerging economies that are interacting and competing head on with enterprises from industrialized countries, which are more established in reputation and international experience.
The crisis has increased the relative weight of enterprises from developing countries.
Between 2008 and 2011, the most dynamic emerging-economy companies in terms of international expansion saw their revenue grow by an average of 16% annually and generated 1.4 million jobs.
These results clearly top those obtained by non-financial firms included in Standard & Poor’s 500 Index (BCG, 2013).
The trend partially reversed in 2012-2013, first because companies in mature markets began to recover the ground lost during the years immediately after the crisis, and second because natural resource companies (which tend to have a larger footprint in developing countries) bore the brunt of the commodity price drop.
While Chinese companies (including those from Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and Taiwan Province of China) are predominant among the 100 largest developing-country transnational corporations —with 37 entities and 52% of sales— there is a growing diversification of countries of origin.
The Russian Federation (8) and India (6) also have a significant presence (see table II.3).
Early in the international expansion process, companies in emerging markets tended to become more competitive thanks to their low operating and production costs.
Yet this cost advantage over their competitors from industrialized countries has been rapidly eroding.
In this new scenario, these companies are developing new and improved capacities on the strength of financial soundness and liquidity, the production of higher-quality goods and services and investment in research and development.
Although it is difficult to generalize, this process has allowed developing-country companies to build strong positions in external markets and has made some of them global leaders in their sector.
Chinese companies have been the greatest exponent of this trend. • Manufacturing companies sought to accelerate the process of learning and assimilation of knowledge and technology.
In order to catch up, they swiftly acquired companies with a high global profile in mature manufacturing sectors with a high level of technological development in industrialized countries.
In less technologically sophisticated areas such as food and beverages, steel and construction materials, companies in emerging economies acquired firms with a strong position in markets of interest, which enabled them to rapidly expand internationally.
Among them were Mexico’s Cemex, Bimbo and Gruma. • There is one particular point to be made about companies that manufacture more technologically sophisticated products.
At first, mainly through imitation and adaptation, they positioned themselves internationally by supplying low-cost and low-quality products to external markets.
Subsequently, in the context of sustained industrial policies, they invested heavily in human capital, technology, market engineering, design and innovation to bring their products and brands up to the standards of a more demanding consumer base.
In the area of basic services and infrastructure, the economic stability of emerging markets and the increase in disposable income of their populations, enabled them to considerably expand the scope and size of their operations abroad.
Furthermore, the development of information and communication technologies (ICTs) opened interesting opportunities in telecommunications and financial services, where in addition to expanding coverage, they developed innovative applications especially designed for or adapted to the needs of host markets.
The approaches of smaller transnational companies have responded to more specific factors and circumstances.
In small and medium-sized countries, the internationalization of some leading companies was due to the exhaustion of the opportunities provided by the domestic market because of its size, level of competition or legal constraints.
Such undertakings have tended to be in neighbouring countries or in the same region.
In such cases, upon reaching a certain level of coverage and performance they begin to draw the attention of larger companies, which could lead to their subsequent acquisition.
On the one hand is strong government support for large corporations, often State-owned, for them to grow, develop and expand internationally.
This is the case in China2 and, to a lesser extent, in India and the Russian Federation.
In the middle are the Republic of Korea, Singapore and Brazil, which have a long history of broad-based industrial policies supporting leading private companies and favouring the creation of national leaders.
On the other hand are cases with no targeted incentives where horizontal policies for making the economy as a whole more competitive are the rule.
By identifying the main driving factors behind the internationalization of transnational corporations from developing economies, significant regional differences are observed.
Foreign direct investment by Asian countries is encouraged by push factors such as: the scarcity of natural resources, the need to reduce production costs and acquire strategic assets, and sophisticated government actions to promote capital outflows through exchange-rate regulation, institutional and financial support and, in some cases, the work of dedicated agencies.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, and to a certain extent in other regions, investments are determined by the need to diversify risk, the rapid opening-up of economies to foreign competition, increasing external competition as a result of deregulation and privatization, and a much more limited State role in investment promotion.
It is noteworthy that the initiatives pursued by State-owned enterprises are important in both regions.
However, those undertaken in developing Asia are diversified in various activities, while those of Latin America focus primarily on hydrocarbons.
Trans-Latins: main sectors and strategies The international expansion of Latin American transnational corporations is reflected in direct investment outflows from them.
In recent years, the trans-Latins have been more active in investing abroad, reaching an all-time high of nearly US$ 50 billion in 2012 (see figure II.3).
In general, FDI outflows from each country vary widely from year to year because the number of large trans-Latins generating them is still small and the aggregate figures are very sensitive to specific events such as an acquisition or the start-up of a large-scale project.
Despite this and international financial market turbulence, FDI outflows from the region have grown exponentially and have been particularly high in the past four years (see figure II.3).
Many of the largest companies in Latin America are currently pursuing active internationalization strategies.
For a discussion of policies supporting outward FDI in China see ECLAC (2011), chapter III.
The most active companies expanding internationally were from Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico and, more recently, Colombia (see figure II.4).
The major corporations from these countries have been internationalizing mainly in basic industries (hydrocarbons, mining, cement, steel, mass-market goods such as food and beverages, and some services such as power, telecommunications, air transport and retail sales.
Chronologically, Argentina and Brazil were the pioneers, leading the first waves of substantial investment abroad.
Mexico and Chile joined the process later and became relevant players during the boom period.
Currently, while Brazil has continued its pattern of internationalization and Argentina has cut back considerably, Chilean and Mexican companies have become the most active ones and have increased their presence in external markets with new production and service operations.
In Brazil, the State and industrial development policies in strategic sectors played a key role in this dynamic.
The geographic destination of investments made by Latin American companies has mostly been in the region itself.
In mid-sized economies, such as Chile, Colombia and Peru, greenfield investments and acquisitions of existing assets have focused on neighbouring countries, although they have gradually extended to other more distant destinations, always within Latin America and the Caribbean (see figure II.5).
The focus on neighbouring countries has been a strategy particularly favoured by service firms.
In addition to América Móvil in the telecommunications sector, there are plentiful examples in financial services (Itaú and Sura), power (EPM), retail trade (Cencosud and Falabella) and airlines (see box II.1).
The region’s largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, have a more diversified internationalization profile in which North America accounts for a large proportion of investment, mainly through the purchase of companies in the United States and Canada.
Brazil is the Latin American country that has made the largest investments in the European Union and in Africa; Mexico has done the same in Oceania, primarily in Australia, where the Australian cement company Rinker was acquired by Mexico’s Cemex for more than US$ 15 billion (see figure II.5).
The economic crisis forced many European businesses to divest assets, which sometimes ended up in the hands of trans-Latins.
In the vast majority of cases the assets were in Latin America, which strengthened the expansion of trans-Latins within the region.
This trend was at its sharpest in the financial sector, one of the hardest hit by the crisis, with the banks Santander, BBVA, HSBC and ING providing good examples.
Cases in other sectors included France’s Carrefour (retail) and Lafarge (cement industry).
It is highly capital-intensive, with network economies that facilitate the integration of subsidiaries in different countries and hold the potential for building global brands.
At the same time, as a strategic sector it is highly regulated and protected by national governments; in Latin America it is one of the few sectors where foreign ownership of enterprises is limited by law.
These factors have led to a partial consolidation of the sector, dominated entirely by enterprises from the region.
The opening and liberalization of public services in the 1990s could have led to suspicions that the airlines would follow the same path as the power and telecommunications companies and would end up under the control of foreign groups.
Most notably, Aerolíneas Argentinas was bought by Iberia and then by Marsans (both from Spain) before being renationalized in 2008.
Continental acquired a majority stake in Panama’s Copa, but the undertaking did not generate the expected benefits and prompted Continental’s gradual withdrawal, starting in 2005 and ending with a complete exit.
Unlike the results of operations undertaken by companies from outside the region, the integration of local and regional companies in the aviation industry has come a long way in recent years in Latin America.
The primary example is Chile’s Latam, formed in 2012 with the US$ 6.5 billion merger between Chile’s LAN and Brazil’s TAM and currently the largest airline in Latin America and the Caribbean.
In addition to its operations in Brazil and Chile, Latam operates in other Latin American markets, where it holds a relevant position.
Its vast operations enable Avianca to provide a denser service network than its main competitors.
Copa opted for a different strategy, using its base in Panama as a hub linking long-haul destinations in Latin America and the rest of the world.
The only exception it made was the purchase of AeroRepública in 2005, which has been known as Copa Airlines Colombia since 2010 and is the third largest airline in Colombia.
Airlines in the Caribbean, like companies in other sectors, establish networks of subsidiaries in several countries in order to minimize operating costs in such small markets (de Groot and Pérez Ludeña, 2014).
In late 2012, Caribbean Airlines became the flag carrier of Guyana as well.
What distinguishes these large airline groups in Latin America is undoubtedly the fact that they are networks.
In each country of the region, the group operates through individual airlines that are subsidiaries of a parent company in order to comply with local regulations limiting foreign participation in the aviation industry.
Most countries in Latin America bar foreign investors from anything but partial ownership of a national airline (often not more than 50%) and restrict flights on certain routes, especially for domestic traffic.
This is an additional organizational burden for airlines seeking to create such pan-regional networks.
However, these companies are an integral part of the larger group, Latam, which owns the aircraft rather than the local airlines.
When TAM was acquired in 2012 by LAN, a specific agreement had to be signed to accommodate legal requirements in Brazil.
In the end, TAM is wholly owned by Latam (which is headquartered in Chile).
However, 80% of the policy decision-making rights remain in the hands of Brazilian investors in order to comply with Brazilian law, which requires that domestic airlines be 80% Brazilian owned.
Following a similar strategy, Avianca has not completely integrated Lacsa in its operations, in order to maintain its status as flag carrier in Costa Rica.
The reason why these major networks have been successful in Latin America and the Caribbean seems to lie in the smaller size of the domestic markets and the strong demand for various options for flights across the continent.
Moreover, entrepreneurs in the region have been sufficiently creative to operate within the legal framework of each country and exploit the potential for expanding their networks.
Not all of the region’s major airlines have embarked on regional internationalization; these tend to be those operating in key domestic markets in the region.
One of the largest Latin American airlines is Aeroméxico; this air operator has followed a strategy different from Latam and Avianca and has focused on its extensive domestic network and its connections with the United States.
These two characteristics (the domestic market and opportunities in the United States) probably explain why this airline has not felt the need to operate in a network.
Another major airline in Latin America and the Caribbean is Brazil’s Gol, a low-cost operator mainly serving Brazil’s vast domestic market.
However, this is a listed company that still has much room for expansion in its domestic market.
In Europe, investment by the trans-Latins is still limited to a few companies, mainly Mexican and Brazilian ones.
Brazilian companies have focused on Portugal; examples include the acquisition of the cement company Cimpor by Camargo Corrêa (in a tough face-off with Votorantim) and purchase of a stake in Portugal Telecom by the telecommunications company Oi.
While the main objective of these purchases was the control of assets that these companies had in Brazil, the end result has also been expansion in Europe.
In 1992, Cemex acquired Spain’s two largest cement makers (Valencia and Sansón) and in 2005 it bought one of Europe’s chief producers, the United Kingdom’s RMC, for US$ 4.1 billion.
In 2013, it announced the merger of its Spanish operations with Switzerland’s Holcim.3 In 2012, América Móvil took its first steps to enter the competitive European telecoms market, investing US$ 5.5 billion as it sought to acquire stakes in KPN (a Dutch group) and Telekom Austria.
In the manufacturing sector, some trans-Latins have capitalized on their expansion in Europe to acquire technical capacities they might not have been able (or would have taken longer) to develop in their home countries.
In 2010, Mexico’s State-owned oil company Pemex increased its stake in Spain’s Repsol to almost 10%4 and since then has been very active in managing the company.
According to Pemex, its primary interest in Repsol was in deepwater exploration technology.
In 2013, and for more modest amounts, Pemex also acquired shipyards in Spain that build ships and platforms for oil exploration.
In Asia and the Pacific, the trans-Latins have an even smaller footprint.
Among the destinations in Asia, Cemex investments in Indonesia and the Philippines stand out, as does the very recent acquisition of Femsa, also in the Philippines.
Although large acquisitions have not been made in China, Brazil’s Marcopolo and Embraer and Chile’s Molymet have made some greenfield investments.
The trans-Latins operating in Africa are almost exclusively Brazilian companies (see box II.2).
However, in recent years, companies from developing countries have become increasingly important players, especially those from China, India, Malaysia, South Africa, the Republic of Korea and Brazil.
Under the administration of President Lula da Silva, Brazilian companies got a boost from an active diplomatic policy that gave them a key role in enhancing relations with Africa.
In addition to business missions led by senior officials and financial support from the development banks, there were export promotion and productive development policies.
It has participated in projects relating to oil and gas, infrastructure, the construction of residential condominiums, urban planning and the production of biofuels, among others.
Since 2006, the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES) has provided US$ 3.2 billion in loans to 65 projects in Angola; 32 of them were undertaken by Odebrecht.
The mining company Vale is Brazil’s largest investor in Africa, having invested more than US$ 7 billion in nine African countries.
In 2012 a coal mining project came on line in Mozambique; it is Vale’s largest investment in Africa.
The enterprise also has vast reserves of iron ore in Guinea, although it has encountered snags with local authorities for developing them.
The needs of its mining operations have led the company to make substantial investments in power plants, railways and port infrastructure.
Petrobras, drawing on its own experience, prioritized deepwater oil exploration and production.
It currently has oil operations in Angola, Libya and Nigeria and is exploring new opportunities in Benin and Ethiopia.
Petrobras also plans to set up an ethanol production plant in Mozambique.
Of the 50 largest trans-Latins, Mexico (16), Brazil (14) and Chile (11) account for the most, followed at some distance by Colombia (6), Argentina (2) and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (1).
Brazilian and Mexican companies account for by far the largest share of sales volume.
They tend to be larger companies, with 37% and 31% respectively of the total sales of the top 50.
Companies engaged in extracting and processing raw materials (from oil companies to iron and steel companies) account for more than 60% of the sales of the largest trans-Latins; service providers (from telecommunications to the retail sector) account for nearly 20% (see table II.4).
With the acquisition of RMC, Cemex doubled in size, gaining operations in an extra 20 countries, mainly in Europe.
In 2007, the company purchased a 68% stake in Rinker, an Australian firm with an extensive presence in the United States market, thereby allowing it to consolidate its presence on five continents.
However, in 2009 it sold its Australian operations to Holcim for US$ 1.750 billion, in order to restructure a US$ 14.0 billion debt incurred in the acquisition of Rinker.
There is considerable heterogeneity in the degree of the different companies’ internationalization.
The largest oil companies remain strongly anchored in the development of reserves in their home country, even though international expansion is a central component of their business model.
The standout in this group is Petrobras (the largest trans-Latin), which holds 18% of its assets outside Brazil (see table II.4).
In the middle are the mining companies, along with some service companies (such as engineering and construction firms, retailers and power companies).
A number of raw materials processors, such as steel and cement companies, those linked to food and beverages, and the telecommunications company América Móvil, which holds 65% of its assets outside Mexico (see table II.4), have been among the most active in expanding internationally.
Economic growth in the region has strengthened the position of the larger national enterprises.
Between 2000 and 2012, sales by the 500 largest companies increased three-fold, fuelled by high raw materials prices, heavy demand from China, and rising disposable income in domestic markets (see figure II.6).
This growth has been led by companies from Brazil and Mexico, both countries with large domestic markets.
In addition, Brazil is endowed with abundant natural resources and Mexico is a neighbour of the United States market.
By sector, growth has been strongest in mining, natural-resource-based manufactures and some services.
These factors have led to changes in the classification of the largest companies in Latin America.
First, Stateowned enterprises have remained at the top, favoured by high raw materials prices (particularly for oil).
Second, perhaps one of the most significant changes is the strong growth of private domestic companies.
Many of the companies currently among the largest had very small operations —both geographically and sectorally— a decade ago.
A large portion of them are trans-Latins; their strong growth has enabled them to compete with the leading global transnationals in the segments in which they operate.
A good example is América Móvil, created in 2000, which is now the fourth largest company in the region after the oil giants Petrobras, Pemex and PVDSA, with operations in 18 countries.
Lastly, the transnational corporations that topped the ranking in 1999 have lost ground.
Except for the retail chain Walmart and automobile assemblers in Brazil and Mexico, fewer transnational corporations are among the largest companies in the region.
This has enabled private domestic companies, especially the trans-Latins, to post strong growth (see table II.4 and figure II.7).
The region’s good macroeconomic performance over the past decade has also helped the international expansion of the trans-Latins, through improved access to financing.
During previous periods, companies in Latin America and other developing regions had much more limited access to capital than their competitors from Europe or the United States, but in the first decade of the twenty-first century interest rate differentials have been narrowing dramatically.
Moreover, major Latin American corporations are increasingly able to tap the international financial markets.
And corporate bond issues abroad have surged in recent years, from an annual average of US$ 12 billion before the financial crisis to nearly US$ 50 billion in 2012 and 2013.
Push and pull factors alike have shaped the international expansion of the trans-Latins.
These include natural growth after becoming domestic market leaders, the need to diversify risk, the potential for converting national trademarks into regional brands, the opportunity to take advantage of privatizations in neighbouring countries, the potential for partnering with other enterprises with more experience in third markets and preferential access to markets through subregional integration and free trade agreements.
In short, internationalization is often a natural step for companies operating in increasingly globalized markets.
Brazil: scale, natural resources and State support Brazil was one of the first developing economies to have a significant volume of direct investment abroad.
As early as 1990 its cumulative FDI exceeded US$ 40 billion, a figure that other developing economies did not reach until many years later.
In Brazil, outward FDI began in the 1970s and focused on the search for natural resources (Petrobras) and on export support activities.
During the 1980s, against a backdrop of macroeconomic instability and falling investment in Brazil, other companies opted for expansion abroad; among them were the mining company Vale and a number of engineering and construction firms.
The process gathered speed in the 1990s thanks to economic reforms that, among other things, led to business restructuring and concentration.
In this process, some companies specialized and others sought greater diversification; in both cases there was substantial expansion towards external markets (ECLAC, 2006).
During this period, Petrobras began to invest in refining, distributing and commercializing petroleum products.
Some companies also increased their investments abroad during times of peak macroeconomic instability, seeking to diversify the risk associated with their domestic operations.
As in other countries in the region, most of the Brazilian companies have focused their international investment on Latin America.
Still, the largest companies have invested heavily in developed countries, especially in the United States and Canada: 7 of the 10 largest acquisitions abroad by Brazilian companies were in these two countries, including those made by Vale, Gerdau, Marfrig and JBS (see table II.5).
Starting in 2010, as mentioned above, new investments were added in Europe, Asia and Africa (see box II.2).
Brazil’s annual FDI flows have been increasing gradually, albeit with marked fluctuations over time.
A period of accelerated growth, starting in 2004, saw investment reach a historic peak in 2006.
In recent years, while other countries (such as Chile and Colombia) saw their investments abroad soar, FDI from Brazil has dropped off dramatically and has been negative in most years.
The reasons for this trend reversal can be seen in the components of Brazil’s outward FDI: capital contributions and intracompany loans (see figure II.8).5 Since 2009, loans between subsidiaries have been in negative territory, indicating that the subsidiaries of some major Brazilian companies are borrowing abroad to finance some of their group operations in Brazil.
Access to financing has thus become one of the reasons for Brazilian companies to invest abroad.
Rising interest rates in Brazil, particularly in comparison with rates in developed countries, have enabled companies with subsidiaries abroad to reduce their financing costs.
Ultimately, negative FDI flows do not indicate that Brazilian companies have stopped investing abroad, although they do reveal a tendency to channel their resources towards the domestic market.
Capital contributions during recent years have remained at a level similar to that of the pre-crisis period (at current rates), indicating that, unlike the Mexican and Chilean trans-Latins, Brazilian companies are not stepping up their expansion abroad.
Brazil does not report data on reinvested earnings, which is the third component of FDI.
The two largest Brazilian trans-Latins (see table II.6) —the oil company Petrobras and the mining company Vale— have been notable for their strategy of divesting foreign assets, particularly in 2012.
That year, Vale sold US$ 1.167 billion in overseas assets, including manganese operations in Europe, coal mines in Colombia and ore carrier ships.
Other major mining companies that are direct competitors of Vale, like Rio Tinto and BHP Billiton, are following similar strategies in the face of rising costs and shrinking operating margins.
Petrobras’s ambitious programme for investing in pre-salt oilfields in Brazil has forced it to cancel some foreign investment projects.
Divestments during the period 2012-2016 are expected to amount to US$ 15.0 billion, including refineries in the United States and Japan and operating fields in Nigeria.
In addition to mining and oil companies, in the natural resources sector four major agribusiness companies are meatpackers; they are JBS Friboi, Marfrig, Minerva and BRF; all of which have expanded substantially since 2005.
JBS Friboi and Marfrig have carried out very large acquisitions in the United States and other markets that have made them the first and fourth largest producers of meat worldwide (see table II.6).
By contrast, Minerva and BRF have limited their foreign expansion to neighbouring countries (Argentina and Uruguay).6 Another major group of Brazilian trans-Latins is concentrated in capital-intensive and natural-resource-intensive industries, including steel.
Notable in this sector are the extensively internationalized Gerdau (whose focus is on Latin America) and CSN (whose largest investments abroad are in the United States and Europe).7 Camargo Corrêa is a diversified group whose largest asset outside Brazil is the Portuguese cement maker Cimpor.
Votorantim is another conglomerate with investments outside Brazil in cement and steel.
Among Brazil’s biggest trans-Latins, the aviation company Embraer and motor vehicle producer Marcopolo are an exception because they operate in engineering-intensive sectors instead of natural-resource-intensive ones, and have therefore had to expand internationally in a different way.
Embraer is export-oriented (only 14% of its revenue originates in Brazil) and, while most of its capacity is in Brazil, it also has production centres in the United States, Portugal and China (see table II.6).
By contrast, Marcopolo sells 89% of its output (mainly buses) in Brazil but also has manufacturing operations in Australia, Mexico and South Africa and, in partnership with local companies, in Argentina, Egypt, Colombia, India and Canada.
Since the acquisition of the brewing company AmBev by Belgian giant Anheuser-Busch, there are substantially fewer Brazilian trans-Latins in mass consumption sectors, with the possible exception of the cosmetics company Natura and the food company BRF.
In the services sector, Itaú (a bank) is the only one with a strategy for expanding abroad, focusing mainly on Latin America.
The largest Brazilian trans-Latins have managed to leverage the competitive advantages provided by their country of origin (abundant natural resources) to expand abroad.
It is unsurprising that most of the Brazilian trans-Latins have the bulk of their operations in Brazil.
Of the largest companies, only Gerdau and JBS Friboi appear to have more activity outside Brazil than within it.8 Moreover, since 2009, as Brazil posted high economic growth rates, corporations appear to have made domestic-market investment projects a priority.
A goodly portion of their cross-border acquisitions sought above all to control Brazilian assets that were previously owned by foreign groups like Portugal’s Cimpor and Spain’s Janus.
The bank’s productive development policy, put in place in 2008, aims specifically at positioning Brazilian companies among global leaders in their sectors, targeting the aviation, oil, gas, petrochemical, bioethanol, mining, pulp and paper, steel and meat industries (BNDES, 2008).
Since 2005, BNDES has granted financing to several enterprises for overseas expansion, totalling US$ 5.750 billion.
For example, BNDES purchased 100% of the US$ 1.26 billion in notes issued by Marfrig to acquire Keystone Foods, as well as a large part of the bonds issued by JBS Friboi in compliance with the guarantees for the purchase of Pilgrim’s Pride for US$ 800 million.
The bank currently holds a 20% interest in Marfrig and a stake of nearly 25% in JBS Friboi.
BNDES also granted a special loan to Itautec to enable the acquisition of Tallard in the United States and has opened special lines of credit for leading software and pharmaceutical firms like Prosoft and Profarma, respectively (Sennes and Camargo Mendes, 2009).9 2.
Argentina: declining outward FDI Unlike the trend in the rest of the region, in Argentina outward FDI has been on the downturn during the past decade.
Argentina was the main direct investor outside Latin America during the 1990s.
Outward FDI flows topped US$ 2 billion annually (25% of the total for the region) until the 2001-2002 crisis, which sent them plummeting.
Although they later ticked up again they did not return to prior levels, even at current prices.
The pattern for inward FDI has been the same: indeed, Argentina (together with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador) is one of only three countries in the region where inward FDI is now lower than it was a decade ago.
Noteworthy among the Argentine transnationals is the steelmaking group Techint, composed primarily of the companies Ternium and Tenaris (see table II.7).
Ternium makes flat steel products; most of its operations are in Mexico, followed by Argentina.
Twenty-eight per cent of its employees are based in Argentina, with 25% in other Latin American countries, 19% in Canada and the United States, 17% in Europe and 11% in other countries.
It was estimated that at year-end 2009, Techint had assets outside Argentina amounting to US$ 17.7 billion, making it one of the largest and most geographically diversified trans-Latins (Vale Columbia Center on Sustainable International Investment, 2011).
Argentina’s other trans-Latins have a far smaller volume of assets than Techint.
Industrial concerns account for most of them; there are 2 agriculture companies in the top 10.
There are no mining, oil or service companies among the leaders. 3.
Mexico: integration with North America drives internationalization Most of Mexico’s major trans-Latins began to internationalize in the first half of the 1990s, just after economic opening and deregulation.
While outward foreign direct investment from Mexico has a long history, it contrasts with Brazil and Argentina in that flows have continued to rise in recent years.
Mexico’s main trans-Latins are very large; many of them are highly internationalized, albeit not particularly diversified in geographic terms (especially compared with the Brazilian companies).
Most foreign assets are concentrated in the United States and in other countries of Latin America, yet there is a group of Mexican trans-Latins whose activities are more geographically dispersed (see table II.8).
They include the cement maker Cemex, food companies Bimbo and Gruma, the auto parts manufacturer Nemak (part of Grupo Alfa) and the chemical and petrochemical company Mexichem.
The main Mexican trans-Latins therefore operate in a fairly diverse range of sectors, from extractive industries to services, and including a wide variety of manufacturing activities.
A notable exception is the financial services sector, which in Mexico is dominated by foreign companies.
The value of their foreign assets sets two companies above the rest.
Over the past two decades, it has acquired enterprises to become one of the three largest cement makers in the world, together with France’s Lafarge and Switzerland’s Holcim (see table II.9).
Cemex is known for the way it deploys technology to reduce costs and capitalize on its knowledge base: this is known as “the Cemex way”.
Its strategy for expanding internationally has been very effective when it comes to integration capacity.
In the 1990s Cemex began to expand in Latin America and, early on, in Spain, where in 1992 it acquired the two largest cement makers (Valencia and Sansón).
In 2005 it bought one of the largest producers of cement in Europe, the United Kingdom’s RMC, for US$ 4.1 billion.
In 2013 it announced the merger of its operations in Spain with Switzerland’s Holcim (see table II.9).
Currently, 44% of its subsidiaries are in Latin America and 46% are in the United States and Europe.
The US$ 15.434 billion acquisition of Australia’s Rinker in 2007, just before the global financial crisis that hit the construction sector hard, led to financial difficulties for the company (Basave and Gutiérrez-Haces, 2013).
América Móvil’s foreign assets are valued at more than US$ 50 million, but its experience of internationalization is more recent.
The company inherited Mexico’s State-owned telecommunications monopoly, Teléfonos de México (Telmex), and grew rapidly in Latin America by taking advantage of low wireless communications penetration within the region.
This was initially achieved through partnerships and then, like its competitor Telefónica, through an aggressive strategy for acquiring assets from other enterprises in the sector (BellSouth, Verizon, AT&T, MCI, TIM and France Télécom) (see table II.9).
Later it acquired assets in the broadband and television segments to reach a critical level that would allow it to provide triple-play packages (ECLAC, 2011).
In 2012, América Móvil invested in assets outside the region for the first time, acquiring strategic interests in Telekom Austria (TKA) and KPN of the Netherlands.
At the end of 2013, América Móvil controlled a 27.7% stake in KPN; however, its attempted takeover of the Dutch firm ultimately failed (Expansión, 6 December 2013).
Both parties signed an agreement for the joint control of TKA and announced a public tender offer for the remaining shares in the telecommunications company.
The parties also agreed to support a capital increase of US$ 1.380 billion.
Mexico’s largest company, the State-owned oil company Pemex, is an example of limited but potentially important internationalization (just 1% of its assets are abroad).
Its main foreign asset over which it has direct control is a 50% stake in the Deer Park refinery in the United States, although in 2011 it increased its holding in the Spanish oil company Repsol to almost 10% with the specific aim of acquiring drilling technology.
The recent opening of Mexico’s energy sector to foreign investment (see chapter I), while still very tentative, could make it easier for Pemex to forge international partnerships, both inside and outside the country.
First, with regard to the domestic business environment, many of these companies had few long-term opportunities because of the saturation of local markets (in sectors including mobile telephony, cement, and food and beverages) and medium-term issues such as volatile domestic demand.
The entry of foreign competition along with the deregulation and privatization of services, forced some companies to shift from defensive strategies to a more aggressive stance.
There were significant pull factors too, the first of which involved the location advantages of the host country.
Mexican trans-Latins focused mainly on the United States and Latin America, which shows the importance of expansion strategies driven by geographical proximity and ethnic (language- or culture-related) or national (Mexican expatriates) networks.
Second were the strategic advantages of internationalization (larger market share, partnerships with transnational corporations and customer follow-up) and competitive advantages (better products and logistics and distribution systems, and turning national brands into regional ones).
Lastly, the integration of the Mexican economy with those of its northern neighbours through the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) in 1994 gave many companies a push towards the United States.
Beyond the trade agreement with the United States and Canada, Mexico has not had robust policy support for internationalization.
Recently, however, the government export promotion agency Proméxico opened a line of support for the internationalization of Mexican companies in order to foster exports, technology transfer, human capital development, investment in innovation and research and development (R&D) and the enhancement of Mexico’s image abroad.
The instruments used are fundamentally the same as for export promotion, but they can also apply to companies seeking to locate production outside Mexico.
Support includes specialized advisory services, business travel assistance, training of human resources and apprenticeship programmes abroad.
There is no financial support as in Brazil, nor is priority given to particular sectors or countries.
The target group for this support is medium-sized companies seeking to start investing abroad, rather than the major Mexican trans-Latins. 4.
Chile: expansion targeting South America The Chilean economy is very internationalized, with high inward and outward foreign direct investment.
Many of the reasons why Chile is a draw for foreign investors also explain the outflow of investments to other countries.
Chief among these are macroeconomic stability, an investment climate that is favourable to business development and sustained economic growth.
High raw material export prices have provided a further boost for the economy in recent years.
These factors have had a positive impact on the profitability of Chilean companies, which have grown and accumulated technical capacities while tapping domestic and foreign sources of financing.
The relatively small size of the local market, combined with the market presence of many foreign companies and high levels of competition in some segments, has forced Chilean firms to focus on certain activities and seek expansion beyond the country’s borders.
Much of the outward FDI recorded as being from Chile is from foreign companies with a subsidiary in Chile that is used to centralize operations taking place in third countries.
Official statistics are not well disaggregated by sector,12 but FDI concentration by industry can be seen in an examination of the top Chilean trans-Latins (see table II.10).13 Noteworthy among these are retailers (Cencosud, Falabella and Ripley) and forestry companies (CMPC and Arauco, part of the Copec group).
In 2011, the two sectors accounted for 63% of the value of the foreign assets held by the country’s 20 largest trans-Latins (Pérez Ludeña, 2011).
The transport sector (Latam and Compañía Sudamericana de Vapores (CSAV)) ranks third, having surged on the back of the 2012 merger of LAN Airlines with Brazil’s TAM.
The food and beverage sector accounts for 7% of the listed total assets, which are held by Embotelladora Andina, CCU, Concha y Toro and Carozzi (Muñoz, Pérez Ludeña and Poniachik, 2013).
Chilean trans-Latins are strikingly absent from some of the most important sectors of the country’s economy, such as mining, power generation and distribution, telecommunications and finance.
In the latter, Chilean companies that have purchased assets abroad have always ended up being acquired by transnational corporations, usually extraregional ones.
This was the case with the pension fund administrators (AFP) and, very recently, with Corpbanca.14 This distribution shows how Chilean business groups have chosen to concentrate their operations in a few sectors.
In 2013, for example, Entel (the only Chilean-owned company in the telecommunications sector) purchased Peru’s Nextel for US$ 400 million.
Concentrating investment in South America is logical from the viewpoint of the development of these companies and their market expansion strategy, but it has the disadvantage of working against diversification of economic cycle risks.
From that standpoint, distributing investment across economies whose cycles are less aligned with those of the Chilean economy (for example, in Europe) could help diversify medium- and long-term risks, as many European companies have done by investing in Latin America.
Censosud, Falabella and Ripley maintain brands in all of the countries where they operate and have successfully reproduced their financial business, as carried out in Chile.
For example, as much as 40% of Falabella’s total assets are classified as financial activities.
All of these firms have benefited from rising consumption in South America in recent years.
In January 2014 the Brazilian bank Itaú acquired a controlling stake in Corpbanca and merged its operations in Chile and Colombia with it.
Another prominent group of Chilean trans-Latins has managed to leverage the country’s natural resources to build capacities that have been useful for them in other markets.
Although there are no Chilean trans-Latins engaged in mining copper (the country’s main natural resource),15 two of the country’s largest trans-Latins are forestry companies: CMCP and Arauco (of the Copec group).
Both combine forestry production (including land ownership) with plants turning out pulp, paper, lumber and other products for sale in the domestic and export markets.
They set out to replicate their business models in other countries, and have expanded mainly in Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, where conditions (both natural and economic) are comparable.
SQM and Molymet are an exception in terms of their internationalization strategy.
Rather than aiming to implement the same business model in other countries, they concentrate their extractive activities (potassium and molybdenum, respectively) in Chile and invest in processing operations in other countries.
This strategy has made them the Chilean enterprises with the widest geographical distribution of assets.
After years of strong growth there is a group of Chilean companies that have become major regional actors in their industries.
Some, like Sonda and Embotelladora Andina, have larger operations abroad than at home.
Yet Chile’s largest companies cannot be compared with their global competitors in terms of size.
Cencosud’s total sales, despite remarkable growth in recent years, are still 35% of the figure for the French chain Casino and 20% of Carrefour’s.
The forestry company CMPC is the largest in Latin America, but its sales stand at less than 20% of those of the largest company in the industry worldwide, United States-based International Paper.
Antofagasta Minerals (which is based in the United Kingdom but is Chilean owned) unsuccessfully tried to acquire mining assets outside Chile; 100% of its operations are now located in Chile.
This raises the possibility that in the coming years some of these companies could be taken over by larger international groups, repeating the events that occurred around 2000.
In practice, hostile acquisitions are more difficult nowadays because almost all of these businesses are controlled by family groups.
In the face of competitive pressure some large companies have chosen to partner more or less closely with larger international groups.
For example, both SQM and CCU have strategic partners in the same industry (Canada’s PotashCorp and the Netherlands’ Heineken, respectively); companies which hold a significant but not controlling package of shares.
Meanwhile the airline LAN and the financial institution Corpbanca opted to merge with Brazilian companies (TAM and Itaú, respectively).
One remarkable feature of the international expansion of Chilean companies has been the lack of explicit State policy.
Not only has there not been any measure of support (or hindrance) from governments, but State-owned enterprises have invested very little abroad (as is the case with the oil company ENAP).
The country’s largest public enterprise, the mining company Codelco, has lately been weighing the possibility of capitalizing on its enormous technical capacities in other countries, yet no project has reached fruition because managers have always made mining domestic copper a priority.
While there has been no official policy for FDI support and assistance, the Chilean Government has consistently implemented policies that have favoured the development of the country’s largest companies.
These policies have drawn record levels of FDI into the economy, while helping Chilean enterprises to expand abroad by allowing them to grow and build capacities in the domestic market, sometimes at the cost of increased competition in certain markets.
The main push factors behind the internationalization of Chile’s trans-Latins therefore fall into three groups.
First are certain constraints associated with the domestic environment, such as a high participation rate in a small, saturated market, the need to open new export markets and consolidate existing ones and the urgent need to scale up.
A second factor is related to specific competitive advantages at individual companies or enterprises associated with the supply of natural resources that allowed them to internationalize, often early.
Thirdly, the internationalization process is related to the economic reforms carried out in Chile, which gave its trans-Latins a significant advantage over their neighbours and over transnational corporations without much experience in Latin America, particularly with regard to operating in recently deregulated and privatized environments.
The main pull factors were found in host country location advantages, particularly opportunities for growth and access to markets in neighbouring countries, especially Argentina, Peru, Brazil and Colombia.
The main competitive advantages obtained were boosting market share, turning domestic brands into regional ones, improving logistics and distribution systems, and building alliances and partnerships with transnational corporations.
Policy changes in receiving countries were very important, especially the opening of neighbouring economies. 5.
Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela: PDVSA at the top Outward FDI from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has increased over the long term (at current prices), from an annual average of US$ 500 million during the 1990s to an annual average of US$ 1 billion during the 2000s.
In real terms, this barely constitutes an increase; in any case growth in the country’s outward foreign direct investment has not kept pace with the rest of the region.
During the 1990s the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was the source of 9% of outward FDI; over the past decade this proportion fell to 4%.
There is little information about trans-Latins in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, but since almost all officially recorded FDI came from the oil sector it is safe to conclude that the State-owned Petróleos de Venezuela (PDVSA) is still the largest.
In 1998 it was the largest transnational corporation among all of the developing economies according to foreign asset value, ahead of Korea’s Daewoo and Mexico’s Cemex (UNCTAD, 2000).
However, its investments outside the country have not grown at the same pace as those of other enterprises, and by 2011 it was placed 13th in the same ranking (UNCTAD, 2013).
PDVSA’s assets outside of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela were always concentrated in processing operations (refineries).
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has taken steps to make domestic investment a priority over foreign investment, including nationalizations.
Indirectly, the policy has also reduced outward FDI because it has given domestic firms more room to grow within the country with less competition from foreign companies.
Petróleos de Venezuela has had to focus its resources on domestic investment because new oil industry regulations require that it have a majority stake in all domestic exploration operations.
Exchange restrictions and the international market penalty that Venezuelan companies face may have prompted many of them to invest abroad from third countries, which would make it hard to properly record outward FDI.
Banesco’s recent acquisition of Banco Etcheverría and Novagalicia in Spain for 1 billion euros was recorded from the United States.
Colombia: the strength of State-owned enterprises In recent years, Colombia has become one of Latin America’s major investors abroad.
Outward FDI between 2003 and 2013 amounted to more than US$ 35.8 billion, which is still significantly below the figures for Chile, Mexico and Brazil but twice that of all the other economies in the region combined.
As in the other countries of the region, for Colombia the main determining factor behind outward FDI has been the sustained economic growth over the past decade that enabled companies to build up capacities and competencies that they subsequently put to use in other markets.
Between 2008 and 2011, many companies faced a saturated domestic market and saw opportunities for acquiring important assets abroad on the strength of a growing domestic economy, appreciation of local currency against the dollar and, in certain instances, some European companies’ need to sell off assets in Latin America.
In Latin America, Colombia is the country where State-owned enterprises have played the leading role in investing abroad, above all in the energy sector.
Colombia’s largest trans-Latins that are not State-owned enterprises are manufacturers and financial services firms.
Although the country has abundant mineral and hydrocarbon resources, there are no large companies in this sector other than Ecopetrol.
Colombia’s largest investments abroad have occurred in the power sector, through three publicly owned enterprises: Interconexión Eléctrica S.A. (ISA), Empresas Públicas de Medellín (EPM) and Empresa de Energía de Bogotá (EEB) (see table II.11).
Of this group, the most active is Interconexión Eléctrica Sociedad Anónima (ISA), a power transmission company that is 54% State-owned.
It currently dominates power transmission in Colombia (81%) and Peru (82%) and is a major player in Brazil (16%) as well as in Colombia’s power interconnections with neighbouring Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In Colombia ISA is limited to power transmission, but it has diversified its investments abroad to include other types of infrastructure.
In telecommunications, ISA began its international expansion in 2009 through the company Internexa, which has consolidated an 18,500-kilometre network of fibre optic lines throughout the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, Chile and Brazil.
In 2010, ISA bought 60% of the Spanish company Ferrovial’s highway concessions in Chile (900 kilometres) for US$ 290 million.
These investments along with as-yet unspecified plans to enter the gas pipeline market, make ISA a specialist provider of linear infrastructures which, although present in different sectors, operate under a similar business model involving substantial initial investments, the expropriation of land and revenue that is regulated and consistent over time (ECLAC, 2012).
Empresas Públicas de Medellín (EPM) is wholly owned by the municipality of Medellín.
In addition to its power businesses (62% of the group’s sales), it operates water and gas services in Medellín and has operations in the telecommunications sector in Colombia and abroad.
EPM accounts for 23% of Colombia’s power generation capacity, 25% of the distribution market and 6% of the power transmission market.
After an unsuccessful experience in building a hydropower plant in Panama, the company has focused on acquiring existing assets.
In 2010 it purchased Distribución Eléctrica Centroamericana II (DECA II),16 Gestión de Empresas Eléctricas S.A. (GESA) and Genhidro (a holding company for generation assets) in Guatemala from Spain’s Iberdrola and became the main distributor of electricity in Guatemala, with nearly 1 million clients.
These subsidiaries added 1.6 million clients to EPM’s portfolio and generated US$ 1.597 billion in revenue in 2011.
EPM has thus become the second-largest player in the Central American electricity market, meeting 51% of the demand for power in Guatemala, 39% in Panama and 22% in El Salvador (DNP, 2013).
Empresa de Energía de Bogotá (EEB), which is also municipally owned but is smaller than EPM, has also acquired assets abroad and currently owns the distributors Transportadora de Energía de Centroamérica S.A. (Trecsa) in Guatemala, and Red de Energía del Perú (REP) and Consorcio Transmantaro (CTM) power transmission firms in Peru.
In early 2014, EEB announced that it had reached an agreement to acquire 23.61% of Transportadora de Gas del Perú (TGP) and 100% of Compañía Operadora de Gas del Amazonas (COGA) for US$ 650 million; however complications arose in the negotiations, competitors also made bids and ultimately the transaction was abandoned.
ISA, EPM and EEB have followed a similar strategy, venturing into neighbouring countries in recent years in search of growth that was barred to them in Colombia because of the regulation of the power sector.
The public institutions that own them (the Colombian State and the municipalities of Medellín and Bogota) have been sensitive to the argument that expansion abroad was a strategy for ensuring corporate strength and, thus, improving over the long haul the public service they must provide in Colombia.
Other major publicly owned enterprises in the power sector in the region, such as the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE) in Mexico, have either not received this kind of DECA II is the majority shareholder in Empresa Eléctrica de Guatemala S.A. (Eegsa), Central America’s leading power distributor, and Comercializadora Eléctrica de Guatemala S.A. (Comegsa), the region’s main power trading company.
DECA II also owns the majority shareholding in Transportista Eléctrica Centroamericana S.A. (Trelec), Guatemala’s second-largest power transmission enterprise. support or, as in the case of Eletrobras (Brazil), have only secured it for specific projects leading directly to domestic energy security.
The State-owned oil company Ecopetrol is the largest company in Colombia and one of the largest oil companies in Latin America (see table II.4).
Its expansion abroad is also very recent and is intended to boost the firm’s crude oil reserves.
In Peru, Ecopetrol has acquired a 50% holding in Savia for US$ 700 million; in the United States it has a 30% stake in several wells in the Gulf of Mexico.
These operations together produce 14,000 barrels per day, less than 2% of the company’s total output.
Ecopetrol also has minority holdings in several operations in Brazil, which have yet to produce.
The company’s strategy involves expanding its international footprint, which is small at present.
It is estimated that the company invested US$ 463 million in the United States alone in 2012.
The three largest privately owned Colombian trans-Latins are Sura (financial services), Argos (cement) and Nutresa (food); together they make up Grupo Empresarial Antioqueño.17 Each one is a sector-specific holding company, headquartered in Medellín and, although they are traded, have a cross-shareholding structure in which each one is controlled by the other two.
This system has, in practice, prevented the take-over of any of them by a larger company.
This was not the case with other Colombian enterprises that began to expand abroad and were acquired by foreign investors, as the Chilean ones were.
It has over US$ 19 billion in assets, 40% of which are outside Colombia.
The group began to expand abroad around 2000 when the group decided to focus on financial services and divest other assets in sectors such as textiles and retail.
Given the group’s dominant position in Colombia, expansion necessarily involved investment abroad, which focused on Central America.
In 2013, it purchased 40% of Grupo Agromercantil de Guatemala, for US$ 216 million, and the Panamanian assets of British bank HSBC (Banistmo) for US$ 2.234 billion.
Grupo Sura’s foreign direct investment strategy has always been based on acquiring controlling stakes in enterprises that are —or are close to being— leaders in their market.
For this reason, the company has not ventured into the region’s largest market, Brazil.
Its expansion has picked up considerable speed over the past three years, as a result of investments abroad in the amount of US$ 4.2 billion.
Just six years ago only 5% of profits were generated outside Colombia; today the figure is 46%.
After this rapid expansion, the group’s strategy is centred on consolidating its position in the markets where it operates.
Through these transactions, Colombian banks have acquired significant swaths of the Central American financial system, amounting to 52.7% in El Salvador, 25.2% in Panama, 22.6% in Nicaragua, 21% in Honduras, 12.8% in Costa Rica and 2.9% in Guatemala.
Argos is the largest cement company in Colombia, where it controls half of the market.
Like Sura, Argos followed a focused strategy, in its case, on the concrete and cement business, divesting other assets and starting to expand abroad.
This process began in 1998 with the acquisition of a plant in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which was This conglomerate comprises around 125 Colombian firms, most of which are headquartered in the department of Antioquia.
It also has operations in Florida, United States. expropriated in 2006 and which is still pending compensation.
Following the 2008 crisis, the French company Lafarge was forced to sell off assets; Argos bought its three cement plants in the United States in 2009 and an aggregates mine in 2011.
Also in the wake of the crisis, in 2009 Argos bought cement plants from the Swiss firm Holcim in the Dominican Republic, Haiti and Panama, and from Lafarge in Honduras for more than US$ 300 million.
Argos is perhaps the only major Colombian company with substantial assets in the United States, where it makes 30% of its sales.
Colombia accounts for 53% of the company’s sales; the remaining 17% are in Central America and the Caribbean.
Having operations in a mature market enables the company to compensate for economic cycle fluctuations, which in the cement industry are quite wide.
In any case, Argos does not plan to continue its expansion in Europe, but will rather focus on Latin America.
Nutresa has also invested in other countries, driven by market saturation in Colombia (it has an 80% share of the market for some products).
In 2000, following a failed attempt at internationalization through retailers of its Colombian products, Nutresa launched a strategy to acquire enterprises that are well positioned in their respective markets, and to maintain their brands.
Nutresa’s strategy in Latin America is based on centralizing services to build synergies and leverage its expertise in similar markets to optimize production as well as distribution channels.
In the United States the company has a small presence in a very specific segment (biscuits sold in discount stores).
In late 2012, Nutresa started up operations in Malaysia, with the goal of increasing its Colombian coffee exports to Asia.
One interesting case is that of Promotora de Café Colombia S.A. (Procafecol), which is behind the Juan Valdez coffee shops, brand and products.
Since the first outlet opened in Colombia in 2002, the company has managed to position itself as a premium coffee brand, expanding first to the United States and then to Latin America and, more recently, to more distant markets such as Malaysia, Kuwait and the Republic of Korea.
There are currently 187 Juan Valdez coffeehouses in Colombia and 80 in another 12 countries.
In 2011, Procafecol announced the launch of an expansion programme through international franchising.
It is hoped that this model will enable the further worldwide expansion of Juan Valdez coffeehouses and Colombian coffee.
Aside from Grupo Empresarial Antioqueño, there is a large group of smaller enterprises, such as Carvajal, Alpina, Colombina and Postobón, which are noteworthy for their foreign direct investment.
Like the larger enterprises mentioned earlier, their investment focus is Latin America, especially Central America.
Colombian companies that invest abroad tend to do so because of the narrow domestic market in a context where most of them have opted for geographical diversification while maintaining their sectoral specialization.
ISA is practically the only company that has used international expansion to diversify away from its main business in the power sector (by venturing into telecommunications and road infrastructure).
Colombia has not witnessed any examples of foreign acquisitions for the purchase of strategic assets, although Ecopetrol could have been seeking to learn from its strategic partners in the United States and Brazil.
All of the companies recognize that an international presence yields benefits in terms of gains in scale, expertise and operating synergies among subsidiaries.
These enterprises have expanded very quickly, almost always via acquisitions, as is the natural choice in domesticmarket-oriented oligopolistic sectors such as power, cement and financial services.
Many of the largest companies funded their overseas investments with resources from international markets, especially in the United States, benefiting from Colombia’s improving credit rating.20 Among them are Ecopetrol, Sura, Argos and the power companies.
As these companies gain a foothold in their new markets, Colombia’s direct investment will be less volatile and less dependent on acquisitions, and more in line with the reinvestment of profits for sustaining operations and for organic growth.
In many cases, the expansion of Colombian companies abroad has coincided with the partial withdrawal of European companies hit by the economic crisis.
Among others, Argos, Sura, EPM and ISA have taken advantage Ratings agencies awarded Colombia investment-grade status in 2011. of this scenario to acquire assets in Latin America, including in Colombia.
Despite these circumstances, very few Colombian companies have capitalized on the situation to invest directly in Europe, in part because they still do not have the requisite scale.
Outward FDI is so important for the Colombian economy that the government recently adopted an explicit policy of support for the internationalization of Colombian companies.
And FDI is often closely linked to exports; government efforts to promote exports should therefore include support for FDI (DNP, 2013).
Unlike in Brazil, where some large companies have received direct financial support from the State for their international investments, support for Colombian companies will be limited to information and advice provided by the offices of the export and investment promotion agency (Proexport Colombia) in many countries around the world.
This support is a very similar to that provided by the Government of Mexico and is by nature primarily geared towards small and medium-sized enterprises, because the larger ones do not need it.
Outward FDI policy support in Colombia might impact the internationalization of medium-sized enterprises but will not substantially affect outward FDI flows.
These support measures from Proexport Colombia will have a budget allocation of US$ 1 million annually, according to the government’s strategy paper (DNP, 2013). 2.
Peru: the first signs Peru is the seventh largest economy in Latin America and a major recipient of FDI inflows, but FDI outflows have been relatively modest despite a marked uptrend in recent years.
All of Peru’s major corporations that have invested abroad began to do so around 2005, taking advantage of the country’s economic growth, macroeconomic and political stability and financing facilities.
These conditions still hold, so FDI outflows from the country can be expected to continue to grow in the coming years.
Grupo Graña y Montero acquired Compañía Americana de Multiservicios (CAM), a power-sector services company with headquarters in Chile and operations in Brazil, Colombia and Peru, as well as two construction firms specializing in major engineering works, especially mining projects (DSD Construcciones y Montajes S.A. and Vial y Vives).
Lastly, in 2012 Grupo Romero bought one of the three largest brokerage houses in the Chilean market, IM Trust, and the aquaculture food and inputs company, Salmonfood.
Metal mining has been the engine of growth in Peru over the past decade.
While most of the sector is in the hands of foreign companies, there are major local groups as well.
Some of them have been able to build domestic capacities in order to expand internationally.
In this sphere, the most interesting cases are Hochschild and Minsur (part of Grupo Breca).
Hochschild specializes in underground gold and silver mining and has extended its operations to Argentina, Mexico and, more recently, Chile (in this case not yet in production), where it purchased a project that will require US$ 1 billion in investments.
Minsur specializes in tin; its sole asset outside Peru is Mineração Taboca in Brazil, which it acquired for US$ 500 million in 2008.
In addition to mining, some companies in the food and beverages sector are notable for their foreign investment, especially Ajegroup, Alicorp and Gloria, which have operations in many markets in the region.
Other Peruvian companies with investments abroad are Grupo ACP (in the microfinance sector, with subsidiaries in Mexico, Brazil and many other countries in the region) and Oben Group (a manufacturer of plastic packaging with plants in Ecuador, Argentina, Colombia and Chile).
Central America, the Caribbean and other smaller economies Outward FDI from the smaller economies shows the same upward trend as in the large economies of the region.
However, the amounts are much more modest and are below US$ 2.0 billion per year for all the region’s economies excluding Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Chile, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia.
Nonetheless, the figures for outward FDI from these economies might be understated.
First of all, a goodly number of these economies do not report data on direct investment outflows, mainly because it is such a recent development that national institutions have not allocated sufficient resources to gather information.
Even for those countries that do report data there is reason to believe that they might be underestimating their outward FDI.
Many of the largest companies based in small economies may have chosen to register their corporate headquarters in other countries (often in the United States) to avoid being hampered by operating in economies with underdeveloped capital markets and, sometimes, a very recent history of civil strife and economic instability.
For this reason, much of the foreign investment by companies in Central America, the Caribbean and the smaller economies of South America might be recorded as being from the United States, Europe or other countries.
In addition, the vast majority of companies in these countries are family-owned and are not traded in the financial markets, so they disclose very little information on their operations.
In any case, some general conclusions can be drawn from the information that is available.
Among these smaller economies, most outward direct investment flows originate in Caribbean countries (see table II.13).
These economies are very internationalized, with cross-border investment levels that are extremely high in relation to their size.
In this context it is not surprising that a large percentage of local companies decide to invest abroad as their only path to growth, and that and most of them do so in other Caribbean countries in order to take advantage of geographic, cultural and market-structure proximity.
Companies in Trinidad and Tobago have capitalized on their larger size to expand in other economies in the region.
Some of these trans-Caribbean companies, even if their headquarters and all of their operations are located in the subregion, are owned by entrepreneurs from third countries.
The best examples are the two largest telecommunication companies in the area: Flow (registered in Barbados) and Digicel (headquartered in Jamaica).
Although their business operations are entirely Caribbean, they are owned by foreign investors from Canada and Ireland, respectively (see box II.3).
Digicel competed very successfully with the dominant company, the United Kingdom’s Cable & Wireless, and after acquiring the assets of Mexico’s América Móvil in 2011, saw its share of the domestic market climb to 70%.
The enterprise very soon began to expand throughout the Caribbean, following deregulation of the sector in these economies.
Expansion picked up speed in 2006 with entry into 11 other Caribbean economies, including Haiti and Trinidad and Tobago.
Digicel also purchased a company in El Salvador and then ventured into Honduras and Panama, although some of these investments were later sold to América Móvil.
In 2006 it began to operate in countries of the South Pacific, where it sought to replicate its experience in small economies.
In 2012 it acquired its biggest competitor in Haiti for US$ 97 million, whereby Haiti became the company’s main market.
Pursuing a strategy similar to that of its rival in the subregion, Flow, Digicel has managed to combine these small subsidiaries in a single market and thus achieve certain economies of scale.
While the quality of telecommunications service in the Caribbean has improved and costs have fallen since deregulation, they are still higher than in other, larger economies.
The same trend towards expansion within the subregion is seen in Central America, although unfortunately there are no official data on foreign direct investment from El Salvador, Nicaragua or Panama.
It is safe to assume that Panama is the source of a considerable volume of outward FDI, albeit most of these resources will be “in transit”, in other words, investments by transnational companies that have subsidiaries in Panama from which they invest in other countries in the region.
Guatemala is the largest economy in Central America, but its average foreign direct investment over the past five years (2008-2012) is only US$ 24 million per year.
Both the Caribbean and Central America are seeing the same trend as in Chile and Colombia, on a smaller scale.
The entry of many foreign companies into these economies has forced local businesses to focus on activities where they are most competitive.
Meanwhile, the small size of the local market has meant that they have had to expand abroad.
Both Central America and the Caribbean are subregions with a high degree of economic integration and relatively homogeneous markets, so these companies can invest in neighbouring countries with relative ease.
In a very small number of exceptional cases, enterprises in these countries have expanded beyond their own subregion.
Moreover, the smallness of these markets makes them unattractive to transnational corporations from outside the region.
Some of the largest trans-Latins in Central America have based their growth on leveraging the inherent advantages of their home markets.
The most noteworthy cases have been in the agribusiness sector, with Pantaleón and Corporación Multi Inversiones (Guatemala) and Grupo Pellas (Nicaragua).
Pantaleón, which also operates in Honduras and Nicaragua, has managed to expand its sugar cane business (integrating agricultural production, industrial processing and energy generation) beyond Central America; it has substantial assets in Mexico and Brazil.
The company’s expansion abroad started to accelerate dramatically in 2006 and today approximately 50% of its production comes from outside Guatemala.
Yet most of the Central American and Caribbean trans-Latins are not capitalizing on any of the inherent comparative advantages of their home country but are just seeking in other countries the growth they cannot achieve at home owing to market saturation.
The sector where this strategy is most common is food and beverages.
In addition to the aforementioned Cervecería Costa Rica, noteworthy in this segment is CBC (the PepsiCo bottler in Guatemala), which stepped up its pace of expansion abroad in 2009 and now has operations not only throughout Central America but also in Colombia, Ecuador, Jamaica, Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados.
Another case of market-seeking is that of Unicomer, the Salvadoran household goods retailer (with brands such as La Curacao), which has extended its presence throughout Central America and the Caribbean and has recently entered Ecuador.
The real estate sector, often linked to the hotel trade, has been a particularly important area for large business groups in Central America.
Many family groups that sold their main businesses to transnational corporations invested the proceeds in residential, commercial or office real estate operations, seeking to capitalize on the expansion of the middle class in these countries (Bull, 2013).
They thus adjusted to the opening of the region’s economies by deciding against competing with the transnational corporations that were coming in, and focusing instead on sectors where they could leverage their knowledge of the local market and their contact networks.
Spectrum develops housing and commercial real estate projects in Honduras, Nicaragua and Colombia.
Poma and Agrisal focus on the hotel business, operating franchises of international groups (IHG in the case of Agrisal) throughout Central America.
The State-owned hydrocarbon enterprises of Trinidad and Tobago are a case apart.
Both Petroleum Company of Trinidad and Tobago (Petrotrin) and National Gas Company (NGC) share extraction, transport and refining operations there with many transnational corporations.
In recent years, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago, as part of its strategy to diversify the economy, has been seeking to promote services associated with the oil industry.
To this end it has encouraged both State-owned companies to invest abroad directly, particularly in African countries with little background in the sector.
While no investments have been made yet, negotiations are under way with Ghana and the United Republic of Tanzania.
In general, foreign direct investment from Central America and the Caribbean is showing an upward trend, especially since 2006.
The scope of these companies is almost always restricted to their respective subregions, benefiting from physical and cultural proximity and similar market structures.
The fundamental competitive advantage of most of these companies is their knowledge of the local market.
Their ability to innovate and to develop new technologies is, naturally, limited, and where they have managed to do so it has often been through partnerships with transnational corporations.
Conclusions The growth of transnational corporations from developing countries is a worldwide phenomenon.
Only a decade ago, very little FDI flowed out from these economies; today it accounts for a third of the total.
This reflects the new weight of Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe and Latin America in the global economy, a trend that gathered momentum with the global financial crisis that erupted in 2008.
Sustained economic growth over the past decade has been the main factor enabling enterprises in these countries to build up enough size and capacity to undertake and then step up the pace of international expansion.
Indeed, in Latin America it is the domestic enterprises that have grown the most over the past two decades, with the region’s major corporations pulling ahead of transnationals from the United States and Europe.
In 1999, there were 40 private domestic companies among the 100 largest companies operating in Latin America.
By 2012, their number had risen to 57 while the number of foreign-owned companies dropped from 47 to 29.
This would indicate that major domestic groups capitalized on expansion opportunities in the region’s domestic markets better than other firms.
The favourable macroeconomic environment has also enabled companies in Latin America and other developing regions to improve their financing conditions.
Most transnationals in developing countries now increase their capital or issue debt in the international markets on terms that are very similar to those of their peers in developed countries, allowing them to compete, for the first time, on a more equal footing for the same acquisitions or investment projects.
However, these new transnationals are not developing in the same way as companies from Europe, the United States or Japan did during the past century.
Businesses in Asia, Eastern Europe and Latin America come from countries that still have economic structures and political environments that often do not compare well with those of other countries.
These companies are not always at the frontier of their industry in terms of internal capacities.
They often lack unique capabilities to give them an advantage over their competitors before investing abroad, as happened with the first transnationals.
In particular, this has been the case with companies in developing Asia.
Most of them have invested abroad to continue with the expansion that was no longer feasible in the domestic market.
In other words, domestic market saturation was a push factor driving investments towards other countries.
On other occasions these firms have sought access to natural resources that could not be sourced sufficiently in their home countries.
Very few have invested outside their country to undertake different activities and thus scale up the value chain; there are virtually no examples of trans-Latins acquiring strategic assets abroad; that is, buying other companies to gain the technology, trademarks or expertise that would enable them to enhance their global operations.
This feature of their strategies is primarily a result of the pattern of specialization among major domestic groups, and it is also reflected in the sectoral composition of FDI outflows from the region.
The major trans-Latins are concentrated in services sectors (telecommunications, retail trade), natural resources (mining and hydrocarbons) and capital-intensive manufactures (steel and cement).
There are relatively few trans-Latins engaged in knowledge-intensive activities, where strategic asset-seeking would be of greater relevance.
Another prominent feature of trans-Latin corporations is a preference for investing within the region, with the exception of a handful of the largest companies in Mexico and Brazil that have a substantial footprint in the United States and Canada.
The tendency to build regional networks is stronger in companies from smaller economies.
In Central America and the Caribbean, many companies have set up networks of subregional subsidiaries.
Focusing on nearby countries is a logical strategy when the objective is to expand the market by replicating the same strategy that was followed in the country of origin.
One problem with this strategy is that it makes these companies more vulnerable to changes in the economic cycle in the region than if they expanded to other regions of the world.
Noteworthy in this regard is the limited presence of trans-Latins in Asia, indicating that few businesses are in a position to capitalize on the strong expansion of these economies and their integration into global value chains.
Unlike in Asia, none of the countries of the region apart from Brazil has applied an active policy in support of the internationalization of their enterprises.
Nor have there been many State-owned trans-Latins, except in the hydrocarbon sector.
Brazil has provided public financing to support some of its largest companies as they invest abroad, but this has not made Brazilian firms more likely to invest abroad than companies from other countries in the region.
Outward FDI from the region is already substantial and in some countries (such as Chile, Colombia and Mexico) it stands at half of inward FDI.
Almost all of the major enterprises in the region have investments outside their home country, and it is foreseeable that this trend will continue to rise in the future.
This calls for a detailed examination of the impact that the internationalization of these companies will have on the local economy.
In this regard, it is worth setting out some of the issues that should be considered in an analysis of this nature.
First, for many trans-Latins, investing abroad is the only way to sustain growth and survive as an independent business enterprise in an intensely competitive environment.
The opening of the region’s economies to international trade and investment has forced local businesses to specialize and internationalize in order to survive.
Second, outward FDI has some benefits on top of mere market expansion, mainly linked to the opportunities for learning that it offers to companies operating in different markets, often in strategic partnerships with others.
Spreading their operations across several countries also helps companies to diversify risk and better withstand crises.
Lastly, trans-Latin corporations can use their operating and financial capacities to acquire strategic assets in other countries for transforming their operations and improving their processes.
While very few companies have chosen this path, the current scenario holds a unique opportunity to emulate leading enterprises in Asia and move towards activities with higher value added and technological content.
S. (2007), “Emerging multinationals from developing economies: Motivations, paths and performance”, Journal of International Management, vol. 13, No. 3.
BNDES (National Bank for Economic and Social Development) (2008), “Política de desenvolvimento produtivo: inovar e investir para sustentar o crescimento”, Rio de Janeiro, May.
DNP (National Planning Department of Colombia) (2013), “Estrategia de promoción de la inversión directa colombiana en el exterior”, Bogota.
Li, Peter Ping (2007), “Toward an integrated theory of multinational evolution: the evidence of Chinese multinational enterprises as latecomers”, Journal of International Management, vol. 13, No. 3, September.
Roehl (2001), “Unconventional foreign direct investment and the imbalance theory, International Business Review, No. 10.
Narula, Rajneesh (2006), “Globalization, new ecologies, new zoologies, and the purported death of the eclectic paradigm”, Asia Pacific Journal of Management, vol. 23, No. 2, June.
Effects on wages and working conditions: descriptive statistics Some evidence regarding the indirect effects of subsidiaries on the rest of the production system FDI and labour relations D.
Sector-by-sector analysis: the role of technology Beyond sectors: activities in which jobs are created Analysis by destination country: patterns of regional specialization E.
Introduction The discussion over the relationship between employment and foreign direct investment (FDI) forms part of the debate on how FDI affects the region’s economic development.
Employment is a dimension that derives from output, and therefore its dynamics and characteristics are subject to production trends and technological developments in the economy, and to the institutional frameworks in which these trends and developments take shape.
In recent decades, the belief has taken hold in various spheres of decision-making that FDI is a driver of development in recipient economies, since it makes a significant contribution to modernization, increased production and, consequently, job creation.
In keeping with this view —which highlights the function of FDI as a complement to domestic savings and a source of new capital contributions— attracting foreign direct investment has been a cornerstone of many countries’ development strategies, with the magnitude of inward investment in local economies sometimes even receiving priority over the type of investment received.
There is also a widespread consensus regarding the importance of creating quality jobs in order to share the fruits of economic growth and increased productivity with a greater proportion of the population.
Productive, high-quality work performs a key role in achieving sustainable growth patterns.
Capital accumulation, technological change and an increasingly qualified labour force, supported by an appropriate regulatory framework, have a positive influence on labour productivity and contribute to high and sustainable economic growth trends.
This in turn helps create good quality jobs, making the process socially sustainable, while the rise in consumption stimulates aggregate demand, feeding a virtuous circle of growth (Weller and Kaldewei, 2013).
The sectoral dimension is important, since activities with higher knowledge content are favourable to such trends.
Especially in countries that are far from the technology frontier, resource allocation patterns guided by short-term efficiency criteria1 can have long-term effects that undermine the potential for efficiency, dynamism and innovation (Cimoli and others, 2009; Reiner 2007).
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the debate reflects concern over the repercussions of globalization on local production fabrics and on employment.
From the specific perspective of the labour market, it is less clear that this type of investment automatically helps to improve the people’s living standards, close productivity gaps or improve income distribution.
The evidence indicates that the impact of investment in natural-resource-intensive sectors,2 particularly mining and hydrocarbons (which are capital intensive and highly profitable owing to current relative commodities prices), is extremely limited in terms of direct job creation.
For this reason, even though these workers’ wages tend to be high, the labour market cannot fulfil its role in primary income distribution.
Investment due to production fragmentation and offshoring strategies involves relocating job creation in the manufacturing and services sectors from developed countries to developing economies.
These strategies are a component of the current globalization process and a characteristic of international competitiveness.
New productive configurations are established according to the manner in which chains of activities are structured between firms and countries and the segments in which jobs are created.
Separating processes into (i) labour-intensive stages, with Defined by the countries’ present capabilities and current relative prices.
The traditional approach to analysing foreign direct investment processes and their effects on recipient economies is based on recognizing the different strategies that lead parent companies to invest in the region.
In literature these are classified as (i) raw material-seeking; (ii) domestic market-seeking; (iii) efficiency-seeking in export platforms; and (iv) seeking access to strategically important assets (technology or highly trained human capital) (Dunning, 2002).
These strategies may be associated with different economic sectors: the first is linked to primary and extractive activities; the second to the production of goods and services directed at the internal market (mainly in the largest countries or those with emerging middle classes).
For this reason, a central part of the debate in the current phase of globalization refers to jobs, wages and workers’ capacities (Gereffi and Sturgeon, 2004).
From some viewpoints, it is proposed that upgrading processes in recipient economies would help overcome dual configurations of this kind.
FDI would initially be geared towards low value-added stages of production and then be concentrated in higher productivity sectors as economies undergo densification and evolution processes that result in more complex production fabrics, as well as developing new capacities.
Evidence of this kind of process can be found in Mexico, for example (Carrillo 2010).
Yet the experiences of most Latin American and Caribbean countries indicate that FDI has followed a path that presents a greater risk of deepening lock-in processes by strengthening economies’ specialization in low-productivity sectors than a possible way to diversify.
As such, the high economic concentration of these processes makes it difficult to counterbalance the growing power of transnational corporations in order to prevent adverse social and environmental impacts (Blackwell, 1997).
More precise knowledge of the effects of different types of investment will help improve the design of policies intended to attract quality FDI and strengthen the institutions responsible for regulating labour markets.
The following section gives an analysis of the quantitative effects of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Section C sets out some considerations related to the quality of the jobs created, while section D responds to the question of where jobs are created in foreign investment projects and describes some of the configurations of this type of FDI in the region.
Effects on employment One aspect that determines the impact of FDI on employment in recipient countries is the way in which it accesses local production fabrics.
Foreign capital is captured through (i) investments in capital goods designed to expand production capacity, such as the creation of new plants, or (ii) changes in the ownership of existing assets, through privatizations of public enterprises or cross-border acquisitions of domestically owned companies.
The first mode is A trend towards narrowing labour-cost gaps —especially between China and the United States— has been observed, while the impact of climate change and rising fuel prices mean that transport and logistical costs are taking on greater importance in relation to labour costs, so that geographically dispersed value chains are beginning to be perceived as higher risk.
There is also greater recognition that the proximity between production and design is important in sustaining the innovative capacity of firms.
These factors led to changes in the outlooks of many business schools, which have recognized that the effects of offshoring were overvalued, culminating in criticism of such management models.
Modifications have also been observed in the production policy approaches of traditional FDI source countries, which aim to rebuild industrial ecosystems within territories, especially in strategic sectors that are conducive to improvements in productivity and innovation.
The second mode reflects financial investments (changes in ownership) in which use is made of existing facilities, which are altered, expanded or enhanced after they are acquired by new investors.
In principle, the greater accumulation of production assets resulting from FDI has an invigorating effect on employment.
Yet under certain circumstances, FDI can have negative repercussions for employment, as when it destroys jobs as part of modernization processes in existing companies.
This is also the case when it forces uncompetitive domestic enterprises out of the market; when local suppliers are replaced with imports, or when labour-saving technologies are introduced.
Where investment is channelled into extremely capital-intensive sectors, even the positive impacts on direct employment may be modest.
FDI analysis and statistics habitually relate both to physical investments —i.e. the incorporation of new capital goods in economies— and financial transactions.
Considering the effects that these flows have on the real economy of recipient countries, this is a crucial distinction.
Studies on the relationship between FDI flows and labour-market dynamics usually differentiate between these two types of investment.
Investment promotion agencies (such as the Invest in France Agency (IFA)) generally focus their reports on physical investment projects, which are more relevant to employment.
Ernst, Berg and Auer (2007) produced a landmark research study in this area.
It was designed to analyse the impact of FDI on employment during the period 1990-2004, especially in the three biggest countries in Latin America (Argentina, Brazil and Mexico).
The authors observed that the substantial inflow of FDI had negative impacts on employment, largely owing to the characteristics of the FDI received.
The study found that most investment during this period did not create new productive activities to spur the recruitment of additional workers.
Quite the contrary, as foreign direct investment was associated with the restructuring of companies, which implied rationalization measures and layoffs.
A substantial part of FDI was earmarked for services —through the privatization of public utilities and bank restructuring— which tended to use existing assets.
Meanwhile, several decades of protection had caused a build-up of excess labour, which was shed during the privatization and subsequent modernization processes.
Deregulation brought about greater competitiveness in the manufacturing sector, the second-largest beneficiary of FDI flows and where, as in services, restructuring strategies to enhance productivity took the form of staff reductions (Ernst, Berg and Auer, 2007).
The authors stress that the employment situation in Mexico, where major investment in manufacturing created many jobs, was different to that in Brazil and Argentina.
Large maquiladoras invested in new facilities in labour-intensive industries, albeit with sometimes inadequate working conditions.
The authors also underscored the emergence of a new generation of maquiladoras that used technology intensively and which employed highly qualified workers.
On the one hand, the authors clearly differentiate between the modes of FDI access and their effects on employment: investments in new plants are thought to have very significant repercussions, while those of privatizations, mergers and acquisitions are difficult to determine before the event.
On the other hand, the authors maintain that efficiency-seeking strategies in global production One of the key issues discussed in the Washington Consensus was the proposal that Latin American countries would push through the privatization of their public enterprises.
In earlier periods of industrialization —in the 1950s and 1960s— State investment had been encouraged to compensate for the absence of private actors who would assume the cost of accumulation that would trigger continued economic growth.
Transferring State-owned enterprises to the private sector meant that fiscal resources filled State coffers, while new actors appeared in the capital accumulation strategy who adopted the logic of profit as a defining parameter for investment and investment destinations.
This type of FDI carries greater weight in Latin America than in China and India. chains are those which create the most employment, followed by market-seeking strategies, while natural-resourceseeking strategies have an insignificant impact on jobs.
The FDI inflows received by the three countries in the period 1990-2004 reflect very different situations, with these investments having a much more favourable impact on jobs in Mexico than in Argentina and Brazil.
During the 1990s, changes in the ownership of local companies (privatizations of public utilities, increased foreign shareholdings in domestically owned companies, and direct acquisitions) were prevalent, while investments in new facilities gradually took on greater importance in the 2000s.
As an ever-greater number of transnational firms consolidate their operations in the region, a third component is assuming a greater role in FDI flows: the reinvestment of earnings by established companies, which may be directed either to physical assets, expanding production capacity, or to financial assets (ECLAC, 2013).
An initial estimate of the size of cross-border transactions as a proportion of total FDI in the period 2003-2013, was made by combining three sources that reflect different aspects of the foreign direct investment process.
These were the investment declared by the region’s central banks, investment projects (contained in the Financial Times database “fDi Markets”) and cross-border acquisitions (reported by Bloomberg).
These estimates indicate that cross-border acquisitions accounted for approximately 37% of the region’s inward FDI.
Unlike investment flows, which reflect the timelines for the implementation of projects, investment announcements reflect decision-making patterns, which are more time-concentrated than if the actual incorporation of capital into recipient economies were recorded.
This means that both concepts (investment decisions and actual investments) refer to different stages of the capital formation process.8 Estimates for mergers and acquisitions include cross-border transactions between foreign firms (in other words, they do not only reflect foreign purchases of locally owned companies).
As a result, the proportion of mergers and acquisitions of total FDI is overestimated and the loss of share over time is underestimated.
There is a time lag between the moment in which projects are announced and such time as they are actually implemented, meaning that the trends in the two variables (announcements and implementation) do not necessarily coincide.
As noted above, it is very difficult to make a priori estimates of the impact of investments consisting of changes in ownership.
Nevertheless, section D gives some estimates based on investment project announcements according to which on average about 290,000 jobs per year were directly created in the whole region during the period between 2003 and 2013.
It should, however, be pointed out that these are press announcements, and therefore may be extremely optimistic.
To obtain a benchmark, this figure was compared with recorded job creation in 11 of the region’s countries, including the largest ones,9 which averaged 5 million jobs per year for the period between 2003 and 2007.
In an optimistic estimate, this analysis suggests that FDI enabled the direct creation of about 5% of new jobs in the period 2003-2013.
As a result of this estimate, it was possible to establish an order of magnitude for the impact of FDI on direct job creation.
Nevertheless, it must be stressed, as is examined below, that the qualitative impact this kind of investment would have on labour markets is even greater than the quantitative impact, and as such, it must be considered that these investments also contributed to indirect job creation, although gains in this regard could not be estimated.
To determine the magnitude of the effects that transnational corporations have on the labour markets of FDI recipient countries, the percentage of total employment accounted for by subsidiaries in these countries, was also estimated.
The scarcity of information for Latin America and the Caribbean regarding employment structures and taking the ownership of companies into account, only allows for a few indicative examples.
The impact of transnational corporations on private wage employment recorded in three countries —Argentina, Chile and Ecuador— was estimated for the manufacturing industry, extractive activities and all economic sectors.
This is a measurement, based on the structure of employment, that reflects not just the result of recent FDI flows (in both physical and financial modes), but also the build-up of foreign capital assets in these countries over the long term.
For example, in Argentina, it was possible to find industrial subsidiaries of transnational firms that have been established in the country since the early twentieth century.
It was observed that between 12% and 17% of wage employees work in transnational corporations, which indicates the extent to which formal private employment has been transnationalized in these economies.
In the manufacturing industry the proportion is greater, albeit with considerable differences between the three countries studied: transnationals account for 19% of formal jobs in Argentina, 28% in Chile and 30% in Ecuador.
In the three countries studied, the extractive industries had the largest share of employees working for transnational corporations (about 50% of employees in the sector).
Limiting the analysis to only the 500 largest firms yields another measurement of the impact of transnational corporations on employment.
This indicator is not representative of economies as a whole, but it shows the significance of transnational corporations in the upper echelons of business in each country.
In this case it was possible to estimate indicators for the 6 countries that had at least 20 firms in the ranking produced by América Economía magazine, observing an extremely high level of heterogeneity.
Transnational corporations accounted for 58% of employment in Peru’s 30 largest firms but for only 16% of employment in Chile’s largest companies.
In recent decades, foreign direct investment flows to Latin American and Caribbean countries have risen sharply, which although advantageous for the development of recipient countries, has also aroused concerns over sensitive aspects such as the protection of labour rights.
The potential benefits of FDI for recipient economies have been emphasized in the design of policies.
Such benefits may be direct, as when the beneficiaries are the people who work for the subsidiaries of transnational corporations; or indirect, as when they are received by workers in domestic enterprises as a result of interaction with foreign firms (spillover effect).
These employment benefits —better wages and working conditions, and faster job growth— are how the labour market reflects the higher productivity of subsidiaries.
Transnationals’ management models are characterized partly by their ability to transfer those factors on which their productivity advantages are based, between subsidiaries located in different countries, thus directly benefiting their employees in recipient countries.
A similar logic accounts for the indirect benefits, insofar as it is possible to transfer productivity gains from subsidiaries to local firms, resulting in positive externalities for recipient economies.
Working conditions in subsidiaries may be evaluated under different standards: (i) those of the country of origin (parent company); (ii) universal standards deriving from guidelines on rights at work issued by agencies such as the International Labour Organization (ILO); and (iii) those of the country receiving the investment (OECD, 2008).
Subsidiaries’ conduct can be evaluated by observing the degree to which they comply, in host locations, with the prevailing standards in the countries where their parent companies are located.
Under this approach, it is argued that the workers in countries receiving investments that seek advantages through reduced labour costs do not receive “fair” wages, while workers in the countries of origin suffer from “unfair competition”.
Such arguments have led to numerous calls for offshoring processes to be restricted, yet it is important to consider that this would also affect the development process in lower-income countries.
This approach could be more suitable for evaluating the impact of offshoring in countries of origin, but it is not advisable for analysing the effects on recipient countries.
A more consistent focus, in respect of human and labour rights, is that of “universal” labour standards, which bear no relation to the economic and social development status of origin and destination countries.
The level of development of these corporate policies is different in each country and to a large extent depends on the regulation of labour in the subsidiaries’ home economies.
European firms tend to adopt policies that offer greater protection than United States corporations, given that European countries have more extensive regulatory frameworks in respect of job security, unions and collective bargaining.
The adoption of these corporate policies by parent companies does not ensure that their subsidiaries will comply with them, which also reduces the efficiency of these codes of conduct in supply chains.
The lack of systematic information also limits the potential for comparison between the labour practices of subsidiaries and makes it impossible to evaluate labour practices in respect of universal standards.
A third approach consists in comparing the working conditions of foreign subsidiaries with the standards of recipient countries.
To do this, wages and working conditions are contrasted with those of local firms, which are used as a counterfactual parameter to determine whether or not subsidiaries make improvements to the conditions of local workers.
This is the only approach that can be adopted with the information available. 1.
Effects on wages and working conditions: descriptive statistics Before examining the evidence for Latin America and the Caribbean, it is useful to give a brief outline of the reasons why subsidiaries might pay higher wages than local firms.
First, the gaps between average wages may reflect differences in the composition of employment: better qualified workers should be better paid.
These differences between employees’ profiles could be either the result of decisions taken at the time of recruitment, or of the human-resources management practices implemented by both kinds of company.
In other words, it is possible that subsidiaries place greater emphasis on training and in-company professional development, which in turn leads employees to improve their profiles over time.
A more elastic demand for labour might give rise to a requirement for higher wages, to compensate for lesser job stability.
Workers may also accept lower wages in exchange for the promise of being able to pursue careers within the company (Doeringer and Piore, 1971).
From another viewpoint, it is argued that transnationals’ subsidiaries could offer higher wages as part of an “efficiency wage” strategy, designed to discourage voluntary staff turnover and thereby ensure that productivity gains remain within the company and do not spread to the rest of the production system.
Different institutional factors, such as the role of the unions and the balance of power in collective bargaining, or consumer pressures in countries of origin, might also partly explain wage differentials (Shapiro, Stiglitz 1984).
The stimulus for better conditions will also depend on the productivity advantages that subsidiary companies have over local firms.
Incentives based on working conditions should also be greater for better qualified workers.
Activities requiring that workers have specific knowledge should also incentivize greater staff retention through the payment of better wages, especially for those with the highest qualifications.
The effects that subsidiaries of transnational corporations have on the qualitative aspects of labour markets were first measured taking the World Bank’s “Enterprise Surveys” as inputs.
These surveys were carried out in 2006 and 2010 in many emerging economies, including most Latin American and Caribbean countries (the Brazil survey is from 2009).
They covered enterprises from the manufacturing industry, the retail trade and various services (hotels, transport and storage, tourism and services related to information and communication technologies).
While the surveys were not designed to analyse qualitative aspects of employment, they do permit the study of basic dimensions such as wages, job stability and staff training efforts undertaken by firms.
They also allow the measurement of some differences in the employment structures of domestic- and foreign-owned firms, to determine whether there is a preference to recruit personnel with higher levels of formal education or a higher proportion of women.
A simple comparison reveals that in all the countries of the region, subsidiaries pay higher wages and offer better working conditions than the other companies.
However, this also underscores the fact that subsidiaries are usually larger companies and tend to be geared towards the most productive sectors of recipient economies.
It might be especially useful to compare the working conditions of subsidiaries with those of similar companies, of domestic origin, in order to determine the size of the potential gap between domestic and foreign firms.
One especially appropriate comparison is to estimate regressions designed to detect the gaps between populations of similar firms, controlling for a set of relevant variables regarding the firm (size, age and branch of activity) and the workers (education level, gender).
It is nonetheless important to highlight that these results do not yet allow “causal” relationships to be established.
It may be supposed that foreign firms are inherently different to local ones and that, in reality, gaps may be explained by a set of non-observable characteristics other than capital ownership.
The results indicate that, on average, subsidiaries pay wages that are 50% higher than those of their local counterparts.
The gaps vary from 26% in Brazil to more than 70% in Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (see figure III.2).
No effects were observed in the other dimensions of employment quality that were evaluated, nor were there any significant differences in relation to job stability or regarding the labour participation of women.
In other words, subsidiaries are not thought to be pursuing policies designed to improve levels of inclusion.
In 9 out of 11 countries studied, transnational corporations were significantly more willing to incur expenditure on training.
In some countries the differences were very narrowly in favour of the subsidiaries, while in Mexico, Honduras and Guatemala the subsidiaries were observed to perform much better than their local counterparts (see figure III.3).
While these results offer an initial approach to evaluating employment quality gaps between domestic and local firms, they should be interpreted with caution, since this type of descriptive statistics usually presents biases (of aggregation, selection or endogeneity).
A more complex econometric analysis, which improves the quality of the estimates and confirms some of the results, is presented below.
Ordinary least squares models were estimated and the following elements included in the analysis: (i) country fixed effects, (ii) industry fixed effects, (iii) lagged dependent variables, to help control for specific aspects of the enterprise, and (iv) different dependent variables, both in levels and in growth rates (see annex).
Based on the surveys for Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay, for the years 2006 and 2010, a cross-country information panel was constructed in order to evaluate the effects on employment, wages, labour productivity and sales.
The sample design used by the World Bank repeats approximately one third of the cases in both years, making it possible to construct a panel.
The main difference between this method and the estimation of gaps set out above is that the analysis focuses on variables of interest measured for 2010, at the same time as controlling for both the values of these variables and the percentage of foreign ownership in 2006.
The objective is to control for the effects of non-observable attributes that may be different between local and foreign firms, and which might be affecting the variables of interest.
In other words, the exercise aims to achieve a tighter estimate of the effects of foreign company ownership on changes in the variables of interest.
Different types of models were considered and different control variables used to analyse the impact of transnational corporations on employment.
The same conclusion was reached in all cases: there was no evidence that the type of ownership had any effect on the number of workers.
Nevertheless, the estimates made with regard to productivity, measured as the volume of sales per employee, yielded significant results, indicating that productivity grows faster among firms with foreign capital.
The estimates indicate that an extra 10 percentage points of foreign capital ownership was associated with a 2% increase in productivity, implying that a completely foreign-owned firm is 20% more productive than a completely locally-owned firm.
With regard to sales, the results varied according to the type of model estimated.
Lastly, it was noted that foreign ownership had positive and systematic impacts on average wages.
The results indicated that an additional 10 percentage points of foreign capital ownership was associated with a 2% increase in wages. 2.
Some evidence regarding the indirect effects of subsidiaries on the rest of the production system Advances in working conditions may also spill over from subsidiaries to domestic firms, in two ways: (i) through productivity improvements and (ii) through the effects that these large employers have on national labour markets.
There is extensive literature examining the channels through which knowledge may be transferred to local production systems, generating productivity increases in local firms, which in turn may result in better working conditions.
The three main channels are: (i) the imitation of good production and management practices; (ii) labour mobility and (iii) the development of supply chains (Dahl 2002; Lundmark and Power, 2004).
The entry of foreign subsidiaries can alter the balance of local labour markets, increasing the demand for labour and exerting upward pressure on wages.
Until now only effects on wages have been recorded, though it is possible that workers may have expectations regarding other working conditions, for which no evidence has been noted.
In any case, subsidiaries may also reduce the labour supply available for local firms, which could lead the latter to increase their wages.
Evidence to that effect has been discovered in various studies carried out on the region.
Tondl and Fornero (2008), in a study of eight economic activities in 14 Latin American and Caribbean countries, observed that the potential of FDI to generate direct and indirect impacts on labour productivity varies considerably between economic sectors.
While the study found positive effects on productivity in most sectors, direct impacts were greater in primary and extractive activities (agriculture, mining and the oil industry).
Meanwhile, indirect effects on productivity arise from foreign investments in the manufacturing industry, which then spread into other sectors (transport and telecommunications also registered some indirect effects).
The evidence suggests that this occurs because manufacturing generates greater production linkages than other sectors, and subsidiaries demand higher standards of their local suppliers.
A second study (Monge-González, 2009) refers to the effect of knowledge spillover on Costa Rican firms, associated with labour mobility from the transnationals operating in Costa Rica’s free trade zones.
Using econometric models that allow for the control of fixed effects in the companies, evidence was found that local firms that recruited former employees of transnational corporations posted higher sales and employment growth rates.
The same result was not obtained when performance is measured by average worker productivity, partly owing to problems with the measurement of this variable.
The enterprises operating in free trade zones increased their contribution to GDP from 0.5% to 0.9% between the early 1990s and 2007.
Free trade zones have increased job opportunities in Costa Rica, especially for highly qualified workers.
It was also confirmed that some high-tech transnational corporations established in Costa Rica represent a significant source of training, education and work experience for their employees (Monge-González and González, 2007).
The authors of the study claimed that the knowledge acquired by employees in enterprises such as Intel, Cisco and Microsoft was not specific to the industry in which these companies operate.
Leiva, Monge-González and Alegre (2011) observed that entrepreneurs who had previously worked in transnational corporations in Costa Rica welcomed the acquisition of a set of knowledge combining “soft” elements such as communication and negotiation with other, “harder” skills such as those relating to the creation or improvement of new methods or products.
The research found evidence of significant positive externalities associated with the dissemination of this knowledge through labour mobility10 from transnational to local enterprises.
Positive externalities were identified deriving from the recruitment of transnational corporations’ former employees by local companies, though the authors indicated that these effects could be greater if local firms were to increase their capacity to absorb, acquire and adapt new technologies and knowledge that would improve their performance.
A study on Argentina —an economy with a high proportion of transnational firms— has contributed some useful inputs to the debate on the indirect impacts of transnational corporations on the labour market.
The research demonstrated that given asymmetric working conditions between local firms and subsidiaries, labour mobility patterns prevailed in which it was the subsidiaries, rather than the local firms, that tended to absorb capacities.
It was noted that enterprises with foreign ownership paid higher wages and offered greater job stability.
Further study on workers’ career paths revealed that subsidiaries of transnational corporations were more inclined to hire those with previous experience in national firms, while local companies pursued recruitment strategies that prioritized the hiring of younger workers moving from the education system into the labour market (Rojo, Tumini and Yoguel, 2012).
The studies by Tondl and Fornero (2008) and Monge-González (2009 and 2010) demonstrate the existence of indirect benefits originating from transnational corporations.
However, they do not explain whether these are the result of companies’ ownership structures or other characteristics.
In this regard, the results of two research studies on Argentina underscore that the technological complexity of the sector is more important than the profile of the agents when it comes to explaining knowledge dissemination processes.
These results therefore demonstrate the importance of the activity sector in generating knowledge-spillover effects with indirect impacts on working conditions (in other words, the complexity of the sector matters more than the origin of the capital).
Even on an equal technological footing, transnational companies are less likely than national firms to give rise to knowledge dissemination processes.
This is because the aforementioned asymmetry in labour conditions gives them a greater propensity to absorb skills, rather than to disseminate them through labour mobility. 3.
FDI and labour relations The phenomenon of global economic transnationalization and the spread of transnational corporations throughout the world have led to fierce debate in the specialized literature on labour relations, revolving around the effects of interactions between transnationals and labour institutions in recipient countries.
On the one hand, advocates of the convergence theory predict that the parent companies of transnational corporations will transfer the prevailing labour relations practices in their countries of origin, to the host countries.
Accordingly, it is the institutional frameworks of host countries that must adapt to the arrival of these enterprises.
On the other hand, those who question this vision maintain that convergence is not empirically proven and that, on the contrary, the success of transnational corporations depends on their ability to adapt to the institutional framework of the host country, which is not radically altered to meet the needs of these companies (Senén González, Borromi and Trajtemberg, 2014).
Advocates of the convergence position argue that globalization tends to foster a “top-down” or “bottom-up” homogenization of labour practices, depending on the point of view from which this process is observed (Kellner, 2002).
In some quarters it is claimed that jobs have become more precarious (Ritzer, 1998; Carrillo, 2010), while those who support these processes suggest that best practices are transferred from more developed economies to the recipient economies (OECD, 2002).
In any case, it would seem that host countries, especially small ones, can do little about these processes, regardless of their outcomes.
Local institutions are seen as a source of resistance to the standardizing pressures from the corporate centre.
In this regard, different studies suggest that investments by transnational corporations outside their countries of origin often consist in an attempt to “escape” or “flee” from more demanding labour regimes, seeking greater flexibility or lower costs (Dombois and Pries, 2000).
By carefully observing the complexity and heterogeneity of this globalization process, it can be seen that transnational corporations pursue a broad range of strategies and obtain a variety of results according to countries, sectors or regions within countries, and in view of the differences in markets, institutions and cultures (Bensusán, Carrillo and Ahumada Lobo, 2011).
To contribute inputs to this debate in respect of Latin America and the Caribbean, some cases were examined that show marked contrasts: Argentina, Mexico and (especially with regard to the maquila industry) some Central American countries.
The impact of transnational corporations on the Argentine labour relations system has been studied extensively.
Senén González, Trajtemberg and Medwid (2011), show the importance of the country of origin for certain indicators affecting unions’ performance within enterprises.
The evidence for Argentina shows that many companies of United States origin either do not have unions or have lower rates of union membership than European firms: only 54% of companies headquartered in the United States have trade union delegates, as compared with 75% of European ones.
Collective bargaining coverage does not differ according to the origin of capital: both European- and United States-owned companies have more than 80% of workers covered by collective bargaining.
Argentine institutions have a significant presence, but this is unable to compensate for the effect of United States firms’ management models.
While transnational corporations usually had limited union representation schemes (no union delegates, no industrial disputes, low collective bargaining coverage and low union affiliation), transnationals were also observed among the groups of companies with indirect and segmented representation, and direct and dispute-oriented representation (Senén González, Borromi and Trajtemberg, 2014).
A research study on Mexico (Bensusán, Carrillo and Ahumada Lobo, 2011), which investigated whether convergence or divergence processes were taking place in labour relations, uncovered findings that contrasted with those recorded in Argentina.
Mexico’s domestic institutional environment has a determinative effect over the forms of worker representation in the country’s transnational corporations (despite the differences that might be expected owing to the various countries of origin).
In consequence, a large proportion of companies are unionized, while other forms of individual and direct representation are assuming greater importance.
Transnational corporations are going further than mere tolerance for unions, and adapting to the domestic environment.
The authors maintain that the unions existing under the Mexican system —selected by the labour authorities— offer more of a labour-protection measure than the practice of a bilateral system between employers and unions.
By contrast, there is evidence that transnational corporations are not passing on best practices in collective bargaining, which are growing in importance in European countries.
On the contrary, the research confirms that some characteristics of the Mexican labour relations system are operating as a factor that attracts transnational corporations, because there are fewer restrictions than in the countries of origin.
It may be inferred that transnational corporations have an aptitude for adapting to the institutional environment of the Mexican labour market.
This conclusion was supported in the different economic sectors examined by the study.
Another case study is that of the maquila industries in Central American countries.
These enterprises operate in economic activities that allow the segmentation of productive processes: developed countries specialize in the stages requiring technology, innovation and design, while offshoring a set of routine, labour-intensive activities to economies with lower labour costs.
This is a way of transnationalizing the factors of production which is becoming widespread in sectors such as textiles, clothing and electronics.
Not only does the maquila industry appear not to reflect convergence processes towards better labour standards; indeed, it has a long history of complaints of non-compliance with labour rights, especially anti-union policies.
In this case, adherence to codes of conduct by the industry organizations belonging to the maquila companies does not appear to be delivering the desired outcomes (Vargas Hernández, 2011).
An analysis of investment project announcements As stated previously, foreign direct investment geared to the development of greenfield projects is the form most clearly linked to job creation.
In the period between 2003 and 2013, new investments accounted for roughly 63% of the region’s inward FDI, a proportion that gradually increased over the course of the decade (see section 1).
Yet despite the importance of distinguishing between types of inflow, official sources in the Latin American and Caribbean region do not usually specify whether FDI takes the form of physical or financial investment, meaning that recourse to private sources and internal estimates is necessary to study (at least approximately) physical investment and its impacts.
This section looks at the results of the survey carried out by “fDi Markets” from the Financial Times, which despite some limitations regarding its coverage and the type of information contained (investment announcements and a significant proportion of estimated data), enabled the discovery of trends, orders of magnitude and different characteristics of projects in the region.
The analysis is intended to develop a microeconomic approach to the problem of foreign direct investment in greenfield projects and production capacity, in order to measure its impacts on job creation. 1.
Job creation announcements presented a similar trend, reflecting some volatility in the occurrence of larger scale projects.
Nevertheless, job creation was outpaced by the growth in investment amounts, rising from 250,000 jobs per year in the period preceding the 2008-2009 financial crisis, to 300,000 jobs per year in the subsequent period.
In 2013, around 860 investor groups announced the launch of projects in the region, though only 420 of them anticipated operations worth more than US$ 20 million.
The total number of investors surged by more than 60% from the period prior to the financial crisis to the subsequent period, while the number of those planning to invest more than US$ 20 million rose by 45%.
This reflects an increase, since 2009, in the number of investors in smaller projects.
Number of investors announcing investment projects, by total capital investment per year C.
Job creation announced (thousands of jobs) Over US$ 20 million Up to US$ 20 million Direct foreign investment is highly concentrated among very few economic actors, both in terms of investment amounts and job creation.
For the period between 2003 and 2013, it was noted that 250 economic groups (5% of all investors) were responsible for 68% of announced investment, and 55% of jobs directly associated with these projects (see figure III.6).
Announcements of investment and job creation recorded similar levels of concentration for the periods before and after the 2008-2009 financial crisis.
Different actors occupy the top 12 places in the investor rankings for capital investment and job creation, reflecting the labour intensity of the economic activities in which they specialize (see diagram III.2).
Diagram III.2 Latin America and the Caribbean: economic groups with the highest share of announced foreign direct investment and associated job creation, 2003-2013 Capital investment announced Job creation announced 1.
Falabella In the same period, companies engaged in commerce and vehicle assembly increased their presence among the main economic groups that created jobs through foreign direct investment, although there were also some exponents of less labour-intensive activities such as mineral extraction and telecommunications, owing to the magnitude of the investments made.
The highly concentrated nature of job creation as a result of announced investment projects is an important factor for understanding the dynamics of labour relations in the region.
As was mentioned in the introduction and in section C, this particular aspect of transnational corporations may create asymmetries in relation to issues such as worker representation and collective bargaining in general. 2.
In terms of economic geography, foreign direct investment is regarded as an element of globalization that tends to restructure territories, relocating stages of production processes from “core” countries to other economies, either in search of their natural resources, because they offer labour-cost advantages, or because they provide access to growing markets.
As a result, networks of destination and recipient countries are shaped around a series of economic activities and investor groups.
From an employment perspective, the investor country is an important variable, since it establishes not only the specialization in terms of the economic activities carried out, but also certain aspects associated with labour relations, management models, and the degree of autonomy between parent companies and subsidiaries, among others (Carrillo and others, 2011).
Analysis of the countries that generate foreign investment projects reveals a situation consisting of the same few countries that have traditionally formed the engine for various forms of globalization, with an as-yet limited presence of new actors: the BRIC countries (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India and China) and some Latin American economies.
Taking the period from 2003 to 2013 as a whole, investment projects originating in European countries accounted for around 38% of announced job creation, while those of the United States accounted for 27% and those of Canada 6%.
Investments from Asia created 17% of new jobs, and those from Latin America 9%.
In other words, 64% of new jobs announced as a result of investment projects originated in Europe and the United States, as observed below.
In terms of the average investment amounts and the number of jobs created, the characteristics of investment projects differ according to the region of origin.
European countries accounted for about 40% of new investments in Latin America and the Caribbean in terms of the number of projects, capital investment and job creation announced (see figure III.8).
Meanwhile, United States firms were responsible for around 31% of announced projects.
However, on average these projects were smaller (21% of total capital investment) but had proportionally greater jobs content (27% of announced jobs) in comparison with projects originating in Europe.
Few investments were planned by Canadian business groups during this period, but they were high in value and low in job content, reflecting their specialization in the mining sector.
The aforementioned differences in the size and job-creating capacity of projects are explained by the sectoral profile of the investments initiated in each region.
The willingness to invest in certain activities appears to depend on the resources, capacities and opportunities offered by recipient economies, as well as on the capacities and technological experience of investor countries.
Investment projects originating in Europe, the United States and Asia specialize in the manufacturing industry, which in each case accounted for more than 50% of new jobs associated with investment announcements, compared with an average of 46% for all inward FDI (see figure III.7).
Investments from Canada specialized in mineral extraction, a sector in which 85% of the jobs associated with Canadian FDI were created, compared with an average of 26% for all investors.
Further analysis shows that Germany, Italy and the other European Union countries announced job-creating investment projects with a greater specialization in the manufacturing industry, while projects originating in France were especially concentrated in commerce and services.
The largest European Union investor, Spain, is highly specialized in services (a sector which accounts for 40% of jobs created thanks to Spanish FDI, compared with 22% on average).
In all of these cases, specialization is measured using announced job creation as a reference.
It has also been noted that investment differs according to the country of origin: job-creating investment projects originating in Mexico have a marked specialization in services, while those of Brazil are focused on manufacturing and mining, and those of Chile on commerce and, to a lesser extent, services.
By comparing the transition matrices on job creation for the periods before and after the 2008-2009 crisis, it was discerned that job creation tends to be more focused on Brazil and Mexico rather than on the regional blocs to which they belong (see table III.3).
Investments originating in Europe generally tend to create more employment in the countries of South America (while job creation associated with German and Spanish projects is also overrepresented in Mexico).
The jobs announced in this subregion are mainly related to manufacturing activities (especially in the context of projects originating in Germany, Italy and the United Kingdom), and also services (particularly Spanish projects).
Conversely, United States investments reveal a greater tendency towards job creation in Mexico and the countries of Central America and the Caribbean.
This is explained by the fact that this job creation is driven by investments specializing in the manufacturing industry, based on labour cost advantages.
Unlike European and North American firms, Asian investors do not seem to have a clear regional preference, focusing job creation on the region’s two biggest economies: Brazil and Mexico.
Investments from Africa, Canada and Oceania, although not major creators of employment because they are directed at the extractive industries, are present in the blocs to which both of the named countries belong, with a more marked footprint in South America.
Sector-by-sector analysis: the role of technology One key aspect of the debate in the region regarding the impact on inward FDI on the countries’ production structure is whether such investment opens up the potential for diversifying the production structure or whether it tends to consolidate lock-in processes in low-productivity sectors.
From this perspective, it is crucial to analyse the sectoral profile of the jobs announced in investment projects, and their dynamics over time, since this has clear consequences not just for the production structure but also for the quality of the employment created.
In the period between 2010 and 2013, manufacturing enterprises accounted for 49% of announced investment amounts, while services companies accounted for 28% and extractive industries 18% (see figure III.10).
The sectoral distribution of the job creation announced through these projects is different from the sectoral distribution of the investment amounts, since different economic activities have different labour intensities.
In the period between 2010 and 2013, the manufacturing industry accounted for 55% of new jobs, with services representing 25% and extractive activities (the primary sector) only 8%.
It is important to note that the share of employment generated by these activities (8%) was less than half the sector’s share of capital investment (18%), reflecting the fact that extractive industries are substantially less labour-intensive than the other economic activities that receive investment in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Compared with the period between 2003 and 2007, changes were observed in the sectoral distribution of announced job creation, particularly a significant increase (of 9 percentage points) in the share of manufacturing employment, at the expense of lower job creation in the primary sector.
This first glance at the sectoral composition of investment projects and related employment provides a useful overview of the sectors in which physical FDI leads to job creation.
However, the problem is complicated by the heterogeneous nature of the region and the diverse motivations of investors, meaning that its analysis requires a more disaggregated perspective.
This result would indicate that new FDI tends to entrench lock-in processes in the region’s production system, in favour of activities that are closely connected with international commodity prices.
When the two periods (2003-2007 and 2010-2013) are compared, it is apparent that labour-intensive sectors suffered a loss of share, both in capital investment and job creation, possibly reflecting a trend for countries to take advantage of labour cost advantages in other regions.
Engineering-intensive sectors, including the automotive industry, accounted for about 40% of capital investment and 50% of announced job creation between 2010 and 2013.
During this period, it was observed that these sectors had a greater impact on both variables, largely owing to the expansion of the automotive industry.
Investments in the automotive sector, in the form of assembly plants and auto parts factories, typically follow efficiency-seeking or market-seeking strategies.
The level of technological complexity is high, which is reflected in the wages paid for the jobs created.
Most engineering-intensive manufacturing industries, excluding the automotive industry, undertake activities that generate more jobs (the production of electronic components, consumer goods, machinery and equipment), and which together account for 70% of capital investment and 80% of jobs created in these industries (see figure III.12).
Biotechnology, engines and turbines, medical devices, semiconductors, aerospace and defence form a group of activities that are more complex, less modular and which are traditionally less established.
Investor countries’ strategies make it a priority to keep these industries within their territory since they are heavily associated with the development of innovative capacity.
During the 10-year study period, investment projects in these activities created 80,000 jobs across the region.
However, these industries are a relatively minor component of capital investment and job creation.
Together they account for about 30% of capital investment and 20% of new jobs announced in the engineering-intensive manufacturing sector, figures that remained stable over time.
The share of total announced investment was also stable, albeit marginal: 2.5% of jobs and 1.4% of capital investment.
The services sector is also highly heterogeneous, since it includes services with low technological intensity that generate lots of lower quality jobs (such as those in call centres), to complex services such as software production.
The information and communications technology (ICT) services sector (which includes software development) on average accounted for almost 50% of capital investment, and 25% of announced job creation, with a share that rose between the periods 2003-2007 and 2010-2013 (see figure III.13).
A comparison of announced capital investment and job creation shows, as expected, that sectors differed markedly in terms of the job content of projects.
In aggregate terms, commerce and construction activities generate the most employment (seven jobs created per US$ 1 million invested), followed by manufacturing and services (three jobs per US$ 1 million).
In the extractive industries, one job is created per US$ 2 million invested.
Labour-intensive manufacturing activities create seven jobs per US$ 1 million invested, as do engineering-intensive activities (including the automotive industry).
Natural-resource-intensive activities (excluding food production) are less labour-intensive, creating two jobs per US$ 1 million invested (see figure III.14).
Services-producing sectors Information and communication technologies Financial services Transport and storage Tourism Services activities are also highly heterogeneous in terms of job creation associated with investment projects.
For example, tourism-related activities (transport and personal services) create more employment than the more modern services in finance and information technology.
While it was not possible to use similar indicators for other greenfield investment in the region, there is nothing to indicate that foreign direct investment presents differing degrees of labour intensity in comparison with similar investments (in terms of the size of agents and technology) made by local firms.
In countries that specialize in investments with high job content, local labour markets have greater potential to influence primary income distribution, insofar as labour institutions support this process and the size imbalance between investors and local unions permits it.
Conversely, in countries where investment has a limited impact on job creation, tax systems must exercise the function of redistributing the income from these investments to the rest of the economy.
While a high proportion of job creation associated with inward FDI in the region is linked to the exploitation of natural resources (extractive industries and industrial processes) and services (almost 25% of new jobs), a comparison of the two study periods (2003-2007 and 2010-2013) reveals encouraging changes.
Sectors seeking labour-cost advantages (labour-intensive manufacturing and low-complexity services such as call centres) saw a loss of share, while job creation gained ground in higher productivity sectors: engineering-intensive manufacturing and services related to information and communications technologies.
However, within the sphere of engineering-intensive manufacturing (not including the automotive industry), 80% of new jobs were created in less capital-intensive activities (the production of electronic components, consumer goods, machinery and equipment), while those sectors11 that are usually a strategic priority for investor countries to keep in their territory maintained a low but stable share over time.
As mentioned previously, investments in these manufacturing industries are thought to have created 80,000 jobs in the region between 2003 and 2013. 4.
Beyond sectors: activities in which jobs are created In addition to the sectors in which jobs are created as a result of FDI, it is interesting to know which specific activities projects are targeted.
For example, an investment in the pharmaceutical sector might involve setting up a production facility, a marketing business, or a research and development laboratory.
The consequences for the quality of the employment created differ significantly between the three cases.
Companies may engage in many different activities, internal processes and management areas such as: production, business-to-business services, business-to-customer services, logistics and distribution, sales, decision-making, engineering processes, and others.
These activities or management units may present various levels of complexity and require distinct capacities, both in terms of the organization responsible and the type of employment that they generate.
In general, these jobs are taken by industrial workers with technical or vocational qualifications.
They tend to be more stable than administrative and commercial job profiles, and offer the potential for on-the-job learning, especially in modern organizations with a greater take-up of technology.
Next in importance in terms of job creation are business-to-business and business-to-consumer services, which together account for 19% of total jobs created.
These areas include call-centre services with varying degrees of sophistication (from customer contact and technical support centres to service centres), as well as different types of sales jobs.
Recruitment to such positions usually requires a higher level of general training, but less specific training.
These jobs also offer fewer opportunities for the in-house acquisition of new capacities, and are less stable (Novick and others, 2011; Del Bono and Henry, 2010).
Infrastructure development (construction, electricity lines and infrastructure for information and communication technologies (ICT)) accounts for an estimated 14% of jobs created by these investment projects.
While the qualifications requirements vary considerably (they are more easily achievable in the case of construction and more complex in the development of energy and Internet infrastructure and ICT services), these jobs are usually rather unstable and disappear once the project is completed.
On the other hand, the jobs created in the areas of research and development, engineering and design and decision-making centres, have high technical skill requirements, produce high value added and are generally more stable than production and services positions.
These areas account for 4% of job creation (1% in decision-making centres and 3% in design areas as a whole).
Over the study period, few changes were observed in the composition of job creation associated with foreign direct investment in management areas.
While 2008 and 2009 were atypical owing to the international crisis, in general job creation has since presented the same structure as in the previous years.
Nonetheless, some changes were noted, which although not of large magnitude are important on a qualitative level.
First, when the periods 2003-2007 and 2010-2013 were compared, it was observed that job creation doubled in strategic activities (research and development, design, development and testing, and training), both in absolute terms (from 5,000 to 10,000 jobs per year) and as a proportion of total job creation (from 2% to 4%).
This was counterbalanced by a slight fall in the proportion of jobs created in the production area of extractive industries (see table III.5).
Second, jobs created in business-to-business services virtually tripled in number and reflected significant gains as a proportion of job creation (up from 3% to 6%).
Meanwhile, business-to-consumer services (including sales services) saw a slight drop in their total share of job creation.
While production activities are still the main driver of new employment, their contribution to total job creation is growing more slowly than the sector average, resulting in loss of share.
Job creation was down significantly (by half) in extractive activities, while it steadied in logistics, distribution and transport activities, and surged by 30% in manufacturing.
In short, encouraging trends may be perceived in the specific management areas in which investment projects are creating jobs, , particularly as regards the growth of employment in strategic activities (research and development, design, development and testing, and training).
Job creation in these areas doubled over the 10-year study period, although they still represent a marginal percentage of total employment. 5.
Analysis by destination country: patterns of regional specialization In this section, some of the core aspects of the above analysis are disaggregated with reference to the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
First, the region’s specialization profile is described in relation to job creation deriving from investment projects, which provides a platform from which to then analyse the different employment intensities of the investments announced in each country.
Lastly, a differential structural analysis is carried out, which seeks to isolate the effects of the sectoral profile of investment in job creation from other characteristics inherent to each country.
In recent years, foreign direct investment in the region has shown a certain degree of sectoral specialization.
Meanwhile capital investment in the Andean countries and some Caribbean ones was very highly concentrated in extractive activities and in natural-resource-processing stages of manufacturing (the metal and petrochemical industries).
A fourth group is made up of those countries whose advantageous location allows services projects to predominate: especially tourism, information and communications technology services, and logistics.
It is important to be aware of the sectoral specialization of FDI in each country, because it defines the number of direct jobs that this type of investment contributes to the local labour market.
For example, in countries where FDI was concentrated in extractive activities, these investments create about two jobs for every US$ 1 million dollars invested, while in countries where FDI specializes in services, 4.6 jobs were directly created for every US$ 1 million invested.
In economies where greenfield FDI specializes in manufacturing industries, every US$ 1 million invested created 6.5 jobs in countries specializing in labour-intensive manufacturing, and 3.9 jobs in countries with more complex manufacturing (see maps III.1 and III.2).
The job content of FDI differs widely between countries, ranging from one job created per US$ 1 million invested in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, to almost nine jobs for the same investment amount in Nicaragua.
While the sectoral specialization of FDI is the main cause of these marked differences, there are additional factors that also help explain the employment intensity of investment.
The Caribbean is the subregion in which the job content of investment announcements presents the widest disparities.
The variable gives rise to two contrasting situations: in one set of economies, investment has a high impact on employment, while in a second group, the effects are more modest.
Map III.1 Latin America: sectoral specialization profile of foreign investment projects and intensity of direct job creation, 2003-2013 (Number of jobs created per US$ 1 million invested) Mexico 4.4 Honduras 4.3 Nicaragua 8.9 Guatemala 3.6 El Salvador 6.3 Costa Rica 5.2 Venezuela (Bol.
In the first set of countries (mainly comprising the Bahamas, Haiti and Jamaica), FDI is thought to generate around five jobs per US$ 1 million invested.
While only limited amounts of FDI were captured in the period between 2003 and 2013, these were channelled into tourism-related activities (hospitality and transport services).
Call-centre services, which create a significant amount of employment in Jamaica, also received notable investment.
In the second set of Caribbean countries (Aruba, the Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago), the situation is almost the complete opposite to that of the first group: although the announced investment is higher, it is estimated that fewer than two jobs are created per US$ 1 million invested.
The sectoral profile of the announced investment is strongly focused on mining, some natural-resource-intensive industrial activities, and the financial sector.
The comparison between Central American and South American countries also reveals clear contrasts associated with the sectors in which investments are made, and the strategies that lead to the inclusion of FDI in local production systems.
The Central American countries and Mexico are seeing FDI patterns with high job content, of about five jobs per US$ 1 million invested.
Meanwhile, foreign direct investment in South America has modest effects on job creation, with an average two jobs created per US$ 1 million invested.
As mentioned previously, the sectoral profiles of foreign direct investment differ by sector and by country (and by region).
It is noted that the countries making up each region present a degree of similarity in terms of the sectoral profile of FDI announcements, and larger differences when compared with the countries of other regions.
These patterns of new investment are explained by territorial factors (location, availability of resources) and the pre-existing characteristics of local production systems.
To set this out more clearly, the differences between sectoral profiles were examined at subregional level, with telling results.
In the Caribbean and South America, it was observed that about 60% of aggregate FDI flowed into extractive activities and natural-resource-intensive manufacturing, while in Central America and Mexico these activities accounted for less than 30% of announced investment.
Engineering-intensive and natural-resource-intensive manufacturing (including the automotive and food industries respectively) accounted for 54% of capital investment announced in Central America and Mexico during the period.
The branches of activity receiving the most capital investment are not necessarily the most important in terms of employment.
The sectoral distribution of job creation is configured differently to that of investment, as can be seen by comparing the three activities with the highest job content with the three sectors that received the most capital investment.
While sectoral specialization is a major factor in explaining the job content of greenfield investment projects, there are specific factors that may account for differences between projects in similar categories but implemented in different countries.
Use of the labour factor varies substantially in intensity, not just between different economic activities, but also between different projects within the same activity.
A range of factors may lie at the root of these variations: the type of technology used, the type of transnational enterprise making the investment (the complexity of the processes carried out, the role performed in the global chain), the institutions operating in each country (especially labour-market regulators and educational institutions) and macrolocal contexts (relative prices), among others.
The impact on the job content of investment projects, as a result of both sectoral specialization and the specific characteristics of projects in a certain country, may be quantified more adequately.
To achieve this, the gap that is produced between the number of jobs created per US$ 1 million invested in that country, and the regional average, is detected by applying a “differential structural” decomposition (see box III.1).
The first, “structural effect” accounts for the differences in the sectoral composition of investment amounts in each country; the second, “differential effect” relates to the differences within sectors, and the third term may be regarded as a covariance.
The structural effect indicates the extent to which the sectoral specialization of investments in a certain country is able to explain the job content gap compared with the regional average.
In other words, if investments in a given country specialized more in capitalintensive activities than was the regional average, the structural effect would be negative.
Conversely, if these investments were more specialized in labour-intensive activities than the regional average, the sectoral structure would have a positive impact on the job content of investments.
For example, in the Plurinational State of Bolivia, it was found that investment projects created 1.8 jobs fewer (per US$ 1 million invested) than they did on average in the region, a difference that is largely due to a greater investment focus on mining activities.
The structural effect (-1.6) accounts for almost the entirety of the gap.
The differential effect indicates the extent to which investment projects in each activity create more or less employment in a given country, in comparison with the regional average.
The same activity or sector could be more labour-intensive in one country than in another, depending on specific factors such as the institutional context (labour relations, the educational system), geography, the type of investor company and the type of production technologies that are channelled into that particular economy.
Continuing with the example of the Plurinational State of Bolivia, country-specific factors contribute to a wider gap, in respect of the regional average, in the intensity of job creation as a result of FDI (-0.2).
However, they do so only marginally given that practically the entire gap is explained by the structural effect (-1.6).
The differential effect manifests itself in the fact that an investment project in a specific sector in the Plurinational State of Bolivia creates fewer jobs than the regional average for the same sector.
It is not possible to know from this analysis what these local factors are, but in theory they may relate to the type of technology used, for example.
The results show that the greater job content of investment announcements for Central America and Mexico is largely due to the sectoral specialization of projects (structural effect).
The differential effect is also positive, meaning that investment projects in similar sectors have a higher job content in Central America than in the rest of the region.
In other words, there are factors other than investment sectors at work, favouring investment-led job creation in the subregion.
In Caribbean countries where investments are channelled into tourism and other services, the job creation gap is positive, largely owing to the types of sector that attract FDI.
Yet the differential effect is largely negative, indicating that investments in the same sector would deliver more job creation in other countries of the region.
Conversely, in the group of Caribbean countries where FDI was directed at financial services and mining, the job content of announced investment presented negative gaps in respect of the regional average.
In these countries, both the sectoral profile of investment and local differences accounted for the fact that FDI made only a modest contribution to local employment growth.
With the exceptions of Argentina and Colombia, South American countries tended to report negative gaps in the job content of FDI.
In general terms, the structural effect was not conducive to job creation, meaning that these economies attracted investment that was less labour-intensive than the regional average, in sectors such as extractive activities or technology-intensive manufacturing, which create fewer jobs than labour-intensive or natural-resourcesintensive manufacturing.
One possible explanation for these specific job-creating effects might be found in the labour institutions (labour relations institutions and wage policies, among others) and educational establishments (type of training given to workers) that operate in the subregion.
Closing reflections Strong investment flows into Latin American and Caribbean countries exert enormous influence over these economies, while also raising a number of concerns over the characteristics that are imprinted on domestic labour markets.
Based on the available information, this chapter examined some of the employment impacts of investment by transnational corporations, in terms of the number and the quality of the jobs created.
The goal is to contribute inputs to the debate on the extent to which these social actors can help raise living standards in Latin America and the Caribbean, close productivity gaps and improve the income distribution.
One initial finding of the study is that transnational corporations are a secondary source of job creation.
During the 1990s, it seems that the most significant FDI processes were privatizations, mergers and acquisitions.
This was especially the case in South America, particularly Argentina, where these transactions represented an extremely high proportion of FDI, and in Mexico, where they accounted for a more modest share.
During this period, most investment would not have created production capacities to spur employment growth, but would have been associated with the restructuring of companies, leading to rationalization processes and layoffs.
Nevertheless, this initial stage, dominated by changes in ownership, also witnessed sustained growth in the proportion of physical investments in different sectors and regions.
The fact that greenfield investments accounted for a larger proportion of FDI (60%) in the period between 2003 and 2013 translated into a larger contribution to direct job creation.
Yet these investments are only estimated to have led to about 5% of net job creation in the region during that period (in an optimistic calculation).
The job content of these greenfield investments varies extensively according to the sectors and subregions in which they are implemented, and also depends on the nature of the investment portfolios that are attracted.
One reason for the low impact of FDI on job creation is the high proportion of investment that is channelled into primary activities and the initial stages of industrial processing, sectors that are more capital intensive.
For every US$ 1 million invested in extractive activities, only one job is created, while the same investment in natural-resource-intensive manufacturing generates two jobs.
Extractive industries thus have a limited impact on direct job creation, and even though the wages paid to these workers tend to be high, the labour market cannot fulfil its role in primary income distribution.
Investment resulting from fragmentation and offshoring strategies in the manufacturing and services sectors involves separating production processes into labour-intensive stages and skills-intensive stages.
While a large proportion of new jobs are created in labour-intensive sectors, it is becoming increasingly apparent that manufacturing and labour-intensive services projects (textiles, clothing and call centres, for example) are seeing their share of job creation decline at the expense of higher growth in more complex activities.
In Argentina, Chile and Ecuador, it was possible to develop a second approach to the measurement of transnational corporations’ impact on employment in Latin America and the Caribbean, which was more structural since it reflected foreign investment accumulation processes over the long term.
In these countries, transnational corporations accounted for between 12% and 17% of formal private employment, with a higher share of up to 50% in the extractive industries.
Transnationals also had a substantially greater impact on employment when considering the countries’ largest firms, a group in which the transnational corporations tend to be overrepresented.
While no estimates of the indirect job creation attributable to transnational corporations have been produced at this juncture, previous research indicates that there are few linkages between these firms and local suppliers and customers, meaning that indirect impacts on local employment are expected to be limited (Chudnovsky and López, 2007).
The study demonstrated that transnational corporations tended to offer better paid jobs in the Latin American and Caribbean countries that were studied.
However, no evidence was found to confirm impacts on other aspects of employment quality, such as greater job stability or a greater participation of women in the workforce.
The findings of different research studies on labour-relations models in Argentina and Mexico, while highlighting the existence of a wide variety of behaviours, tend to offer greater support for the theory that transnational corporations adapt to local contexts.
The effects of the interactions between transnational corporations and labour institutions in host countries are fiercely debated.
The convergence theory suggests that transnational corporations transfer the prevailing labour practices in their countries of origin to the host countries, so that it is the institutional frameworks in the host countries that must adapt.
In Argentina, the evidence indicates that the country’s labour institutions generally have an important presence, however this is less prevalent among firms of United States origin, which is confirmed by lower union membership among their workers.
The study of labour relations, not just in the region’s large countries but also in smaller ones, is especially important given that foreign direct investment is a highly concentrated economic phenomenon.
Indeed, for the period between 2003 and 2013, just 250 economic groups (5% of total foreign investors) accounted for 68% of announced investment amounts and 55% of the direct jobs that were created.
In other words, the “representative agent”12 approach is particularly inadequate for considering this phenomenon.
This approach is based on the concept of the “representative agent”, whose behaviour reflects the dynamics that determine economic growth.
According to this view, the diversity of agents and the ways in which they are linked —i.e. structures and institutions— are important only insofar as they influence the behaviour of the “representative agent”.
Carrillo, J. (2010), “Modelos productivos, el modelo de maquila y multinacionales”, Trabajo y modelos productivos en América Latina.
Carrillo, J. and others (2011), “Las filiales de la Argentina y México en la cadena global de valor”, Multinacionales en la Argentina.
Stiglitz (2009), “The political economy of capabilities accumulation: the past and future of policies for industrial development”, Industrial Policy Development.
Cimoli, M. and others (2009) “Institutions and policies shaping industrial development: an introductory note”, Industrial Policy Development.
Power (2004), “Working through knowledge pools: labour market dynamics, the transference of knowledge and ideas, and industrial clusters”, Urban Studies, vol. 41, No. 5/6, London, Taylor and Francis.
Novick, M. and others (2011), “Nuevas actividades económicas surgidas a partir del paradigma TIC: el sector del software y los servicios de call center”, El desafío de las TIC en Argentina.
Yoguel (2011), “La evolución del empleo en las empresas multinacionales en la Argentina.
Medwid (2011), “Empresas multinacionales y doble institucionalidad: los impactos del origen de capital en las filiales argentinas”, Multinacionales en la Argentina: estrategias de empleo, relaciones laborales y cadenas globales de valor, M.
Stiglitz (1984), “Equilibrium unemployment as a worker discipline device”, American Economic Review, vol. 74, No. 3.
Vargas Hernández, J. (2011), “Impacto de las maquiladoras centroamericanas en el crecimiento económico y el empleo”, Suma de Negocios, vol. 2, No. 2, Bogota.
Based on the information available, four dimensions were analysed: employment, sales per worker as a proxy variable for productivity, total sales, and wages.
The estimates given below are the result of an exploratory analysis designed to obtain some simple conclusions that will be researched more exhaustively in the future.
The type of company ownership may affect these four dimensions, since foreign holdings may improve the functioning of firms, increasing their profitability, their sales and possibly their productivity or their job creation.
In particular, it may be expected that productivity gains are associated with higher wages.
The data used are from “Enterprise Surveys” of the World Bank, which were uniformly applied in several countries of the region in 2006 and 2010.
The World Bank uses a standard sampling method with partial overlap, making it possible to build panels using the subset of enterprises interviewed on both occasions (approximately one third of the observations for each year and country).
The panel that was employed consisted of 2,402 observations, although comprehensive information was not available in all cases.
The study focused on a limited number of variables that were particularly relevant and which were available in the aforementioned survey.
The dependent variables used were total employment (the number of employed persons, both permanent and temporary), sales and wages.
One particularly useful aspect of the survey is that it also gathered retrospective information on sales and employment (three years).
As regards variables expressed in monetary units, local currencies were not converted into a standard unit (such as the United States dollar), but the original values were expressed in logarithms and in all cases lagged values of these country-specific effect variables were used as controls.
This means that results can be detected that have impacts on the variation rates of dependent variables.
This study did not use particularly advanced econometric analyses; instead ordinary least squares (OLS) models were estimated in which the following elements were included: (i) Country fixed effects.
Country dummy variables were included to filter the effects of prices and productivity differences between countries.
This means that the other variables are assumed to have the same relative impact on the results, even when the levels are not the same. (ii) Industry fixed effects.
Exogenous changes affecting certain sectors, in their entirety, are thus controlled for without distinction as to country (for example, changes in oil prices, to which certain industries are more sensitive than others). (iii) Lagged dependent variables.
These were included because it is difficult to identify all the necessary variables (which in some cases may not be available or observable).
For example, with regard to foreign ownership, it might be assumed that the proportion of foreign ownership is associated with the size of the enterprise.
Thus, controlling for the lagged employment (size) of the enterprise and foreign ownership, it is possible to observe the impact of ownership type on current employment and job creation. (iv) Different dependent variables.
Where available, both absolute values (for example, employment) and growth rates are taken into consideration.
The results presented below have been estimated with robust standard errors and using the individual sampling weights.
Employment From an analytical perspective, it may be expected that foreign company ownership boosts employment.
When foreign firms are more competitive than local ones, this may be manifested in the form of faster growth in output and employment.
Yet higher levels of output may also be achieved by improving the efficiency of existing workers.
The link between company ownership and variation in employment was studied with a view to supporting one of the above statements.
The dependent variable is total employment (permanent and temporary) in 2010 and, as stated previously, both country and industry effects are controlled for.
The results show that the total number of jobs, in a company in 2010, was largely determined by the same company’s employment in 2006, as well as by its sales in the domestic market in 2006.
There is no sound explanation for this finding, even though the effect is substantive.
The second column includes a categorical variable on capital problems, which does not seem to have any impact.
The third column includes controls for the average wage in 2006 (even where including this variable entails the loss of many observations).
In the final column, all of these variables are included simultaneously, with no observable reduction in the effect on domestic sales.
The variable of interest in this analysis, the percentage of foreign company ownership, is not significant in any of the estimates produced.
Although the coefficient of the variable is positive in all estimates, in no case does it reach acceptable levels of significance.
It is therefore possible to state that in this exploratory study, no evidence was found to link higher levels of foreign ownership with larger workforces.
The second dependent variable to be studied is the increase in the number of permanent jobs.
Diagram Diagram III.1 Map Map II.1 Latin America and the Caribbean: strategic hubs and direction of international expansion Summary and conclusions As in previous years, this report provides a quantitative overview of foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows and examines these capital flows by destination economic sector and geographical area of origin.
It describes the pattern of FDI originating in the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, focusing on the international expansion under way at some of the region’s major companies, the so-called trans-Latins.
The main theme of the report is the operations of European companies in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Because the European Union economic bloc is the leading origin of inward FDI in the region, the main characteristics of European FDI are reviewed, identifying the leading investor countries and their preferred destination economies and sectors in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The report examines the behaviour and strategy of the major European transnationals and, in search of a more thorough understanding, takes a detailed look at two sectors where foreign capital, especially from Europe, plays a substantial role: commercial banking and power.
Overview of foreign direct investment in In 2011, US$ 153.991 billion in foreign direct investment (FDI) flowed into Latin America and the Caribbean —28% more than in 2010.
It was the second year of growth after the decline triggered by the 2009 financial crisis.
Latin America was the region that recorded the highest percentage increase in FDI inflows, which brought its share of global inward FDI to 10%.
In contrast to 2010, global FDI flows jumped 17% and also rose in the developed countries, which had posted the sharpest drops in the two previous years.
The region’s sustained economic growth (albeit slower than in 2010) continued to attract investments seeking to tap into dynamic domestic markets.
High international prices for raw materials spurred investments in natural resource extraction and processing.
And the economic crisis in the developed economies continued to prompt business restructurings, relocation of operations and offshoring of manufacturing operations and remote business services.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, all of the subregions and most of the countries received more investment than in 2010 (see figure 1).
Brazil accounted for most of the increase, reaching US$ 66.66 billion —nearly half the region’s total.
Generally speaking, most of the countries of South America saw rising FDI inflows, with record highs posted in countries such as Chile (US$ 17.299 billion), Colombia (US$ 13.234 billion) and Uruguay (US$ 2.528 billion).
Central America overall recorded a 36% increase; all of the economies of this subregion saw gains.
Inward FDI to the Caribbean rose after falling for two years in a row, thanks above all to an increase in investment projects in the natural resources sector.
Inward FDI increased in the Dominican Republic (US$ 2.371 billion) and Suriname (US$ 154 million).
Overall, the real estate and tourism sectors continued to show the effects of the international financial crisis.
In the Bahamas, though, with financial support from Chinese investors, construction has begun on the largest hotel complex in the Caribbean.
Over the past two decades of rising FDI flows, transnational companies have consolidated a robust presence in Latin America and the Caribbean, especially in the more capital-intensive sectors.
As a result, the high profits garnered by foreign companies in the region are a key variable for examining the impact of inward FDI and FDI income on the balance of payments of the economies of the region.
Reinvested earnings as a percentage of total FDI have been growing steadily since 2002 and hit 46% in 2011.
And there has been a leap in the repatriation of profits to parent companies, from an average of some US$ 20 billion between 1998 and 2003 to a high of US$ 93 billion in 2008 (see figure 2).
There are two main reasons behind the rising share of reinvested earnings and the increase in repatriation of FDI profits from 2003 on.
First is the sharp rise in the region’s FDI stock as a natural outcome of the nominal increase in earnings on these investments.
Second, the increase in reinvested and repatriated earnings between 2004 and 2007 was situational, boosted by favourable economic conditions in many of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, rising raw materials prices, new business opportunities and the growing purchasing power of the middle class.
All of these factors fed the profitability of many transnationals operating in the region.
Situational factors aside, the level of cumulative FDI in the region continues to fuel the outward flow of income associated with these capital flows, showing that FDI is not a one-way flow of resources.
This makes it even more pressing to assess qualitative aspects of FDI, such as its ability to spur the development of strategic sectors, transform the production structure, accumulate knowledge and contribute to job creation and job quality.
The ability of FDI to transform the production structure of the economies of the region largely depends on the pattern of investment destination sectors.
For most of the economies of South America, which are heavily reliant on natural resources, the bulk of FDI still flows into the natural resources sector.
In 2011, Brazil was an exception in that investment in natural resources dropped because there were no major acquisitions in the hydrocarbon sector as there had been in 2010.
By contrast, in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean only 8% of total FDI went to natural-resource-related activities; services (53%) and manufactures (40%) still accounted for the bulk of inflows.
For the region overall, FDI to the manufacturing sector went mostly to medium-high-tech industries, whose share of greenfield FDI projects grew while the percentage going to high-tech projects fell to just 3%.
As for the origin of FDI, the Netherlands was the leading investor in the region, basically because it is a conduit for investments from third countries.
Despite the sharp rise in investment from Asia over the past two years, most inward FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean is from European Union countries.
This decline came in a context of high volatility for these capital outflows in recent years because the number of countries and companies involved is small.
Nevertheless, there is indeed a long-term expansionary trend in FDI by trans-Latin companies.
Moreover, as was the case in 2009, the drop may be attributed to the pattern followed by Brazilian companies.
In 2011 Brazil recorded a negative FDI position of US$ 9.297 billion, essentially because of loans that foreign subsidiaries of Brazilian firms made to their parent companies (see figure 3).
Nevertheless, this does not mean that Brazilian companies have abandoned their strategy for expanding internationally —rather, it shows that securing funding abroad was an advantageous option in recent years and that in 2011 they preferred to invest in their own market.
Chile was the country of the region accounting for the most outward FDI in 2011, at US$ 11.822 billion, followed by Mexico (US$ 9.640 billion) and Colombia (US$ 8.289 billion) (see figure 3).
Overall, the trans-Latins continued to focus on expanding in their home region and in neighbouring countries: Mexican companies tended to invest in the United States and Latin America and the Caribbean; Chilean companies focused on Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Peru; and Colombian companies have established a solid presence in Central America.
Beyond this overall trend, in 2011 trans-Latin companies stepped up their acquisitions of assets held by European and United States companies.
This is still an incipient development, but for many of these groups it could mark the beginning of a global expansion.
Despite the situational decline in 2011, the long-term uptrend in outward FDI from Latin America and the Caribbean held, in a global context where the emerging economies are increasingly relevant players.
It is in this setting that the governments of the larger economies of the region, home to some of the major trans-Latins, have begun to weigh targeted policies for supporting the international expansion of their leading companies.
Projections of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2012 are based on two conflicting situations.
On the one hand, it is clear that the region will continue to attract transnationals thanks to strong growth prospects amid considerable international uncertainty.
On the other hand, the crisis in Europe could deepen, pushing up finance costs and limiting the availability of credit, with adverse effects on investment in the region, especially by European transnationals.
In any case, if commodity prices remain high and the region continues to show macroeconomic stability, investment in the primary sector and in domestic market products and services will likely grow.
In view of long-term trends in flows and the preliminary information available, ECLAC estimates that FDI inflows to Latin America and the Caribbean will vary by between -2% and 8% compared with 2011 flows.
FDI flows will therefore remain high in the region in 2012, at around US$ 150 billion.
At nearly 40% of total FDI inn the region, this makes the European Union the leading origin of inward FDI to Latin America and the Caribbean (see figure 4).
European transnational companies have a diversified presence in the economies of Latin America, spanning extractive, manufacturing and service sectors; they are major players in strategic industries such as banking and energy.
While the European Union still ranks as the largest investor, over the past 10 years Latin America and the Caribbean has seen a decline in its share of overall investment flowing from the European Union.
For example, Spain, the largest European investor in the region, is shifting its investment focus to other countries inside the European Union bloc and to other developing regions.
In absolute terms, European FDI towards Latin America and the Caribbean surged during the second half of the 2000s but the increase was not evenly distributed among the subregions.
In this subregion, rising commodity prices and growing domestic economies attracted new investment seeking to exploit natural resources and tap into brisk local markets, especially for manufactures.
This subregion was impacted by the economic slowdown in the United States and its substantial effect on investment overall, including from Europe.
The destination sectors of European FDI have been determined by the production structure of the countries sending and receiving these capital flows.
Spanish and Italian transnationals have concentrated on service sectors and have a broad footprint in the region; companies based in Germany, Great Britain and the Netherlands have focused on manufacturing in the larger economies (Brazil, Mexico and Argentina).
In the receiving economies, European investment in the countries of South America has flowed above all into the service sectors and into natural resource exploration, exploitation and processing.
In Brazil, the largest share of European investment is in manufacturing industries.
In Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, European companies have a larger footprint in services and manufactures and a markedly smaller one in natural resources.
Recent years have seen a surge in investment by European transnationals in search of natural resources; this is especially the case in mining, where British companies account for the largest share.
New investment has flowed into the hydrocarbon sector; here, the most active companies are based in the United Kingdom and Spain and often operate in cooperation with the region’s major State-owned oil companies.
The positive impacts of such investments include increased exports, job creation in non-urban areas and higher tax revenues.
The main issues are that many involve enclave operations or a very limited amount of local processing.
European manufacturing firms have been very active in Latin America, especially German, French and Italian ones in the automotive industry; German companies in electronics; companies based in Great Britain, Italy and the Netherlands in food and beverages; and German and French companies in the chemical industry.
These firms have benefited from the good economic performance and lower volatility of many of the countries of the region and from the growing purchasing power of broad sectors of the population.
However, the international financial crisis has slowed or halted some of the investments that had been announced, owing above all to the funding difficulties that some transnationals are facing.
The positive impacts of such investments include increased production capacity and exports, job creation, enhanced production linkages and, in certain cases, technology transfer and capacity building.
In the services sector, European companies have consolidated their presence after streaming into Latin America in the mid-1990s drawn above all by Stateowned asset privatization programmes.
With a longterm vision, many European companies in areas like telecommunications and power have entered a phase of greater stability in which the priorities are to leverage economies of scale and increase market share, with profit margins that enable them to maintain and enhance their global position.
In the telecommunications and energy sectors, Spanish and Italian companies are major players, as are Spanish and British ones in banking and French and Portuguese retail chains.
Operations in Latin America have become essential for these companies’ worldwide business —especially for Spanish companies.
With the current situation in Europe, operations in Latin America considerably help parent companies balance their consolidated balance sheets and weather adverse circumstances.
Moreover, the region’s sound economic performance in recent years and the growth potential of its markets, along with its serious and persistent infrastructure gaps, have encouraged new companies to set up operations.
This has happened in sectors where European companies were already present and in other sectors not as extensively explored.
As a result, the European presence has grown more diverse in recent years and the number of companies with operations in the region has increased.
European investment in Latin America significantly impacts recipient country production structure in several ways.
First, European transnationals account for a large share of greenfield investment in the manufacturing sector, which is the main driver of increased production capacity.
Second, of all the foreign companies present in the region the ones based in Europe have been the most active in R&D, especially in Brazil and Argentina.
Brazil is the only country that has positioned itself as a prime location for European transnationals seeking to internationalize their R&D activities.
European corporate R&D centres in Brazil have an increasingly high profile in these companies’ global innovation networks and are yielding substantial positive local impacts in terms of technology transfer, production capacity building and innovation.
Obviously, market size is a key determinant, but industrial structure (the most diversified in the region) and robust production and industrial development policies have also been significant factors.
On the flip side, trans-Latin companies have stepped up investment in the European Union in recent years.
At present, this involves a handful of companies whose operations mirror the production structure of Latin America and the Caribbean, in sectors where the leading companies (mostly from Brazil and Mexico) have carved out global competitive advantages.
Investment by transLatins in the European Union has centred on the basic industries (oil and petrochemicals, mining, cement and steel) and on consumer goods such as food.
The economic situation in Europe can bring new business opportunities associated with potential acquisitions.
Expectations are that over the short run the flows of European FDI to Latin America will be shaped by at least two opposing factors.
On the one hand, the European crisis is opening new opportunities for transnational firms.
High profitability and business opportunities in Latin American markets point to an increasing presence.
And the difficult situation in Europe could force some companies to relocate operations to lower-cost destinations, among them some countries of the region.
On the other hand, the situation in Europe could slow or even reverse the flow of FDI if the crisis deepens and financing becomes more difficult to secure and more costly.
In any event, a wave of disinvestments seems very unlikely, although some projects could be put on hold or postponed.
In an increasingly globalized world, the European Union has economic, social and cultural characteristics that are especially useful for the development of Latin America and the Caribbean.
And the region itself can become a source of stimulus for the European economies (particularly as they face the financial crisis) and for their major transnational companies.
Both regions therefore need to enhance their investment cooperation programmes in terms of production policy, technological cooperation and innovation so as to better leverage the array of complementarities between them.
Latin America should supplement its policies for promoting FDI with greater efforts in the industrial policy area to boost the permanent and dynamic benefits of these capital flows.
They need to move from policies targeting FDI to policies that focus on what transnational companies do in areas such as human resource development, technology transfer and innovation and R&D.
Latin America and the Caribbean could thus draw greater benefit from the stock of knowledge, quality investments and broad potential of European companies in the region.
The international financial crisis, the banking sector and foreign direct investment in Latin America and the Caribbean Over the past few decades, financial systems (a linchpin of economic development) have undergone profound transformations spurred by deregulation and technological progress, generating new credit and saving opportunities for individuals, households and businesses.
In the advanced economies, the proliferation of financial innovations helped broaden business options (some of them speculative in nature) that relied on high levels of leverage and thus made it possible to diversify and transfer risk.
The burgeoning industry went through an accelerated process of concentration and grew ever more integrated at the local, regional and global level.
Ambitious reforms launched in the 1980s sought to open the capital account and liberalize local capital markets and the banking system.
Among the more significant measures were easing interest rate controls, privatizing State-owned and development banks, lifting restrictions on the entry of foreign banks and allowing banks to engage in multiple activities.
The goal was to encourage domestic saving, complemented by foreign saving, and foster the efficient allocation of resources.
But macroeconomic instability and external vulnerability laid bare the fragility of Latin America’s financial systems.
In response to serious and recurring bank crises, new legal and institutional reforms geared towards prudence were rolled out and helped strengthen the financial system.
On a global scale, financial institutions and transactions grew so large and complex that they overwhelmed weak regulatory and oversight regimes and the evaluation capacity of private risk rating agencies.
So, when the conditions changed they set off a colossal financial crisis as national, regional and multilateral authorities launched substantial efforts to mitigate its impacts and contain the contagion.
Nevertheless, the financial crisis that began with subprime mortgages and the collapse of Lehman Brothers and was made worse by the European sovereign debt crisis has still showed no clear signs of remission, keeping many industry actors in a precarious situation.
While the international financial crisis hit Latin America and the Caribbean hard, with some differences, it was unlike previous meltdowns in that the local economies recovered quickly and banking systems remained stable and sound.
Indeed, banks are now better regulated and capitalized, and they are more efficient.
This could lay the groundwork for more orderly, sustained development in the future.
Despite brisk growth, though, the financial systems of Latin America still lag somewhat behind, especially when compared with the advanced economies.
With few exceptions, the degree of bank access and use is lower than in other counties with similar per capita income levels, and it is skewed towards short-term credit —even more so following widespread adoption of updated consumer loan administration practices (see figure 5).
Throughout this process the international dimension of the banking business has become increasingly important.
As markets matured and became more competitive, some major banks in the advanced economies set out in search of new opportunities outside their home countries.
They were spurred by burgeoning trade and transnational corporate operations, the growing need for financing to cover global payment imbalances and the advance of emerging economies.
Cross-border loans managed from the parent company began to increase, and subsidiaries were established or local institutions purchased to offer banking services in foreign markets.
Over the past few decades, many developing countries saw a growing influx of foreign banks.
More recently, many financial sectors in developed countries, especially in Europe, have been the setting for cross-border mergers and acquisitions.
In the mid-1990s, the presence of foreign banks in emerging economies began to swell.
Latin America became a prime destination, on the strength of economic reforms, the privatization of State-owned assets and the weakness of the local banking sector.
Foreign banks now have a market share of nearly 20% in developing Asia, 35% in Latin America and 90% in Eastern Europe.
This process was limited to a few financial institutions from Europe and the United States and Canada, some with a long-standing global vocation (Citigroup and HSBC) and others that in just a few years have gained a strong foothold in selected countries or regions (Santander and BBVA).
The Spanish banks are at the forefront in Latin America; Italian and Austrian ones were the major players in Eastern Europe (see figure 6).
Over the past two decades, the growing presence of foreign banks has become one of the key factors shaping Latin America’s banking industry.
Local authorities expected that the influx of international institutions would recapitalize local banks, encourage modernization, make the industry more competitive and limit the potential for further financial crises.
For the handful of international institutions operating in the region, this has become a central part of their global business, especially in the case of the Spanish banks.
Overall, the entry of foreign banks in Latin America and the Caribbean galvanized the regional financial market.
Foreign banks stiffened domestic competition, forcing the sector’s margins and costs down.
They helped modernize the Latin American banking system by improving internal processes, perfecting risk rating systems and broadening the supply of services.
They furthered social inclusion and reached new, growing segments of society that before then were mainly served by national banks.
But foreign banks are still markedly biased towards higher-income segments of the population, which are usually less risky.
With the relative maturity of the market, the efficiency and productivity indicators of domestic and foreign banks have started to converge.
The regional and global turmoil of the early 2000s and the international financial crises after 2007 might have influenced the pull-back and greater caution on the part of foreign banks.
Domestic banks responded quickly, made substantial improvements in efficiency and productivity and took back much of the market share lost during the previous decade.
Recently, the global financial crisis has led to concern over the large share of the Latin American banking system that is in the hands of European banks.
Strong pressure associated with sovereign funding could trigger massive losses for these entities overall, and limits on recapitalization could force banks to deleverage in order to restore their capital ratios.
But while these institutions were not unaffected by the credit crunch and deteriorating interbank market liquidity, they have exhibited resilience and stability and are thus less likely to become a channel for the transmission of external shocks.
These outcomes may be attributed to the high degree of operating autonomy that Latin American subsidiaries have from their parent companies: much of their lending is denominated in local currency and is funded with local deposits.
Foreign banks depend very little on foreign-currency funding from their parent companies or international interbank markets to fund their lending operations.
In short, foreign banks were drawn to Latin America by two principal factors.
First, developed-country banks were searching for new options in the face of shrinking income in mature and very competitive domestic markets.
Second, Latin America’s revamped institutional framework and improved macroeconomic context after the series of profound economic and financial crises of prior decades enabled them to enter markets with low levels of bank access and use and high growth potential.
Foreign direct investment in the power sector in The power sector is a strategic one for all countries because it impacts the economy directly, influences the competitiveness of the other sectors and can drag along construction companies and components manufacturers.
In all of the countries, the State exerts control over the sector through regulatory agencies and, often, through State-owned companies.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, FDI has streamed into the power sector over the past 20 years, giving the corporate strategies followed by transnational power companies a good deal of influence over power system development in many economies.
Foreign investment was especially sizable between 1996 and 2001, when most of the countries of the region conducted profound power sector reforms and privatized many State-owned power companies.
FDI in the power sector neared US$ 5 billion in 1999 and US$ 10 billion in 2000, accounting for 6% and 13%, respectively, of total received FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean.
In the 1990s, European companies were in a better position to seize the opportunities opening in the region, thanks to their size and financial capacity and the competitive pressure sparked by the creation of the European Single Market that drove them to turn their sights abroad.
This group of companies still comprises the leading private power companies in Latin America and the Caribbean; their footprint spans many countries and a range of industry segments.
Incoming European and United States companies focused on the acquisition of existing assets.
Although this involved heavy FDI inflows it did not necessarily increase total investment in the power sector.
In many cases, the reforms did not appropriately address the structure of the power industry, especially where the production chain was segmented into too small markets.
The result was a sector split between public and private companies; the vast majority of the latter were transnationals.
In many economies (especially the smaller ones in the Caribbean, where the power sector is of necessity small and there is not much scope for segmenting), State-owned companies completely dominate the industry.
From 2001 on, the end of privatizations and overlapping energy crises, macroeconomic instability and regulatory uncertainty in a number of countries drove power sector FDI down.
Many of the transnational companies mentioned above were hit hard and took heavy losses that forced them to restructure their assets in the region.
Although they eased off on investment they did not divest themselves of their assets in Latin America, with the notable exception of France’s EDF.
Since 2006 there has been renewed interest in investing in Latin America, sparked by sustained market growth and stable regulatory environments that have been changed slightly to favour private investment in the power sector.
In this setting, major transnational power companies have announced organic growth projects in the markets where they operate in the region, seeking a higher profile in emerging economies and a lower one in the markets of Europe, the United States and Japan where there is virtually no growth.
In recent years, European and United States transnationals established in the region since the 1990s have been joined by new actors, many based in countries of the region.
TransLatin power companies include Colombia’s ISA and EPM and Brazil’s Eletrobras, all of them State-owned and with a long history in their home countries but that have only recently ventured into international expansion and have kept it within the region.
This dynamic has boosted private-company investment in the electric power system (see figure 8).
In Brazil, private companies did not even account for one third of generation capacity in 2003 and now make up more than half.
In 2010 their share of power output was 63% in Central America and 45% in Mexico.
The bulk of private investment in the power sector in Latin America and the Caribbean is from transnational companies.
But this investment boom does not extend to all of the economies of the region, and in some segments and countries there is an investment shortfall that does not cover the demand fuelled by economic growth.
Companies specializing in renewable and nonconventional energies such as wind and solar power have ventured into the sector in recent years.
This is the fastest-growing segment, both worldwide and in the region; while its share of power generation is still marginal (in the area of 1%), in Brazil it now accounts for 10% of all greenfield power generation investment.
By late 2011, installed capacity in Brazil had grown to 1500 megawatts, with another 6700 megawatts in the development stage.
Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua and Uruguay are also making great strides in installed wind power capacity.
Latin America has drawn on available wind resources in these countries and improved techniques, especially in solar photovoltaic power, to build on earlier development of these energy technologies in Europe.
One factor has been FDI from European companies that built up their competencies in their domestic markets.
Second, declining investment in Europe freed production capacity and sent the price of components spiralling down.
And last, countries in the region managed to avoid the often unsustainable direct subsidies used in Europe to promote renewable and non-conventional energies by using indirect assistance such as tax exemptions or preferential treatment in distribution.
As a result, Uruguay, Brazil and Mexico have started construction of numerous wind projects which will offer electricity at prices comparable with other energy sources.
In the second half of 2011, solar photovoltaic power projects also started to take off, although to a much lesser extent than wind projects.
Although they have not used direct subsidies, the governments of the region have supported renewable and non-conventional energies in order to reduce the degree to which many economies depend on foreign sources of energy and to help cut CO2 emissions from fossil-fuel-driven power plants.
Latin America already produces more than 50% of its electric power from renewable sources (thanks to hydropower plants) and could increase this percentage by developing other renewable power sources.
Some governments provide incentives for renewable and non-conventional energies as a way to support the incipient industry that supplies components and support services for these energy sources.
Noteworthy in this regard is Brazil’s localcontent policy, which has attracted 12 of the world’s leading producers of components for the wind industry to set up production facilities in the country.
In addition to building more sustainable power systems, the challenge for the region is to ensure an appropriate level of investment that guarantees quality service at a reasonable cost that is not a drag on the competitiveness of the economies.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that the region needs to invest some US$ 404 billion in generation and US$ 313 billion in transmission and distribution by 2035 (not including Mexico).
The region should take advantage of its draw for international investors (which are no longer just European companies), and it should also allow the State-owned power companies that are present in all of the countries except Chile to contribute to the development of their power systems.
Final considerations FDI inflows into Latin America and the Caribbean reached a record high in 2011, following significant surges in the two preceding years.
Within this trend, investment flows match, and reinforce, the production structure of the countries of the region: projects in high technology sectors are few and far between and concentrated in just a handful of countries.
Repatriated earnings have soared in some countries to levels similar to inflows, a reminder that FDI is not unidirectional and that the focus must be on the quality of investment in order to promote structural change and knowledge transfer or boost local capacities.
With capital flows buoyant and profitability high for transnationals, there is scope for promoting productive development policies, increasing reinvestment of profits and assessing mechanisms for generating higher fiscal revenues in support of development of the region’s economies.
Introduction In 2011, US$ 153.991 billion in foreign direct investment (FDI) flowed into Latin America and the Caribbean.
At 28% more than in 2010, these capital flows grew more rapidly than those for any other region in the world, and the region’s share of total world FDI rose to 10%.
The bulk of the increase in inward FDI for the region went to Brazil, which received US$ 66.66 billion, but all subregions and almost all the leading economies benefited from stronger inflows.
Outward FDI (direct investments made abroad by companies based in the region) fell to US$ 22.605 billion and were impacted by the trend in Brazil, where the FDI outflow turned negative.
Despite global financial market uncertainty, the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean continued to attract a growing volume of FDI and other capital flows in 2011.
The deteriorating situation in the advanced countries (particularly in Europe) during the third quarter of the year had but a very limited impact on the region (ECLAC, 2011c): despite a slight slowdown compared with 2010, GDP in the region continued to grow at the rate of 4.3%.
Commodities, which make up a significant percentage of exports for many of the region’s economies, saw prices that remained high and did not fluctuate much during the year.
Thus, economic growth and high international prices for natural resources boosted transnational corporate operations in the region and, therefore, inward FDI, which even topped the levels recorded in 2008 before the worst moments of the international financial crisis.
The favourable economic environment boosted returns on FDI, enabling transnationals to finance a large proportion of their investments with subsidiaries’ earnings and led to a surge in the transfer of earnings to parent companies.
It is therefore quite likely that for the region as a whole FDI will not be a net capital contributor.
This should be borne in mind when looking at FDI as a potential source for knowledge and technology transfer and a way to build local capabilities (by fostering national innovation systems, creating production linkages, developing human capital and developing local businesses, among other factors), especially in strategic sectors.
Investments in technology-intensive industries and in research and development still account for a modest percentage of inward FDI in Latin America, and they are highly concentrated in the region’s two largest economies: Brazil and Mexico.
It is useful to look at the upward trend in inward FDI (measured in current dollars) to the region over the past two decades in the light of what these flows mean for the region’s economy as a whole (see figure I.1).
After the flood of inflows between 1996 and 2001, when FDI surpassed 4% of GDP, the percentage has stabilized in the area of 2.5% over the past few years.
The FDI figures do not include the flows received by the main financial centres of the Caribbean.
These figures differ from those contained in the editions of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean published in 2011, as the latter show the net balance of foreign investment, that is, direct investment in the reporting economy (FDI) minus outward FDI.
On a global scale, the emerging economies have been gaining importance in the production of goods, the provision of services, international trade and the exchange of capital flows.
Other emerging economies are increasing in importance as a source of inward FDI for the region, and trans-Latin companies are expanding internationally at a steady pace despite the drop in aggregate outward FDI last year.
The governments of the larger economies of the region, where some of the leading trans-Latin companies are based, have begun to weigh targeted policies for supporting the international expansion of these companies.
The uncertainty that has prevailed for nearly five years now has not eased, but the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have continued to show responsible macroeconomic management and resistance to external turbulence.
If sovereign debt problems and drastic fiscal adjustments do not lead to any further worsening of conditions in Europe, and if the robust pattern of growth in China does not diminish, the countries of the region should see no significant deterioration in their current position.
It is thus highly likely that FDI flows will remain The present chapter is divided into five sections.
The second reviews the strategies pursued by transnational companies by looking at FDI destinations, sources and mechanisms.
The third part outlines new FDI projects according to technology and R&D content.
Section D describes the key characteristics of the region’s countries as foreign investors and the expansion of transLatin companies.
It also takes up the incipient policies for supporting outward FDI that are being deployed in the region.
Overview of foreign direct investment worldwide In 2011 worldwide FDI climbed 17% over the previous year, going from US$ 1.29 trillion to US$ 1.51 trillion and marking the second consecutive year of increases in these capital flows after the declines in 2008 and 2009 triggered by the international financial crisis.
But despite this recovery, worldwide FDI is still far from the record high of US$ 1.96 trillion seen in 2007.
FDI growth worldwide has been uneven, with patterns varying from one destination region to another.
In 2011, FDI flows into the developed economies were up by 18.5% over 2010, going from US$ 0.64 trillion to US$ 0.75 trillion, outpacing the increase in the developing economies and driving their share of global FDI up slightly, from 49.3% to 49.9% (see table I.1).
Nevertheless, this increase was far from enough to offset the plunge that the advanced economies have seen in their share of FDI over the past decade.
Within this group, South-East Europe and the countries of the former Soviet Union posted the largest gains (30.6%), followed by Latin America and the Caribbean (up 27.8%) and Asia and the Pacific (10% increase).
The United States was the largest individual recipient; at US$ 210 billion, it was down by 7% compared with 2010.
The countries of the European Union reached US$ 414 billion —a 32% increase over the previous year but still less than half of the total inflow for 2007.
In 2011, surging cross-border mergers and acquisitions were once again the main factor behind higher global FDI flows.
The latter rose by US$ 219 billion; the former increased by US$ 168 billion (see figure I.3).
Most of this increase seems to have taken place in the developed countries, where the economic crisis and financial instability would have encouraged corporate restructuring aimed at rationalizing operations and cutting costs, as well as acquisitions seeking to take advantage of favourable currency and stock market movements.
However, the values of mergers and acquisitions provide background for interpreting their share in total FDI flows.
Another factor behind rising FDI flows was the marked increase in the reinvestment of earnings by subsidiaries of transnational companies.
In the developed countries, this component of FDI jumped relatively sharply in 2010 and 2011 after plunging in 2008, the first year of the crisis.
Financial market uncertainty grew after August 2011 as volatility and sovereign risk, while far from the levels seen in late 2008, soared in several European countries.
FDI flows were not affected by this situation, but fewer mergers and acquisitions were announced in the second half of 2011 although the pace remained strong on the momentum of a natural backlog.
In other words, the surge in cross-border mergers and acquisitions in 2011 was due to operations agreed during the closing months of 2010 and first half of 2011, and it is to be expected that the uncertainty seen in the second half of 2011 will impact the transactions to be finalized in 2012.
In short, global FDI trends were up slightly, although announcements of new cross-border mergers and acquisitions saw a period of stagnation in the closing months of the year.
While flows to developed countries picked up, in relative terms, during 2011, the trend towards a larger share for the developing economies did not change.
Nevertheless, FDI and other capital flows towards the developed countries have been more volatile since the onset of the global economic crisis in 2008.
This increase in flows to Brazil, combined with the smaller increases posted by almost all of the economies of South America, drove inflows to that subregion up by 35% (see figure I.4).
Mexico and Central America received 4% more than in the previous year.
FDI to the Caribbean rose by 20% in 2011 after falling for two years in a row (see table I.2). basis of official figures and estimates at 16 April 2012.
After FDI plummeted 40% in 2009 owing to the global financial crisis, flows to the region have increased two years in a row.
The factors behind this uptrend (a relative return to confidence on the international scene and the good performance of the economies of the region) held stable during the period.
Despite uncertainties in the developed economies leading to an uptick in financial instability from August 2011 on, transnationals as a whole have resumed their global expansion plans.
This relative rally can be seen in a slight rise in cross-border mergers and acquisitions in the region during 2011.
Investment in the extraction Portfolio investment is the purchase of negotiable securities (public or private) such as stock and bonds, as well as money market instruments.
It does not include investments with a significant degree of involvement in the management of the investee (in practice, when the equity stake exceeds 10%), which are regarded as FDI.
FDI has been a major source of capital for the region over the past two decades and has never recorded a negative balance, but net portfolio investment fell to nearly zero between 2000 and 2004.
Furthermore, although portfolio investment has increased sharply in Mexico and South America, FDI is the main component of the financial account in the smallest economies.
And the economic crisis in the developed economies could be prompting business restructurings, the relocation of operations to other countries and more offshoring of manufacturing operations and remote business services.
Continued economic growth in the emerging economies, including several in Latin America and the Caribbean, is seen as also favouring South-South investment by increasing the size and number of transnational companies in emerging countries.
As seen last year with the inrush of FDI from China (the third largest direct investor in the region), international expansion strategies followed by major corporations based in emerging economies pose new opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean.
In the region, responsible macroeconomic management and sustained economic growth, albeit at a slower pace than in 2010, have continued to encourage investment seeking to tap into dynamic domestic markets.
Against this backdrop of steady economic growth, with private consumption growing faster than GDP (ECLAC, 2011a), broad sectors of the population are gaining access to consumer goods and services provided, in many cases, by transnationals.
Confidence in the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean on the part of investors worldwide can be seen in all capital flows, not just FDI.
Macroeconomic stability and the demonstrated ability to weather the impacts of the global crisis of 2008-2009 have increased portfolio and other investment flows1 to the point that, between 2007 and 2011, they surpassed FDI (see figure I.5).
The rise in portfolio investment is attributable to the buoyancy and financial robustness of domestic markets and to low returns at the international level, which has spurred investment in emerging markets (ECLAC, 2011b).
A look at the FDI-to-GDP ratio shows that, in the region, these flows are far more important for the smaller economies.
Many other countries of the Caribbean and Central America also received FDI in excess of 5% of GDP.
Among the medium-sized and large economies, inward FDI in Chile accounted for as much as 7% of GDP, followed by Uruguay at 5%.
For the largest economies in the region, FDI accounted for a far smaller proportion: Mexico and Argentina received flows equivalent to less than 2% of GDP.
For Brazil, the ratio was only 3%, despite the sharp rise in FDI in 2011.
On average for the region, the FDI-to-GDP ratio in 2011 was 5.8%, slightly above the level for the previous year but still below the 8% posted in 2007.
Capital contributions made up 82.2% of total FDI; intra-company loans accounted for 17.8%.2 In 2011, the already-high share coming from European transnationals (in particular, from the Netherlands,3 Spain and France) rose again, to 64.4% of total FDI flows.
Asian transnationals, led by companies from Japan, consolidated their position as the second largest investors in the Brazilian economy, accounting for 13.6% of these capital inflows.
In the Americas, companies from the United States and Canada accounted for 10.4% of the investments; transLatins made up 5.1%.
The remaining 6.6% was from companies based in Africa and Oceania, as well as in Israel, the Russian Federation and other countries.
By sector, the manufacturing industry consolidated its position as the main recipient of FDI in Brazil, at 46% of the total.
The metallurgical sector stood out (US$ 7.802 billion), thanks to construction of a new integrated plant by Germany’s ThyssenKrupp at an estimated cost of US$ 6.75 billion (ECLAC, 2010), followed by the food Brazil’s official statistics on FDI do not include reinvested earnings, so 100% of FDI in Brazil refers to capital contributions and intra-company loans.
According to data from the Central Bank of Brazil, only 8% of inward FDI registered as being from the Netherlands is from companies based there.
The rest refers to investments by companies in third countries transferred through subsidiaries in the Netherlands that were set up specifically for this purpose (see box II.2). and beverage industries (more than US$ 5 billion each).
Other sectors receiving more than US$ 1 billion in FDI were the fuel, automobile, cement, chemical, electronics and plastics industries.
While the ThyssenKrupp plant is designed for exporting steel to Europe, the transnationals that invested in the other sectors were mainly seeking access to the growing domestic market in response to government policies that protect local content in many industries.
Inputs for the growing oil industry are subject to substantial local-content requirements;4 other examples are the electronics,5 automobile6 and power sectors (see chapter IV).
FDI flows to the service sector accounted for 44% of the total, owing above all to investments in commerce and telecommunications.
Investment in the primary sector, at 9%, was down from previous years. (b) Other South American economies In 2011, FDI flows to the other economies of South America rose 33%, to US$ 54.658 billion.
Paraguay was the only one to see a drop compared with the previous year.
Some economies that had already posted record highs in 2010, such as Chile, Colombia, Peru and Uruguay, received still higher flows in 2011.
FDI flows to Chile rose by 13% in 2011 to a new record high of US$ 17.299 billion, confirming the country’s draw for transnational companies.
It is one of the South American economies with the largest presence of foreign capital.
By sector, direct investments have focused on services (33% of total FDI) and the primary sector (61% of the total).7 In the former, financial services and the power sector account for the largest share, as does copper mining in the latter.
Several transnational companies, like Australia’s BHP Billiton and Freeport-McMoRan from the United States, embarked on greenfield and expansion projects in the metal mining industry.
In the mining sector, Japan’s Mitsubishi Group acquired a 25% stake in Anglo The consulting firm Wood Mackenzie estimates that 100 new oil platforms will be needed in Brazil over the next 10 years.
In 2001 only four Brazilian shipyards had the capacity to build them.
American Sur at a cost of more than US$ 5 billion;8 the Sumitomo group acquired a 45% interest in Minera Quadra Chile for nearly US$ 700 million.
These cases illustrate the role that a number of Japanese consortia are playing in financing mining operations in Chile, thus securing access to mining resources as an input for other operations.
These transactions were valued at more than US$ 700 million each (see table I.3).
This transaction is caught up in a major legal battle between Anglo American with the world’s largest copper producer: Chile’s State-owned National of dollars) (Millions Copper Corporation (CODELCO).
The dispute has to do with Country where CODELCO’s acquired Host country of Company or assetcall option over 49% of Anglo American Sur, one of Buyer company acquired transaction took place Anglo American’s subsidiaries in Chile.
The dispute has had wide media coverage; the outcome of the legal Anglo American Sur (25%) United Kingdom battle and its potential Mitsubishi repercussions are yet to be seen.
This transaction is not formally regarded as FDI because it is a transfer of assets between foreign companies.
This transaction is caught up in a major legal battle between Anglo American with the world’s largest copper producer: Chile’s State-owned National Copper Corporation (CODELCO).
The dispute has had wide media coverage; the outcome of the legal battle and its potential repercussions are yet to be seen.
Inward FDI to Colombia increased by 92% to a record US$ 13.234 billion.
As in recent years, the natural resources sector attracted most of the investments.
Investment in the mining sector fell between 2010 and 2011, to 20% of total FDI, but inflows to the oil sector were up sharply, to 40% of the total.
The largest acquisition in this sector, with Japan’s Itochu purchasing assets held by Drummond for US$ 1.524 billion, did not involve inbound FDI but rather a change of ownership between transnationals.
BHP Billiton and Xstrata announced a US$ 1.3 billion investment to expand their coal mines.
Other than natural resources, the sectors receiving the most FDI were commerce, transport and telecommunications, with DHL announcing a US$ 1.3 billion investment for a regional logistics centre in Bogota.
Other major transactions included the acquisition of Protabaco by British American Tobacco for US$ 452 million and the acquisition of the remote business service provider Computec by Ireland’s Experian, for US$ 408 million.
Spain, the United States, the United Kingdom and Chile are among the largest investors in Colombia, behind the Netherlands and Panama, which chiefly act as conduits for the flows.
In addition to confirming the upward trend over the past decade, this new high was well above the US$ 3.492 billion average for the period 2000-2010.
Reinvested earnings made up 65% of total FDI; net loans with parent companies accounted for 31%; capital contributions made up 4%.
While there are no official data disaggregated by sector, other sources indicate that mining is still the main destination for FDI.
The Government of Peru estimates that there is a pipeline of investment projects worth some US$ 9.115 billion for the expansion of existing operations and US$ 18.016 billion (99% of which is from foreign investors) in new initiatives with environmental impact studies already approved (Ministry of Energy and Mines, 2011).
FDI inflows into Argentina increased slightly in 2011, to stand at US$ 7.243 billion, of which new capital contributions accounted for 55%; reinvested earnings for 31%; and intra-company loans for the remaining 14%.
The largest corporate acquisition was the purchase of the Argentine subsidiary of the United States company Occidental Petroleum by China’s Sinopec, for some US$ 2.450 billion.
This acquisition, and the entry of the state-owned China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) the previous year, has made Chinese companies key actors in Argentina’s hydrocarbons sector.9 The most noteworthy development in this sector was the exit of the Spanish firm Repsol, following expropriation of most of its assets in April 2012.
They included the purchase of Interbaires (an operator of duty-free shops) by Switzerland’s Dufry for US$ 285 million and the acquisition of Allus Global BPO Center (a provider of remote business services) by Brazil’s Contax for US$ 206 million.
In 2011, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela attracted US$ 5.302 billion in FDI flows, more than three times the figure for the previous year.
Over the past 10 years, inward FDI to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had been low for the size of its economy.
In 2009 and 2006, it even posted negative flows owing to the nationalization of subsidiaries of transnational companies.10 In 2011, as in 2010, all FDI was in the form of reinvested earnings and intra-company loans because the balance of capital contributions remained in negative territory —disinvestments by transnational companies exceeded new contributions.
The oil sector received 65% of inward FDI; 20% went to financial operations.
FDI in Uruguay continued the uptrend seen in recent years and totalled US$ 2.528 billion in 2011 up 2% over the previous year.
The wood and pulp plant in which Chile’s Arauco (Copec group) invested an estimated US$ 2 billion will come on line in 2013.
FDI was concentrated in the primary sector, which, according to preliminary data, accounts for 40% of FDI (hydrocarbons, 35% and mining, 5%); industry received 39% while the services sector received 21% of the total.
This relative stagnation may be attributed to new oil sector regulations giving preferential treatment to State-owned Petroecuador, thus prompting the exit of several foreign oil companies in 2010.
Nevertheless, new investments in the sector in order to expand output are being announced.
Besides natural resources, Germany’s tyre company Continental announced This transaction is not included in net FDI because it involved the simultaneous entry and exit of foreign capital. 10 A 2011 coverage adjustment in oil sector activities prompted a substantial retrospective revision of FDI figures for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The data for 2010 went from a negative flow of US$ 1.404 billion to a positive US$ 1.209 billion. that it will invest US$ 104 million in a retreading plant.
Switzerland’s Holcim, a cement company, is to invest US$ 120 million in expanding its plant.
FDI flows into Paraguay totalled US$ 186 million, 31% less than in 2010.11 The vast majority of investment was concentrated in the service sector, chiefly finance and commerce. (c) Mexico and Central America Mexico was the region’s second largest recipient of FDI in 2011, at US$ 19.554 billion, which was 6% lower than the 2010 figure.
Reinvested earnings from subsidiaries accounted for 35% of total inflow; capital contributions made up 45%, and intra-company loans accounted for 20%.
The United States regained its position as the main investor in Mexico (52% of total flows) after losing that status in 2010 when the Netherlands headed the list.
Spain ranked second; its 16% share was concentrated above all in telecommunications, financial services and non-metal mineral products.
In third place was the Netherlands (7%), followed by Switzerland (6%), Japan (4%) and Canada (3%).
Another acquisition was the purchase of Convemex (a maker of plastic utensils) by the Colombian group Carvajal for US$ 180 million.
Among the firms announcing substantial greenfield investments (which will be executed over several years) are Japan’s Honda (US$ 800 million), Mazda (US$ 500 million) and Hitachi (US$ 310 million); Korea’s Hyundai (US$ 100 million); Nestlé (US$ 700 million); and a number of companies providing capital for wind-power generation projects (see chapter IV).
The services sector received 49% of inward FDI, with the financial sector accounting for 13% of the total.
Within this sector, Colombia’s Grupo SURA acquired the Latin American pension, insurance and investment The figures for Paraguay are estimates based on data available up to the third quarter. fund assets of the Netherlands firm ING in a transaction amounting to US$ 3.614 billion —the largest corporate acquisition of 2011.
This transaction exemplifies the expansion of Colombian companies abroad and the slide of some European groups, but it does not impact total FDI in Mexico because it is between two transnationals.
Natural resources attracted just 4.3% of inward FDI in Mexico; this small share is still slightly above the average for the past decade.
Despite this, foreign firms, Canadian ones in particular, conducted 20 minor acquisitions in the mining sector in 2011.
Panama and Costa Rica are still the main destinations for FDI; between them they receive 59% of total FDI to this subregion (see figure I.7).
Manufacturing, chiefly export-oriented sectors seeking efficiency gains receives 35% of inward FDI in the subregion (not including Guatemala or Panama), turning it into a major export platform, mainly towards the United States.
To this end, the subregion devised incentives for attracting FDI and promoting the creation of special export zones and free trade zones.
While the World Trade Organization (WTO) regards some of these incentives as export subsidies that should be dismantled or replaced, those countries that have approved reforms of their incentive regimes (Costa Rica and Panama) have kept the main tax exemptions but no longer link them to business export performance (Martínez Piva, 2011).
The special regime for establishing and operating headquarters for multinational companies (Law No. 41, which came into force in 2007) continued to attract investments, as did infrastructure projects such as expanding the Panama Canal and building a subway in Panama City.
These projects, executed by transnational companies like Spain’s Sacyr Vallehermoso and Brazil’s Odebrecht, do not directly involve FDI inflows but they do draw suppliers like Germany’s tunnel boring machine manufacturer Herrenknecht AG to set up operations.
Construction is still one of the most attractive sectors for foreign investors.
With these transactions, Colombian companies are enhancing their presence in Panama, which has been considerable for several years.
The percentage of FDI destined for extractive industries in the subregion is low, too; Nicaragua is the only country to post substantial growth in the past few years, to 12% of its total for 2011.
In recent years, the high price of metals has drawn the interest of investors in this sector and prompted a response from Governments and civil society.
And improvements in the region’s infrastructure, especially in access to power, have enhanced the viability of mining projects.
Mining company interest in initiatives in Central America has come up against renewed awareness of social and environmental rights on the part of affected communities and sparked heated debate in some countries.
In 2011 the Government of Panama approved allowing foreign States to participate in mining activities, either by providing financing or through partial or full ownership of companies.
This would open the door to investments by Stateowned mining companies (Chinese or Russian ones, for example) or by private companies (like some in Brazil) supported by funding from public banks.
This reform angered a number of groups, including indigenous communities —especially the Ngöbe-Buglé.
Protests have continued, focusing on adding a provision to the law that would set stricter environmental standards for mining and hydropower projects.
In March 2012 the government agreed to cancel mining concessions in Ngöbe-Buglé territory.
Legislation has changed in Costa Rica as well, but the objective in this case was to restrict mining operations in order to protect the environment.
In 2010, the Government of Costa Rica placed a nationwide moratorium on open-pit and underground gold mining.
This did not block the purchase of assets already in operation, such as the takeover of Compañía Minera del Guanacaste by the United Kingdom’s Ascot Mining.
In Honduras, the general mining law of 1998 is still in force but debate over amending it has swirled since 2004, when the Civic and Democratic Alliance was created to advocate for reforming this piece of legislation.
As the debate in Congress continues, consensus has been reached on issues such as citizen participation, stricter environmental controls, a 100% municipal tax hike, the use of mineral resources for projects in the public interest and for emergency support, the definition of exclusion and protected cultural heritage areas and the creation of a fund for restoring affected areas.
In Guatemala, the law enacted in 1997 is still in force, but the reform of mining legislation has been a matter of debate over the past few years.
As in other countries, the issue is how to reconcile business interests with regard to the calculation of royalties with environmental interests relating to water use and the interests of indigenous communities, which require mandatory community impact consultations.
It is in Guatemala that mining recovered the most on the strength of rising international prices.
In 2011, Russia’s Solway Group bought nickel mines that had not been operated for more than 30 years.
Solway has experience in restarting abandoned projects and expected that after the first 18 months output could reach 35,000 tons of ferro-nickel a year, rising to 150,000 tons by year four or five and becoming one of the largest ferronickel operations in Latin America.
The company has two projects under way: the Fénix project, where infrastructure is being built, and the Montúfar project, which identified the mining resources 30 years ago.
Mining in Central America will expand if the current metal price cycle continues and the countries achieve sustainable, consensus-driven resolution of the issues concerning social and environmental impact and distribution of revenues.
It is worth mentioning that Guatemala and Honduras have both fiscal regimes in this sector that are extremely favourable to investors (ECLAC, 2012).
Given the size of the economies and the scant mining tradition in the area, most of this development is expected to come from FDI.
The largest inflows were concentrated in the service sector as the market opened in activities previously under the purview of the State (telecommunications and insurance were opened up to private investment in 2011).
Liberalization of the telecommunications market for providing Internet and mobile telephone services (approved in 2008) has attracted companies like Spain’s Movistar, Mexico’s América Móvil and Colombia’s Metrowireless.
The Japanese firm Bridgestone has announced new investments in the manufacturing sector.
These flows break down into reinvested earnings (66%), and equity (28%) and other capital (6%).
In 2011, transport, warehousing and telecommunications were once more the main FDI recipients (with 31%), owing to the expansion of telecommunications companies.
Manufacturing (excluding the maquila industry) ranked second, at 24% of the total, as coffee processors stepped up the reinvestment of earnings, distribution centres expanded and beverage companies purchased transport equipment.
The maquila industry, the third largest recipient of FDI flows, saw a decline of 39% as several textile companies closed when their contracts were not renewed.
The largest investor in Honduras was the United States (28.6% of the total), followed by Canada (18.4%) and Mexico (15%).
FDI flows to Guatemala rose by 22% to US$ 985 million; reinvested earnings accounted for most of this figure.
The largest transaction was in the power sector with the change in ownership of Deorsa and Deocsa, which Spain’s Gas Natural Fenosa sold for US$ 449 million to the investment fund Actis based in the United Kingdom.
Inward FDI in Nicaragua reached US$ 968 million, almost twice the figure for 2010.
Inflows rose for all sectors, but the sharpest increases were in mining (US$ 114 million) and commerce and services (US$ 118 million).
Canada (26.4% of the total) and the United States (16.4%) are still the main investors, followed by Mexico and Spain at 11.9% each.
The Electrobrás investment in the Tumarín hydropower plant was the largest announced this year: some US$ 1 billion over the next few years.
In the services sector, Ireland’s online staff recruitment firm Saongroup started up operations.
El Salvador received US$ 386 million in FDI, thus returning to the average for the past decade after the decline in 2010.
The main recipient sectors were manufacturing (63%), commerce (19%) and communications (10%). (d) The Caribbean FDI flows into the Caribbean subregion totalled US$ 4.690 billion in 2011.
This increase after two years of decline was mainly driven by higher flows to the Dominican Republic (US$ 2.371 billion, The economies of the Caribbean as a whole have been the hardest hit by the economic crisis since 2008.
Investment in the tourism sector —which is especially important for members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS)— and in financial services, in the Bahamas, has borne the brunt over the past three years.
The natural resources sector (which has tradtionally figured heavily owing to metal mining in the Dominican Republic, hydrocarbons in Trinidad and Tobago and bauxite in Jamaica) has, since 2008, been attracting more and more FDI.
The biggest investment projects are in gold mining, including a US$ 800 million undertaking by Canada’s IAMGOLD and the US$ 400 million venture by United States-based Alcoa and Newmont —both in Suriname.
Alcoa announced a US$ 200 million investment in bauxite mining in Suriname; oil exploration projects are under way in Guyana.
After growing by 43% between 2000 and 2007, FDI into the rest of the region fell off by 8% in the wake of the international financial crisis as inflows to the services sector sagged.
Smaller investments in manufactures and services for export were concentrated in free trade zones in the Dominican Republic and Haiti and in a number of call centres.
FDI inflows to the Dominican Republic jumped by 25% in 2011, to US$ 2.371 billion, boosted above all by the mining sector, which received 40% of the total, followed by electric power and commerce.
Investment in tourism and real estate rose slightly over 2010 but was still far short of the levels seen at the end of 2007.
FDI in the Bahamas also increased considerably to US$ 840 million in the first nine months of 2011, equivalent to 45% more than in 2010.
This was largely the result of the Baha Mar major tourism project (see box I.2).
The economies that posted higher FDI flows included Suriname (US$ 154 million), which received significant investment in gold and bauxite mining; Guyana (US$ 247 million); and Haiti, which registered record high inflows of US$ 181 million in 2011.
The other Caribbean economies for which data are available posted more moderate growth in FDI or even a reduction.
At an estimated total cost of US$ 3.5 billion, this project alone will double the hotel capacity of the Bahamas when it opens its doors in 2014.
A local consortium will own the complex; international hotel chains will manage the hotels.
However, the project is only possible with financing from China Exim Bank, which offered a US$ 2.5 billion loan in March 2010.
Under the same agreement, the bulk of the construction work will be done by China State Construction Engineering Corporation (CSCEC), one of the largest construction companies in China.
At a time when the fallout from the real estate and financial crisis in the United States is making it hard for tourism projects in the Caribbean to secure financing, funding from a Stateowned Chinese bank was, no doubt, key for moving ahead with such an ambitious initiative.
It is a good example of the foreign expansion model followed by Chinese companies based essentially on financing from State-owned banks (see ECLAC, 2011a, chapter III).
The project will have a major impact on the local economy, above all by creating jobs; between 6,000 and 7,000 will be permanent.
Another 4,000 local jobs will be created during construction, but in keeping with the tradition followed by many Chinese construction firms, CSCEC expects to hire up to 8,000 Chinese workers.
Once the project is complete, the economy of the Bahamas will be even more dependent on the tourist industry.
Trinidad and Tobago attracted US$ 293 million in FDI in the first half of 2011, in line with the same period in 2010.
FDI inflows to these countries are directed mainly at the tourism sector.
Patterns of origin and destination of foreign direct investment The United States and the countries of the European Union are still the main investors in Latin America.
In 2011 the Netherlands was the largest source of FDI flowing into the region, although it is estimated that most of these flows originated from companies based in other countries (see box II.2).
United States transnationals accounted for 19% of FDI flows to the region (a lower share than during the previous five years).
Japanese investment jumped to 9% of the total in 2011, boosted by major acquisitions.
The first and third largest of these in 2011 were by Japanese companies.
Another six purchases made by Asian companies, above all from China, were on the list of the 20 largest transactions (see table I.3).
Investment originating in China in 2011 did not match the US$ 15 billion posted in 2010 (ECLAC, 2011a), but there were acquisitions such as Sinochem’s in Brazil and Sinopec’s in Argentina, along with greenfield investments like the Minmetals and Chinalco mining operations in Peru and the major tourism project in the Bahamas (see box I.2).
In the automobile sector, Japanese and Korean firms already installed in the region announced investment projects, as did recent arrivals such as China’s Chery.
Other investments by Asian countries include those by India in wind energy in Brazil and by Viet Nam in the telecommunications sector in Haiti.
FDI from other countries in the region, whose share of the total had been rising steadily in recent years, fell slightly to 5% in 2011.
The main reason was declining outward FDI for the region overall (examined in the following section), followed in second place by the rising share of trans-Latin company expansion projects in the United States, Europe and other regions.
In terms of the region as a whole, in 2011, FDI was concentrated primarily in the services sector, which received 45% of inflows, followed by manufactures with 38%, and natural resources with 18%.
The pattern of distribution by sector differs significantly from one country or one subregion to another.
In 2011, the percentage of FDI received by the natural resources sector in Brazil fell sharply, with corresponding increases in the shares of services and manufactures (see figure I.9).
In the other South American countries, on the other hand, 57% of the FDI received in 2011 was channelled into the primary sector.
The pattern of distribution by sector in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean was much the same as in previous years, with 53% of FDI going to services, 40% to manufactures and 8% to natural resources.
Beyond official figures for FDI, data on mergers and acquisitions provide a more detailed picture of which countries are investing in the region and in what sectors.
Overall, cross-border mergers and acquisitions with Latin America and the Caribbean as a destination totalled | US$ 82.786 billion, similar to last year’s figure.12 By sector (see figure I.10), in 2011 the larger share went to services, with 53% of the total.
This is a lower percentage than the one yielded by official data on FDI, indicating that greenfield investments play a larger role in this sector.
In 2011 there was no repeat of the unusually large transactions seen in 2010, when three topped US$ 5 billion.
The only one in excess of that figure in 2011 was Mitsubishi’s purchase of a 24.5% interest in Anglo American Sur in Chile, for US$ 5.39 billion (see table I.3).
As mentioned above, the region is still a strong draw because of its natural resources and the degree of domestic market growth.
That is why mergers and acquisitions centre on the mining, oil and gas sectors and on non-tradable sectors like telecommunications and infrastructure.
For large corporations, then, Brazil is, in addition to a major producer of raw materials, a large and expanding market.
Asian companies are moving well up on the list of major acquisitions as they considerably expand their operations in the economies of the region.
This is taking place as major European transnationals pull back, in a sort of buyback of strategic assets moving from ownership by European companies to Japanese or Chinese control.
It therefore comes as no surprise that major Japanese conglomerates are positioning themselves in the economies of Latin America: Japan has had a substantial presence in the region for years.
While the geographical distribution of Asian companies is fairly uneven (they are taking positions in different countries in the region), they are heavily concentrated in natural-resource based sectors, that is, mining, oil and gas.
Capital income and reinvested earnings Over a period of 20 years, growing FDI flows from transnational companies have become a determining presence in Latin America and the Caribbean, especially in the more capital-intensive sectors.
While there are substantial differences among countries, foreign companies tend to be heavily involved in sectors like mining, hydrocarbons, steel, electrical utilities, banking and commerce, and they almost completely dominate others such as electronics, the automobile industry and telecommunications services.
On the whole, the high profitability of companies with foreign capital operating in the region is a determinant variable for analysing FDI flows and the balance of payments of the economies of the region.
When transnational company earnings are reinvested in the same country where they are generated, they are one more component of FDI, along with capital contributions by parent companies to subsidiaries and intra-company loans.
Almost all of the economies of the region compile information on all three components, with the notable exception of Brazil, which does not count reinvested earnings.
However, not all of the countries of the region record the components separately.
Capital contributions are the most variable of the three components, since most are from corporate mergers or acquisitions.
Intra-company loans are a flexible way of allocating resources among subsidiaries and represent 20% of total FDI flows in the past five years.
Since 2002, reinvested earnings have emerged as a major component of total FDI flows; indeed, over the past five years they have become the largest component, accounting for 42% of total FDI flows.
This is principally because levels of cumulative foreign capital in the economies of the region are constantly rising, especially in comparison with annual inflows.
In addition, the expansionary phase of the business cycle underway in the region and high prices for raw material exports have boosted the returns on capital.
The impact of these two factors is particularly evident in Chile, a country with considerable FDI stock, a sound economic performance, and an export product (copper) that commands high prices in international markets.
Reinvested earnings have therefore been especially high in the past decade in Chile (69% of all inward FDI).
There are two main drivers of rising FDI income from 2003 on; one is structural and the other is situational.
On the one hand, the sharp rise in the region’s inward FDI stock starting in the 1990s naturally boosted the repatriation of earnings on those investments.
This figure was US$ 50 billion higher than Latin America and the Caribbean’s total foreign exchange earnings from services, including tourism, and it accounted for 3.5% of the region’s GDP that year.
All of these components surged in recent years and peaked at nearly US$ 153 billion in 200813 (see figure I.12), thanks especially to soaring direct investment income.
While portfolio investment income and other investment income held relatively steady, direct investment income climbed from averages in the area of US$ 20 billion between 1998 and 2003 to a high of US$ 93 billion in 2008 (see figure I.12).
FDI remittances rose in absolute terms throughout the decade in all of the major economies of the region, except for Mexico and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In Mexico, the crisis impacted subsidiary profitability; in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, besides the crisis, measures were deployed to restrict the ability of transnational companies to remit their profits abroad.
Chile, which averaged US$ 17 billion in direct investment income payments over the period 2008-2010, accounted for 20% of the total sent from Latin America and the Caribbean during this time.
The situational factor is that the repatriation of earnings associated with FDI and the operations of transnational companies surged in 2004-2008, chiefly because of favourable economic conditions in the region, rising raw materials prices and new business opportunities as the purchasing power of the middle class increased.
All of these factors together pushed up the profits of many transnational companies in the region.
This was particularly the case for transnationals seeking natural resources or internal markets.
From 2009 on, the profits of transnationals in the region were impacted by the international crisis, but the repatriation of earnings has begun to edge up again in recent years owing in part to the good economic performance of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Beyond the fluctuations associated with the business cycle, the ratio of FDI income to FDI stock averaged Situational factors aside, the level of FDI stock in the region is such that the outward flow of FDI income from Latin America and the Caribbean will continue to be high, demonstrating that FDI is not a one-way flow of resources.
FDI volume is only part of the story; the region needs to work on promoting FDI with a high technology content directly linked to potential benefits in terms of production diversification, technology transfer, innovation, new capacity building and broader opportunities for joining global production chains.
As has been said on other occasions, the development impact of FDI should be assessed both quantitatively and, above all, in qualitative terms.
Technology intensity and transnational companies’ involvement in research and development Beyond the volume of investment flowing into the region, FDI projects can differ qualitatively in terms of their capacity to make a sustainable contribution to the development of the host economy.
Investments in the highest technology content sectors of the manufacturing industry and in research and development have the greatest impact in this regard.14 Such investments contribute the most to knowledge creation, absorption and dissemination and so generate dynamic impacts that contribute to structural change (ECLAC, 2007).
This section uses information as of 2011 to update the analysis contained in the two most recent reports In 2011, 61% of investment projects in Latin America and the Caribbean were in low- and medium-low-technology sectors, with medium-low-tech sectors receiving 43% and low-tech sectors receiving 18% (see figure I.13).
Most of these projects were in the metal, oil refining, food, textile and pulp and paper sectors.
In the automobile industry, European companies such as Renault, PSA and Volkswagen have expansion initiatives in the pipeline, particularly in Brazil but also in Mexico and Argentina (see chapter II).
Volkswagen announced projects in Mexico for some US$ 400 million and plans to invest more than The classification of manufacturing sectors into high-, mediumhigh, low- and medium-low technology intensity is explained in annex I.A-1. 15 The information used refers to announcements of new FDI projects.
Some might not have been actually implemented, or implementation might span several years.
Nevertheless, an examination of what happened in previous years shows that information on projects announced is a good indicator of projects effectively executed.
US$ 4 billion in its four production plants in Brazil, and it has announced a new production line in Argentina that will manufacture gearboxes.
However, the proportion of cross-border projects in high-technology-content sectors (pharmaceuticals, office machinery, medical instruments) in the region slipped in 2011, to just 3% (see figure I.14).
While R&D-associated projects flowing into the region rose from 3% of the worldwide total to 6% (see figure I.15); only Brazil (at 5% of the worldwide figure) can be regarded as a major destination for such projects.
A number of United States electronics companies (IBM and Motorola, for example) are working on new R&D operations in Brazil, as are European companies in the automobile industry (including Fiat and Volkswagen) and in its steel (Foseco) and chemical (Rhodia) sectors (see chapter II).
Several R&D projects in Brazil are directly associated with the primary sector.
BG Group has plans for a new R&D centre; Siemens is to install an oil and gas R&D facility to be operated in partnership with the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
In Uruguay, Finland’s pulp and paper company UPM-Kymmene is expanding its R&D operations at its Fray Bentos pulp mill, to focus on wood fibre and its impact on end product properties.
An examination of information on the technology content of manufacturing operations and R&D thus shows that the region is still receiving greenfield investments heavily skewed towards low- and mediumlow-tech sectors.
This is despite the relative increase in the volume of medium-high-tech projects, which are concentrated in Brazil and Mexico.
Moreover, Brazil is the region’s only major destination for the internationalization of transnational company R&D.
The other Latin American and Caribbean countries have not managed to position themselves as a preferred destination in this area.
Outward foreign direct investment and the trans-latins Outward investment flows In 2011 outward FDI flows from Latin America and the Caribbean fell by 51% compared with 2010, to US$ 21.911 billion as flows from Brazil dropped into negative territory (see figure I.16).
As explained below, this decline does not signal a reversal of the internationalization of Brazilian companies.
In addition to Brazil, outflows from Mexico (another major investor abroad) were down 34%.
By contrast, Chile, whose outflows climbed 28%, became the region’s largest investor country abroad; Colombia posted a 26% gain.
Other economies of the region, such as Argentina, Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Peru, have very low levels of investment abroad, although outbound investment from Argentina increased to US$ 1.488 billion in 2011 (see figure I.18).
While outward FDI from the region has been trending up and averaged more than US$ 30 billion over the past six years,16 FDI still represents a smaller proportion of the capital account of the countries of the region than loans and deposits, which are grouped in “other investment” (see figure I.17).
Although they are more volatile, “other investment” flows have topped outward FDI almost every year since 2000 and stood at US$ 103 billion in 2010 —more than twice outward FDI.
This trend holds for most of the countries of the region with the notable exception of Colombia, where outward FDI has been higher than “other investment” over the past decade.
Portfolio investment as a cross-border capital flow is relatively small in the region, averaging US$ 10.155 billion between 2008 and 2010; this is one third the amount of outward FDI.
Chile accounted for the bulk of outward portfolio investment, owing to the portfolio diversification of its pension system and the accumulation of resources in its sovereign fund.
The uptrend in outward FDI flows from the region mirrors the global trend, where developing economies have made strides as the origin of FDI flows —even more so since the most recent global financial crisis.
In 2007 the developing and transition economies accounted for 16% of global outbound FDI; by 2010 (the latest year for which complete data are available) they had climbed to the basis of official figures as at 16 April 2012. a Includes Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras.
Despite the drop in outflows in 2011 (owing above all to the pattern in Brazil and, to a lesser extent, Mexico), there is no reason to expect a reversal of the recent trend towards greater international expansion of the major transLatins.
Because there are relatively few large trans-Latin companies, their individual expansion projects trigger variations in aggregate flows and contribute to the high volatility of outward FDI.
Some of these companies, such as Petrobras and PDVSA, are quite large but concentrate almost all of their assets in their home country.
Others have operations across several countries in the region, such as América Móvil, or even worldwide, like CEMEX.
Many others are just beginning to internationalize: several major companies after a strategy shift, like Mexico’s PEMEX, and others as part of a natural growth process.
But an examination of the strategies followed by the major trans-Latins shows that most of the investments go to neighbouring countries in the region; for Mexican companies that includes the United States as well.
This overall pattern is true for Brazilian companies, too, although the size and financial capacity of some of them are such that there are several examples of expansion on a global scale.
Chile is perhaps the country whose outward FDI is most concentrated in neighbouring countries: of the 20 largest Chilean transLatins, 16 have all of their foreign subsidiaries in Latin America and the Caribbean; the operations of most of these are concentrated in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Peru (Pérez Ludeña, 2011).
Much of the foreign expansion of Colombia’s trans-Latins is focused on Central America (see box I.3).
Like most trans-Latins, Colombian companies have concentrated their international expansion efforts in other countries in the region.
However, while the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Panama received 47% of Colombia’s outward investment during the 1990s, flows to both countries (especially the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) fell sharply from 2001 on.
Deteriorating economic relations with the latter were one of the reasons that Colombian companies began to expand towards other countries in the region.
A particular focus has been on Central America, where they now have a strong presence in a number of economic sectors.
FDI by Colombian companies is driven mainly by a search for markets.
In recent years, Colombia’s good economic performance has helped boost profits at major companies, and appreciation of its national currency with respect to the currencies of Central American countries has helped spur investment in the latter.
The main target sectors have been natural resources, financial services, power and the food and cement industries.
In the financial sector, Colombian companies have gained a significant foothold in Central America over the past few years.
Grupo Aval operates in all of the countries of the subregion, principally through its 2010 acquisition of BACCredomatic GECF in Panama for US$ 1.92 billion.
Grupo SURA also played a leading role in the largest ever acquisition by a Latin American company, when, in 2011, it bought the pension, insurance and investment fund assets of the multinational firm ING in Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay for US$ 3.614 billion.
In early 2012 Sociedades Bolívar announced its intention to acquire HSBC’s Central American banking operations for US$ 801 million in a transaction that has yet to be settled and would include 29 offices in Costa Rica, 57 in El Salvador and 50 in Honduras.
At the forefront of the power companies have been Empresas Públicas de Medellín (EPM), which has focused on expanding in Central America; Interconexión Eléctrica Sociedad Anónima (ISA), with its investments in Brazil, Chile, Peru and other countries; and, to a lesser extent, Empresa de Energía de Bogotá, with assets in Guatemala and Peru (see chapter IV).
The extractive industries accounted for 68% of outward FDI between 2008 and 2010, mainly through the State-owned Ecopetrol.
A major player in the industrial sector is Cementos Argos, which has a significant footprint in the United States that will be further enhanced upon completion of its announced US$ 760 million acquisition of the United States-based assets of France’s Lafarge.
The food company Nutresa produces meat in Panama since it bought Panama’s Ernesto Berard in 2008, as well as chocolates following its purchase of Nutresa México (2009) and ice cream after buying Helados Bon in the Dominican Construction service companies have focused their international operations on Panama.
Since 2006 Conalvías has carried out several urban infrastructure projects awarded by Panama’s Ministry of Public Works; early 2012 brought the announcement that Conconcreto has been awarded a US$ 30 million contract for phase three of the Multiplaza Pacific Mall in Panama City.
Other sectors where Colombian company operations in Central America are concentrated are aviation, with the Avianca-Taca merger (ECLAC, 2011a, box I.3); the textile industry, with production and distribution firms like Totto, Cristal, Leonisa and Olímpica; and metal parts for the automobile industry, with Fanalca’s recent investment in Panama.
These companies have posted rapid international expansion over a short period of time that has propelled many of them to leadership positions in their new markets, as is the case with EPM in power distribution in Central America.
This shows how important outward FDI from Colombia is for the countries of Central America.
It is also contributing to the development of Colombia itself, where in 2010 promoting these investments was included for the first time in the country’s National Development Plan (see part 2 of section D).
As for the sectors that attract Latin American investment, there have been major acquisitions in the service industry (specifically, in financial services, as well as in telecommunications and energy) and, in the primary sector, in oil and gas (see table I.5).
Despite lower outward FDI flows from the region in 2011, several trans-Latin companies took advantage of the opportunities that arose when a number of European companies were forced to sell assets in the region in order to recapitalize and face the difficult economic situation in Europe (see chapter II).
This can be seen in the list of major mergers and acquisitions by transLatins abroad: 5 of the 10 largest transactions involved European company assets.
Brazil, because of its size, is the country that most influences the trend in outward FDI from the region.
Although Brazilian companies have not stopped expanding abroad and have not made major disinvestments, they are placing greater emphasis on their investments in the domestic market because investment prospects in Brazil are good.
For example, the main reason for the two largest cross-border acquisitions made by Brazilian companies (see table I.6) was not to expand their business in other countries but rather to gain control of the assets that the foreign firms had in Brazil.
CPFL bought Spain’s Jantus, whose only assets were wind farms in Brazil, for US$ 987 million.
TLNP acquired a 10% stake in Portugal Telecom in a US$ 961 million transaction arising from the reorganization of Brazil’s telecom market, where Portugal Telecom is a major actor.
Chile was once again the country of the region with the most outward FDI: US$ 11.822 billion.
Chile’s major trans-Latins tended to focus on the retail, forestry products and transport sectors (Pérez Ludeña, 2011); their subsidiaries remained concentrated in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Peru.
The largest investment in 2011 was for some US$ 950 million to build the Montes del Plata pulp mill in Uruguay in a joint venture between Chile’s Arauco and the Swedish company Stora Enso.
Chilean companies are slowly beginning to internationalize outside the region: Sigdo Koppers acquired the Belgian engineering firm Magotteaux for US$ 794 million; the wine producer Concha y Toro bought Fetzer Vineyards in the United States for US$ 239 million.
There are no official data on destination countries or sectors, but announcements of acquisitions and greenfield investments suggest that Mexican companies continued to pursue a strategy of expanding towards the United States and other countries in the region.
Among the former are Alfa, which acquired Eastman Chemical’s plastic (PET) and purified terephthalic acid (PTA) manufacturing businesses for US$ 600 million; CEMEX, which increased its interest in its subsidiary CEMEX Southeast (US$ 360 million); and Bimbo, which increased its stake in its subsidiary Sara Lee Corp. (US$ 157 million).
In addition to investments in Latin American countries, some major Mexican companies have announced new plans outside the region.
Alfa, through its high-tech aluminium auto parts subsidiary, Nemak, has opened a plant in India in order to capitalize on the latter’s domestic market potential.
PEMEX has opened a representation office in Singapore for centralizing its exports of crude oil to emerging markets, especially China and India.
And CEMEX has announced a number of investments in European Union countries, where it has had subsidiaries for years.
One involves opening a new premixed concrete plant in southern France (see chapter II).
These flows have surged in recent years; a number of the country’s trans-Latins positioned themselves in other countries, especially in Central America (see box I.3).
The purchase, valued at US$ 3.6 billion, was one of the largest in history to be carried out by a Latin American company.
Grupo SURA will handle financial operations associated with pension and insurance fund asset administration in Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru and Uruguay.
Argentina saw its outward FDI grow by 54%, to US$ 1.488 billion.
Argentine firms have not made major corporate acquisitions abroad, but they have participated in greenfield investment projects and in non-traditional sectors like software and digital services.
The technological solutions companies Baufest and Grupo ASSA are opening new centres in the United States and Mexico, respectively, to meet the needs of the North American market.
This sharp drop from the US$ 2.671 billion posted in 2010 is due to the strategy adopted by the country’s largest company, PDVSA, to repatriate earnings from subsidiaries.
One of the largest transactions is the pre-merger agreement in Mexico entered into by Grupo Embotelladoras Unidas (Geupec) and PepsiCo (United States) with Empresas Polar, the leading food and beverage company in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, for creating a nationwide bottler and distributor.
The agreement is that Empresas Polar is to be a major shareholder in the new company.
Income from investments abroad by trans-Latin companies has soared in recent years, with capital income on direct investment going from an average US$ 4.6 billion between 2000 and 2007 to more than US$ 8 billion in 2008-2010.
Income from FDI totalled US$ 10 billion 2007 and 2008 and fell back to US$ 7 billion in 2010,18 so it seems that the international crisis did have some impact on the remittance of earnings from trans-Latins abroad to their parent companies.
Latin American and Caribbean policies supporting foreign direct investment Virtually all of the countries of the region have policies for promoting exports and attracting foreign investment, but measures supporting the internationalization of domestic companies (outward direct foreign investment) are still but embryonic.
Only in the past few years have some countries of the region responded to the outward FDI boom that began in 2004 by weighing specific measures such as providing information and technical assistance, incentives and subsidies and financing for companies.
This attitude stands in contrast with the solid support that companies from other countries receive for expanding internationally.
China’s “go global” strategy adopted in 2000 is seen as the main factor behind the rapid international expansion of Chinese companies, thanks above all to the financing for foreign investment that they receive from State-owned banks (ECLAC, 2011a).
There is much room for discussion as to whether it is appropriate to use public funds to boost FDI (Tavarez and Young, 2005).
Among the arguments in favour are higher yield and productivity, acquisition of knowledge, enhanced technology capacity at the company level and an improved production structure at the country level thanks to externalities.
It can also be argued that business internationalization can stimulate the capital markets and, by increasing competition, encourage R&D.
On the other hand, arguments against hold that these companies, which are leaders in their home countries, should not receive special support because they are not at a disadvantage for competing in global markets and have no problems in accessing financing, especially when compared with SMEs.
And it is hard to guarantee that the benefits of business internationalization will spill over into the economy.
It is in this setting that the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean are starting to deploy instruments to support business internationalization.
The main lines of support are provided by Brazil’s National Development Bank (BNDES) and have been enhanced by the new production development policy put in place in 2008 (BNDES, 2008).
This policy aims specifically at positioning Brazilian companies among global leaders in their sectors, targeting the aviation, oil, gas, petrochemical, bioethanol, mining, pulp and paper, steel and meat industries.
BNDES has opened a number of support windows; providing financing is the most important one.
BNDES can take an ownership stake in Brazilian trans-Latins making new acquisitions, provide financing with performance requirements that seek for BNDES to share in future profits and grant special lines of credit to certain companies (Sennes and Camargo Mendes, 2009).
Portfolio and direct investment income has grown the most, while interest on other investments has been more volatile even though volume was up sharply throughout the period.
The share of the region’s financial income from investment abroad coming from loans and deposits (other income) has increased substantially.
BNDES currently has a 14% interest in Marfrig and a stake of nearly 17% in JBS Friboi (ECLAC, 2011a).
There are other efforts that, while neither systematic nor institutionalized, promote internationalization.
So far, the forceful foreign expansion of Mexican companies has taken place without robust and targeted policy support for internationalization.
In 2010, the government export promotion agency ProMéxico opened a support window for internationalizing Mexican companies.
According to ProMéxico, this policy is warranted because it helps promote exports, encourages the transfer of technology, can have a positive effect on the balance of payments by means of repatriated earnings, boosts the development of human capital and investment in innovation and R&D and enhances Mexico’s image abroad.
The instruments are essentially the same as for promoting exports, but they are also available to companies seeking to locate their production operations outside Mexico.
Support includes specialized advisory services, assistance for business trips, staff training and internships abroad.
Unlike Brazil, there is no financial support, nor are there target sectors or countries.
Support is aimed at medium-sized companies that want to start investing abroad, not major Mexican trans-Latins.
This policy is in the experimental phase, with several pilot projects under way; the instruments are yet to be assessed.
Like Mexico, Colombia (whose economy ranks fourth in the region in terms of outward FDI) has only just recently considered providing support for foreign investment.
It includes providing trade information to Colombian investors through Proexport, the government agency charged with promoting exports, tourism and FDI.
But policies for supporting internationalization are still in early stages, and there is no experience on which to assess their potential scope.
In Chile, through technical bureaus at the Ministry of Finance and the Ministry of Economy, Development and Tourism, discussion has begun on implementing new instruments for supporting business internationalization.
So, business internationalization policy efforts are emerging in the region; Brazil has made the most progress in this regard.
Among the specific goals already defined are the creation of world-class companies, focusing on financing new acquisitions and targeting priority sectors.
Mexico and Colombia are at even earlier stages of policy development and are beginning to tackle issues that will over time be important for policy maintenance and for deepening and expanding policy impacts.
It is important to assess these policies and develop mechanisms for feedback and the requisite institutional framework.
It should also be borne in mind that public policy for promoting internationalization can have information failures or create perverse incentives.
The complex decisions involved and the growing importance of business internationalization open a research agenda with major challenges for the region.
Concluding remarks In 2011, FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean rose for the second straight year; at US$ 153.991 billion it is 12% above the historical high recorded in 2008.
In recent years, flows to Latin America and the Caribbean have grown more than in any other region of the world as its share of global FDI flows rose from 6% in 2007 to 10% in 2011.
The economies of the region have leveraged renewed confidence at transnational companies to attract capital to the region in a larger proportion than elsewhere in the world.
They have done so on the strength of the area’s sustained economic growth and commodity prices in global markets.
Brazil is out in front on both factors: its inward flows have soared over the past two years.
Moreover, the crisis and uncertainty in the developed economies are feeding the secular trend towards production process efficiency-seeking, which involves relocating certain operations to lower-cost economies.
The region’s good economic prospects stand in contrast to stagnation in the developed economies, especially in Europe, which is the origin of the largest share of the inward FDI towards Latin America and the Caribbean (see chapter II).
This has driven an increase in capital flows to the region that are not limited to FDI.
Indeed, during the past five years FDI has accounted for less than 50% of the region’s balance of capital; it has been surpassed by the combined total for portfolio investments and loans.
The growing flows of FDI to Latin America and the Caribbean over the past 20 years have positioned transnational companies as key players in many sectors, especially capital-intensive ones like mining, hydrocarbons, automobiles, steel, electronics, power, banking and commerce.
This stock of foreign investments, which is present to a greater or lesser degree in almost all of the economies of the region, in turn yields income that is also proportionally high.
Over the past few years the region’s sound economic performance and high commodity prices have positively impacted the bottom lines of the transnational companies operating in the region and thus boosted FDI dividends for the countries of origin to an average of US$ 85.567 billion between 2007 and 2010.
And in many economies, more than half of the FDI flows is in the form of reinvested earnings from subsidiaries, so FDI does not yield a net inflow of capital to Latin America and the Caribbean.
This being the case, the developmental impact of FDI for the region will come in the form of potential knowledge transfers, the capacity to develop new industries and integration in global value chains.
Despite the drop in total outward flows from the region, trans-Latin companies have continued to expand.
Europe is still the main origin of FDI for the region (see chapter II); for most European transnationals their assets in Latin America have more strategic value than ever before.
However, if the current economic climate continues there is reason to expect that the relationship between Latin American and European countries will grow more balanced in the coming years, with asset acquisition and strategic alliances in both directions.
Against this backdrop of abundant capital and good economic performance, the priority should be to make strides towards production transformation that extends the high productivity of certain sectors out to the rest of the economy.
The countries of the region need to view FDI as support for developing those sectors that they regard as strategic.
Bibliography BNDES (Brazilian Development Bank) (2008), “Política de desenvolvimento produtivo: inovar e investir para sustentar o crescimento”, Rio de Janeiro, May.
Young (2005), “FDI and multinationals: patterns, impacts and policies”, International Journal of the Economics of Business, vol. 12, No. 1, February.
Manufacture of motor vehicles, trailers and semi-trailers Manufacture of railway and tramway locomotives and rolling stock, and other transport equipment n.e.c.
Information on capital contributions for 2005 includes net loans from parent companies.
Introduction Over the past decade the European Union was the origin of an average US$ 30 billion per year in foreign direct investment to Latin America and the Caribbean, accounting for nearly 40% of all FDI flowing to the region and making it the main investor there.
This chapter looks at the principal patterns and characteristics of FDI flows between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as the strategies followed by the transnational companies that are behind these investment flows.
It also refers to some of the specific microeconomics of European FDI, its importance for greenfield investment in manufacturing and its contribution to innovation and research and development (R&D) in the region.
Investment flows and transnational companies from the countries of the European Union have a long history in the region.1 During the early stages of export development, transnationals were major players in the primary sectors The European Union currently has 27 member states: Austria (1995), Spain (1986), Sweden (1995) and United Kingdom (1973). and some infrastructure areas, such as railways.
Later on, during the import substitution model decades, European direct investment had to negotiate high trade barriers; companies focused on investing in manufacturing (the automotive, food and beverage and chemical industries) and above all on the larger economies (Brazil, Mexico and Argentina).
Indeed, before the economic opening of the 1990s, nearly 75% of the total stock of European FDI in the region was in these three countries; the leading investors were the United Kingdom, Germany and France and, to a lesser extent, Italy and the Netherlands (ECLAC, 2002).
During the 1990s the historical context was particularly favourable to direct European investment in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The region was deploying profound structural reforms to speed up international insertion, using FDI as a source of funding and a tool for modernizing production.
FDI saw an unprecedented surge, and transnational companies, many of them European, ventured into a wide range of operations in the region (ECLAC, 2002; Calderón, 2002; Chudnovsky, 2001).
European companies substantially diversified their presence in the region’s economy as many of the limitations on foreign ownership in extractive sectors (such as hydrocarbons and mining) were lifted or, in the case of the service sector, disappeared in a wave of privatizations.
From then on, countries like Spain and Portugal swelled the European presence in the region.
And reforms in Europe aimed at forging an economic and political union put increasing pressure on European companies to scale up in order to compete in European community and international markets (ECLAC, 2002).
It was in response to the need for companies to expand in order to compete that the European Union became the main source of cross-border acquisitions both worldwide and in Latin America (Vodusek, 2002).
By the second half of the 1990s, then, the European Union had become the main source of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Companies from Germany, France, the Netherlands and the United Kingdom increased their footprint in Latin American markets; the evolving situation enabled new actors, essentially Spain and Portugal, to enter the picture.
Latin America and the Caribbean thus became the main destination for European investments in emerging and developing economies and ranked second among extraregional destinations after the United States and Canada.
More than 80% of Spanish and Portuguese investments in emerging markets went to Latin America and the Caribbean.
For Germany and the Netherlands the share ranged between 40% and 50%; for the United Kingdom, France and Italy the percentage was lower, in the area Previous editions of Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean looked at European investment in the region from several different angles.
For example, the 2001 report examined FDI from the European Union and, especially, how the creation of that economic bloc helped boost FDI flows towards Latin America and the Caribbean.
This chapter looks at European FDI in the aggregate (with information from the balance of payments) and from a microeconomics viewpoint taking business strategy into consideration.
It explores an area that is not always covered by the literature on foreign investment: R&D activities conducted by subsidiaries of transnational companies.
This is a key issue because of the growing internationalization of transnational corporate R&D and the major role that European transnationals play in R&D in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Section B of this chapter looks at FDI outflows from the European Union to the rest of the world and to Latin America and the Caribbean in particular over the past decade —both in terms of overall patterns and at the country level.
Section C discusses the business strategies followed by European transnationals in the region, focusing on the distinguishing features of these strategies and the factors behind them.
Section D examines the internationalization of innovation and R&D on the part of subsidiaries of European transnationals and explains how the region (above all, Brazil) has positioned itself in the process, generating substantial impacts in terms of innovation and capacity-building.
Section D also shows that looking at R&D and, more broadly, the nature of subsidiaries, is crucial for understanding the permanent impacts of FDI and transnational corporate operations.
Section E describes the main patterns of still-incipient Latin American investment in Europe and the strategies being followed by the principal trans-Latins involved.
And section F sets out the main conclusions for the chapter and discusses prospects for the next few years.
FDI and business strategy in the steel and automobile industries are examined in ECLAC (2010); telecommunications in ECLAC (2011 and 2008); and tourism and software in ECLAC (2009 and 2011, respectively).
For a more historical take on European investment in the region, see ECLAC (2002), Vodusek (2002) and Chudnovsky (2001).
European Union Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean The European Union as a source of global FDI outflows Global flows of FDI have, traditionally, been concentrated in developed economies as the chief senders and receivers of global movements of capital.
The larger economies of the European Union have thus been major sources and destinations of these capital flows.
Indeed, nearly half of the global stock of FDI originated in European Union countries (see figure II.1).
Obviously, a large portion of these capital flows is between countries in this economic bloc, particularly between the larger economies; several European Union economies are among the largest FDI sending and receiving countries worldwide.
The major European transnationals (and small and middle-sized ones, as well) are among the most internationalized in the world and surpass their peers in the United States and Japan in several indicators of economic activity (Dunning, 2002; European Commission, 2011).
And just in terms of extraregional investment, European transnationals are highly internationalized; many are global industry and sector leaders.
As a result, the investment behaviour of European companies largely shapes the pattern of global FDI flows.
The subsequent entrance of Japan completed a trio that accounted for most of the worldwide flow of FDI.
But the developing countries have been gaining ground, especially over the past 10 years, both as receivers and as senders of foreign investment (ECLAC, 2011).
Even more recently, they have positioned themselves as the main receivers of FDI, with more than 50% of the worldwide total (ECLAC, 2011).
Obviously, the past few years have been especially challenging for the European Union because of the financial crisis and, recently, the substantial sovereign debt problems that some of its economies are facing.
Traditionally, the European Union countries that have led investment in the region have been the United Kingdom, France and Germany; Spain and Portugal followed later on.
Generally speaking, United Kingdom, Netherlands and German transnationals are the most globalized; Italian and French transnationals tend to be more regional in scope.
Spanish and Portuguese companies began to transnationalize later and used Latin America as their chief springboard for international expansion (Calderón, 2002; Dunning, 2002; ECLAC, 2002).
As for Spain, aggressive internationalization did not start until the 1990s; its ratio of outward FDI stock to GDP went Latin America and the Caribbean was one of the prime destinations of European Union investment during the 1990s, but it became less so during the first decade of the twenty-first century.
This stagnation has been due, in part, to the accession of new European Union member States, the growing relevance of the Middle East and North Africa on Europe’s foreign agenda and the severe financial crisis that hit some member States particularly hard.
In addition, the region has been less welcoming to FDI than Asia, largely because there has been less of an effort to boost the technology and innovation content of the production structure in the countries of Latin America, which is still very naturalresource oriented.
Intra-European-Community investment accounted for some 60% of the total between 2000 and 2010 (see table II.1).
FDI towards new European Union member States has been, above all, through businesses in search of lower production costs.
European Union investments flowing to the United States accounted for some 12%.
Latin America and the Caribbean was the prime destination of extra-European Community investments during the 1990s (ECLAC, 2002) but has slipped over the past decade, with its share falling to just 3%.
The situation during the 1990s was indeed an unusual one marked by a flood of privatizations in the region that sent Spanish companies heading for the exit.
During the 1990s, an average of 12% of European Union FDI outflows went to Latin America and the Caribbean; it fell to 9% between In this context, other developing regions gained as a draw for European investment.
Such is the case with the developing countries of Asia, especially China, as well as Africa (see table II.1).
Over the past five years, FDI flows to Latin America and the Caribbean from the European Union have been comparable to those going to the countries of Africa, at some 3% of total European Union FDI outflows.
When analyzing FDI it is important to bear in mind that the statistics are imprecise, with inconsistencies among countries and among the agencies that compile and publish them (see box II.1). global and regional factors were behind the fall in European investment.
The global international environment turned less favourable when stock markets began to slide in 2000 amidst liquidity crunches and funding constraints faced by transnational companies, sending major acquisitions down from the levels seen in prior years (ECLAC, 2003).
The accession of new European Union member States opened opportunities for investment within that economic bloc, drawing the attention of European businesses away from Latin America and the Caribbean.
Latin America saw an easing of the sweeping privatizations that had attracted substantial FDI flows, and economic growth slowed in the face of the adverse international scenario.
European companies —Spanish ones in particular— were hit hard by the crisis in Argentina.
In 2003, then, European investments stood at just US$ 12 billion, the lowest in a decade.
Mexico is by far the main destination in the subregion; during the second half of the decade it received 24% of European FDI towards the region (see figure II.6).
From 2003, flows from the European Union to the region followed a cyclical pattern, albeit with an upward trend.
According to official sources in the countries of the region, FDI from the European Union rose from some US$ 12 billion in 2003 to more than US$ 25 billion yearly after that, peaking at US$ 45 billion in 2007 and standing at US$ 36 billion in 2010 (see figure II.4).
Uptrending European FDI outflows to the region during the second half of the decade made the European Union the main source of FDI in the region.
This was, as seen in the preceding section, despite the latter’s declining position as a destination for international investment from Europe.
Surging European FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean during the second half of the decade, and soaring FDI overall in the region, was not evenly distributed among the subregions.
Rising levels of European investment were due essentially to flows towards South America (see figure II.5), with Brazil receiving 53% of total FDI in 2006-2010.
Countries like Argentina, Colombia and Chile were also among the main receivers (see figure II.6).
Rising commodity prices and vibrant economies in this subregion were a significant factor in attracting new investments on the part of European companies in search of natural resources and markets for manufactures, especially in Brazil (see section C), where the flow of FDI from the European Union has burgeoned since 2002 (see figure II.7).
By contrast, European FDI towards Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean held relatively stable in the area of US$ 10 billion to US$ 12 billion per year (see figure II.5).
These economies bore more of the brunt of the crisis in the United States and financial turmoil in the global arena.
The strongest impact was seen in investment South America Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean the basis of official figures from the central banks of the Latin America and Caribbean countries.
Generally speaking, the European Union has exceeded the regional average in countries of South America such as Argentina and Brazil (see table II.2).
In any event, the drop in FDI flows from the United States led to an increase in the European Union’s share of FDI towards Mexico over the past five years, to 43% of the total.
Although the United States has been the largest investor in many countries, Spain was for many years the main source of FDI to countries like Chile and Argentina.
Nevertheless, the higher profile of new actors as a source of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as active internationalization strategies being pursued by companies in developing countries such as China, could be seen as a warning sign for the European Union’s position in the region.
Ranking FDI flows according to the size of the economy changes the order of the principal receivers.
Taking the European Union FDI-to-GDP ratio for 2010 as an indicator turns Chile into the largest receiver in the region (see figure II.A-2).
International investment agreements have improved the provisions of domestic legislation in the countries and created a stable, transparent climate.
Such agreements (especially, bilateral investment treaties) have begun to multiply worldwide.7 The member States of the European Union, led by the United Kingdom, Germany, France and the Netherlands, have been very active in signing international investment agreements —especially bilateral investment treaties— with third countries.
During the 1990s the European countries signed many such agreements with most of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Argentina, Chile, Peru and Uruguay have bilateral investment treaties in force with most of the principal European economies (see table II.A-4).
The world’s network of international investment agreements is growing more atomized and complex.
Current agreements are not coordinated at the international level and often overlap, address related issues (trade, intellectual property and industrial policy) and have changing substantive provisions and dispute settlement mechanisms.
Efforts aimed at establishing multilateral investment agreements have been limited in scope.
A noteworthy example is the Energy Charter Treaty signed by some 50 countries, including those of the European Union, to promote investment in the energy sector.
Other, larger-scale initiatives, such as the Multilateral Agreement on Investment, were unsuccessful.
But international investment agreements and bilateral investment treaties do not have a substantial impact on FDI flows; these streams of capital are driven more by other factors such as economic growth and market size.
Indeed, Brazil, which has virtually no investment agreements in force with European Union member States, is the one with the largest inflow of FDI.
The European Union is currently discussing the future of the international investment agreements signed by its member States with a view to establishing a common investment policy.
When the Treaty of Lisbon entered into force in December 2009, the European Union took on sole responsibility for FDI under the common trade policy umbrella.
While there is political will, implementing it in practice is a challenge because there are so many agreements in force and the countries continue to negotiate on an individual basis.
Consolidating European policy concerning investment agreements has been the subject of debate, and the outcomes are likely to have significant consequences for the architecture of the global international investment agreement regime. figure II.8).8 During that period, Spanish investment was heavily tilted towards energy, telecommunications, infrastructure, banking and other services, as well as oil and gas extraction industries.
Between 2000 and 2010, 86% of Spain’s FDI in the region went to services; the manufacturing sector (chiefly in Brazil) and the primary sector received 12% and 2%, respectively (Arahuetes, 2011).
This process was spearheaded by a small number of companies.9 Large Spanish companies in the services sector were involved in some of the largest acquisitions that the region has seen, propelling them to the top of the markets where they operated.
Spanish companies acquired many of the highest-value assets in the region, displacing some of the largest global operators in services and infrastructure.
Spain rapidly became the second largest source of FDI in the region, behind the United States.
One of the characteristics of Spanish investment in the region is that it is concentrated.
According to estimates, Telefónica, Endesa, Repsol, Iberdrola and the banks Santander and BBVA account for 95% of total Spanish investment in the region (The Economist, 2009).
But the turn of the century brought troubled times for Spanish companies.
The political and economic crisis in Argentina that put an end to the convertibility regime dealt a strong blow to companies operating in service subsectors.
This, coupled with factors having to do with the shaping of the European Union itself, helped shift the focus of Spanish investment to other countries in the bloc (see figure II.9), and Spanish investment in the region fell off sharply in the last few years (see table II-A.2).
This did not mean the end of operations in the region, though, and there are companies that have retained their leadership in services and extraction sectors.
The companies that inserted themselves in the 1990s maintained their positioning through concessions.
Throughout that decade the door to the region was through joint or consortium acquisitions; stand-alone acquisitions were more predominant in the 2000s.
While 2001-2003 may have marked the end of the Spanish investment boom in the region, subsequent investments began to take shape in new sectors as new, smaller companies ventured into the region (García-Canal and others, 2008) in new sectors (including construction, tourism, financial activities such as insurance, and even manufacturing).
The amounts invested by Spanish companies during the second half of the decade were far smaller, but their business footprint became more diverse and trended more towards services.
Spanish investments have dropped off in the past few years, for both structural and situational reasons.
Among the structural factors are the end of privatizations and Spain’s renewed interest in other European Union member States and other developing regions.
As for the situational factors, the adverse impacts of the crisis for Spain’s economy affected its investments in the region as well.
Nevertheless, their operations in the region have helped some Spanish companies weather the financial crisis.
Many are seeing high profits in the region that are offsetting their performance in Europe and helping them balance their consolidated balance sheets (see section C).
Germany is one of the traditional European investors in the region, but during the 1990s German companies were not quick to seize the new opportunities afforded by economic opening.
Over the past decade, German investments accounted for 4% to 7% of flows from Europe (see figure II.8) and were quite volatile (see table II.A-2).
Nevertheless, the figures do show that German investments in the region are growing, from US$ 6 billion in 1999-2004 to US$ 10 billion in the second half of the decade.
In keeping with their traditional positioning, the focus has been, above all, on Brazil, Mexico and Argentina, in capital-intensive sectors where Germany has significant competitive advantages and German companies are global leaders (such as the automobile, chemical and machinery and equipment industries).
Their strategy combining a search for markets for manufactured goods with horizontal FDI enabled them to take advantage of the region’s favourable economic climate over the past few years (see section C).
While the amount of German FDI is not significant and the share going to the region is low (only 7% of German assets abroad are in Latin America), innovation and R&D on the part of German companies are very important for the region (see section D).
French investment also has a long history and is linked to the manufacturing sector in the larger economies of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Unlike Germany, though, French companies were actively involved in the privatization processes and gained a foothold in a number of services sectors.
Some of the companies that participated in privatizations subsequently withdrew; such was the case with the telecommunications sector.
French investment surged starting in 2004 and has been upwards of US$ 5 billion a year since 2008.
Over the past few years, French transnationals have made major acquisitions in the telecommunications and energy sectors (see chapter IV) and in some manufacturing sectors, such as the chemical industry, chiefly in Brazil: 75% of French assets in Latin America and the Caribbean are in Brazil (see table II.A-1).
The United Kingdom’s investment exposure in the region is lower; only 3% of its assets abroad are located in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Its share of the flow of European investment to the region has held steady at about 12% and is concentrated in mining, some manufactures (such as food and beverages) and financial services.
Italy has had a historical presence, as well, especially in traditional manufactures such as food and automobiles.
Italian investment has seen substantial growth over the past decade, going from US$ 4 billion during the first half of the decade to more than US$ 22 billion in the second half (see table II.A-1) and venturing beyond traditional manufactures to enter some service sectors.
Italian transnationals with market-seeking strategies made major acquisitions in telecommunications and infrastructure.
The recent surge in Italian investment in the region has driven its share of total European flows from 3% in 1999-2005 to 16% in The Netherlands is a special case, with provisions of law that have led many transnationals to locate their tax domicile there and channel substantial investment resources to third markets.
Statistics published by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean should therefore be contrasted with data from the central bank of the Netherlands.
In recent years, Netherlands investment in the region has centred on Brazil and Mexico, in the form of major acquisitions in manufacturing sectors such as beverages and steel.
Balance of payments statistics do not yield a sectoral breakdown of European Union FDI in the region, making it necessary to turn to information on corporate mergers and acquisitions in search of an indicator in this regard.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, funds for corporate acquisitions by European transnationals during 2000-2011 went chiefly to the services sector, at 66% of the total.
But there are differences between South America and Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean: while the share going to services in the two subregions was quite similar (in the area of 66%), the percentages for natural resources and manufacturing were not.
In South America, natural resources and manufacturing accounted for 12% and 22%, respectively; the breakdown in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean is 3% and 31%, respectively.
Beyond these figures, which are indicative, refer only to acquisitions and do not include greenfield investments, it is clear that European investment destination sectors have been determined by production structure and international insertion of the countries sending and receiving investment flows.
As a result, the focus tends to be more on natural resources in South America and on manufactures in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean.
The largest sums of European FDI in manufacturing in the Southern Cone are going to Brazil (the country in this subregion with the most diversified and complex industrial structure).
The European Union, then, has been the leading investor in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past decade, especially in the countries of South America.
Despite these substantial investment streams, European Union (above all, Spanish) interest in the region has waned over the decade as the investment focus shifted to other counties in the European Union bloc and to other developing regions.
Nevertheless, the widespread privatization of State-owned assets in the region in the late 1990s was a one-time event in a particular historical context.
Even so, it is also clear that aggregate FDI data at the balance of payments level are imperfect and, while indicative of general trends, are not conclusive and should be supplemented by looking at the strategies followed by the transnational companies that are the main drivers of these investment streams.
This challenge is compounded by factors such as the increasingly complex financial operations of transnational companies, measurement methodologies and degrees of coverage that vary from one country to the next, the existence of tax havens and the impossibility of breaking FDI down into greenfield investments and mergers and acquisitions.
First, only 12 countries of the region (the largest ones, which are also the ones that attract most of the total flows to the region) report data on the origin of FDI.
There is therefore no way to conduct specific analyses of certain countries.
In addition, some countries, like Brazil, do not report data on reinvested earnings.
Second, the existence of tax havens makes it difficult to determine the origin and destination of FDI, both for European investment in the region and for Latin American investment in Europe.
It is estimated that the developing countries lose hundreds of billions of dollars in tax revenue as a result of tax shelter strategies followed by transnational companies in tax havens throughout the world (Oxfam, 2000 and 2011; Cobham, 2005).
Third, aggregate data from EUROSTAT are sometimes inconsistent and cannot be disaggregated by country.
Fourth, FDI data are adjusted over time, due to the way information is compiled and to timing adjustments to the balance of payments capital and financial account.
All the same, aggregate data from various sources on FDI between the European Union and Latin America are relatively consistent and show similar patterns (see figure 1).
However, an especially sensitive aspect of FDI between the European Union and the region has to do with the Netherlands, which has rules that make it especially attractive to transnationals as a platform for investing in third countries.
Some examples are (i) the so-called ‘participation exemption’ that exempts dividends and capital gains from subsidiary companies from corporate income tax ; (ii) the large double taxation treaty network; (iii) guarantees that provide certainty as to how income from subsidiaries will be taxed; and (iv) the special tax regime for intra-company loans.
These rules lead transnational companies to channel FDI, interest, dividend and royalty flows between the parent company in one country and its subsidiaries in other countries through entities located in the Netherlands (Van Dijk, Weyzig and Murphy, 2006).
These peculiarities call for caution when assessing FDI flows from the Netherlands.
The data compiled by the central bank of Brazil includes FDI through special financial institutions, completely distorting FDI from the Netherlands to Brazil.
Contrary to the conclusion that could be drawn from the central bank of Brazil data, the flow of investment from the Netherlands to Brazil between 2005 and 2010 has been fairly stable, at about US$ 1 billion per year.
This highlights the importance of supplementing FDI balance of payments statistics with other kinds of information —mergers and acquisitions, investment projects and business strategies— to better understand the issue.
Business strategies followed by european transnationals European Union transnational companies operate in an array of production and service sectors in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Over the past decade, European companies have implemented different corporate strategies in the region (natural-resource-seeking and market-seeking) through a variety of mechanisms (greenfield investments, mergers and acquisitions and alliances with local companies).
This section describes the main strategies followed by European companies, the investment mechanisms they use and the international and regional factors that have shaped their behaviour in Latin America and the Caribbean.
In search of natural resources: the oil companies make their way as they go, and mining investment and profits continue to expand Over the past few years European companies have continued to roll out active natural-resource-seeking strategies.
The long tradition of European investment in such operations in the region has recently gotten an extra boost from favourable raw materials prices (see figure II.10) and high demand from emerging economies.
The European companies that have most actively followed this strategy have been British hydrocarbon and mining companies and Spanish hydrocarbon firms.
Natural-resource-seeking strategy has been especially forceful in the Southern Cone countries, although there have also been projects in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean.
FDI destination sectors in the Southern Cone countries have tilted more towards natural resources in a process known as “reprimarization” —a shift back towards primary production (ECLAC, 2011).
Over the past few years, these countries, which traditionally have been recipients of substantial amounts of FDI in natural resources, have seen this pattern take further hold, above all in the mining sector.
But the hydrocarbon sector and the mining sector have followed different paths.
While the hydrocarbon transnationals were the most active in major acquisitions in the late 1990s and early 2000s, it is the mining companies that have implemented the more aggressive strategies over the past few years via large acquisitions and ambitious expansion plans in the region.
There is a wide range of business strategies in the hydrocarbon sector, and they change in keeping with developments at the country level, regulatory changes (including nationalizations) and political developments because the sector is so important strategically and politically.
The European companies need to position themselves in a sector dominated by large State-owned enterprises like Petrobras, PDVSA, Pemex and ECOPETROL.
They have had to implement flexible strategies, adapt to regulatory changes and, in many cases, conduct important negotiations with the States.
Marked price fluctuations have forced companies to constantly change their budgets and relocate assets in line with operating costs specific to each oilproducing area.
European transnationals have taken an active stance and stepped up investment both for their own account and in partnership with other companies, thus helping to fuel surging investment in natural resources in the region.
Spain’s Repsol is one of the largest European hydrocarbon companies; it operates in 14 countries in the region, and its drive for internationalization has centred on Latin America and the Caribbean (46% of its 2010 profits came from operations in the region).
And Repsol has embarked on new exploration and drilling operations, particularly in Brazil, that are expected to boost its oil reserves significantly.
In April 2012 the Government of Argentina nationalized most of Repsol’s assets in the country.
British Petroleum began extracting natural gas in Trinidad and Tobago, as did Shell in Peru through a consortium with a United States company.
PDVSA is working on agreements with European companies (such as Italy’s Eni SpA and the French company Total) Between 2005 and 2010, 30% of FDI in Colombia went to the oil sector. 12 In the mid-1990s Repsol, like other Spanish firms, began to expand internationally, mainly in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Its strategy was based on the acquisition of firms with a dominant position, given its own experience in managing monopoly structures 13 Repsol-Sinopec is now the leading holder of exploration rights in the Espíritu Santo basin.
There is widespread interest in oil exploration in Brazil. to operate the Orinoco Oil Belt.
It seems that in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, private participation is a priority for securing new investment and increasing the production of crude oil.
However, several factors have made it difficult to reach agreements with European countries.
For one thing, the nationalization of assets a few years ago impacted several transnationals in the sector.14 For another, the relatively high cost of exploiting crude oil in the area, coupled with funding problems at some companies because of the international crisis, is a constraint for new investment.
The mining sector has been booming over the past few years, and European companies are active players.
Robust demand from the emerging economies (above all, China) and rising prices have spurred companies to step up their exploration efforts and launch new exploitation projects, especially in metal mining (see figure II.10).
Companies have sought to secure access to funding and greater economies of scale.
Investments in mining are indeed the main factor behind surging FDI in natural resources and the reprimarization of economies.
In this sector, regulatory frameworks have been relatively stable, ensured favourable rules of the game for greenfield investment and, along with rising prices, increased profitability (see figure II.11).
These levels of profitability have given rise to robust debate as to revenue from the region’s natural resources and national policies concerning management of non-renewable resources.
Among the major European companies is Anglo American (United Kingdom), one of the largest mining companies in the world.
It has operations in 11 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, with stand-alone subsidiaries or joint ventures in Chile, Brazil Peru, Mexico, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia focused on copper, ferro-nickel and coal.
Anglo-American’s largest operations in the region are in Chile and Brazil; they account for 20% of the company’s jobs.
In Colombia, it has a 33% stake in the world’s largest open-pit coal mine (Cerrejón); in Venezuela it owns more than 90% of the firm Loma de Níquel.
Anglo-American’s sales in South America stood at US$ 7.5 billion in 2010 —25% of its worldwide sales.
Anglo American has recently scaled up its operations in the region through major acquisitions, projects and greenfield investments located above all in Brazil and Chile.
Its investments in the region over the past decade top US$ 10 billion (Anglo American, 2011).
One of its largest acquisitions is the purchase of IronX Mineração and Sistema-Minas Rio, both in Brazil, for more than US$ 4 billion.
In Chile, Anglo American embarked on a massive expansion project at its Los Bronces Division in 2007 involving an investment of US$ 2.3 billion.
The project includes new grinding facilities, a flotation plant and new pipe conveyors and pumping stations.
It will boost production from a current output of 230,000 tons to 400,000 tons a year and make the Los Bronces Division the fifth largest copper mine in the world in terms of output.15 In 2011 Anglo American took legal action in Chile against the world’s largest mining company, Corporación Nacional del Cobre (CODELCO).
The dispute involves the Chilean company’s call option on a 49% stake in Anglo American Sur, one of Anglo American’s subsidiaries in Chile, and dates back to the late 1970s when Compañía Minera Disputada was privatized, acquired by the United States company Exxon and subsequently sold to Anglo American.
The conflict has captured considerable public and media attention and raised questions as to mining and tax policy in Chile.
How the legal battle will play out and what the implications might be remain to be seen.
FDI in some natural-resource-intensive manufacturing sectors has also soared over the past few years.
The pulp and paper sector has recently seen major acquisitions, such as Finland’s UPM-Kymmene acquisitions in Uruguay for US$ 2.404 billion, as well as greenfield investments.
Initially, its strategy was acquisitions-based and led to a broad network of subsidiaries in Brazil (1998), Argentina (1998), Chile (1999) and Mexico (2003) that also manage operations Another major Anglo American operation in Brazil is the US$1.9 billion Barro Alto ferro-nickel project. in other countries, including Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay, and in the Caribbean.
Stora Enzo has recently adopted a natural-resource-seeking strategy based on alliances and joint ventures with companies in the region, like Odebrecht and Aracruz in Brazil and Arauco in Chile and Uruguay.
So, then, investments based on a natural-resourceseeking strategy have surged in recent years, especially in the mining sector.
The appreciation of several Latin American currencies against the dollar has boosted the purchasing power of the population and, coupled with a growing middle class, opened significant business opportunities for companies whose strategy is to seek local and regional markets for manufactures.
The 2008 crisis and the current financial situation in Europe have put the brakes on some investments, especially as the international markets see credit tighten.
Companies have not cut back on production capacity, but they have postponed or halted some expansion projects.
European companies following this strategy are found in a range of manufacturing sectors, especially the attract European participation in new projects.
European natural resource companies will have to face the growing presence of Chinese firms in the region, which are starting to invest heavily in hydrocarbons and metal mining in Latin America and the Caribbean and are expected to step up such investment in the coming years (ECLAC, 2011).
The prospects for European investment in this area are good, both for hydrocarbons and for mining.
And major projects (especially in mining) are slated in Chile, Peru and Ecuador over the coming years; European countries will be active participants.
Some European investments, particularly in the automobile and electronics sector in Mexico, can be regarded as driven by an exportefficiency-seeking strategy.
In this section, such investments are viewed as part of a market-seeking strategy for manufactures.
These operations do indeed tilt towards a search for local and regional markets for manufactured goods: most of them aim to export to the United States and Canadian market under the umbrella of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
Relatively few European investments in the region can really be seen as pursuing a low-cost-seeking strategy aimed at establishing global export platforms.
One example of this is Volkswagen’s manufacturing plant in the State of Puebla that assembles the Beetle model. automobile, food and beverage, electronics, chemical, steel and tobacco industries.
Many of these companies were early internationalizers and have been operating in the region for decades.
European companies have tended to focus on the larger economies (Brazil, Mexico and Argentina), but many of their operations there supply other countries in the region.
In recent years, European firms following this strategy have benefited from the good economic performance and lower volatility posted by a number of countries in the region, such as Panama (8.8% average GDP growth over the past five years), Peru (7.1%), Argentina (6.9%), Uruguay (6.5%), the Dominican Republic (5.9%) and Paraguay (5.6%).
Brazil, with its vast market, has been a preferred destination for these investments.
One of the distinguishing features of European manufacturing investments in the region is that they are more slanted towards greenfield projects than investments from other countries are.
Official data on FDI cannot be disaggregated between greenfield investments and acquisitions, but information on cross-border investment projects gives an idea of the share going to greenfield investment.
The automobile sector has attracted considerable European investment over the past decade, especially in Brazil and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico and Argentina (ECLAC, 2010).
At the forefront have been European companies that internationalized early in the region, like Volkswagen18 and Fiat; there are also relative newcomers, including Renault and PSA Peugeot-Citroën.
In Brazil, where attractive innovations such as flex-fuel engines have been developed, automobile company strategy is to tap the local and regional market on the strength of their compact vehicles (ECLAC, 2010).
Research and development activities at subsidiaries in Brazil are an increasingly important part of global innovation strategies pursued by their parent companies (see section D).
There are many factors behind Brazil’s emergence as a destination for such investments; among the strongest are soaring local demand and regional integration through MERCOSUR.
By contrast, European companies operating in Mexico (chiefly, Volkswagen) are following export-oriented strategies targeting, above all, the United States under the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).19 Between 2003 and 2011, Brazil and Mexico received 38% and 24%, respectively, of the new jobs associated with greenfield projects in manufactures.
Volkswagen turns out 1.3 million vehicles in the region —nearly 20% of its worldwide output— mainly in Brazil 19 Fiat produces the Fiat 500 model in Toluca, Mexico.
Fiat and PSA Peugeot-Citroën have production plants in Argentina as well; these operations seek to leverage MERCOSUR and production complementarities with other subsidiaries in Brazil.
European companies are investing heavily in the automobile industry in the region.
Volkswagen has announced US$ 400 million in projects for producing its new Beetle model at its plant in the State of Puebla in Mexico and will invest nearly US$ 4.5 billion in its four production plants in Brazil.
Volkswagen announced it will invest some US$120 million in a new production line to make gearboxes in Argentina.
PSA Peugeot-Citroën said that it plans to invest US$ 960 million in Brazil during 2012-2015; this announcement underscored the increasing importance of the company’s operations in Brazil as it drastically restructures its European operations, cutting more than 6,000 jobs.
European companies have been very active in the steel sector, as well, especially in Brazil —drawn by that country’s ranking as the leading producer of iron ore in the world— and Mexico (ECLAC, 2010).
ArcelorMittal, the leading European company in the sector, has made major acquisitions, including the Lázaro Cárdenas steel company in Mexico, as well as greenfield investments (especially in Brazil).
ArcelorMittal is unique in the industry because it combines a high degree of internationalization with a widely diversified product mix.
Germany’s ThyssenKrupp Steel and Franco/German Vallourec are other European steel companies with substantial operations in the region (mostly in Brazil and, to a lesser extent, in Mexico).
Among the highprofile projects is the creation of Companhia Siderúrgica do Atlântico in Rio de Janeiro under a strategic alliance between ThyssenKrupp Steel and Brazil’s Vale, involving more than US$ 6 billion.
The company’s production capacity, at five million tons of steel slabs, means that a large share of crude steel will be produced outside Germany for the first time.
The 2008 crisis forced this company, too, to put off some investment projects (ECLAC, 2009).
European transnationals have also made major acquisitions in the food and beverage sector in Mexico, Colombia and Brazil.
Heineken (Netherlands) bought the beer operations of Mexico’s Grupo Femsa, and Interbrew (Belgium) bought AmBev in Brazil; these operations totalled more than US$ 1 billion.
Italy’s Parmalat and the French company Danone are two major players in the food sector.
European company investments and operations in the electronics sector are concentrated in Brazil and Mexico.
Some of these companies, such as Siemens (Germany) are leaders in innovation and R&D (see section D).
The cosmetics and cleaning product sector is a traditional target for European corporate investment in the region, both through acquisitions and through greenfield projects.
Germany’s Henkel has two regional facilities (in Mexico and Brazil); it is following an acquisitionbased strategy focused on Mexico.
Investment in telecommunications, energy, banking and infrastructure jumped, usually linked to the purchase of State assets or subsequent intra-company purchases of previously public assets.
This was particularly relevant for Spanish firms,20 but some Portuguese, French and Italian companies were involved as well.
European companies were involved in some of the largest acquisitions in the region, making them leaders in their markets.
Spanish firms in particular saw in the region an opportunity for needed growth as Spain faced new patterns of competition following its entry into the European Union (ECLAC, 2002).
At the head of this process was a handful of major companies: Telefónica in telecommunications, Endesa in energy and the banks Santander and BBVA in the financial sector.
But the early 2000s were rough for European companies —especially for Spanish firms.
The Argentine crisis of 2001 dealt a severe blow to companies that were operating in a regulated environment.
Many were forced to consolidate and has implemented significant greenfield projects as well.
In 2001, L’Oréal announced a new manufacturing plant in Mexico that will supply the United States and Canadian market (L’Oréal, 2011).
European companies whose strategy is to seek local and regional markets for manufactures have, then, been very active in recent years.
These firms have benefited from the region’s good economic performance, lower volatility and growing purchasing power.
It bears noting that behind this generalization lie many national situations, as well as specificities at the sector and individual company level.
This process started in the 1990s, when large Spanish companies (medium-sized in European and global terms) were forced into an active international expansion strategy in order to become more competitive and avoid hostile takeover by their European competitors.
To this end they drew on massive surpluses generated in the local market thanks to their natural monopoly status in some sectors and the booming stock market, enabling them to raise capital for funding ambitious expansion plans. the heavy outlays they had made, by restructuring principal subsidiaries in the region.
The decade also brought problems in the wake of regulatory changes that shifted patterns of competition in some sectors, especially in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Plurinational State of Bolivia; this impacted the operations and investments of some European companies.
Companies have begun to benefit from the region’s good economic performance and growing political and regulatory stability, and from rising demand for services on the part of a population whose purchasing power is growing.
Privatizations have come to an end; the acquisitions that are taking place are linked to corporate positioning strategies.
The main problems in investing in service sectors have to do with the regulatory environment and patterns of competition in individual countries.
This is increasingly challenging the capacity and objectives of the region’s regulatory agencies overseeing services such as telecommunications and energy.21 The operations of major European companies in the service sector are now in a phase marked by greater stability and consolidation; most of them are following strategies for the long run.
Instead of major acquisitions and subsequent sale of assets, the priority is to consolidate through longterm strategies, develop economies of scale and gain market share with high profit margins in order to ensure a solid global position.
For some companies (especially Spanish See chapter IV for a more detailed discussion of the energy sector and new ventures on the part of European companies in the field of renewable and non-conventional energies.
For an assessment of FDI and business strategies in the telecommunications sector, see ECLAC (2011 and 2008).
For the tourism and software sectors, see ECLAC (2009 and 2011), respectively. ones), expanding in Latin America and the Caribbean was key for acquiring know-how and experience and becoming major transnationals.
Firms like Telefónica were thus able to extend their internationalization to other regions.
The prospects for major Spanish corporate investments in the region are promising; Latin America and the Caribbean is likely to continue to account for a growing share of their operations (IE Business School, 2012).
The Latin American and Caribbean subsidiaries of major Spanish companies are highly independent, but they are also subject to stringent financing and local management requirements.
The high profitability of their operations in the region is contributing a good deal to their global profitability, and it has helped their parent companies improve their balance sheets and better weather the financial crisis.
For example, 60% of Telefónica’s approximately US$ 22 billion in operating income before depreciation and amortization (OIBDA) for 2010 came from operations in the region (see figure II.13).
The OIBDA margin for its operations in Latin America was 53%; for its operations in Spain and the rest of Europe the figure was 45% and 26%, respectively (Telefónica, 2011).
Operating income from the Latin American operations of the banks Santander and BBVA accounted for 54% and 48% of the total, respectively (see chapter III).
Endesa (acquired in 2009 by Italy’s Enel) reported global operating income on the order of US$ 7 billion in 2010; more than 50% was generated in the region.
The situation varies among sectors and companies, but their operations in the region are positive for the major Spanish companies, especially in view of the current global economic environment and, particularly, the situation in Spain.
Rest of the world the basis of annual reports of the respective companies.
In recent years, several factors have led European companies to set up or expand operations in service subsectors in the region.
Some of these factors are good economic performance, a young demographic structure and higher purchasing power in segments of the population where there is space for market growth, along with significant infrastructure gaps in the region.
This process has taken place in sectors with a long-standing European presence, such as retail and tourism (ECLAC, 2011), and in relatively new ones that include construction, logistics and financial activities (insurance).
The European presence has diversified in terms of sectors, and the number of companies with operations in the region has surged.
The new companies are relatively small compared with those that first established operations in the region, and the amounts invested are smaller, too, but it is clear that Latin America and the Caribbean is well positioned as an attractive destination for European companies.
French and Portuguese investments in the retail sector have a long history and a substantial footprint in the region.
The Carrefour group has an extensive worldwide presence; in the region, it operates through more than one thousand stores in Argentina, Colombia and Brazil.
The only regions where its sales grew in 2011 were Latin America and the Caribbean and Asia, particularly China.
Sonae’s strategy has been to position itself globally based on alliances with local companies.
In Brazil (the main destination for its investments in the region), Sonae has joined forces with Enplanta Engenharia in managing shopping centres in several cities (ECLAC, 2007).
Studies show that this sector has good potential for investment growth in the coming years, especially in Uruguay, Chile and Brazil (ATKearney, 2011).
In the construction sector, several European companies (mostly Spanish, such as Sacyr Vallehermoso, Acciona, ACS and Ferrovial, but some German ones, too) have been setting up operations in the region.
Significant business opportunities and wide-ranging concession programmes in the region have drawn these Spanish firms to set up operations and thus offset the construction industry’s situation in their home market.
In 2006, Sacyr acquired a 50% stake in Europistas, a highway concession operator with operations in Chile, Brazil and Costa Rica.
Other service sectors that have been a significant draw for European companies are logistics, media, financial services (see chapter III) and casinos.
The German global logistics firm DHL has a large footprint in the region.
In recent years, facing substantial increases in the price of fuel, an essential input for its operations, DHL has restructured drastically and consolidated its operations worldwide.
By contrast, in Latin America and the Caribbean DHL has stepped up its investments in the light of good prospects for market growth in the next few years.
It has a pipeline of several greenfield projects in the region; in 2008 it opened two new operating hubs (one in Panama and one in Mexico), four sales centres in Brazil and a customer service centre in Argentina.
In 2009, DHL opened, in Mexico, its most advanced dispatch port and call center in the region.
And the media subsector is seeing investments from companies that are not global heavyweights but do, like Spain’s PRISA group, have a dominant position in the region.
On the other hand, investments in certain financial sectors reveal the difficulties that some European companies have encountered in the region and that have, in a few cases, even forced them out of their market position.
For example, the commercial banking, investment management and insurance group ING (Netherlands) had operations in Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Mexico and Chile and a positioning strategy including acquisitions, expansion projects and alliances with domestic firms (like Peru’s AFP Integra pension fund manager).
But ING was hit hard by the crisis and decided to divest all of its investments in the Latin American insurance sector by 2013.
The goal is to scale down and focus on the European market.
ING’s decision is linked to the terms of a sizeable loan from the Government of the Netherlands during the 2008 financial crisis.
The crisis, then, has forced the company to virtually withdraw from the Latin American market, although it will maintain its commercial banking operations in Mexico.
In the gambling casino sector, the Spanish group Codere is pursuing an active expansion strategy in the region, issuing bonds to fund new acquisitions and, potentially, listing its operations in the region on the stock market.
Noteworthy among its acquisitions is the takeover of CIE Las Américas in Mexico in 2012.
European transnationals have a large and, in some cases, long-standing presence in Latin America and the Caribbean.
This makes it hard to list all of the economic and social impacts of their operations in the region, although some can be highlighted (see table II.4).
Investments associated with natural-resource-seeking strategies have had a substantial impact on exports, especially in the countries of South America.
Such operations promote job creation in non-urban areas and in related infrastructure, thus improving social inclusion in isolated communities.
Among the issues that have surfaced are their minimal production integration with the local economy, problems with local communities and environmental pollution.
European investments under a strategy to seek markets for manufactures also have socioeconomic impacts.
They include rising exports (automobile industry), the creation of jobs and production linkages (food and beverages, chemicals, automobile industry), innovation, R&D and technology transfer (automobiles and electronics) (see section D), as well as enhanced production and export capacity thanks to European corporate investments in greenfield manufacturing projects.
Many of these investments are associated with creating and building capacity and generating highly skilled jobs in the region, especially in Brazil.
Challenges and issues have to do with insufficient linkages, dependence on imported inputs and low value added in some areas (assembly operations in Mexico, for example), low labour intensity (due in part to the nature of individual sectors, such as the steel industry) and environmental pollution (chemicals) (see table II.4).
Investments under service-market-seeking strategies are increasing the population’s access to telecommunications (ECLAC, 2011) and electric power (see chapter IV).
This has clearly boosted social inclusion (by, for example, widespread electrification and greater access to and use of information and communication technologies), but there are still marked divides because services such as telecommunications and banking are concentrated in medium and high socioeconomic segments.
The main issues and difficulties here have to do with regulatory frameworks in individual countries and sectors (see chapter IV for the power and renewable and non-conventional energy sector) and negative impacts on the environment and on indigenous communities.
In the banking sector, private investment is having a crowding-out effect on local and development banks (see chapter III).
Private investment crowding out local and development banks Low value added, focus on static advantages, dependence on imported components.
In those sectors where difficulties and issues arise, the countries need to improve their regulatory frameworks and the fit between European investments and reality in Latin America, promote the benefits and potential of FDI and the corporate stock of knowledge while ensuring environmentally friendly investment and compliance with environmental protection standards.
European transnationals and research and development Transnational companies from the European Union have such a wide footprint in Latin America and the Caribbean that it is hard to catalogue them all.
However, as seen below, their research and development activities are very important for the region.
This section first discusses Transnational companies and the internationalization of research and development: the region is not the prime destination for European companies Over the past few decades, globalization has woven a tighter fabric of global interdependence; transnational companies and technological change are at the centre of the process.
These companies are a driving force behind the internationalization of innovation and R&D (UNCTAD, 2005).22 They are seeking to improve the use of existing assets so as to leverage their competitive advantages in response to international market scenarios.
And they have a strategic rationale: boost their own capacities and thereby create, absorb or internalize new technological assets (Narula and Zanfei, 2008; Griffith, Redding and Van Reenen, 2004).
In this setting, the factors that transnationals weigh when deciding where to locate their R&D centres, especially when developing countries are involved, include market potential and the quality of human resources, cooperation with other agents in the national innovation system and intellectual property regimes.
In the past decade, transnational companies have stepped up investments in R&D outside their home country (Hall, the internationalization of R&D, the role that European transnationals are playing in the process and how Latin America and the Caribbean is positioned.
It then looks at European corporate R&D in the region as a key to assessing the most powerful and permanent impacts of FDI.
Corporate R&D may be defined as work undertaken on a systematic basis in order to increase the stock of knowledge, and the use of this stock of knowledge to devise new applications.
It has been estimated that the 700 major transnationals account for 70% of private spending on R&D. 2010), for a variety of reasons.
Many greenfield projects associated with R&D centres are being located outside these companies’ home countries —increasingly in the emerging countries of Asia, especially China and India.
R&D spending in Asian countries has surpassed European Union levels and is expected to top United States levels in the next few years thanks primarily to marked increases in China (Goldman Sachs, 2010).
There are several ways to class R&D centres at subsidiaries of transnational companies in emerging countries.
Obviously, the flow of knowledge between parent company and subsidiaries (and thus the flow of benefits to FDI recipient countries) depends on the nature of the subsidiaries and on the rationale for internationalizing R&D.
The more the rationale has to do with better using and exploiting technology assets and existing capacities at the firm, the greater the flow of knowledge from parent company to subsidiaries.
Conversely, where R&D is being internationalized to create and absorb new knowledge, the greater the flow of knowledge from subsidiaries to parent company will be (Narula and Zanfei, 2008).
The benefits of internationalizing R&D for the home country and the recipient country encompass several dimensions (see table II.5).
Potential benefits for the recipient country include local technical capacity building, highly skilled jobs, human resource development and productivity spillovers (through demonstration and competition effects).
Potential benefits for home economies involve access to new sources of knowledge and expertise, greater and better access to external markets, new knowledge to be harnessed in home markets and longer product life cycles.
On a more general level, R&D at transnational companies is shaped by the nature of the subsidiaries —something that the empirical and theoretical literature on the impacts of FDI and transnational companies on developing countries has been examining more closely in the past decade (see box II.2).
Voigt, “Drivers and impacts in the globalization of corporate R&D: an introduction based on the European experience”, Industrial and Corporate Change, vol. 20, No. 2, 2011.
These characteristics refer to key factors, such as corporate strategy and sector of activity, and to others that include technological capacity, interconnection with the global value chain and integration in knowledge networks.
These characteristics of subsidiaries also apply to potential R&D activities, albeit in a broader sense and referring to company operations as a whole.
FDI with a market-seeking strategy generates more linkages and jobs because high-quality inputs are less relevant and companies following such a strategy generally operate in sectors with greater local-content requirements, such as the food industry.
Firms following export-efficiency-seeking strategies generate relatively few linkages because their input quality and cost requirements are high (Tavares and Young, 2005).
But it is also intuitive to think that the linkages effectively generated by operations seeking efficiency tend to be deeper and thus yield more in terms of product and process upgrading.
It is therefore useful to distinguish between the breadth of linkages generated (which is greater in a marketseeking strategy) and their depth when they are generated (which is greater when the strategy is to seek export efficiency).
Technological capacities at subsidiaries can also help explain the impacts of transnational companies.
Subsidiaries are more than just a replica of the parent company; they have, just to a certain extent, some of the advantages of a transnational company on top of their own technological activities and their own capacities and competencies that shape any linkage creation, spillover or technology transfer process (Marín and Bell, 2004).
The value chains of which subsidiaries are a part can be dispersed or concentrated.
In dispersed value chains, transnationals configure their value chain as a minireplica of the parent company.
The interdependence of subsidiary and parent company activities is likely to be low, as is the risk of enhancing local linkages, so the expectation would be greater creation of jobs and linkages.
On the other hand, transnationals can have concentrated value chains, with few activities at each location (Hansen, Pedersen and Petersen, 2008).
But if the linkages are indeed generated and inputs sourced locally, greater upgrading of employment and local content is to be expected.
Transnational parent-subsidiary coordination and degree of subsidiary independence are also useful for determining the existence of linkages and job creation (Marín and Arza, 2009).
The more autonomy a subsidiary has to set up a supplier and product development system, the greater the linkages and job creation will be.
But once the linkages have been generated they tend to be stronger —and the flows of knowledge greater— when subsidiaries are more highly integrated and coordinated with the parent company (Fosgren, 2002).
There is empirical evidence that these factors are useful for understanding the impacts of FDI and transnational companies in the region.
For example, Marín and Bell (2004) and Giuliani and Marín (2007) show that the existence of subsidiaries in Argentine industry does not ensure spillovers for domestic companies, but rather that the capacities and knowledge accumulated at the subsidiaries themselves are the source of productivity spillovers.
In a study of a small number of assembly operations in Mexico, Sargent and Matthews (2006) show that greater responsibility inside a transnational’s network is acquired through business effort by the subsidiaries’ managers rather than being guaranteed by the parent company.
Giuliani (2008) looks at technology transfers in investments in high-tech sectors in Costa Rica.
The results suggest that subsidiaries tend to not transfer knowledge to local companies, even if linkages are established.
During that same period, the United States and Canada (chiefly, the United States), were at the receiving end of 22% of R&D investment.
But the reason most often cited for locating R&D in the home country is the low cost of researchers.
Innovation and research and development at subsidiaries of European companies in the region: Brazil consolidates its leadership Innovation and R&D at transnational companies, whether they are based in Europe or elsewhere, have varying degrees of relevance among the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Although statistical evidence at the microdata level is not strictly comparable from one country to another, covers different periods and sectors and has its own limitations, it does cast some light on the issue when larger economies are involved.
Subsidiaries of transnational companies in Brazil and Argentina figure relatively heavily in manufacturing innovation and R&D.
In Brazil, subsidiaries of transnationals account for 35% of sales and some 47% of spending on R&D.
In Argentina, they make up nearly 50% of R&D spending (De Negri and Laplane, 2009).
In Brazil and Argentina, transnationals account for nearly 42% of overall spending on innovation.24 By contrast, in Mexico and Chile transnational companies play a smaller role in innovation and R&D.
In the case of Chile, statistical information for 2005 suggests that transnational companies are spending more on R&D but still account for a relatively low share, in the area of 12% (Vergara, 2012).
In Mexico, subsidiaries of transnationals account for some 25% of R&D spending (De Negri and Laplane, 2009).
Information from microdata on these countries does not show how much can be attributed to European transnationals, but information on cross-border R&D projects in the region yields some data in this regard: 64% of cross-border investment linked to R&D projects comes from the European Union (see figure II.15).
These activities are important as a mechanism for generating technology and knowledge transfer to the production structure, enhanced local technical capacity, productivity spillovers and highly-skilled jobs, among other things.
R&D is highly concentrated in Brazil (ECLAC, 2011), the only country in the region that European companies see as a prime location for such activities (see figure II.16).
Traditionally, R&D at Brazilian subsidiaries of transnational companies has focused on developing and tailoring products and technology for the local market and, in some cases, for the regional market.
After the deregulations that took place in the 1990s, subsidiaries cut back sharply on local technology and innovation activities (Cassiolato, Corporate spending on innovation breaks down into R&D, acquisition of machinery and equipment, purchase of knowledge from external agents (licenses are one example) and workforce training.
But over the past decade Brazil has been taking on an increasingly more prominent role in the global R&D strategies pursued by European transnationals.
Compared with local companies, subsidiaries of transnationals in Brazil are more innovation-oriented and invest more in R&D (Franco and Quadros, 2004).
The automobile industry is one of the sectors that have seen the largest increase in R&D in Brazil and where subsidiaries have made the biggest efforts in terms of capacity building for product innovation (Reddy, 2011).
Assembly operations and auto parts manufacturers alike have enhanced local engineering, stepped up hiring, opened laboratories, formalized product development processes and ratcheted up workforce training (Costa, 2005).
Subsidiaries of European companies The pharmaceutical industry has followed a different path; only a handful of transnationals are doing R&D in Brazil. have played a significant role in this and are increasingly involved in global product innovation.
One example is the accumulation of capacities and competencies in developing suspension systems (Volkswagen is a case in point) and small flex-fuel engines (up to 1000 cubic centimetres) in a compact-car oriented market (ECLAC, 2010).
Firms that are relatively new to the market (like France’s Renault and PSA Peugeot-Citroën) have pursued a centralized innovation strategy.
Their strategy depends on the technological capacities of the parent company, as happens with many traditional subsidiaries.
Companies that have been in Brazil longer (such as Volkswagen and Fiat) have followed a relatively decentralized strategy where subsidiaries have begun to partner with their parent companies on strategies for worldwide product innovation.
Over the past decade, Fiat has stepped up investments in laboratories, facilities and workforce and upgraded the technology used in its operations (Quadros and Consoni, 2009).
Volkswagen’s product development unit does not have a global mandate: its focus is on creating and tailoring models for emerging countries.
Both examples fit the definition of subsidiaries with limited relevance, where R&D has been oriented towards designing regional products from global platforms.
The strategy followed by Volkswagen’s truck and bus division is among the examples of greatest product development and capacity-building autonomy.26 The Resende, Rio de Janeiro In December 2008, Germany’s MAN acquired the Volkswagen truck and bus division.
Volkswagen plans to merge Scania and MAN to create the largest truck manufacturing company. plant is the group’s first completely independent operation; Volkswagen is in charge of product design, engineering, supply chain management, quality control and marketing.
The plant is laid out in modular units, where the suppliers assemble not only the modules but the final product as well, with substantial process innovation (Quadros and Consoni, 2009).
In other manufacturing sectors, such as steel and chemicals, European companies are also making a considerable contribution to innovation and R&D.
The Brazilian subsidiary of the British steel company Foseco plays a crucial role in the company’s global strategy.
Foseco has operations in more than 30 countries and is well positioned in a range of industry segments.
One of the company’s four global excellence centres is in Brazil; it has developed major innovations in smelting that exemplify the innovations that the Brazilian market has contributed to the global market (Borini Oliveira and Guevara, 2005).
The French chemicals company Rhodia, which has two manufacturing plants in Brazil, has one of its five worldwide R&D centres there.
These centres make up a global work network; many projects receive support from other centres.
The overarching goal is to offer products tailored to the region’s markets, although some products developed in Brazil are for the rest of the world as well.
Other European companies have been building up their operations in Brazil over long periods of time.
At first, during the 1970s, the Brazilian subsidiary only assembled modular equipment and required minimal skills from its workers (Schreiber and Pincherio, 2009).
As operations consolidated and the subsidiary built up its capacities, the company upgraded its operations technologically.
By the 1980s the Brazilian subsidiary had become a domestic and regional supply hub, but it still did not conduct R&D.
In the late 1990s, prompted by environmental requirements instead of a strategic decision, the company started investing in R&D in Brazil.
This led to a substantial exchange of employees between the parent company and the subsidiary, boosting the company’s global capacity.
The subsidiary has continued to take on greater responsibility and autonomy to face new R&D challenges (Schreiber and Pincherio, 2009).
In the telecommunications sector, subsidiaries of transnationals seem to be less involved in innovation.
Several ICT sector initiatives have promoted local R&D and have attracted substantial investment on the part of European companies such as Ericsson and Siemens.
But the subsidiaries of European transnationals have not been involved in implementing global innovations (Camillo, Galina and Consoni, 2008, 2004).27 Siemens could be an exception in the industry: in 2005, Siemens Brazil had more than a thousand employees (direct and indirect) working on R&D and engineering; it is partnering with a number of universities and research centres.
The prime objective is to develop and tailor products for the local market.
However, these operations do not seem to be heavily integrated with the company’s global R&D efforts (Reddy, 2011).
A number of R&D projects are currently under way; they are in high technology- and knowledge-content sectors such as chemicals, automobiles, biotechnology, and oil (see table II.6).
Brazil has built up substantial apacities in these sectors; much of the R&D conducted by foreign firms is done jointly with local companies and universities.
There is evidence that R&D at subsidiaries of transnationals encourages innovation and spending on R&D by local companies, thanks to demonstration and competition effects (Araujo, 2004).
So, then, transnational companies —European transnationals in particular— account for much of the innovation and R&D activities and spending in Brazil.28 They promote capacity building, technology transfer, human capital development and innovation among local companies.
It is not by chance that out of all the countries of the region Brazil has the most proactive industrial policy for promoting capacity building and encouraging innovation and change in the production structure.
Focusing on the link between industrial policy and innovation involving transnational corporate FDI should be a priority in order to promote the permanent benefits of these capital flows.
A research centre to be set up in Rio de Janeiro will be operated jointly with the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.
The project is part of a plan to invest a total of US$ 600 million in Brazil.
It will be the base for the firm’s R&D and engineering operations in Latin America; most of the staff will be engineers, researchers and highly skilled technicians.
A new innovation centre is to be set up to supplement R&D operations in the region.
The centre will partner with Brazilian universities on general solutions, prototype design, personalization and mobile and fixed communications.
CGGVeritas opened a technology centre in Rio de Janeiro after signing a technology cooperation agreement with Petrobras.
The centre will also seek alliances and joint projects with local universities specializing in geophysical studies.
It will focus on water chemistry, bioethanol and mining and oil applications.
The centre is similar to others that the company has in Finland, China, Germany and the United States.
The new centre will concentrate on aerospace, defence and urban innovation and will operate in cooperation with local companies, the Federal University of ABC and the FEI University Centre.
The information technologies act of 1991, updated in 2001 and 2003, provides incentives for R&D for companies that meet requirements such as investing at least 5% of sales revenue in R&D and partnering with universities and research centres.
But it does not seem to have enhanced the value added of local supply chains or built up technological and scientific capacity.
Among the problems that are holding back R&D at transnationals in Brazil are logistics and infrastructure issues and some shortages of skilled labour.
Trans-Latin companies in the European Union Latin America and the Caribbean joins the global trend Over the past decade, the growing economic weight of the emerging economies has shaken up the world economic scene.
The emerging economies (especially the BRIC countries) are increasingly relevant players in inward and outward FDI flows (ECLAC, 2011).
Transnational companies in emerging economies are deploying aggressive internationalization strategies; their climb up global business rankings reflects their growing influence (Sauvant and Mc Allister, 2010).
The region’s transnational companies —the trans-Latins— have ratcheted up investment over the past few years.
The most extensively internationalized firms are based in Brazil, Chile, Mexico and, more recently, Colombia.
To some extent, geographical coverage has been limited to neighbouring countries or to Latin America and the Caribbean; investing in countries of the European Union has been lower than in other regions.
Nevertheless, investment by trans-Latins in the European Union has jumped in recent years, from between US$ 2 billion and US$ 2.5 billion during the period 2006-2009 to a record US$ 12 billion in 2010 (see figure II.17).29 In just five years the region has invested upwards of US$ 20 billion in European Union countries.
Brazilian investments make up the bulk of this figure, at approximately 71% of Latin American investment in the European Union between 2006 and 2010, followed by Colombia (18%) and Chile The statistics show only FDI flows from Brazil, Chile and Colombia to European Union countries.
Among the countries with substantial investments abroad, Mexico is the only one missing: it does not publish official information on outbound FDI by destination. (11%).30 In aggregate terms, 13% of the investments made by transnationals from Brazil, Chile and Colombia between 2006 and 2010 went to the European Union (see figure II.18).
For Brazil, FDI flows refer only to capital contributions. a The Investments heading from the countries of the region to the European Union have different targets.
Brazil has the largest share of investments in Europe, with 16% of the total between 2006 and 2010 (see figure II.18); most of them were in the Netherlands, Portugal and France.
For Chilean and Colombian companies, Europe was at the receiving end of just 8% and 5%, respectively, of their investments during that same period.
According to official statistics, Chilean investment has been concentrated in Spain; FDI flows from Brazil refer only to capital contributions and do not include intra-company loans.
In 2010 Brazilian investment abroad in the form of capital contributions totalled US$ 26 billion, of which US$ 8 billion went to European Union countries. 31 In terms of FDI stock, Brazil has the largest investment footprint in Europe, followed by Mexico and Chile (see table II.A-6).
Colombia has invested heavily in the United Kingdom.32 Mexican investments in the European Union account for a large part of outbound investment from Latin America, but the figures cannot be determined from official statistics.
According to other information on new investment projects in the European Union announced by trans-Latins, Mexican companies account for more than 30% (see figure II.19).
Rep. of) (3 countries) United States and Canada Caribbean financial centres Asia and Oceania the basis of official figures and estimates. a The information is on investments outside Brazil, Chile and Colombia.
For Brazil, FDI flows refer only to capital contributions. basis of investment tracking information in “fDi Markets”, Financial Times.
Most Latin American FDI in Europe is in the basic industries (oil and petrochemicals, mining, cement and steel), in consumer goods sectors (the food industry).
From 1990 to date, more than 50% of Chilean investment in Europe has been in Spain (Openshaw, 2012). 33 The major Brazilian trans-Latins have internationalized on their own, without cooperation from financial institutions or government aid.
It should, however, be borne in mind that many of them were originally State-owned, showing how important the State and industrial policy were in inception and in the accumulation of capacities.
One of the distinctive features of their internationalization has been the combination of organizational capacities and management styles (Fleury and ohers, 2010).
The trans-Latin companies operating in Europe have used entry mechanisms that include acquisitions, greenfield investments and corporate alliances, and they have followed different strategies or combinations of strategies (see table II.7).
The first companies to internationalize in Europe pursued market-seeking strategies and, later, strategies in search of export efficiency and strategic assets.
The sectors most targeted by market-seeking are cement, steel, food, and engineering and construction.
Strategies in search of export efficiency are seen above all in the automobile and aeronautics industries, where representative examples include Sabó, Nemak (Alfa Group) and Embraer.
Strategicasset-seeking strategies are emerging in acquisitions of companies that have specific knowledge and capacities.
To cite an example, in 2008 Gerdau acquired Spain’s Sidenor, which stood out for its R&D operations and its knowledge of the European market.
That market was a vital one for the company’s positioning strategy (see box II.3).
For 2011-2015 it has announced plans to invest US$ 6 billion, 25% of which will go to its production plants abroad.
Gerdau’s diversified international presence encompasses 14 countries around the world, but its main production operations are in the United States and in other countries of the region, such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Colombia and Mexico.
Its European operations are concentrated in Spain, where it acquired Sidenor in 2008 for US$ 286 million.
The fact that Sidenor had an R&D centre was a major consideration for the acquisition.
The centre had developed production capacities and had business partners elsewhere in Europe, including assemblers and suppliers for the automobile industry (Vasconcelos, 2010).
The acquisition enabled Gerdau to launch its quest for internationalization in Europe from a more competitive position and rapidly procure Sidernor’s knowledge, technical and production capacities and position in the European market.
Product adaptation is another rationale for subsidiaries of trans-Latin companies to invest in operations abroad.
For example, Brazil’s WEG, which makes electric motors, has a major subsidiary in Portugal dedicated to special lines of high value-added motors.
This subsidiary plays an essential role in tailoring products to the local market and to European standards (Vasconcelos, 2010).
To this end it has an R&D unit that facilitates compliance with European product standards and certification requirements.
These two examples illustrate the rationale that can lead trans-Latins to do R&D in Europe.
Such operations can bring benefits for the home country, too, such as tapping into new sources of expertise, putting that expertise to work in the domestic market, lengthening the product life cycle and gaining a better foothold in external markets.
The largest acquisitions by trans-Latins in Europe reflect the importance of the mining, food, cement and steel sectors, among others.
Acquisitions in service subsectors have focused on banking and telecommunications, chiefly in Portugal and by Brazilian companies.
Most acquisitions in the steel and cement sectors have taken place in Spain or Portugal.
Some trans-Latins are using Spain as a gateway to the European market.
The main destinations for such investments are Portugal (34%), Spain (21%) and Poland (14%).
Petrobras, Sabó and Cemex are among the companies with major greenfield investments in the European Union.
Colombian companies have made acquisitions in the oil and mining sector and in some services, such as packaging.
Mexico’s Cemex is one of the most internationalized companies: more than 65% of its workforce and global sales are outside Mexico.
From its first acquisitions in Spain in 1992 to major ones in developed countries in the 2000s (Southdown in the United States, RMC in the United Kingdom and Rinker in Australia), Cemex is an early internationalizer among the trans-Latins.
It has stressed adopting and disseminating the best practices of acquiree companies as part of its capacity-building strategy.
Europe has become one of Cemex’s most important markets, both in terms of production and in terms of asset location and sales.
Cemex has production facilities in Austria, the Czech Republic, France, Germany and Spain; the European market has gone from 24% of the firm’s global sales to the current 35%.
Twenty-five percent of its cement production capacity is in Europe (Cemex, 2011).
Cemex recently opened a new 5,600-square-metre manufacturing plant in France at an investment of nearly US$ 3 million.
Cemex is a good example of how a trans-Latin company has generated advanced organizational capacities, learning from growth and domestic and international expansion (Lucea and Lesard, 2010).
The current situation in Europe is impacting transLatins with a market-focused strategy, but it can open new prospects, too, especially for acquisitions.
Value loss and the need for capital at some companies, plus conditions in countries like Spain, can mean opportunities for transLatins to continue internationalizing operations in Europe (see chapter I).
Investment projects announced in 2011 confirmed the trend for Latin American investments in the European Union (see table II.A-6).
Projects are under way in the steel, metal, cement and oil sectors, especially by major trans-Latins from Brazil and Mexico.
Fleury and others, “El camino se hace al andar: la trayectoria de las multinacionales brasileras”, Universia Business Review, No. 25, 2010; and annual reports of the respective companies. a The European countries mentioned are where the companies’ production operations are located.
Concluding remarks The European Union invested, on average, nearly US$ 30 billion a year in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past decade, accounting for 40% of total FDI and making it the largest investor in the region.
But Latin America and the Caribbean has been losing ground to other regions of the world as a location for European transnationals, for two reasons.
The first is the end, in the early 2000s, of the sweeping privatizations that drew in many Spanish companies.
The second is the shift in focus by Spanish transnationals (the main drivers of European FDI in the region) towards investment within the European Union economic bloc and in other developing regions, such as Asia.
Nevertheless, the flow of European FDI to the region surged in the second half of the past decade even though it was distributed unevenly among subregions.
The uptrend in European FDI centred on South America: Brazil was the leading recipient, with more than 50% of total FDI.
South America’s rising commodity prices and growing economies attracted greenfield investments associated with strategies seeking natural resources and markets for manufactures.
By contrast, European FDI towards Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean held relatively stable; this region was hit harder by the economic crisis in the United States and global financial turmoil, which had the most significant impact on investments, especially from Europe.
The sectors targeted by European investment were determined by the production structure of FDI sending and receiving countries.
Spanish (and, to a lesser extent, Portuguese) transnationals are major players in service sectors throughout the region; German, British and Netherlands companies have the larger footprint in manufacturing, especially in the larger economies (Brazil, Mexico and Argentina).
French and Italian firms, while less internationalized in the region, have a diversified presence.
Most European investment in South America has gone to the service and natural resources sectors.
Brazil is the only country where manufacturing has accounted for the largest share.
In Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, European companies have a larger presence in services and manufacturing and a smaller one in natural resources.
Spanish investment in the region has shifted over the past 10 years.
Until the early 2000s, Spanish business internationalization focused above all on Latin America, especially services and hydrocarbons.
Spanish companies were involved in major corporate acquisitions and positioned themselves as leaders in telecommunications, energy and banking.
The amounts invested have become smaller, and the focus has shifted to the European Union.
Smaller Spanish firms began to set up operations in new service sectors in the region, such as construction, tourism and finance, insurance and even manufacturing.
As a result, even though the amounts are smaller, the Spanish presence is growing more diverse and consolidating its focus on the service sector.
Germany, while not extensively internationalized in the region, is among the traditional investors and has targeted specific sectors and countries.
This historical focus has not changed over the past decade and is still on investing in Brazil, followed by Mexico and Argentina, in capitalintensive sectors where German firms have competitive advantages and are world leaders (automobiles, chemicals, and machinery and equipment, for example).
French investing is concentrated in Brazil and is associated with manufacturing and services.
French investment is on the rise and has been topping US$ 5 billion since 2008.
In recent years, French companies have made major acquisitions in telecommunications, energy and some manufacturing sectors, such as chemicals.
Great Britain is the European Union country that has invested the least in the region; operations have focused on mining, hydrocarbons and manufactures like food and beverages.
Italy has had a historical presence, too, especially in traditional manufactures like food and the automobile industry.
Over the past decade, Italian investment has seen substantial growth, branching out from traditional manufacturing investments to services such as telecommunications, as well as energy and infrastructure.
And investment from the Netherlands has centred above all on Brazil and Mexico in the form of acquisitions in manufacturing sectors such as food and beverages.
Investments associated with a natural-resourceseeking strategy have surged in recent years, especially in mining.
There is investing in the hydrocarbons sector as well, in many cases in cooperation with State-owned companies.
Investments following this strategy have had a range of impacts, including higher exports, job creation in non-urban areas and growing fiscal revenue as tax receipts climb.
The main issues are that these operations are in enclaves and have a low processing content.
European companies whose strategy is to seek markets for manufactures have been very active, too, and have benefited from the region’s economic performance, lower volatility and growing purchasing power.
But the international crisis has chilled some investing, especially because some transnationals are hard-pressed to secure financing.
Some of the impacts of these investments are increased production capacity and exports, the creation of production linkages and employment and, in certain cases, technology transfer and capacity-building.
Operations based on a service-market-seeking strategy are more consolidated than a decade ago; most have a longterm vision.
European investments in telecommunications and energy, for example, have entered a phase marked by greater stability where the priorities are to take advantage of economies of scale and grow market share, with profit margins that ensure a sound global position.
For many firms (especially the Spanish ones), their operations in the region have contributed a good deal to improving parent-company balance sheets and helped them cope with the current situation in Europe.
The potential for market growth and substantial gaps in infrastructure and other areas, on top of good economic performance, have encouraged new companies to set up operations, both in sectors with a traditional European presence (commerce and tourism) and in new ones (construction, logistics and finance).
The European presence has thus grown more diverse in recent years, and the number of companies with operations in the region has grown.
European investment has a number of distinctive traits; two of them stand out.
First, European transnationals account for a large share of greenfield investing in the manufacturing sector; this is where FDI does the most to increase production capacity and create production linkages.
Second, these companies play leading roles in R&D, especially in Brazil and Argentina.
For transnational companies, though, Brazil is the only country that has positioned itself as a prime location for internationalizing R&D; the R&D centres of subsidiaries operating in Brazil are increasingly involved in corporate global innovation strategies.
This is having substantial impacts in terms of technology transfer, production capacity building and innovation.
It is no accident that Brazil has a more diversified industrial structure and a more proactive industrial policy than other countries in the region.
These two traits, then, attract transnational company R&D; this, in turn, deepens the process of structural change.
This chapter also brings an important analytical message: there are two increasingly meaningful factors for assessing the impact of transnational corporate operations.
They are the capacity of subsidiaries and the nature of innovation and R&D.
These characteristics are crucial for understanding the impacts in terms of linkages, innovation, technology transfer and capacitybuilding.
It is not enough to identify corporate strategies and target sectors; the characteristics of subsidiaries and of innovation and R&D operations are also part of the picture for gauging the sustainability of the dynamic benefits and more permanent nature that set FDI apart from local investment.
Trans-Latin companies (above all, from Brazil and Mexico) have stepped up their investment in Europe over the past few years.
This process involves a small number of companies whose operations reflect the region’s production structure and centre on sectors where leading Latin American firms have carved out global competitive advantages.
This has been especially true in the basic industries (oil, petrochemicals, mining, cement and steel), mass consumption sectors (food) and some services (banking).
While the situation in Europe is impacting trans-Latins with a market-seeking strategy, it can bring new opportunities for acquisitions.
On the one hand, the European crisis is opening new opportunities for transnationals.
High profitability (especially for Spanish firms) in the region, along with Latin American market potential, points to broader positioning.
The crisis could drive certain companies to move operations to lower-cost locations, which would mean ramping up their activities in the region.
On the other hand, the current situation in Europe could reverse the flow of investments if the euro crisis balloons and the lack of financing grows more critical.
This is not likely to trigger a wave of corporate disinvestment because their operations in the region are very profitable, but it could halt or delay some investment projects.
Even so, the European companies that are likely to step up investing in coming years are those following natural-resource and market-seeking strategies.
Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union should promote cooperation that increases and enhances investment as a sustainable source of growth and development.
The region should redouble its industrial policy efforts to promote the permanent, dynamic benefits of FDI.
Beyond the need for an FDI promotion policy, strides should be made towards production development policies that take account of the operations of transnational companies, moving from FDI policy to policy geared towards what transnationals do in areas like human resource training, technology transfer, innovation and R&D.
Latin America and the Caribbean could thus reap greater benefit from the stock of knowledge of European companies and their broad potential in the region.
D. (2004), “Desempenho inovador e comportamento tecnológico das firmas domésticas e transnacionais no final da década de 90”, Master’s dissertation, Universiad de Campinas (UNICAMP).
Szapiro (2001), “Local systems of innovation in Brazil, development and transnational corporations: a preliminary assessment based on empirical results of a research project”, unpublished.
Glufke Reis (2010), “El camino se hace al andar: la trayectoria de las multinacionales brasileras”, Universia Business Review, No. 25.
García-Canal, E. and others (2008), “La expansión de las empresas españolas hacia América Latina: Un balance”, Revista globalización, competitividad y gobernabilidad, vol. 2, No. 2, Georgetown University.
Giuliani, E. (2008), “Multinational corporations and patterns of local knowledge transfer in Costa Rican high-tech industries”, Development and Change, vol. 39.
Marín (2007), “Relating global and local knowledge linkages: the case of MNC subsidiaries in Argentina”, L.
Van Reenen (2004), “Mapping the two faces of R&D: productivity growth in a panel of OECD industries”, The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 86, No. 4.
Petersen (2008), “MNC strategies and linkage effects in developing countries”, Journal of World Business, No. 44.
Arza (2009), “The role of multinational corporations in innovation systems of developing countries.
Bell (2004), “Technology spillovers from FDI: an exploration of the active role of MNC subsidiaries in the case of Argentina in the 1990s”, SPRU Working Paper , No. 118.
Voigt (2011), “Drivers and impacts in the globalization of corporate R&D: an introduction based on the European experience”, Industrial and Corporate Change, vol.
OEME (Observatorio de la Empresa Multinacional Española) (2010), “La multinacional española ante un nuevo escenario internacional”, second annual report, June.
Matthews (2006), “The drivers of evolution/upgrading in Mexico maquiladoras: how important is subsidiary initiative?”, Journal of World Business, vol. 41, No. 3.
Embraer Embraer is to build a new plant for producing structures and composite materials.
The initial investment is expected to be US$ 60 million and increase to US$ 150 millon over the ensuing three years as a second plant for producing metal structures is built.
Alfa Slovakia Metals Nemak, a subsidiary of Alfa, is seeking to double its production capacity and therefore plans to increase its workforce from 600 to 900.
The company manufactures cylinder heads and other aluminium components for the automobile industry.
Banco do Brasil Banking Banco do Brasil is expanding its operations in Vienna to serve as the parent company for its operations in Europe.
This expansion of an existing plant has a production capacity of 80 cubic metres of cement per hour —30% more than the old plant.
Introduction In the past few years deregulation and technological advances have produced sweeping changes in the financial sector, so central to economic development.
Financial markets have become increasingly integrated locally, regionally and globally and this, combined with proliferating financial innovation, has facilitated speculative behaviour.
The developed countries have the deepest and most sophisticated financial systems, whereas the developing economies have, broadly speaking, less developed financial sectors and industries.
Yet this situation has changed significantly in recent times: a number of developing countries and their banking systems appear relatively stable and solvent and have begun to gain international stature, while the advanced economies have found themselves at the eye of the greatest financial crisis since the Great Depression of the 1930s.
This chapter looks at the main changes in the financial industry and the factors which have led to the difficult situation today.
The largest banks have deployed strategies which have, in various ways, driven the industry’s transformation: they have increased in size, diversified their activities, internationalized their operations and made heavy use of financial innovations to increase their profits.
The Latin American and Caribbean region has been a key player in one of these aspects —the arrival of foreign banks in local financial systems.
In fact, Latin America, together with Eastern Europe, is the developing region which has seen the most prolific local start-ups by foreign banks.
Accordingly, here the development of Latin America’s banking industry will be examined, along with the role of foreign banks in this process.
The banking industry has grown very rapidly in the region in the past few years and, perhaps more importantly, has shown good, stable capitalization and liquidity indicators.
This chapter will look at the entry strategies of the main foreign banks and their significance in local banking markets, as well as how these banks behave and perform compared to local banks in terms of management, introduction of products and services, solvency, profitability, costs and so forth.
Lastly, in view of the significance of European banks in Latin America, the chapter turns to an analysis of the destabilizing effects these banks could have as a result of the international financial crisis.
The global financial system: boom and bust Properly channelled, the financial system is a key piece in long-term economic development.
The links between financial activity —through savings and investment decisions— and economic growth are amply documented (Levine, 1997; Woodford, 2010).
Nevertheless, despite their high correlation, causality between the two is not well established.
Generally speaking, inasmuch as income levels rise, so does demand for financial services and the role of borrowing systems grows within an economy (see figure III.1).
When institutional conditions are right, moreover, the financial system can help to overcome capital restraints on business and sector expansion and thereby stimulate growth.
Financial sector development, then, broadens options for channelling savings and thereby the modalities of financing.
This gives economic agents access to the resources they need for medium- and long-term enterprise, such as slow-maturing projects and housing.
This in turn facilitates the emergence of new firms and the realization of investment opportunities, as well as better use of production potential.
The changes sweeping through financial systems in the past few years in the wake of deregulation and technological progress have brought new savings and credit opportunities for individuals, households and companies.1 Advanced economies, generally speaking, have the deepest and most sophisticated financial systems, of which the banking sector is a main —but not the only— component (see figure III.2).
Firms have been able to increasingly diversify their financing away from banks through the issuance of bonds in capital markets (IMF, 2006).
Securitization is a financial practice consisting of pooling various types of contractual debt —residential and commercial mortgages, auto loans and credit card debts— and transforming them into transferrable securities, such as bonds or collateralized mortgage obligations (CMO), which can be sold in an organized market.
This transfers financial risk and converts illiquid assets into tradable, immediately transferrable assets.
The best known risk management products are credit default swaps (CDS), which are risk hedging operations that protect the holder of a credit instrument against default by the issuer.
These hedges are usually applied to public and private debt and mortgage securities. the largest component of the financial sector (see figure III.2).
Financial system development was expected to make the market function more efficiently and provide fuller information, enable agents to maximize their investments (depending on their risk propensity and wealth level), and allow asset prices to reach an optimum level (Fama, 1970).
But multiple problems arose in markets, making price behaviour unstable and prone to large distortions, which increased systemic risk (Segura, 2010).
A large-scale crisis thus began to brew, encompassing markets for equity, bonds, currencies and other financial instruments around the world, and with them a large chunk of the real economy.
Today, amid the ongoing fallout and implications of the crisis, there is mounting consensus that the financial industry has operated in an incomplete and asymmetric manner.
This is leading to efforts to strengthen regulation and oversight of financial markets to make them more transparent and minimize their frequent turbulence (Cihák and Podpiera, 2006).
Regulatory and institutional change in the world’s financial systems: similarities and differences with respect to the experience in Latin America The financial sector became very heavily regulated in the wake of the economic crisis of 1929.
The Glass-Steagall Act passed in the United States provided measures for rebuilding confidence and preventing financial entities from speculating with savers’ deposits.4 During the next four decades, competition between financial institutions remained limited in most of the advanced economies, and interest rates and universal bank operations were regulated.
The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) was set up and central banks began to act as lenders of last resort.
Starting in the 1970s, however, interest rate controls began to be gradually relaxed, the restrictions preventing convergence between activities conducted by entities in different spheres were lifted, and investment bank operations were gradually deregulated (see diagram III.1).
In the United Kingdom, financial deregulation (what became known as the “Big Bang”) began under Margaret Thatcher, encompassing both the stock market and the removal of controls on financial transactions.
In the United States, under President Reagan, the Federal Reserve began to “reinterpret” the Glass-Steagall Act and to allow bank subsidiaries to engage in investment business.
In the 1990s, the global economy was performing in a fairly stable manner; there were only a few crises of a largely regional nature and these were quickly resolved.
In this scenario, liberalization and financial sector opening became surrounded by an “aura of optimism” and received explicit backing from international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank and from senior figures in some of the world’s largest economies, and this helped to sweep them across the globe.
In the case of Latin America, which had been badly hit by the external debt crisis of the 1980s, the diagnosis offered was that the region suffered from a structural shortage of capital, which constrained saving and investment and therefore long-term economic growth.
National banks and financial agents were considered to be functioning inefficiently, as well.
Accordingly, an ambitious reform plan was devised, inspired by Anglo-Saxon liberal thinking and supported by international agencies: the Washington Consensus (see diagram III.1).
In the financial sphere, the order of the day was capital account opening, along with liberalization of local capital markets and the banking sector.
This was expected to increase domestic saving, which would be complemented by external saving, and favour efficient resource allocation.
Among the most significant measures, interest rate controls were eased, public banks were closed or privatized, restrictions on entry of foreign firms were lifted and banks’ operating scope was broadened to increase competition.
However, difficulties in controlling national macroeconomic instability and in mitigating external shocks —such as the Mexican crisis (1994), the Asian crisis (1997) and the Russian crisis (1998)— showed up the fragility of Latin America’s financial systems.
Shortcomings in bank management and oversight encouraged burgeoning consumption and a sharp rise in borrowing by economic agents, which led to frequent and severe financial crises, in which bank capital was eroded and multiple financial entities failed (Frenkel, 2003; Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache, 2005).
New legal and institutional reforms were gradually implemented with the aim of strengthening the financial sector.
Most important among these were central bank autonomy, the strengthening of regulation and prudential oversight systems, the development and deepening of capital markets for both stocks and bonds (backed by public debt securitization), and the privatization of pension systems and their migration to individual capitalization schemes.
Towards the late 1990s, the changes occurring on the world stage gathered pace and deepened with the technological revolution.
In this context, two emerging trends became highly relevant: • Rapid and intensive integration of financial markets.
At the national level, links were strengthened between various entities through the interbank markets and the payment system.
At the international level, the various financial markets became highly interconnected as a result of free movement of capital in most of the world’s economies and the rapid spread of information and communications technologies (ICTs). • The emergence and proliferation of financial innovations and highly risk-prone operators.
Notable among the first are what are known as structured products, and among the second are hedge funds (also known as alternative investment vehicles or high-risk funds), which by their nature and means of operating compromised market stability.5 In the United States, these accelerating changes were to become emblematic.
In 1998 a merger was authorized between Citibank, the insurance company Travelers and Salomon Smith Barney, a major investment bank.
In 1999 the Glass-Steagall Act was repealed and a year later the Commodity Futures Modernization Act was passed, which limited the role of federal agencies (such as the Securities and Exchange Commission) in the regulation and oversight of derivatives markets.
Soon after 2000, the rapid changes in the international financial system began to show potentially harmful effects.
In fact, the stock market crash associated with information technology firms led to a sharp slowdown in the global economy.
The central banks of the world’s largest economies responded by implementing expansionary monetary policies, ushering in a long period of very low interest rates and thereby facilitating liquidity, borrowing, consumption and, indirectly, speculative investment.
In the United States, for example, the interest rate fell from 6.5% in November 2000 to 1.8% in December 2001, and remained at those sorts of levels until mid-2004.
Ultimately, the consolidation of the ideological paradigms underlying market deregulation, together with technological change, began to entrench the traditional roles of the financial industry.
In the United States and the United Kingdom the financial market gained greater significance, although it also left much of society, basically households and small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), outside financing circuits.
In continental Europe the banking system continued to fulfil a very important function, although it embraced many of the financial innovations.
The banking network’s high capillarity enabled it to offer a wide range of services, including risk hedging and payments, and to cover most territory and agents.
As noted earlier, as a result of Latin America’s traumatic experiences in the wake of the Washington Consensus, Structured products, also known as market-linked investments, are fixed-income financial investment vehicles whose value is derived from a single equity, a basket of securities, options, raw materials, debt issues or foreign exchange.
These products are based on an underlying financial swap and are traded bilaterally outside the stock market, which makes them difficult to price.
Some of the best-known structured products are collateralized debt obligations (CDOs), mortgage-backed securities (MBS), special purpose vehicles (SPVs) and structured investment vehicles (SIVs). many of the region’s governments were already aware of the need to channel financial activities by means of sound public policies and adequate regulation.
However, early in the new century, the bursting of the dot.com bubble, the financial crisis in Argentina and banking problems in Mexico prompted new reforms aimed at strengthening regional financial markets and making them more transparent.
Since then, sound economic performance in the region, especially in South America, has underpinned rapid development in the banking sector.
Simply put, the traditional business of banks has been to capture funds from individuals or entities with a capital surplus and channel them to economic agents which need them.
The basic premise of this process of financial intermediation is to obtain sufficient margin, i.e. an attractive difference, between the cost of deposits taken and the yield on funds lent.
In the 1990s, banks in industrialized countries had large capital surpluses, but amid mounting competition pressure began to mount to lower costs and find ways to increase steadily shrinking profit margins.
Moreover, their domestic markets, their main source of income, were reaching maturity and offering few new opportunities.
With deregulation of the banking industry, new possibilities began to emerge which transformed the very foundations of the sector.
The largest banks, for example, began to forge new strategies to revert the tendency towards smaller margins and generate more profits.
But in developing countries, with their specialization in primary sectors of production and incipient financial development, it seems necessary to have a strong banking system able to capture the savings produced by the economy, evaluate the risk associated with investment projects, generate the confidence of small savers and investors and manage the payments system efficiently.
It would make little sense to seek rapid capital market development in a country which has only a narrow base of agents capable of accessing these borrowing mechanisms.
As well as improving profits of shareholders capital, greater leverage helps to reduce financing costs, since the inclusion of debt on the balance sheet reduces capital costs (inasmuch as it generates a multiplier effect on investors’ own resources). than in the first half of the 2000 decade.
In that period, as well as increasing in size, the industry further swelled its profits (see figure III.3).
The large banks in the advanced economies were the major players in this process.
In fact, 600 of the world’s 1,000 largest banks, representing three quarters of the entire industry’s assets and profits, were in the United States, Japan and the European Union (see figure III.4).
At the national and international levels, the banking sector underwent rapid consolidation, driven by competition and the quest for size, efficiency and synergies.
In the search for economies of scale, mergers and acquisitions —not organic growth— became the instrument of choice and a common event in many countries.
In fact, the banking sector has been one of the most active in such transactions at the global level, along with telecommunications, media and entertainment corporations, and energy companies (see figure III.5).
The great majority of the largest operations have been mergers between firms in the same countries in the world’s principal markets (see table III.1).
As a result of this process, concentration in the sector increased and so did the power and importance of the largest banks.
In the European Union, notwithstanding differences between countries, the five largest banks had a market share of around 40% (FBE, 2011).
In the United States and Japan, concentration was even higher, with that figure over 60% (see figure III.6).
In the United States, financial industry mergers and acquisitions have multiplied in the past few decades and since the late 1990s such operations have taken place increasingly across different segments.
Between 2000 and 2010 the assets of the three largest banks (JP Morgan, Citigroup and Bank of America) rose from 19% to 43% as a proportion of GDP.
Yet the significance of the banking sector did not change greatly within the economy (see figure III.7).
This process made the largest national banks even more powerful (EBF, 2011).
The banking sector’s weight in the European economies also reflects their role as international financial centres, however, especially in the cases of the Netherlands and the United Kingdom.
In the mid-1980s, while the United States was becoming a net borrower, Japan was becoming the world’s largest creditor.
In the 1990s, Japan’s financial system suffered a severe crisis after the bursting of the stock market and real estate bubbles, and this gave way to an intensive reorganization and concentration of the industry.
The heavy concentration of the banking sector in national economies made the world’s largest credit institutions even larger.
In this concentration process, a small number of banks came to dominate national, regional and global markets.
This is the group of institutions which has undergone the greatest changes in this period as a result of mergers and acquisitions and developments in the financial sector of the major global markets.
Early in the 2000 decade, Japanese banks held one third of the assets of the 20 largest institutions, but this share halved during the deep, drawnout crisis in the sector in Japan.
The three largest banks in the United States have maintained their preponderance, but European banks, especially in the United Kingdom and, to a lesser extent, in France, have secured much larger shares in total assets.
However, in the course of the recent financial crisis, some of the traditional banks in advanced economies have been displaced by new institutions from developing countries, especially China (see table III.2).
Some banks in the developing world are now very substantial and are enjoying rapid growth (The Economist, 2010).
Brazilian banks in the top 1,000 fell in number from 22 to 15, following heavy consolidation in the industry.
This tendency, which has generally been justified on the grounds of efficiency and economies of scale, has led to mounting concern over the stability of the international financial system.
Seeking to take advantage of economies of scale, banks hastened to adopt a universal bank model.
Operating in mature economies, however, they began to find their sheer magnitude becoming incompatible with the shrinking profit margins in traditional intermediation activities.
The banking industry’s internationalization is evident in the sharp increase in external assets, mainly loans, of banks with overseas operations.
Almost two third of such loans —whether extended directly by the parent bank or transacted by subsidiaries abroad— correspond to large banks in eight countries: France, Germany, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States (see figure III.8).
Today three quarters of those assets are held in developed countries: 63% are cross-border loans and 37% are extended locally.
Large banks with international interests have entered external markets directly by opening branches or buying local banks in order to broaden their client base and deposit pool, and thereby to finance lending activity.
Between 2000 and 2011, loans extended directly by such banks through their local subsidiaries abroad increased from 27% to 37% of their total external assets.
The role of banks in Japan grew in the 1980s as the Japanese government attempted to promote the international role of yen.
This phase also coincided with the growth of syndicated bank lending and the expansion of currency and interest-rate derivatives markets that enhanced banks’ scope to expand their geographical reach in both funding and lending.
The establishment of the Single European Market, which allowed the free movement of capital and provision of banking services among the member countries of the European Union, and the subsequent entry into effect of the euro, increased the pressure on European banks.
In this scenario, several entities began to seek opportunities to broaden their operations and revenues abroad, especially in developing countries (Calderón and Casilda, 2000).
As of the mid-1990s, foreign bank presence in emerging economies began to increase significantly, particularly in Latin America and Eastern Europe, where they now have market shares of close to 40% and 90%, respectively (BIS, 2010a).
Between 2000 and 2011, credit extended by subsidiaries of banks with international activities increased from 27% to 42% of their total assets.
Latin America became the priority in the first phase of this process (Claessens and others, 2008).
In developing Asia, international entities have a smaller market share of around 20%.
European banks have been very active in this, with Spanish banks spearheading the process in the case of Latin America.
Portuguese institutions account for around a third of bank assets in Angola and Mozambique (World Bank, This process has been limited to a few large financial institutions in Europe and the United States, which fall into two clearly defined categories (The Economist, 2010).
The first consists of banks with a long history which have forged a limited presence in many countries, enabling them to service transnational corporations and local consumers.
The second group comprises entities which have established a large presence in the host countries’ retail banking segment in just a few years.
The outlook today for advanced-economy banks to enter or increase their presence in developing countries is rather more complicated.
First of all, the institutions that now have large presences in emerging economies benefited from opportunities that were unique, such as the liberalization of the banking industry in Latin America after the debt crisis and the bank privatizations in Eastern Europe after the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Second, it would be very difficult to enter the most attractive markets with the greatest potential —those with an emerging and growing middle class (Kharas, 2010)— since massive sales of banking institutions are unlikely to occur in the foreseeable future in China, India or the Russian Federation.
Third, the largest banks in developing economies have suddenly become the industry’s elite, thanks in part to the difficulties being experienced by developed country banks and to their home economies’ strong, steady growth.
Lastly, as local regulations have tightened, the traditional internationalization strategies employed by the largest developed country banks have ceased to be feasible.
This strategy was aided by the regulatory changes that enabled banks and financial institutions to operate as universal banks, since these diversified hitherto fairly limited business options.
The real estate market offered the ideal arena for this sort of strategy.
Banks invested their incoming short-term resources (sight deposits) in long-term assets (mortgage loans) and, in the expectation of being able to service their liabilities, borrowed more in the interbank monetary markets.
A highly leveraged balance structure has a multiplier effect on asset returns (Eraso and Urra, 2011).
In other words, if a bank can generate returns on its activities, the more leveraged it is, the greater the returns on equity.
This strategy was refined using innovative financing mechanisms, by issuing securities collateralized by a pool of underlying assets (loans), which raises resources while keeping debt off the balance sheet.
This sort of leveraging can be highly effective during the boom phase of the business cycle, but can become an irreversible burden if conditions take a turn for the worse.
During the long economic boom, many financial institutions —mainly investment banks and entities operating as universal banks— became over-leveraged.
Essentially, two factors encouraged this behaviour: • The possibility of recording certain balance sheet entries as capital, which strengthened banks’ solvency indicators.
Banks used these financial innovations, such as residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) and collateralized debt obligations (CDOs) to securitize some of their lending and turn it into instruments that could be transferred to other investors, along with the associated risk.
Banks thus removed loans which could be readily securitized from their balance sheets, which allowed them to continue lending while still meeting the capital requirements established in domestic legislation and thus raise additional revenues.
In the real estate sector, for example, mortgage loans were extended to clients with poor solvency.
Risk rating agencies also operated procyclically, assessing assets and structured products as a function of the ease of trading them on (Medina Ávila, 2008).
During a downturn, a financial institution with such a highly leveraged business structure can find its solvency seriously threatened if even a relatively small proportion of its assets perform under par.
Term mismatches between assets and liabilities can leave even a solvent bank in serious trouble if deposits and other short-term financing instruments are withdrawn en masse.
Very often, far from evaluating and distributing risk more efficiently among financial agents, these innovations make certain assets, institutions and markets increasingly opaque, and spread the perverse effects of those inefficiencies very rapidly.
In sum, financial entities managed their borrowing procyclically as a function of expected risk: highly leveraged during the upswing of the cycle and less so during contractions.
Thus, the more banks financed their assets by borrowing, the more profitable —but also the more risky— their operations became.
Financial institutions and operations became too large and complex for regulation and oversight schemes and exceeded the capacity of private risk rating agencies to assess them.
For this reason large banking entities came to the attention of governments and international agencies; however, it was now apparent that they were too big to fail.
Banks with diversified portfolios need to monitor the evolution of individual risks, in terms of both loans extended and other investments, especially variable returns instruments and structured products.
As a result, interest rates rose thus began to find it hard to meet repayment obligations, which led to a sharp drop in real estate prices and sales.
A number of financial entities began to struggle to find the liquidity to service their debts and to raise new financing.
As the serious global imbalances11 worsened, the subprime mortgage problem detonated a crisis of vast proportions which compromised the very foundations of the financial systems in the world’s largest economies (Titelman, Pérez-Caldentey and Pineda, 2009).
The banks’ leveraging strategy could not be sustained by indefinite expansion of credit, because this unfettered process was increasingly distorting real economy parameters.
The value of derivatives was three times stock market capitalization in 2000 and 10 times stock market capitalization by 2007 (see figure III.10).
In the second half of 2007, interbank borrowing and intermediary credit operations began to grind to a halt.
Basically, what is understood by global imbalances is the large and persistent external deficit of the United States, on the one hand, and the huge current account surplus of certain Asian economies, especially China and, to a lesser extent, some Middle Eastern economies, on the other.
The losses generated by the sharp fall in real estate prices were not limited to the subprime mortgage segment, but spread rapidly to some of the world’s largest financial institutions (see table III.3).
In the final months of 2008, the worsening financial situation reached its darkest point with the failure of Lehman Brothers.
All this unleashed massive problems in the economies of the countries concerned and gravely damaged the financial institutions involved.
Between 2008 and 2010, 1.609 billion euros of this amount were used (13.1% of European Union GDP and 2.9% of the total assets of the financial system). international financial system, but have not resolved the underlying problem: the solvency of financial entities.
The need was now obvious for a thoroughgoing reform of the rules governing the financial sector, including the regulators and oversight institutions, the markets and main agents (both the banks and the credit risk agencies), and risk capital funds.
At the end of 2010, following agreement by all the member States, the European Parliament and the Council for Economic and Financial Affairs (ECOFIN Council) adopted the new regulatory framework, which came into force on 1 January 2011.
Nevertheless, although these deliberations have been treated as urgent, their outcomes have been fairly insubstantial.
Despite all efforts, before the recovery was well under way new factors began to drive global economic conditions back into negative territory.
Doubts quickly surfaced over the ability of some advanced economy States to service their obligations, particularly in the European Union, whose expansionary fiscal policies during the preceding years had swelled public indebtedness.
Within a few months Greece, Ireland and Portugal received bailouts and Spain and Italy were left in very delicate situations which have yet to resolve (Davies and Ng, 2011).
As financial instability persisted, concerns mounted over the sustainability of public finances in other euro zone countries, including the largest (Vause and von Peter, 2011).
The financial crisis has dominated the agendas of the most prominent international forums.
In November 2008, the first Leaders’ Summit of the Group of Twenty (G20), held in Washington, D.C., laid down key aspects of financial system reform, with a view to making it more transparent, solid and stable (Group of Twenty, 2008).
Since then, the G20 has met many times and summits of political leaders have gradually given way to more technical meetings attended by ministers of financial affairs and central banks.
The International Monetary Fund (IMF), in collaboration with the Financial Stability Forum (FSF) and other bodies, should work to better identify vulnerabilities, anticipate potential stresses, and act swiftly to play a key role in crisis response.
Many specific measures have been taken in each of these areas of reform (Group of Twenty, 2009).
The most significant of these include the lifting of bank secrecy in countries committed to transparency, the regulation of high-risk operations (such as over-the-counter (OTC) transactions and short selling), the creation of new international coordination bodies (such as the Financial Stability Board, FSB) and a strengthened role for IMF and the World Bank.
In addition, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) has produced agreements for strengthening international rules regarding banking systems in order to reduce the risk of contagion from the financial sector to the real economy.
In December 2010, the Committee issued Basel III, a global regulatory framework for strengthening banking institutions and systems.
Basel III is intended to enhance the previous versions (Basel I and Basel II, also known as the New Basel Capital Accord) and make capital and liquidity requirements more stringent.
This initiative has received firm backing from the G20 leaders and will be implemented gradually starting on 1 January 2013.
Essentially, Basel III is intended to broaden banks’ capital base, improve the quality of their resources, impose a ceiling on leverage ratios, create countercyclical and capital conservation buffers, and impose special requirements on banks of systemic importance: those whose size and interconnectedness with other intermediaries is such that they warrant special attention.
In addition, the new rules establish a global liquidity standard for the first time (BIS, 2011).
Under the calendar adopted, the aggregate of the minimum capital requirement plus the conservation buffer must rise from 8% in 2013 to 10.5% by 2019 (BIS, 2011).
It remains to be seen what effects these new standards may have on bank performance or the macroeconomy.
According to estimates carried out by international agencies and private institutions, in principle there should be no significant implications for long-term GDP growth.
Conversely, the impacts on financial institutions and the banking sector are unclear, aside from a fairly evident fall in the rate of return on equity.
In sum, the current crisis appears to be rooted in both macro- and microeconomic factors.
The macro factors include problems stemming from mounting disequilibria in international balances and the difficulties caused by a long stretch of low interest rates.
The micro factors fall into three areas: regulation, incentives and risk appraisal.
Lack of regulation, heightened competition and the quest for ever increasing returns led financial entities to grow immoderately and leverage their balance sheets to the extent of endangering the entire system.
The growing integration of financial systems and the proliferation of innovative instruments that facilitated risk trading and diversification made banks into extremely complex institutions that were hard for governments and regulators to monitor.
When conditions changed and a massive financial crisis broke out, national, regional and multilateral authorities went to tremendous lengths to cushion its effects and contain the contagion.
Given the catastrophic economic and social consequences if the financial system were to collapse, burdensome rescue plans were deployed; these have had only partial effects, however.
The financial crisis which began in the subprime mortgage segment and the Lehman Brothers failure, and worsened with the European sovereign debt problem, has shown no signs of relenting.
Many of the industry’s agents are therefore still trying to operate in highly uncertain conditions.
Lastly, the pressure, depth and cost of new regulatory requirements and the short time available for preparing for them could force major shifts in the strategies of the industry’s principal agents.
Transborder activities could certainly be impacted, perhaps leading some banks to withdraw from certain markets.
This could be particularly relevant for Latin America, where international banks play a key role in national financial systems.
Latin America’s financial markets have developed a great deal in the past decade, but they are still shallower than those in developed economies (see figure III.2).
Domestic savings have been insufficient to finance investment needs, so access to external financing and its vagaries have done much to determine growth and volatility (Manuelito and Jiménez, 2010).
Since a large percentage of the population still have difficulties in accessing financial services, the financial culture remains limited.
Capital markets, i.e. equity, bonds and other debt instruments, are little developed and consist mainly of government securities and other types of public debt instruments.
With the exception of countries which have developed pension funds, such a limited capital market has little to offer institutional investors.
As a consequence of all this, Latin American markets are underdeveloped in terms of sophisticated financial products and services such as derivatives and other structured products.
Nevertheless, in light of earlier considerations with respect to developed countries, a cautious approach to financial innovation may be considered a strength of the region’s financial systems (Marshall, 2011).
Although the financial crisis struck the region, its banking systems remained solid and the economy recovered relatively quickly, contrasting with the more traumatic episodes of the past.
Except for a drop in returns at the height of the crisis, assets, especially lending, continued to expand throughout the period (see figure III.11).
Given the weight of bank lending in GDP, the level of development of Latin America’s bank markets today is about a third of the average for the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (Manuelito and Jiménez, 2010).
In the United States, Japan and the European Union, bank credit was well in excess of 150% of GDP, compared to just over 70% of GDP in Latin America and the Caribbean (see figure III.12).
Rep. of) Latin America and the Caribbean Costa Rica With almost a third of the 250 largest banks in Latin America, Brazil accounts for almost half of assets, loans, deposits, equity and profits in the region’s banking industry (América economía, 2011). 16 During the recent international crisis, Brazil deployed a countercyclical monetary policy and slashed interest rates to historic lows.
Along with other monetary policy measures, this pushed public banks to greatly increase lending, to such an extent that the share of public banks in the market increased, reversing the trend hitherto.
National private banks Per capita GDP Banks are the predominant actors in intermediation activities in the region and the main source of credit for individuals and companies.
Bank credit has burgeoned in the past decade, but broadly speaking loan portfolios lean heavily towards short-term lending, especially in the consumer segment.
Longer-term lending, especially for housing, is much less developed in all the countries of the region except Chile.
Latin American banks thus have a markedly different credit structure from banks elsewhere, both in developing countries and in other emerging economies in Asia and Eastern Europe (World Bank, 2012a).
What is more, most of the Latin America economies are quite financially shallow for their levels of per capita GDP (CAF, 2011).
The counterpart to this is that commercial banks in the region retain much of the risk associated with their lending in their own portfolios and finance their credit activities basically from deposit-taking and the issuance of standardized bonds; a few banks also obtain resources from the international financial system (Manuelito and Jiménez, 2010).
In general, Latin American bank portfolios contain a high percentage of public debt securities, because previous crises left a legacy of high liquidity requirements and the propensity to seek safe investments (BIS, 2007).
In the past decade, the banking market has developed most in Brazil and Chile —though with great differences between them— and has grown rapidly in Colombia, as well.
Brazil has the largest banking system in the region,15 of which the country’s public banks form a large part.
The key role played by Brazil’s public banks in boosting credit during the financial crisis, together with other measures, may be thanked for the country’s rapid economic recovery (see figure III.13).16 The depth of banking markets in Latin America countries varies greatly, and not only as a function of economy size or per capita GDP.
Some large economies, such as Argentina and Mexico, have small banking systems in relation to their level of economic development, owing to the lingering impacts of the severe financial crises they experienced a decade ago (BIS, 2007; CAF, 2011).
This situation appears to be changing in Mexico, however, owing among other factors to the economic recovery, more stable household income, growing consumer confidence in the banks and the consolidation and positioning of large, mostly foreign, financial entities (see figures III.14 and III.15).
Generally speaking, Latin America’s banks have maintained good, stable capitalization indicators over the past decade—much higher, in fact, than those of banks in the rest of OECD, the euro zone and Japan, although lower than those in the United States.
Higher capitalization rates in the United States are the result of the government’s massive injection of resources to ease the fallout from the subprime mortgage crisis (see figure III.16).
Chilean banks have the lowest capitalization rates and Chile is also the only country in which these rates have fallen in the past decade (see figure III.17).
This has to do with sharp growth in lending, funded by increased external borrowing and issues of capital and subordinated bonds, which has enabled Chile to maintain good solvency and liquidity indicators (Central Bank of Chile, 2011).
Latin American banks have much higher liquidity indicators than banks in advanced economies (see figure III.18), which is the result of certain aspects of monetary policy.
Because capital markets in the region are quite shallow, several countries still use legal reserve requirements as liquidity controls.
This type of measure directly impairs the efficiency of banking systems by imposing an additional cost on credit provision, thus limiting the rate at which banks can turn deposits into loans (Manuelito and Jiménez, 2010).
Such policies do, however, tend to force banks to preserve a cautious liquidity position.
Conversely, in economies with more developed debt markets, the monetary authority can regulate liquidity by varying the supply of monetary instruments, essentially bonds, in order to influence interest rates and, through these, aggregate demand.
In these circumstances, banks tend to adjust their liquidity positions to the lowest legal level, since liquid assets are usually less profitable than alternative investments.
The recent growth in the Latin American banking market has taken place largely through infrastructure development and technology absorption (branches, cash dispenser machines, electronic banking, mobile banking, and so forth).
This has afforded the population greater access to financial services, at the same time as capturing a larger proportion of the savings generated in the economy and assigning scarce financing resources to profitable investment projects.
The number of bank branches in the region has soared in the past few years, almost doubling between 2004 and 2010, yet still remains far short of the number in more advanced economies (see figure III.19).
The gap may narrow quite rapidly, however, given technological advances that bring banking services closer to people, such as automatic cash dispensers, remote access via Internet and mobile banking.
The rapid increase in cash dispensers, albeit with some lag with respect to the number of branches, could help to shorten distances between the region and the more advanced economies in this regard (see figure III.20).
Technological progress is also greatly alleviating the client pressure on branches, which is helping to lower the banks’ operating costs.
Be that as it may, these margins are still much larger than in more advanced economies and the region continues to display large internal inequalities (see figure III.21).
Rates of arrears portfolios are declining, in sharp contrast to the situation in advanced economies, where this indicator has risen by a factor of 3.5 since 2007.
In short, the institutional reforms of the 1990s seem to have borne fruit, especially as regards financial system stability and soundness.
Yet, despite the notable growth, financial systems are still lagging behind those of industrialized countries.
With few exceptions, bank coverage in the region’s economies is smaller than in other countries with similar levels of per capita income and leans towards short-term lending —increasingly so as modern practices of consumer lending management have spread.
As a result, banking services are not meeting real needs and have yet to reach a large portion of households and firms in the region, especially SMEs.
Yet, notwithstanding the lags in financial intermediation, it is encouraging that banks in the region have come through the first blow of the international financial crisis relatively unscathed, since this suggests that they have learned the lessons of the past.
Today Latin America’s banks are better regulated, better capitalized and more efficient, which should form a basis for more orderly and sustainable development of the sector in the future.
Establishment of foreign banks in Latin America: seizing a one-off opportunity In the past two decades, the growing presence of foreign banks has become one of the hallmarks of the banking industry in Latin America.
Governments in the region, backed by a number of international agencies, expected that foreign banks setting up operations in the their economies would help to recapitalize local banks, drive modernization and increase competition in the industry, and thereby reduce the possibilities of new financial crises breaking out (Yildirim and Philippatos, 2007; Ballescá, 2007; Minda, 2007; Jeon, Olivero and Wu, 2010).
The sector was reformed, removing most of the barriers that previously prevented the entry of foreign banks and allowing the privatization of State banks, which were also allowed to operate in a broader range of activities.
Reforms were also aimed at adapting the region’s banking systems to international solvency standards, freeing up working capital and boosting efficiency and productivity.
Foreign banks have much larger presence in Latin America and the Caribbean than they do in more mature banking markets, such as in Europe or the United States.
Latin American markets are significant for banks with international operations: loans extended in the region by the subsidiaries of foreign banks rose from 36% of their total external assets in 2000 to 57% in 2011.
Throughout this process, the financial sector has been one of the most important destinations for foreign direct investment (FDI) in the region, especially in Chile and Mexico (see table III.4).
Spanish banks account for 42.5% of this figure, followed by banks from the United States and the United Kingdom with around 12% each.
Latin American banks investing in other counties in the region are also beginning to claim a significant share.17 The largest economies, Mexico and Brazil, have been the most favoured destinations, since they account for almost 50% of all investments announced in the sector, followed by Chile with 12% (see figure III.23).
Rep. of) America the basis of information from BankScope and Claessens and others, Foreign Bank Presence in Developing Countries 1995-2006: Data and Trends, During the phase of international expansion, Latin America was a prime destination for a select group of banks that were seeking out new business opportunities in developing countries (see figures III.9 and III.22).
Foreign (especially Canadian, Spanish, United States and British) banks flooded into the region, with their main entry strategy being to buy up local financial institutions (see table III.5).
The experiences of the region’s two largest economies –Brazil and Mexico– have differed in this respect, however.
In Brazil, given the powerfulness of local private groups, the size of the market and the central role played by public banks in financing investment and economic development, fewer foreign institutions entered the market, and a number of them Itaú of Brazil has been particularly active in this regard.
In Mexico, on the other hand, the outbreak of a series of financial crises within a fairly short period of time combined with other factors to alter people’s views about foreign banks, and Mexico is now one of the Latin American countries in which foreign banks maintain the greatest presence (see figure III.22).
Spanish banks have been some of the most active financial institutions in the region.
In the 1990s, they (and especially Banco Santander and BBVA) saw Latin America as offering a unique opportunity.
Nearby options, such as In December 2011, the five largest banks in Brazil —which accounted for 77% of the system’s total assets— included two State banks (Banco do Brazil and Caixa Económica Federal), two private Brazilian banks (Itaú Unibanco and Bradesco) and one foreign bank (Banco Santander).
The Banco Nacional de Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social (BNDES), Brazil’s development bank and the main provider of investment financing in the country, is not included in this group because it is not a deposit institution. other European countries, had mature, high-priced markets that offered few openings for acquisitions (Calderón, 2005).
Generally speaking, Latin American banking markets were fairly undeveloped and had wide spreads and high potential levels of profitability, and this, together with the improvements that were being made in banking supervisory and regulatory systems, was opening up attractive business opportunities.
At the same time, there was clearly a shortage of capital and a lack of new products to meet a growing demand for financial services.
And all of this was found in the context of a shared language, culture and history; while this was a limiting factor in other situations, here it was conducive to the transfer not only of capital but also of technology and management expertise (Calderón and Casilda, 2000).
These banks launched an ambitious strategy focusing on the acquisition of big national financial institutions that had large amounts of local deposits, thereby positioning themselves as leading players in most of the region’s economies (Pozzolo, 2008) (see table III.6).
This approach led to such an increase in the concentration of Latin America’s banking market that, today, the three largest institutions account for over 50% of the system’s total assets, and the 10 largest account for 85% (see table III.7).
Initially, apart from Brazil and Mexico, foreign banks focused on medium-sized countries (see box III.2).
Once they had consolidated their position in local markets, however, the major Spanish institutions embarked on new diversification plans.
An important factor in this respect was the possibility of gaining access to pension fund administrators and insurance companies.
In the early 2000s, Banco Santander and BBVA made a forceful entry into the region’s largest markets (Brazil and Mexico) and established what was to be their new global strategic approach (see table III.6).
At the same time, they were making new acquisitions in Mediterranean Europe and the United Kingdom (see table III.3).
The Brazilian market proved to be an especially difficult one for Spanish banks; in fact, fierce competition with local institutions forced BBVA to pull out of that market very quickly, while Banco Santander has been working extremely hard to hold on to and expand its market share.
Mexico thus became one of the main focuses for Spanish banks’ operations in Latin America after restrictions on foreign capital in the banking system were lifted in 1998 (Suárez, 2010) (see box III.2).
Once they had gained control of some of Mexico’s largest financial institutions, Spanish banks turned their attention to the United States market.
Seeking to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the large population of Mexican immigrants living in the United States and the large volume of remittances that they send back home, BBVA acquired a number of banks in the southern part of the country and consolidated them into BBVA Compass (Calderón and Machinea, 2008).
Banco Santander bought Sovereign Bancorp as a means of entering the competitive market in the north-eastern United States.
The fact of the matter is, however, that the State-run industry was ultimately handed over to the private sector in Mexico and wound up being largely dominated by foreign banks.
Throughout almost all of the twentieth century, banking was the sole province of local institutions.
The only foreign bank operating in Mexico was Citibank, which had set up its operations in 1929 —long before the passage of legislation restricting foreign banks’ involvement in 1966 (Beck and Martínez, 2010).
In 1982, in the aftermath of the debt crisis, the sector passed from private (mainly Mexican) hands to the State, which paid out some US$ 500 million in compensation to prior owners.
In the early 1990s, as part of the country’s structural reform effort, the financial sector underwent a fast-paced liberalization process and the banking sector’s reprivatisation was announced.
Even while negotiations were being pursued in connection with the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas (FTAA), which entailed a more flexible approach to foreign investment in the industry, it was determined, as part of the reprivatisation process, that a controlling interest in these institutions should remain in Mexican hands.
In all, 18 banks (a number of which fetched very high prices even though their finances were not in very good shape) were auctioned off, with the Government of Mexico taking in approximately US$ 12 billion from the sales.
After the new owners had taken possession of these institutions, authorization was given for the establishment of new banks as well, thereby spurring competition, particularly for market share.
This triggered a credit boom at a time when trade liberalization was sparking a dramatic shift in the country’s production structure against a backdrop of weak financial supervision and regulation and major shortcomings in the banking system in terms of capitalization and loan-risk assessment.
By 1994, the steady increase in the deficit on current account, the loss of reserves and the overvaluation of the exchange rate had made the macroeconomic situation untenable.
A severe adjustment plan was then launched, with a 50% devaluation, which sparked a deep banking crisis that drove up the volume of non-performing loans to the equivalent of 15% of GDP.
The State stepped into the banking sector once again and put a drastic bail-out plan into place at a cost of nearly 19% of GDP.
In addition, many of the recently privatized institutions folded (Avalos and HernándezTrillo, 2006; Suárez, 2010).
In 1995, although the decision to keep the largest banks —Banco Nacional de Mexico (Banamex), Bancomer and Serfín— in Mexican hands remained in place, the regulations on FDI in the banking sector were loosened and the pace at which the sector was being opened picked up, with foreign banks’ share of the national market expanding from 6% to 25%.
The banks remained in a weakened position in the wake of the crisis, however, and the government came under pressure because of the cost of the bailout.
This, together with the pressure being exerted by some international organizations and foreign governments for a greater liberalization of the sector, pushed the government into moving ahead more rapidly with the elimination of all remaining legal restrictions on the acquisition of Mexican institutions by foreign banks (Haber and Musacchio, 2005).
With these transactions, foreign banks came to control more than 80% of the banking system’s assets (Claessens and others, 2008).
Mexico thus went from being one of the countries whose banking sector was the least accessible to foreign investment to one in which foreign institutions had one of the largest market shares in the system.
However, owing to the difficulties that it has faced in overcoming the impact of two major banking crises in little more than a decade, Mexico’s banking sector is quite small relative to the country’s level of development.
Starting in 2000, banks embarked upon an intensive effort to reorganize and clean up their accounts.
Their strategies focused on boosting efficiency, making staff cuts (especially senior positions), targeting middle- and upper-income sectors, and attracting funds at the lowest possible cost in the country’s depressed credit market so that they could widen their spreads and increase their commissions and administer the payments system.
This strategy proved to be very effective, and banks began to turn a large profit.
During the Administration of President Calderón, various reforms were introduced that made the system more transparent, which led to a slight reduction in commissions, and credit activity, especially in the case of consumer credit, began to surge.
Mexico was hard-hit by the 2008 crisis because of the impact that it had on its production of exports for the United States market.
The portfolio of non-performing loans swelled, and business and household credit shrank.
The federal government implemented an expansionary monetary policy which, in combination with price stability, staved off a greater decline in household income and a spike in borrowing costs.
As the economy began to make a comeback in 2010, and given the sturdy financial position of banks operating in Mexico, consumer lending also began to rebound, but this was not the case for investment loans.
In fact, the banks were well-capitalized before the crisis erupted, obtained funding from local deposits, and did not engage in high-risk investments or issue high-risk paper (BBVA Research, 2011).
The banks continue to concentrate on consumer loans, however, while nonbank agents are accounting for most of the volume of mortgages and business loans (Mundo ejecutivo, 2011; Fenton and Padilla, 2012).
According to the authorities, Mexican financial institutions are very well positioned for the adoption of Basel III, but the industry remains somewhat underdeveloped, and bank loans amount to the equivalent of 45% of GDP, which is still a far cry from the levels seen in the largest Latin American economies (see figure III.14).
BBVA has recently begun to explore opportunities in the Orient for entering into strategic alliances with some of the biggest banks in China and India: China CITIC Bank (CNCB) and Bank of Baroda, respectively (Casilda, 2011).
It has also acquired a controlling interest in the Turkish Garanti Bank (Cinco días, 2011).
Two of the banks that have had the most ambitious plans for global expansion for the last few decades, Citigroup and HSBC, then began to strengthen their presence in the region in response to regulatory changes in their home countries.
These institutions gradually moved into more and more different segments of the industry, operating at one and the same time as both investment and commercial banks, until they reached the point of becoming universal banks that receive deposits, extend credit and market securitized products.
As noted earlier, this has shown itself to be a successful survival strategy in a market where the investment banking segment is growing exponentially, and it has led to a high degree of consolidation between commercial and investment banking (ECLAC, 2003).
These large, increasingly well-regarded universal banks expanded their international operations and began to offer a wide array of services.
After a century of catering to businesses and private high-end clients, in 2001 Citigroup made the leap to consumer banking by buying Banamex in Mexico for US$ 12.821 billion.
This was the largest acquisition in the entire history of the banking industry in Latin America (see table III.5).
Although this transaction placed Citigroup among the elite of the Latin American financial system, Citigroup continued to use a selective strategy, waiting for opportunities to take over new institutions with a more suitable structure for retail banking.
This strategy led it to undertake major acquisitions in El Salvador that strengthened its position in Central America and to enter into an alliance with the Luksic conglomerate in Chile for the marketing of banking services and products via three different brand names: Banco de Chile, Banco Edwards and Citibank.
HSBC is one of the world’s largest financial institutions, with operations in over 80 countries.
In the mid-1990s, it decided to strengthen its position in Latin America, which until that time had been very limited.
First it acquired minority holdings in banks in Brazil, Mexico and Peru to complement some small holdings that it already had in Argentina and Chile.
Canada’s Scotiabank has been operating in the region, especially in the Caribbean, for a long time (ECLAC, 2008; IMF, 2009a).
Its internationalization strategy has focused on rapidly growing markets and economies with favourable demographics in which bank penetration is still low.
In the early 2000s, its regional operations were mainly in Argentina and Chile, but when the financial crisis erupted in Argentina, it withdrew its capital from that country and began to build up its operations in Mexico, where it bought Inverlat, and in Central America, the Dominican Republic and Panama.
The empirical evidence concerning the impacts of the entry of foreign banks is not entirely conclusive.
This forces local banks to specialize in providing services to higher-risk clients, which makes them less profitable, less efficient and less competitive.
Others have asserted that foreign banks may boost capital outflows and that the integration of capital markets magnifies the impact of external financial shocks on credit and interest rates.
It is also argued that foreign banks usually use wider net interest-rate spreads than local ones do and behave like rentier capitalists, which means that local banking markets become less competitive (ECLAC, 2003; Moguillansky, Studart and Vergara, 2004; Green, Murinde and Nikolov, 2004; Haber and Musacchio, 2005; Galindo, Izquierdo and Rojas-Suárez, 2010; de la Torre, Martínez Pería and Schmukler, 2010).
While the literature on the subject is voluminous and includes a vast number of empirical studies, it focuses on particular aspects of the subject and fails to encompass a long enough period of time to permit an overall assessment of the effects of the move to open up Latin America’s banking market to foreign institutions.
Figures for the period from 2001 to 2010 indicate, however, that traditional loans and deposits have continued to figure very prominently in the balances of Latin American institutions as a whole (see figures III.24 and III.25).
In the case of loans, the Argentine crisis and the impact of the shocks created when the dot-com bubble burst at the start of the 2000s led to a slight contraction in credit activity on the part of both local and foreign institutions.
Once those shocks had dissipated, however, credit rebounded and remained strong until the outbreak of the subprime mortgage crisis.
The resulting credit squeeze was especially severe for foreign –and particularly European– banks, which were more severely affected by the international crisis.
Meanwhile, local bank lending made a strong recovery from 2003 on and, by 2010, local banks had increased their portfolios by nearly six percentage points; this is by no means a negative development, since bank funds continue to be the main source of financing in Latin America’s economies.
In fact, this increase in the share of local bank balances represented by credit can be interpreted as being indicative of increased access to financing for businesses and households (see figure III.24).
Although foreign banks behaved in virtually the same way there as in other countries of the region, local banks, which had more options and for which the effects of macroeconomic imbalances were still fresh in their memory, maintained balances in which credit played a much smaller role.
In fact, high interest rates acted as a disincentive for lending, to some extent, and influenced the strategies employed by financial institutions, which opted for short-term government assets and for the local bond market, which was expanding thanks to Brazilian firms’ increased access to international credit markets (Solorza, 2009) (see figure III.24).
Nonetheless, the country’s macroeconomic stability enabled Brazilian institutions to increase their lending activity substantially.
This has not been dampened by recent disturbances in international markets, with the public banking system playing a key role in stabilizing and buttressing economic activity.
As occurred earlier in the European and United States banking systems, deposits have been declining in importance as a financing instrument for Latin American institutions, although the rate of decline has been very gradual, and traditional deposits still represent nearly half of the claims on local banks and somewhat more than that for foreign banks in the region.
This, in combination with the large share accounted for by own resources, leaves little room for the development of other sources of financing —such as bonds, other types of securities or interbank operations— by deposit-taking institutions (see figure III.25).
The level of local banks’ own resources soared following the regional and international upheavals of the early 2000s, but then subsided to their former levels in the aftermath of the subprime mortgage crisis.
This last crisis sparked a move to deleverage that greatly improved foreign institutions’ capitalization indicators.
In the closing years of the decade, both local and foreign banks converged towards a capital ratio of around 14%, which is slightly above the ratio seen in advanced economies.
Both public and private Brazilian banks, which had capitalization indices well above the global average, contributed a great deal to this result.
In Brazil, deposits behaved in much the same way as loans did (see figure III.25).
In general, the strategies deployed by the Latin American banking system have been conservative ones based on past crises, the size of the financial market and borrowers’ behaviour.
This situation reflects the fact that their parent companies’ strategies are also quite similar, as well as the fact that the number of international groups that maintain a major presence in the region is quite limited.
The behaviour of local banks, on the other hand, has differed from bank to bank.
The big Brazilian banks, for their part, have been buttressed by a countercyclical monetary policy and the application of an expansionary credit policy by the public banking system.
In Brazil, in addition to an overall decline in rates, the convergence of local and foreign banks has been significant, especially since the subprime mortgage crisis.
The trend in rates on deposits has been quite similar to the trend in lending rates, and this is particularly true in relation to the differing modes of behaviour seen in Brazil (see figure III.29).
This greater competition was expected to trigger a significant reduction in the spread between borrowing and lending interest rates, and the efficiency and productivity gains were expected to drive down operating costs to such an extent that they would more than make up for the narrower spreads and thus boost profits.
And, in point of fact, the performance of both local and foreign banks has, on the whole, borne out the projections made when the sector was just beginning to open up.
The breakdown of the spreads between lending and borrowing rates is one of the most important factors to take into consideration when analysing the influence of competition, particularly with regard to foreign banks, in Latin American markets.
Except in Brazil, where interest rates have systematically been high, although they are declining, local banks have charged somewhat higher interest rates on loans than foreign banks have (see figure III.28).
Unit costs have fallen steeply throughout the period under review for both local and foreign banks (see figure III.30).
Generally speaking, foreign banks have had lower unit operating costs than local institutions have, but the gap between the two then began to narrow until it disappeared completely in 2010, while unit operating costs have actually been slightly lower for local banks since 2008 (Zahler, 2008).
The case of Brazil is especially interesting in that local banks have clearly had lower costs than their foreign counterparts —a fact which bears witness to the difficulties that foreign banks have had in breaking into the region’s largest market.
A similar trend has been seen in differences between operating costs, especially since the financial crisis, with local banks outpacing their foreign counterparts thanks to the larger spreads that they are able to command (Gelos, 2009).
The subprime mortgage crisis sparked an upsurge in arrears, however, especially for foreign institutions, although they still had lower indices than local banks did (see figure III.31).
This was especially evident in Brazil, but the situation was turned around quite quickly, thanks to the government’s countercyclical policies and the credit stimulus packages that the public banking system rapidly put into place.
In the rest of the region, arrears indices remained low and stable, and the indices for local and foreign banks swiftly converged.
This appears to indicate that this is one of the facets of institutional behaviour in which the greatest improvement can be seen since the entry of foreign banks into the region.
A more in-depth study will be needed to confirm this hypothesis, however.
Foreign banks’ greater experience in this field, their use of the standardized statistical assessment techniques that are so firmly embedded in advanced countries’ financial management systems, and the large banking groups’ greater pool of knowledge about borrowers and international operations are some of the factors that have been expected to bring about improvements in this area.
The arrears index is a good indicator of banks’ ability to assess the risks of different financial operations.
Once they had absorbed the impact of the external and regional financial shocks of the early years of the decade, local and foreign banks began to see their returns on assets and their profit/capital ratios rise (Pérez-Caldentey, 2009).
The international crisis of 2007-2008 temporarily altered this trend, but the banks soon resumed their former growth path.
In recent years, asset yields for both types of banks have been quite symmetrical throughout the region, although this indicator does show slightly more favourable results for foreign banks (with the exception of the period immediately after the subprime mortgage crisis).
In Brazil, however, the situation is just the opposite, since local institutions have systematically outperformed foreign banks (except during the early years of the decade, owing, in all probability, to the Argentine crisis and the recent entry of foreign banks), all of which goes to show how strong their position has been all along.
As mentioned earlier, as a result of strong competition among the major local banks, foreign institutions’ capital/profit ratios in Brazil have been somewhat lower than the average for the region as a whole; they have, however, followed a very similar trend, except during the early years of the 2000s (see figure III.33).
In sum, the entry of foreign banks into Latin America and the Caribbean, which took place primarily during the second half of the 1990s, has galvanized the regional financial market.
Foreign banks spurred competition within the market, which led to narrower spreads and lower costs.
The regional and global shocks of the early 2000s and the international financial crises that have broken out since 2007 are also likely to have been factors in this loss of ground, along with the more cautious attitude adopted by foreign banks.
Local banks have responded to these circumstances with alacrity by boosting their efficiency and productivity levels and have regained much of the market share they had lost during the preceding decade.
In addition, the strength and size of local banks in Brazil and other countries of the region enable them to maintain slightly wider spreads.
These advantages, together with their efficiency gains, have allowed local banks to begin to outperform foreign institutions in terms of profit ratios, especially since the most recent international financial crisis.
The complexity of the international financial crisis and the position of European banks in Latin America and the Caribbean Because foreign banks have played such an active role in the banking system of Latin America and the Caribbean, they can also serve as a vector for the negative effects of the international financial crisis in the region.
And, in fact, at one point there was a danger that, as has happened in the past on several occasions, bank credit would be abruptly cut off, which would have destabilized the macroeconomic situation and thwart economic recovery efforts (Canales-Krijenko and others, 2010).
Impact of the crisis in the European banking sector Increases in sovereign risk have led to huge losses for European banks, with the direct impact on them being estimated at some 300 billion euros (IMF, 2011a).
In response to this adverse outlook, the European authorities took steps to contain the crisis and to cope with the deterioration in economic conditions as best they could.
A stress-test exercise was conducted with the major banks as a means of monitoring their performance more closely and assessing their response to difficult conditions (see box III.3).
The European Central Bank (ECB) also began to buy up the debt of the hardest-hit countries on secondary markets and offered new liquidity facilities to the most distressed financial institutions.
In late 2011, the European banking system’s solvency position worsened as the Franco-Belgian bank, Dexia (one of Europe’s largest), found itself in dire straits only a few months after having turned in a strong performance on the stress test.
In order to contain the damage that would be caused by an outright failure, the governments of Belgium, France and Luxembourg quickly stepped in and nationalized it.
This situation highlighted the urgent need to speed up the system’s recapitalization, which called for political decisions at the highest level.
In general, in a scenario of this kind, banks see a reduction in business volume and start to sustain losses, especially in their loan portfolios, but also because of the devaluation of assets such as real estate holdings.
This indicator reflects banks’ holdings of capital plus reserves, undistributed earnings and perpetual preference shares that will enable them to cover their risk assets (loans, stock and other investments).
In other words, it is a measurement of the guaranteed own funds which they can use to cover their investments in risk assets.
It does so by applying a stress and solvency test to nearly a hundred European banks and by supervising compliance with capital adequacy rules under an adverse scenario.
In July 2010, it published the results of the first of these tests.
The European Central Bank (ECB), the European Commission and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision all emphasized that the results confirmed how strong a position the European banking system was in to withstand adverse macroeconomic effects and financial shocks, but the market reacted with scepticism.
In July 2011, the results of the second stress test (which was carried out after the downturn in expectations regarding an economic recovery had become consolidated and European banks had begun to recapitalize) shed light on just how difficult the situation facing many banks was.
In order to gauge their capacity to meet capital adequacy requirements in 2012 and how that had changed since 2010, two scenarios were used: a baseline stress scenario and an adverse stress scenario (EBA, 2011a).
Of the 90 banks that took these tests, EBA found capital shortfalls in only eight: five in Spain, two in Greece and one in Austria (which would need 2.5 billion euros in fresh funds).
It also recommended the recapitalization of 16 banks that had passed the test but had exceeded the 5% 1-tier capital cut-off by just one percentage point (EBA, 2011a).
Under the parameters used for the test in the adverse stress scenario, none of the major European banks would have serious solvency issues, with their scores coming Deutsche Bank (6.5%), Barclays Banks Lloyds TSB Bank (7.7%), Société Générale UniCredit (6.7%), Commerzbank (6.4%) and Crédit Agricole (8.5%).
Although Spain was one of the countries which had the largest number of troubled banks, it should be noted that it was the only member country of the European Union in which 95% of the country’s financial institutions were tested.
The average coverage was 65%, and the threshold figure set by EBA was 50% of each country’s financial system.
If only four financial institutions in Spain had been examined (Santander, BBVA, La Caixa and Bankia), there would have been no major difficulty.
The problematic institutions in Spain are its savings and loan associations, which are undergoing sweeping reforms.
Even so, in most cases, when faced with adversity, banks can fall back on access to loan-loss provisions made available by their governments.
In fact, without the aid of public capital inputs, nearly one third of the banks that took the stress test would have failed and would be faced with the prospect of sustaining heavy losses if the economic situation were to deteriorate.
In this type of case, those that would be the hardest-hit under an adverse scenario would include British banks, led by Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), Allied Irish Banks and Lloyds Banking Group, all of which passed the solvency test with the help of hefty inputs of government capital.
At the other extreme, Santander and BBVA, which did not receive government help, were the leading profit-makers.
As in the first test, the supposedly good health of the banking system prompted many analysts to view the results with scepticism and thus to abstain from making any effort to refute negative expectations and the prevailing lack of confidence.
Under this voluntary restructuring arrangement, the country’s 206 billion euros of debt would receive a 53.5% “haircut” in nominal terms (Financial Times, 15 March 2012).
However, uncertainty began to mount again in Europe as Greece faced difficulties in forming a government and called fresh elections, and as concern grew that Greece could leave the euro zone.
Under the plan devised for the banking system’s capitalization, banks were required to meet the 9% tier-1 capital ratio by June 2012.
In December 2011, the European Banking Authority estimated the capital required by Europe’s 70 largest banks to meet the new standards at 114.685 billion euros (EBA, 2011a); some private analysts put the number at double that.
At the level of these new standards, nearly 60% of the banks would not have passed the stress test, which had used the pre-existing standard of 5% (see box III.3).
If a bank does not reach the target figure, it must submit a recapitalization plan and is not allowed to pay dividends or bonuses to its shareholders.
Realistically, however, European banks have very few ways of quickly generating own funds.
Under the current circumstances, it is difficult to convince the market that the banks can pull out of the crisis by selling off assets, cleaning up their loan portfolios or paying out shareholders’ dividends in the form of securities rather than cash.
In fact, in early 2012, the financial sector was in worse shape than any other sector in European markets, with the Italian bank UniCredit, Societé Général of France and the Spanish banks Bankia, Bankinter, Banesto and Caixabank faring particularly badly.
To deal with this situation, ECB has used its longterm refinancing programme to auction off fresh funds to banks at 1% interest and a three-year maturity.
The European banks flooded into the first auction, and 523 banks applied for a total of 489.2 billion euros; in the second, nearly 800 banks received a total of 529.5 billion euros (The Wall Street Journal Americas, 2012a).
The banks have used these funds to cover maturities and to invest in new bonds issued by distressed countries (mainly Spain and Italy) at higher interest rates, with this margin helping them to improve their balances.
This money also helps them to cover their debts and, in some cases, to make deposits in central banks around the globe (but especially in ECB), although their yield is lower.
This injection of almost 1.2 billion euros has helped to stabilize the European banking system, lessen the risk of bank failures and save the banks from having to divest themselves of large sums of loans or other assets in order to cover their financing requirements.
This measure has been less effective, however, in spurring a reactivation of bank lending to businesses and households in troubled economies.
The overall thrust of these reforms has been to shore up liquidity and bank solvency in order to reduce the likelihood of further systemic crises.
It is also very possible that, as a result of the reduction in bank leveraging, banks will play a less central role as intermediaries.
There is, however, no broad consensus concerning the potential effects of these measures. • The implementation of Basel III could influence global economic growth.
Some analysts, financial institutions and national authorities believe that increased own-capital requirements and the proportional increase in more liquid, but less profitable, investments will drive up the cost of credit, lead to credit rationing and make corporate and household saving less profitable.
This, in turn, would hurt the real economy (BIS, 2010a and 2010b). • The austerity plans unveiled by banking institutions are far from enough to cover their capital requirements.
There seems to be a vicious circle whereby, since private investors are not willing to provide the funds needed for recapitalization, governments have to obtain the necessary funds, which further exacerbates the public debt problem.
This chain of events heightens the complexity of the situation and jeopardizes the stability and growth of the global economy. • The steps taken to inject liquidity into the banking system do not resolve the underlying problem, but instead merely provide temporary respite to the countries and institutions that have been hardest-hit by the sovereign debt crisis.
What is more, they have temporarily blunted the incentives for banks to reduce their sovereign bond holdings generated by the steep reduction in the profitability of these instruments on the market.
However, they have not managed to spur bank lending, and this has deepened the recession.
As long as the crisis remains unresolved, credit demand will remain depressed, and this will, in turn, hurt the banks’ main business operations.
For the authorities who are moving this process forward, however, the expected benefits in terms of macroeconomic stability outweigh the problems associated with higher intermediation costs (see box III.1).
Nonetheless, there is still a great deal of uncertainty about the outcome, and more definitive results are expected in the next few months.
The European banking crisis and Latin America and the Caribbean: possible vectors of contagion Banks that operate internationally extend loans in external markets through two very different channels: directly, from the bank’s headquarters to a borrower abroad, and indirectly, via one of its subsidiaries or associates in a foreign country.
In Latin America, foreign banks tend to use the second option more often, and the volume of this type of lending is quite large, given the major role played by these institutions in local banking systems (see figure III.22).
The effects may be very different depending on what strategies these institutions adopt in relation to their subsidiaries abroad.
If banks manage their foreign operations on a centralized basis from their headquarters, any capital or liquidity squeeze in their home market could have the effect of making their foreign subsidiaries cut back on lending activity in the local market in order to shore up the business group’s asset position or to transfer liquidity to the main office.
On the other hand, while some decisions may be centralized, local subsidiaries may use a business model of their own, and their lending activity may therefore vary independently of the problems troubling their parent company or headquarters.
This last option is the one that has been chosen by many of the subsidiaries of foreign banking institutions in Latin America, notably in the case of Spain’s Banco Santander and BBVA.
Lending by foreign banks in Latin America has risen sharply in the 2000s (see figure III.36).
The only breaks in this trend have been seen in the wake of the bursting dot. com bubble and the Argentine crisis of 2001, the subprime crisis of 2008 and the deterioration in Europe’s position in the third quarter of 2011.
And in fact, subsidiaries of foreign banks have cut back on credit more swiftly and more deeply than local private banks (IMF, 2010b).
In absolute terms, the Brazilian, Mexican and Chilean markets have been the major attractions for foreign banks (see figure III.36).
In the third quarter of 2011, these three countries accounted for nearly 80% of all existing foreignbank loans in the region.
When measured in terms of GDP, this type of credit has been especially significant in Chile and somewhat less so in Mexico.
By contrast, thanks to the strength and size of the major local banks, Brazil’s exposure is much lower (see figure III.37).
Rep. of) the basis of information from the Bank for International Settlements.
Between 2000 and 2005, the percentage of localcurrency loans extended to residents via local subsidiaries jumped from 36% to nearly 60% of total loans, and this percentage has held steady up to the present day (see figure III.38).
Given the strong deposit base that these subsidiaries have had ever since the start-up of their operations in Latin America (thanks to their strategy of buying up large local institutions), most foreign banks do not have to rely to any great extent on other types of financing.
In fact, the loans granted by subsidiaries of foreign banks are primarily funded with local deposits, and this gives them a great deal of autonomy vis-à-vis their parent companies.
This strong base in local markets may also explain why the percentage of credit extended by foreign banks in Latin America is so low (with most of the lending that does take place being accounted for by interbank operations) and is much less than it is in other developing regions (IMF, 2009a).
Finally, almost half of all transborder foreign-currency credits have a term of less than one year, although the percentage of longer-term loans is on the rise.
While these types of credits are still just a fraction of the total credits granted by foreign banks, the fact that they are increasing may be a reflection of the lower risk rating that is being assigned to the region.
A few of the world’s largest banking institutions dominate the foreign banking industry’s operations in Latin America (see tables III.2 and III.6, and figure III.22).
As mentioned earlier, five institutions (Banco Santander, BBVA, HSBC, Citigroup and Scotiabank) hold 80% of the assets of foreign banks in the region (see table III.6).
In addition, Canadian, Spanish, United States and British banks account for nearly 75% of the credit granted by foreign lending institutions (see figure III.39).
Thanks to the growth, structure and behaviour of foreign banks, together with their credit strategy in Latin America, the credit squeeze triggered by the international financial crisis was less severe than it would otherwise have been.
In fact, although they have not been immune to that contraction or to the deterioration of liquidity in interbank markets, these institutions have exhibited resilience and stability, and these traits have made it less likely that they might act as vectors for the transmission of external shocks.
Some of the main reasons for this are as follows: • Most of the credits granted by foreign banks are in the local currency and are channelled through their local subsidiaries. • A large part of foreign banks’ financing comes from local sources, with the largest one being a stable deposit base.
This situation has been leveraged by macroeconomic stability and growth, combined with the institutional strength displayed by Latin America. • The subsidiaries of foreign banks do not rely heavily on their parent companies for foreign-currency finance or on international interbank markets for clearing their credit operations.
On the one hand, Spanish and Canadian banks’ operations in the region are highly specialized and are coupled with their operations in mature markets, such as the United States and the United Kingdom.
On the other hand, the more globalized banks, such as Citigroup and HSBC, have a highly diversified international presence which helps them to weather regional crises more easily.
In addition, none of the banks operating in Latin America maintains a presence in the emerging markets that have been hardest-hit by the current financial crisis, such as those of Eastern Europe (IFI, 2012a).
Lastly, the Spanish banks Santander and BBVA have been able to meet the requirements set forth by the Government of Spain thanks to the sound performance of their foreign operations, particularly in Latin America.
The strength shown by foreign banks in Latin America has also been underscored by the swift recovery of their lending activity after the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008.
These procyclical outcomes are largely attributable to the region’s (and Brazil’s, in particular) robust economic performance (see figure III.36).
The deterioration in Europe’s situation has set off alarm bells, however, given the possibility that the subsidiaries of European banks might act as a vector of contagion.
And in fact, the strong pressures associated with sovereign borrowing could trigger deep losses and, owing to the constraints affecting recapitalization efforts, could force banks to deleverage in order to boost their capital ratios (IMF, 2011b).
Given this prospect, concerns about the possible effects of asset sales or liquidity transfers have been on the rise (IMF, 2010a).
In Latin America, however, it was thought that if European banks were suddenly to retreat, the adverse impact would be mitigated by the presence of well-capitalized local banks and, to a lesser degree, by the arrival of institutions from other countries that would rapidly take up where the Europeans had left off (IFI, 2012b).
And this appears to be what is actually happening in the region, especially in Brazil (World Bank, 2012b).
In late 2011, in line with this scenario, the Chilean CorpBanca acquired the assets of Banco Santander in Colombia for US$ 1.225 billion.
On the other hand, tight bank regulation has helped to avert large capital transfers to foreign banks’ headquarters.
In Brazil and Mexico, for example, regulations are in place that limit the size of the loans that can be made between a parent company and its local subsidiary and that restrict parent companies’ ability to draw down the capital reserves of local subsidiaries below prudential levels.
In Chile, banks established in the country, whether Chilean- or foreign-owned, are treated as Chilean, have their own capital and are subject to the oversight of the banking regulator.
Accordingly, the capital backing their loans and deposits is Chilean and the only means by which capital could be repatriated would be through the sale of the shares that carry the right to administer the business and receive its profits.
Yet, even in that case, the whole structure of deposits, capital and loans would remain unaltered in Chile under new ownership.
This is especially significant for Latin America, given the extremely important role played by Spanish institutions in the region’s banking markets.
These institutions’ solvency indicators have, however, been good (strong capitalization and high levels of loan-loss provisions) thanks to the fact that Spanish regulators take the phase of the business cycle into consideration and view it as a crucial factor in determining the proper level of provisions.
Nonetheless, since they are ranked as systemically important financial institutions, and given their estimated capital requirements as of December 2011, both banks had to increase their levels of own resources (EBA, 2011b).
These Spanish banks have used varying means of complying with the demands of the European authorities: • In late 2011, six months before the deadline, Banco Santander had reached a 9% tier-1 capital ratio (Santander, 2012).
The 15.302 billion euros that it needed to be ranked as a systemically important financial institution were cut to less than half that sum by counting the convertible bonds that were to be swapped in October 2012.
It also exchanged preferential stock for new shares and decided to pay part of its dividend in shares as well.
It also carried out some divestitures in Chile and Colombia and moved forward the sale of 4.41% of its Brazilian subsidiary (El País, 2012a). • BBVA needed 6.329 billion euros for the same purpose.
It shored up its capital ratio by exchanging preferred stock for mandatory convertible subordinate bonds, thus saving itself from having to sell off any strategic assets (BBVA, 2012).
The European Banking Authority actually does not consider preferred stock as tier-1 capital, whereas it does place bonds that are convertible into shares in that category.
In December 2011, this operation brought the tier-1 capital ratio for BBVA up to 8.7%; the ratio would then rise somewhat more thanks to accounting adjustments on its operations in the United States (BBVA, 2012).
BBVA also took advantage of the cheap loans available under the long-term refinancing programme of the European Central Bank, taking out 11 billion euros in credits in December 2011 and a similar amount in February 2012 (The Wall Street Journal Americas, 2012a).
In late May 2012, BBVA announced that it was considering selling its pension funds in Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, with combined assets of US$ 69 billion and a client base of 11 million.
BBVA stated that this decision was unrelated to the turbulence in the Spanish banking system and was, instead, a response to the interest shown by various agents in the pension fund market (El País, 25 May 2012).
In any case, the decision could take some time and would not be made before 2013.
According to analysts, the value of BBVA pension fund activities in the region could be as much as US$ 5 billion (El Mercurio, 25 May 2012).
Thus, at least in the short run, the major foreign players in Latin American banking markets will comfortably meet the Basel III capital requirements, thereby consolidating their solvency, and the new minimum leverage ratios will not pose a problem (Terrier and others, 2011).
What is more, thanks to the degree of independence that these banks’ subsidiaries enjoy, the higher cost of credit to be borne by the parent companies because of the new, stricter requirements are not likely to be transmitted to operations in Latin America.
Conclusions The financial industry has changed a great deal in recent decades in response to stronger competition, deregulation, the technological revolution and demands for higher profits.
All of this has induced major financial institutions in advanced countries to adopt ambitious growth and diversification strategies.
These changes have also been spurred by the rapid and deep deregulation of the industry, which was itself prompted in large part by a long period of low interest rates and ample liquidity.
The swift consolidation of the financial sector at the national and international levels has been evident both in specific segments and across the entire industry, as enormous financial conglomerates have taken shape that offer commercial and investment banking services, insurance, pension fund schemes and other services.
This approach, which has usually been justified on the grounds of efficiency and economies of scale, has led to heightened concern about the stability of the global financial system, however.
As the proportion of assets that were financed with debt rose, the banks became more profitable, but their operations also became much more risky.
In addition, the growing integration of financial systems and the proliferation of new types of instruments, which facilitated transactions and risk diversification, turned banks into extremely complex institutions that are difficult for regulators and governments to control.
When the upswing in the business cycle came to an end, this trend was reversed, and the resulting chain reaction was difficult to control, despite all the efforts of national, regional and multilateral authorities to contain the contagion.
The financial crisis that was triggered by the subprime mortgage crisis and the collapse of Lehman Brothers in the United States has now been exacerbated by Europe’s sovereign debt troubles, and the outlook shows no convincing signs of brightening.
As a result, many stakeholders in the industry are in a precarious position.
Reforms are being adopted in an attempt to bolster the industry’s solvency and liquidity that will surely have major implications for the performance of the main banking institutions, especially in terms of increasing difficulties in offering readily available, low-cost financing.
And all of this will no doubt have repercussions on the world economy’s growth and stability.
The higher intermediation costs generated by the new regulations and standards will increase the cost of borrowing and reduce the returns on saving.
This is particularly daunting for economic agents for which the banking sector is the only source of financing and the only repository for surpluses.
This means that small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and middleand lower-income households will be the hardest-hit.
The impact of reduced banking activity will be the greatest in countries and regions of the world, such as continental Europe and Latin America, in which funds channelled through the banking system play a greater role in total financing for the economy.
Under these circumstances, governments and their institutions, particularly public and development banks, will no doubt have a more active role to play in generating and allocating the financing needed for development.
In normal times, public banks should promote credit activity, facilitate access to information and make up for marketing failings but should not enter into open competition with private banks.
In difficult times, development banks are called upon to play an important countercyclical role and to help to deal with information asymmetries.
These changes could also have an effect on transborder activities, which, in some cases, could cause some institutions operating internationally in certain markets to pull back or redeploy.
This could especially be the case for Latin America, where international banks play a key role in local financial systems.
One encouraging factor in this respect is the great resilience shown by the Latin American banking system during the recent international crisis and, above all, the strength displayed by foreign banks’ subsidiaries, which, despite being sensitive to liquidity problems in international interbank markets, did not reduce their credit activity to any significant degree in markets within the region.
This outcome is attributable to the great degree of autonomy enjoyed by the subsidiaries of the main foreign banks and to the fact that most of their loans are denominated in the local currency and financed locally, primarily from deposits.
In the past decade, the Latin American and Caribbean countries’ financial system has grown rapidly and performed well.
It is still far behind the financial systems of the advanced economies, however, and it continues to display considerable limitations, both in terms of the banking system and in relation to its stock, bond and insurance markets.
However, although the international financial crisis did have a strong impact on the region’s financial systems, these negative effects were soon overcome and, in just over a year, the region’s stock and banking markets had regained their pre-2007 levels of activity.
Be this as it may, banking markets in Latin America and the Caribbean are less developed than would be expected, given their levels of per capita income.
The reforms that have been introduced have yielded good results in terms of the stability of the system, but they have not been so successful in extending banking services to a large group of businesses and individuals.
In the past decade, the system’s assets have increased significantly in all of the countries, although the various indicators (credits and deposits over GDP, offices and ATMs over total population, etc.) still lag considerably behind those of advanced countries.
Latin American financial systems also lag behind in offering sophisticated financial services and products, such as derivatives and other structured instruments —although, in view of the experiences of developed countries, their cautious approach to adopting financial innovations could be regarded as a strength rather than as a weakness.
In theory, financial innovations should make it possible for markets to operate more efficiently (by, for example, lowering transaction costs) and should make them more complete by paving the way for better risk distribution.
While it is true that financial innovations have helped to drive the growth of international markets in recent decades, many questions have been raised since the recent international crisis as to the role that such innovations played in bringing about and propagating that crisis.
In that sense, especially for a region such as Latin America and the Caribbean, where the banking industry has shown itself to be very resilient and has made major advances in terms of capitalization and liquidity, the wisest course of action seems to be to continue taking a prudent approach to the use of these types of products.
It is important for the region to continue to build an effective institutional structure for risk management, regulation and supervision in line with best international practices (Basel III).
Foreign banks’ entry into Latin America and the Caribbean has galvanized the regional financial market, spurring competition within that market and pushing the sector to narrow its spreads and lower its costs.
They have also helped to modernize the banking sector by improving in-house procedures, refining risk-rating systems and expanding the range of products and services on offer.
Finally, although this effect has been less marked than the other two just mentioned, they have also contributed to efforts to reach new and growing segments of Latin American society, especially the emerging middle classes.
They continue, however, to exhibit a strong preference for higher-income (and, generally, lowest-risk) sectors of the population.
While it has made progress, over the past decade the banking industry in Latin America and the Caribbean has had a relatively less diversified business structure.
While loans and deposits account for a very large percentage of business volume, especially in local institutions, which signals some reticence to introduce additional products and services.
But loan institutions in the region are better capitalized and have higher levels of liquid investments than such institutions do in advanced economies, and this is especially true in the case of foreign banks.
The region’s banking industry, which has very probably been buttressed by its macroeconomic stability, has sharply reduced its lending and deposit interest rates, and its operating costs have also decreased, especially in the case of foreign banks.
Furthermore, the latter have steadily been making efficiency gains, whereas their local counterparts have been making steady progress in boosting their profit ratios.
In both cases, substantial reductions in default indices have also been seen.
More recently, as the industry has continued to mature, the driving force which foreign banks have injected into the market appears to be beginning to wane, to judge from the stagnation of efficiency and productivity indicators for the banking industry as a whole and the foreign banks’ progressive loss of market share.
The crises that broke out in Argentina and Mexico in the early 2000s, the external shocks of 2001 and 2007, and the increasing strength and power of private local banks, especially in Brazil, have all contributed to this relative decline in the role of foreign banks.
The local banking system has responded flexibly and rapidly to the international financial crisis by significantly raising its levels of efficiency and productivity and regaining part of the market share that it had lost with the arrival of foreign banking institutions.
The powerful position of Brazilian, as well as Chilean and Colombian, banks has allowed them to maintain slightly wider spreads and this, together with their efficiency gains, has enabled local banks to surpass foreign institutions in terms of own-funds profitability, most notably since 2007.
A more in-depth analysis would be worthwhile, however, especially one that focused on the impact of different national regulatory systems on efficiency and productivity.
In some cases, public banks also maintain a major presence, and further study in this respect would also be warranted.
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean generally are at a midway point in terms of their development and have a limited financial culture, with SMEs accounting for a large part of their production activity.
Calderón, Álvaro y José Luis Machinea (2008), “América Latina: ¿una plataforma para la globalización de las mayores empresas españolas?”, La gran apuesta: Globalización y multinacionales españolas en América Latina.
Eraso, Unai e Ibai Urra (2011), “Situación actual y tendencias de la industria bancaria mundial: Apalancamiento y rentabilidad”, Bolsa.
Minda, Alexandre (2007), “The entry of foreign banks into Latin America: a source of stability or financial fragility?”, Problemas del desarrollo.
Mundo ejecutivo (2011), 1000 empresas más importantes de México, México, D.F., noviembre.
The Wall Street Journal Americas (2012a), “El Banco Central Europeo inyecta otra gigantesca dosis de liquidez”, 1 de marzo. (2012b), “El acuerdo griego no desencadenará los pagos de CDS”, 2 de marzo. (2011a), “HSBC, detalles de su reestructuración”, 12 de mayo. (2011b), “HSBC retrocede en el plan de ser el ‘banco local del mundo’”, 27 de mayo.
Introduction The electricity sector is of strategic importance in all modern economies, because the ability to supply electric energy reliably and at reasonable cost is crucial to any productive activity and a basic element in family well-being.
As a result, energy policy can have a significant influence on a country’s industrial development.
Total worldwide energy expenditure is estimated at 8% of GDP, of which electricity represents 17% (the remainder corresponds mainly to the combustion of hydrocarbons and biomass (IEA, 2011a).
The strategic importance of the sector and its natural monopoly characteristics (particularly in the transmission and distribution segments) has meant that it has traditionally been dominated by State-owned enterprises, generally national or local monopolies.
Following the 1990s reforms in most Latin American countries, the sector was opened up to competition, particularly in the generating segment, and also to foreign direct investment (FDI).
Today it is shared between State-owned firms, which in some countries continue to have a monopoly over the activity; large transnational enterprises from Europe, the United States or other countries of the region; and, to a lesser extent, domestically owned private enterprises.
The electricity sector has been one of the largest FDI recipients in the region over the last few years, and in nearly all countries its configuration has been determined by the degree of openness and facilities given (or not given) to transnationals.
As in other regulated sectors (telecommunications, water and sanitation, transport), the regulatory framework is the main determinant of private investment —including FDI— in the transmission and distribution segments; whereas in the generating segment, the key factors are risk sharing mechanisms and price setting.
In addition, there are expectations of growth in electricity consumption in each market, normally linked to GDP growth, but also affected by the economy’s sector composition, and the international situation, which influences the global strategies pursued by transnational corporations.
This chapter analyses investment flows in the sector, the strategies of transnational enterprises and the degree to which economic conditions, the different regulatory frameworks and the global economic context determine investments in this sector.
Section B presents an overview of the sector, focusing particularly on the business dynamic.
Section C analyses the electricity market in the region’s countries and the influence that the sector reforms implemented in the 1990s have had on its current configuration.
The following section provides an overview of the transnational enterprises in the sector, their investment strategies in the region and the effect of the European and global situations.
Section E analyses electric power generation from renewable sources, and particularly the exponential growth of wind power in Brazil, Mexico and other countries of the region.
The final section sets forth a number of conclusions and analyses the policies implemented by the countries of the region to develop the sector in accordance with the multiple objectives mentioned above.
Global overview of the electricity sector The electricity sector is highly capital-intensive, has natural monopoly characteristics (particularly in the transmission and distribution segments) and is poorly internationalized —although there are increasing international connections in the transmission network, the exportation and importation of electricity remains very marginal in most countries and is only important in very specific cases.
It is also a strategic sector with a large weight in the economy, whose correct functioning is crucial for all other sectors and the population’s well-being.
For all of these reasons, the sector is highly regulated in all countries, and in many cases controlled directly by the State.
World electricity demand (and production) grew by an average of 3.4% per year from 1973 to 2009, when, in the wake of the economic crisis, demand dropped by 0.7% —the first fall since records began.
The International Energy Agency (IEA) is forecasting demand growth of 2.4% per year between The behaviour of demand has differed between developed and emerging economies.
In countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) electricity consumption fell by 3.8% in 2009, while growing by 3.2% in the rest of the world.
In 2010, OECD countries increased their production by 3.6%, without regaining the 2008 level, while growth in developing countries continued.
To meet the demand growth (and replace obsolete assets) estimated annual investments of US$ 675 billion will be needed, 60% of which will take place in emerging economies (see table IV.1).
While OECD countries still accounted for 52% of world electricity consumption in 2009, 80% of future growth is expected to occur in the emerging economies.
The four largest of these (Brazil, China, the Russian Federation and India) account for 63% of all electricity consumed outside the OECD.
In advanced countries, the growth of electricity demand will be dampened, firstly by slower economic growth and secondly by improvements in conservation and energy efficiency.
The distribution segment is a highly regulated business in close contact with consumers, which sometimes puts firms in this segment at the centre of social conflict regarding the price and quality of the services provided.
Although each segment has very different business models, electricity companies tend towards vertical integration and generally operate in more than one of segment.3 In some Electricity can be generated in thermal, hydroelectric or nuclear power plants, or in plants fuelled by other renewable resources (see box IV.1).
Transmission involves the transportation of energy from generators to the distributors through high-voltage power lines.
Distribution is the transportation from the latter stage to final customers, normally at lower voltages.
Commercialization is the sale of this energy to the consumer, and in most countries is combined with distribution.
Roughly half of the investments received in the sector are in the generation segment, about 15% in transmission, and 35% in distribution, although these proportions can vary from country to country.
This trend reflects coordination economies between different segments and the specific nature of the sector’s assets in.
Generating plants have no value without transmission lines, which in turn have no value without distribution networks.
This increases the risk for firms making large investments in one segment without being certain that the other firms will make appropriate investments in the other segments. countries, this concentration is restricted, to generate as far as possible a market between the different segments and to prevent monopolies from developing.
In most countries of the world, with the notable exception of United States, the electricity sector has been dominated by State enterprises often operating as monopolies.
This situation has been changing gradually, particularly since the 1990s, when many countries wholly or partially privatized their electricity companies, while liberalizing the sector with measures to foster greater competition.
These reforms attracted FDI into the sector, firstly because liberalization opened up space in many countries for the entry of new players; and secondly, because the new privatized firms pursued an international expansion strategy to increase their size and enhance competitiveness.
Nonetheless, even in cases of total privatization, governments never cease to be involved in the corporate strategies of large electricity companies, particularly in relation to potential mergers and acquisitions that dilute the supposed national nature of the firm.
For example, national governments in the European Union have often maintained an exclusive “golden share” in electricity companies, giving them veto power on key corporate decisions.
The world’s 10 largest electricity companies, measured by sales in 2010, are dominated by European firms.
This partly reflects the fragmentation of the market in the United States, but it is also the result of processes of concentration and international expansion of the sector which stemmed from the creation of the single European market in 1993.
Following regulatory changes that introduce greater competition in the European Union, electricity companies were forced to scale up through mergers and acquisitions.
Mergers occurred firstly inside each country, thereby increasing concentration in national markets.
The next step was international expansion, when these firms could exploit the advantages acquired in this concentration process, mainly their size and financial capacity.
The result has been the creation of large firms, some of them highly diversified geographically, but still with a strong presence in their country of origin and often still controlled by the respective national States, such as Electricité de France (EDF), GDF Suez and Enel.
In the case of GDF-Suez, electricity represents just 50% of group sales.
From the technology standpoint, electricity companies usually purchase the technology they use rather than create it internally.
A study of the world’s 2,000 most innovative firms ranked electricity 39th out of 46 sectors, with research and development (R&D) expenditure accounting for 0.67% of the budget, close to the figures of sectors such as forestry products or the drinks industry (ECLAC, 2010a).
Although electricity generation and distribution are technologically complex and continuously developing processes, progress is the result of research by engineering firms and equipment manufacturers, which sell their products and build infrastructures for electricity companies.
The latter restrict their R&D to the maintenance of the equipment they possess, improving processes, and marketing energy.
Despite being large firms that are usually present in all segments of electricity sector, very few of them diversify into other branches of infrastructure or services.
In fact, a number of experiments in this regard, undertaken by firms such as Endesa and Iberdrola of Spain in the 1990s, were subsequently reversed, when the firms in question refocused on the electricity sector.
The most common possibilities for business diversification are engineering and construction, and the extraction and distribution of hydrocarbons.
The Colombian firm Interconexión Eléctrica S.A. (ISA), Spain’s Iberdrola and the French enterprise GDF are among the few electricity companies with dedicated engineering and construction branches; but even in these cases, vertical integration with the rest of the group is limited.
This underscores the general strategy of electricity firms not developing their own technology.
The combination of the electricity business with hydrocarbons is more an exception than the rule, despite clear connections between the two sectors, and the fact that, less than a decade ago, there were business trends towards convergence between the two sectors in southern cone countries (ECLAC, 2005).
The most significant case currently in Latin America involves the Brazilian State-owned oil company Petrobras, which has 15 generating plants with over 5GW capacity, which it supplies directly with natural gas (of which is the country’s sole provider).
Another important example is the merger between Gas Natural and Unión Fenosa (Spanish companies with numerous branches in the region) with the aim of exploiting synergies in the distribution and marketing of gas and electricity (see point 1 in section D).
There are several firms in the non-conventional renewable energies segment which are simultaneously electric power generators, equipment manufacturers, and technology developers.
This segment (see the definition in box IV.1) still represents just 3% of the world total (IEA, 2011a), but over the last 20 years it has grown faster than the rest of the industry (see figure IV.1).
In 2010, the last year for which global data have been compiled, investments in renewable energies worldwide increased by 32% to US$ 211 billion.4 Growth in that year was concentrated particularly in wind power in China and small-scale (rooftop) solar power in Europe.
Over the last 20 years, there has been an FDI trend in the sector, which is the only growth path for many firms, since the exportation of electricity is a very limited alternative, and in most cases large electricity firms have reached the maximum size in their countries of origin permitted by the regulators.
Hydroelectric energy and power generation from fossil fuels are the oldest technologies; both date from 1882 during the earliest days of electricity.
Hydroelectric power achieved its maximum expansion following the Second World War: the construction of new power plants peaked in Europe and United States in the 1960s, in Asia and Latin America in the 1970s, and in Africa in the following decade.
Thermal power plants burning fossil fuels (coal, gas or oil derivatives) have developed over time.
A major innovation was the introduction of combined-cycle plants in the 1990s, the process for which consists of a gas that fuels a turbine, and the resultant heat produces steam which drives a second turbine.
Nuclear technology was born in 1956, and achieved its greatest expansion between 1965 and 1975, when most experts predicted that this electricity generating source would be dominant by 2000.
Subsequently however, its growth has been held back by burgeoning costs and lengthy power-plant construction times, partly caused by the additional security measures required following accidents, such as those of Three Mile Island, Chernobyl and, more recently, Fukushima.
Renewable generating sources, apart from hydropower, are geo-thermal, biomass, wind power, photo-voltaic solar panels, thermodynamic solar power and wave power.
Geo-thermal generation (which harnesses hot water or steam from underground) and biomass (which consists of burning plant material in thermal power plants) have a long tradition; wind and photo-voltaic solar power have been developed in the last few years, while thermodynamic solar and wind power are still very incipient.
The power plants in question can have several GW of capacity or else can be very small.
Those with less than 30 MW are classified as “small hydroelectric plants”, and are usually given preferential treatment, together with other renewable energies, given their smaller social and environmental impact.
Nuclear plants are usually above 1,000 MW, coal-fired plants range between 300 MW and 1,000 MW, and gas-fired plants are usually around 500 MW.
Oil fuelled power plants are typically less efficient and more polluting, but they are also quicker to set up and can be much smaller.
This makes them preferable for small-scale electric systems or for increasing capacity rapidly.
Hydroelectric, wind and solar energies have lower operating and maintenance costs, but high capital costs (about 80% of the total).
For nuclear power plants, the current costs (including uranium consumption) absorb one third of the total.
Fuel consumption represents one third of total costs in coal- fired and two thirds in gas-fired plants, which are less capital-intensive.
Electricity generation with fossil fuels emits large amounts of CO2 and other environmentally polluting gases; and there are large disparities in emissions intensity between plants: 0.9 tones of CO2 per megawatt hour (MWh) of electricity in the case of coal, and 0.33 tons of CO2 per MWh in the case of gas.
Carbon capture and storage capacities exist that would make it possible to eliminate most of these emissions, but thus far none has been implemented on a commercial basis.
It difficult to compare the costs of each of these technologies, because they depend greatly on the local circumstances of each plant.
A study made of various plants in OECD countries estimated a median cost of US$ 99 per megawatt hour in nuclear plants, US$ 82 in combined-cycle plants, and US$ 56 in coal-fired plants (using a discount rate of 10%, and excluding CO2 emission costs) (IEA, 2010).
Nonetheless, these parameters (calculated in Europe) are highly sensitive to the availability and price of the different fuels in each country.a The following table provides another estimate of the cost of renewable energies, using 2008 data and a discount rate of 7%.
Hydroelectric energy has the largest range, because it depends more on the specific circumstances of plant location.
Nuclear and thermal plants have a high load factor (about 85%); but in the case of renewable energies, which usually depend on the availability of water, wind or sun, this factor is much lower.
Accordingly, their contribution to electricity generation (measured in MWh) is nearly always less than their percentage of installed capacity (expressed in MW).
This is clearly one of the biggest risks faced by electricity firms and, unlike the case of direct expropriation, there is no national or international legislation that adequately protects against it. (vi) A presence in several countries dilutes hydrological risk, in terms of the effect on hydroelectric production of a shortage of rainfall during a certain period.
Given the importance of this energy source in Latin America, it is a particularly relevant risk in the region.
On the other hand, international firms face a number of disadvantages compared to local enterprises, normally stemming from their lack of knowledge of local regulations and institutions, and their reduced bargaining capacity with the political authorities.
International firms are also often in a weaker position when interacting with local communities for building new infrastructures.
For this reason, many firms do not build new assets outside their country of origin, although they do purchase already existing firms.
As is true of most services, there is no global electricity market, but a number of national markets with their own technical and regulatory specifics.
The transnational enterprises in the sector tend to have assets in several markets as part of an expansion and risk-diversification strategy.
Globally, the sector remains poorly internationalized and, in many countries, particularly developing ones, it is still totally shielded from international competition.
Among emerging economies, however, Latin American countries are the most open to FDI in this industry, which goes a long way towards explaining why firms from mature markets such as Europe are keen to invest in the region.
The electricity sector in Latin America As occurred in Europe, Latin America implemented reforms to the electricity sector in 1990, which created regulatory frameworks that are generally friendly towards private investment.
Moreover, in the last few years there has been a sustained in demand, driven by burgeoning economic growth, along with favourable international context for attracting capital into the region.
This minor investment boom in the sector has not affected all economies equally, so there are still countries with supply problems owing to low investment in capacity.
The privatization and reform process As is true of other public utilities, such as telecommunications, gas and water distribution, or transport, the electricity sector in Latin America was traditionally the exclusive preserve of State-owned monopolies (and municipal monopolies in the case of many distributors).
All of these reforms aimed to introduce principles of competition in the electricity sector, particularly in the generating segment; but while all shared the same principles, they were applied differently.
While privatization was complete in Chile, other countries stopped halfway (Brazil and Colombia); others opened the sector to private capital under a single-buyer model (Costa Rica and Mexico); while some, such as Uruguay, maintained the vertically integrated monopoly (Altomonte, 2002).
The first privatization process in the region was undertaken by Chile in the early 1980s, a decade before other countries.
This helped the development of privately owned Chilean firms which, as from 1992, took advantage of the reforms in other countries in the region to invest in them.
This regional network made ENERSIS highly attractive to transnational corporations which were looking to expand in the subcontinent in the late 1990s.
In 1999, the Spanish firm Endesa made a full takeover of ENERSIS S.A., and in the following year, the United States firm AES purchased Gener, another Chilean firm in the sector (see point 1 of section D).
The ENERSIS S.A. and Gener takeovers represented a common feature in the region’s privatization processes: the preponderance of foreign firms compared to domestic ones, either in the privatization directly, or else through subsequent takeovers (ECLAC, 2005).
In both Chile and Argentina, the electricity sector attracted very large flows of FDI in that period.
In 2002, when the privatization process had been completed, 10% of the cumulative FDI stock in Argentina and 15% in Chile was concentrated in the water, gas and electricity sectors.5 Brazil also launched an ambitious privatization process in the electricity sector in the 1990s, which attracted large FDI inflows in the second half of that decade.
This process was broadly complete in the distribution and transmission segments, but was interrupted in the generating segment by a major energy supply crisis that occurred in 2001 and 2002, caused by drought that reduced hydroelectric output (72% of installed capacity).
There were also a number of design failings in the privatization process, and the adverse effect of the 1998 devaluation on plans for new-capacity investment.
As a consequence of this crisis, which caused outages and had a high economic and political cost, the privatization of electric power generation was halted, and the importance of State enterprises (Eletrobras and Petrobras) as generators strengthened (d`Araújo, 2009).
Colombia also suffered an energy crisis caused by rainfall shortage between 1992 and 1993; and this triggered the reform of the sector, including the privatization of many of the country’s electricity firms in the period 1995-2000.
El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Panama also implemented reforms in the 1990s, resulting in the entry of foreign investors.
In the first three of these countries, reform and privatization occurred after a decade of minimal investment in the electricity system as a consequence of civil wars; and for this reason the new private managers of the firms had to cope with crisis situations that hampered the success of these privatizations.
In fact the reforms affected most Latin American economies, radically changed the panorama in the electricity sector, and allowed transnationals to enter the sector, as described in the following section.
Very large amounts of FDI entered the region, but the new regulations were poorly suited to the structure of electricity industry, particularly in cases where the productive chain was segmented in markets that were too small.
This led to collusion or the reintegration of entities in certain cases and generally resulted in low levels of investment in new In FDI data by sector, the figures for the electricity sector are combined with those for water and gas distribution.
Although in Chile and Argentina privatization affected these sectors, it can be assumed that most of that FDI was channelled into the electricity sector. capacity (Altomonte, 2002).
The FDI that entered the region in the sector was used to purchase pre-existing assets; and total investment in the electric sector declined as a result (Rozas, 2010).
The economic crisis in Argentina in late 2001 marked the end of this period of reforms, privatizations, and the incursion of foreign enterprises in the electricity sector in Latin America.
This was partly because the devaluation of the Argentine currency had an extremely adverse effect on the conditions under which electricity companies (and other public utilities) operated in the country;6 but also because it coincided with an exhaustion of the easiest privatization possibilities and a global financial crisis.
With The crisis in Argentina in late 2001 and early 2002 meant the breakdown of the exchange-rate parity between the peso and the dollar which had prevailed throughout the previous decade.
In that period concession contracts on privatized utilities (including electricity firms) set their rates in dollars, indexed to prices in the United States.
With the breakdown of this parity, the government set rates in pesos and eliminated indexation as a way of controlling inflation.
The electricity firms considered this a breach of contract, and most of them appealed the decision in international tribunals.
From 2001 onwards, the privatization process stalled almost entirely, and since then the spaces for public and private enterprises have remained defined with few changes, except in the cases of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
In both of these countries, the decision to nationalize was not based on reasons exclusively pertaining to the electricity sector, but formed part of a policy to increase the State’s role in strategic sectors of the economy, and was matched by similar processes in other sectors.
Determinants of private investment in the sector The outcome of the privatization process in Latin America was an electricity sector that divided between State firms and private enterprise — the latter mostly transnational corporations, as a result of the acquisitions that occurred between 1996 and 2001.
Nowadays, the few nationally owned private electricity companies operating in the region are generally subsidiaries of large groups that also operate in other sectors, such as Colbún in Chile (part of the Matte group) and CPFL in Brazil (controlled by Votorantim, Bradesco and Camargo Corrêa).
These private firms do not currently have expansion plans outside their country of origin; and the trans-Latin enterprises in the sector (Empresas Públicas de Medellín (EPM), ISA, Eletrobras) are State-owned (see point 2 of section.
With the exception of Chile, all countries have Stateowned firms in some segment of the electricity sector, often coexisting with private firms (see table IV.3).
In addition, in a large group of countries, electricity is in State hands.
Apart from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (which re-nationalized the private firms), the public sector tends to dominate in the smaller economies, where monopoly situations are also more likely to exist, owing to the difficulty of introducing competition between participating agents.
In Ecuador and Paraguay, State domination is complete, whereas in the case of Uruguay, the public enterprise Administración Nacional de Usinas y Trasmisiones Eléctricas (UTE) controls transmission, distribution and all generation, except that using biomass and wind power.
Nonetheless, some small countries in the region have a large number of private electricity firms, such as the Central American republics of El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua and Panama.
The distribution of electricity markets between public and private enterprises has not varied much over the last few years, and there are no prospects for change in the short and medium terms.
Although no new privatizations or nationalizations of electricity firms are foreseen, in many economies of the region private investment has increased in the markets that were open to receive this, encouraged by promising sector growth prospects and stable regulatory frameworks that are attractive for investors.
Moreover, the emergence of new renewable energy sources has also opened up new opportunities for private participation (see section E).
As is the case in other developing regions, electricity demand in Latin America has grown on a sustained basis over the last few years, outpacing the expansion in developed countries.
On the other hand, greater energy efficiency in processes could offset this effect and reduce demand in the future.
Apart from expectations for demand growth, it is regulatory frameworks that determine the pace of private investment in the sector.
These differ widely between countries, and it is impossible to analyse each one in this chapter; but certain key measures are highlighted which have contributed to investment in new capacity, particularly in the generating segment, in the region’s largest economies.
In Brazil, the most important change involved the introduction of auctions to build new generating capacity as from 2004.
Most projects in the system were submitted by private operators, although the large hydroelectric projects were bid in association with Eletrobras, to ensure implicit government backing.
Favourable regulatory conditions for private investors in electricity generation are supported by good prospects in the transmission segment (through tenders) and in distribution (in which nearly all the market is now private), given the size of the Brazilian electricity market and its growth prospects.
Alongside economic growth generally, the most energy-intensive sectors in Brazil (not only electricity) are growing particularly vigorously (Altomonte and others, 2011).
As a result, the world’s leading electricity companies are very interested in the Brazilian market; and those already in the country have plans to expand.
This means, firstly, a large increase in the country’s mining activity; and secondly, that its energy needs were mainly covered with electricity the previous five years.
The problem stems from the 2002 devaluation, when the government converted rates into pesos but did not allow them to be indexed to inflation.
Thus far, firms in Argentina have not announced expansion plans, leaving capacity expansion in government hands, either directly or else through programmes that provide incentives for firms to expand capacity through direct subsidies.
In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, electricity constraints have been more serious and affected industry in particular in the last few months of 2009 and first half of 2010; the problems stemmed from the drought which reduced hydroelectric production (ECLAC, 2010b).
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia the possibility of supply outages also arose in 2011.
Over the last few years, the sector has underinvested Ministry of Energy and Mines of Peru.
Current plans to increase capacity will not bear fruit until 2012 at the earliest.
Mexico opened the electricity sector to private investment in the generating segment in 1994 (while keeping the Federal Electricity Commission (CFE) as sole buyer,15 through various modalities.
The most important have been contracts with independent energy producers, whereby the CFE awards the building and operation of a generating plant to the firm that bids the lowest electricity price in auction.
All plants set up in this way have been combined-cycle thermal plants, in which the risk of an increase in the gas price is borne by the CFE, since the private generator can pass this cost increase on in the price of the electricity it sells.
This situation, compounded by the fact that the CFE signs power purchase agreements (PPAs) lasting 20 years, means that the investments are particularly safe and easy to finance for private investors and, consequently, the auctions arouse great interest.
A total of US$ 14.991 billion of investment was attracted under this modality, although the vast majority of this was for contracts announced between 1999 and 2004 for power plants that came on stream between 2005 and 2010.
More recently, the self-supply modality has gained ground in Mexico, in which one or several large consumers enter into partnership with an electricity generator to build and operate a plant to supply them with electricity.
This does not require CFE participation, which would only receive payment for transmission and distribution.
The investments made in these plants total US$ 10.172 billion and are concentrated essentially in wind power (see section E).
It is the only firm in Mexico operating in the transmission and distribution segments, following its takeover in 2009 by Luz y Fuerza, another public enterprise that distributed electricity in the centre of the country.
Its articles of association explicitly prohibit any investment abroad. also export projects (US$ 3.115 billion), which enable firms to build plants to sell electricity to the United States.
Under these modalities, the private sector share has gradually expanded to account for 45% of all electricity produced in 2010.
Owing to the slowdown in the Mexican economy over the last decade, electricity consumption did not attain the growth expected of it; and in 2010 there was idle capacity of 47%.
In 2011, this slack was reduced to 33%, as a result of delays in the entry of new plants, a revival of consumption and the withdrawal of the oldest and most inefficient plants of the CFE.
Although all transnational firms in Mexico have plans to expand their investment, these will depend on the government’s decision to open more contracts for independent energy producers and continue with the self-supply model, which in turn depends on retiring CFE capacity.
In the short and medium terms, there are no prospects for opening up the electricity transmission and distribution segments to private investment.
In Central America, private firms have also grown their market share in generating segment in the last decade and now account for 62% of total electricity production in the subregion.
In the distribution segment, transnational enterprises such as EPM and AES play a key role, along with Gas Natural Fenosa (which recently sold its holdings in Guatemala).
Since 2004, generating capacity has grown slightly faster than maximum demand, reversing the contrary trend that had prevailed since 1990.
In most Caribbean countries, the sector is dominated by a single State-owned firm, except for the three largest economies: the Dominican Republic, where the generating segment is in private hands, and Trinidad and Tobago and Jamaica, where the Japanese firm Marubeni is a major player.
In Latin America, the space left for private investment in the electricity sector has mostly been exploited by foreign investors; but, for various reasons, the trends of this industry are hard to discern in each country’s FDI data.
Firstly, Mexico is the only country that publishes data on FDI in the electricity sector specifically, while information for the other countries is aggregated with gas and water distribution.
In the first place, nearly all countries have large FDI inflows in this sector, except those where the electricity sector has remained entirely in State hands.
Small economies that receive a relatively large amount of FDI in the sector include the Dominican Republic, Guatemala and Nicaragua.
In general, FDI flows were greatest between 1999 and 2001, when the privatization process is were still under way and the concomitant wave of mergers and acquisitions.
In the later years, FDI declined, before reviving somewhat between 2008 and 2010, but this general trend is greatly affected by the volatility of flows from year to year, reflecting mergers and acquisitions in this industry.
In many cases, particularly Colombia, where there are strong local firms, the balance of FDI is negative, since these firms have purchased assets from transnational enterprises.
Although this problem is common to all industries, it is a particularly sensitive issue in electricity and other infrastructures, since projects are very often financed with debt.
In markets where long-term power purchase agreements are established, many firms prefer to undertake generation using the project finance modality, in other words through a subsidiary devoted exclusively to the project; and they use the agreement as a loan guarantee.
Under this modality, up to 80% of project financing can be debt, with as little as 20% obtained from equity.
The figures represent the investment commitments expressed by firms interested in electricity generation, transmission and distribution projects, in which private enterprises (both domestic and foreign) participate.
The difference in magnitude compared to FDI data is explained by the fact that the information represents investments that were announced (but not necessarily executed), and includes all private investment (domestic and foreign) but does not deduct the dis-investments made by transnational firms.
Irrespective of the type of firm that undertakes them, investments in new capacity in the electricity sector are subject to the legal, political and social difficulties faced by all large infrastructure projects.
In addition to the social and environmental requirements they have to fulfil, and which are usually specified in advance in regulations, there are reactions from the affected communities and civil society at large.
These are increasingly active, and often succeed in overturning administrative decisions and achieving modifications or even the cancellation of already-approved projects.
While this considerably reduces the land directly affected, it makes hydroelectric energy far more dependent on the rainfall regime.
Composition of electricity generation As an exception, AES does not include nuclear energy among its alternatives. there was a crisis in the sector owing to a lack of rain.
At that time, the authorities decided to diversify generation towards natural gas power plants and provided incentives to build gas pipelines from Argentina.
This model also entered into crisis in 2004, when Argentina cut off gas exports to Chile, which made it necessary to consume diesel in combined-cycle power plants, more generation with coal, and the construction of liquefied gas terminals.
Rep. of) The composition of a country’s electric power generation depends firstly on the natural conditions prevailing in it and the size of its electricity market.
Apart from these circumstances, there are regulatory and investment decisions made by governments which push electric power generation towards one technology or another.
No electricity firm has a defined strategy that favours or excludes generation with a given technology; and each decides to invest in the technology that market signals suggest.19 Despite losing ground in recent years, hydroelectric power continues to dominate electricity generation in the region, with 50% of installed capacity (see figure IV.6).
This is an exceptional case in the world (the global percentage of hydroelectric energy is 16%), which means that electricity production in the region has a small carbon footprint (measured by CO2 emissions per kilowatt hour (KWh) produced), and reduces reliance on fossil fuel imports in many countries.
Nonetheless, this supply structure means that the region’s electricity systems are highly dependent on rainfall regimes.
Unlike the situation in South American countries, in Mexico combined-cycle thermal power plants are the priority alternative (representing 52% of installed capacity and 100% of private investments until wind power emerged), mainly owing to the low cost of gas in the United States, to which Mexico is connected by a gas pipeline.
The country has an open and competitive gas market which guarantees fuel supply to generators.
Hydroenergy, which in Mexico has less potential than elsewhere the region, is in the hands of the CFE, as also is geothermal and nuclear energy.
The other expansion path involves non-conventional renewable energy sources, particularly wind (see section E).
The leading economies of the region with a larger proportion of thermal power plants include Chile (60% of total).
This country depends very heavily on hydroelectric energy (at least in the central zone where most consumption takes place), and in 1988 the basis of official figures.
The smaller countries mainly use liquid-fuel thermal power plants, which are more flexible but much more costly to operate, particularly with the current level of oil prices.
In Central America, these plants were built following privatizations, to deal with emergency situations (they can be built much more quickly than any other alternative) in the context of much lower oil prices than currently prevail.
The result is an electric power generating structure that is excessively biased towards liquid fuels, with high electricity prices and total energy dependence.
At the present time, the possibility of installing combined-cycle power plants is being studied,20 together with a return to building hydroelectric plants (such as Tumarín in Nicaragua) and the incipient entry of wind power (see section E).
Electricity prices are generally higher in Central American countries than in South America; and, although heavily influenced by taxes and subsidies, the structure of electric power generation and the size of the market are decisive factors (see figure IV.8).
This also occurs, in more extreme form, in the Caribbean countries, particularly the smaller economies.
Average prices for industrial consumption in these economies are consistently above those prevailing in the rest of the region, with levels of US$ 0.4 per kilowatt hour in Haiti, US$ 0.36 in Barbados, and US$ 0.25 in Jamaica.
Apart from large-scale hydroelectric plants, renewable sources remain marginal in the region.
Small-scale hydroelectric, biomass, and geothermal energy plants have traditionally been important in certain countries in the region, and remain so within this segment.
Nonetheless, the burgeoning growth of wind power over the last two years is driving the renewable energy segment in the region.
Brazil now has 1,500 MW capacity installed and another 6,700 MW In September 2011, AES announced the investment of US$ 970 million in a natural gas plant in El Salvador.
As a proportion of new capacity being planned, wind energy represents 3.7% in Brazil and 10% in Mexico (SENER, 2010).
This phenomenon is not exclusive to large countries, however: Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua and Uruguay also developed considerable wind energy capacity D.
The strategies of transnationals in Latin America As the growth of electricity demand worldwide is concentrating on emerging markets, it is rational for electricity firms from Europe, the United States or Japan to attempt to increase their share in these markets.
Among them, Latin American countries are generally more open to foreign investment, so nearly all large transnationals have investments in the region and, almost without exception, currently intend to strengthen their positions in these markets (see table IV.5).
Privatizations and market liberalization in the 1990s provided the big opportunity for transnationals to enter the Latin American electricity sector.
At that time, European firms were best placed to invest in the region, given their size, financial capacity and the outward orientation which the process of creating the single European market had encouraged them to adopt.
This explains their current dominance of the sector in the region, led by Spanish firms such as Endesa (now part of Enel), Iberdrola and Unión Fenosa, which had grown thanks partly to heavy investment in infrastructure in Spain since the second half of the 1980s.
Nearly all of them have participated in takeovers and major restructuring processes in Europe, such as the mergers between Suez and Tractebel, Enel and Endesa or Gas Natural with Fenosa, which have often had implications for the restructuring of their assets in Latin America.
All of them have suffered major operational crises in the region, particularly companies with assets in Brazil (devaluation in 1999 and energy crisis in 2001-2002); Argentina (devaluation and renegotiation of contracts in 2002); and Chile (drought in 1998 and gas supply cut off in 2004).
In response to these crises, most of the companies had to embark on asset restructuring programmes, which generally involved the divestment of certain enterprises, concentration of their operations in electricity sector, and the abandonment of diversification towards other services and infrastructures.
Despite these obstacles, no company decided to withdraw from the region, with the partial exception of EDF (which maintained just a single generating plant in Brazil).
The financial effort of the takeovers in the late 1990s, and the difficulties encountered in these markets in the early years of the new century, meant that for several years most transnationals adopted a cautious attitude towards undertaking new investments.
This situation has now changed, however, and in recent years these companies have announced ambitious investment projects in the region, generally targeting the organic growth of the markets in which they were already present — except for Argentina, where transnationals operating in the country (Enel, Duke Energy and AES) have not announced any expansion plans.
The projects in question cover transmission, distribution, and generating businesses alike, and include a substantial increase in renewable energy projects (apart from hydroelectric power plants).
Investment expansion plans in the region are being hampered by the adverse economic situation in Europe, where, to a greater or lesser extent, these firms have most of their assets.
This means that Latin American assets are now extremely important for the firms in question, since they are in markets with growth prospects offering generally high returns.
Most of these firms earn more than 10% of their revenues in Latin America, and in fact much more than this in the case of smaller firms such as Gas Natural Fenosa or AES (see figure IV.9).
In many cases, their profit percentage is even higher, which suggests that operating returns in the region are higher than the group average.
Moreover, the economic and financial conditions prevailing in their markets of origin, particularly for the Spanish firms and Portugual’s EDP, mean that the firms have difficulties in financing very ambitious expansion operations.
In keeping with this general desire to gain presence in Latin America, one of the largest European electricity firms, the German E.ON, has recently entered the market announcing in early 2012 that it had taken a 10% stake in the Brazilian generator MMX for US$ 471 million.
This will make RWE, also based in Germany, the only large European electricity company without a presence in the region (Diario Financiero, 12 January 2012).
In recent years, these transnationals have also been joined by new trans-Latin companies in the sector, ISA and EPM (of Colombia) and Eletrobras (from Brazil).
These are all State-owned and have a long track record in their respective countries; they embarked on international expansion only very recently, and always within the region.
In the last few years a number of Asian companies have also entered the market, such as the Japanese Mitsui, Kepco from Korea and the Chinese enterprises State Grid and Synohidro.
Electricity transnationals also face competition from firms in other sectors, which are attracted by the profitability and stability of investments in electricity assets.
In this connection, there has been a significant increase in investment funds with controlling interests in electricity companies (see box IV.2), a trend that looks set to continue in the future.
Lastly, traditional electricity firms have seen new groups enter the generating market with wind energy and other non-conventional renewable energy sources.
This is still a young and expanding segment with many relatively small firms, but, as the sector develops, a process of consolidation is likely, in which the traditional large electricity firms will no doubt play an important role.
European and United States transnationals (a) Enel: the firm with the largest market share in South America The State-owned Italian firm, Enel, is the largest transnational in the electricity sector in Latin America.21 Most of its assets in the region come from the Spanish enterprise Endesa, which Enel took over in 2007.
At the time Its total assets in the region are less than those of the two largest State-owned firms: CFE and Eletrobras. of the merger, the two firms were highly complementary in their geographic scope: whereas Endesa focused on the Iberian peninsula and Latin America, Enel dominated Italy and the markets of eastern Europe, mainly.
For this reason, the Italian enterprise has not completed its consolidation with Endesa, and most of its assets in Latin America operate under that brand.
Their strategy involves purchasing infrastructure assets (generally already built) that generate a predictable and stable income flow.
In the last few years, they have benefited from a low interest-rate environment and rising expectations of inflation, which makes them an attractive investment alternative for savers seeking less volatile assets than variable income instruments but with a higher return than can be earned on public debt.
Within the electricity sector, they mainly invest in assets that yield regulated returns, such as transmission lines.
Nonconventional renewable energies, involving high fixed capital investments and relatively low and predictable operating costs, are also suitable as investment fund assets when power purchase agreements (PPAs) can be signed that offer a stable long-term income.
Some funds with active investment strategies purchase firms in distress with the aim of strengthening their financial position and then selling them on.
Most have a more conservative attitude and purchase preexisting assets with relatively stable operating expectations.
In these cases, the fund usually keeps the existing management team in place.
The largest operation undertaken by an investment fund in the region thus far has been the takeover of Transelec, which dominates the transmission segment in Chile.
This firm was purchased for over US$ 2 billion in 2006 by a consortium of Canadian investment funds led by Brookfield Asset Management (BAM).
BAM has US$ 121,558 million in assets, distributed between hydroelectric generation in North America and Brazil (where it has 451 MW capacity), real estate in the commercial offices segment, and regulated infrastructure assets, arising from its stake in Transelec.
In addition, 20% of its capital is applied in more cyclical activities, such as residential real estate or privately owned firms.
More recently, in 2011, two electricity distribution and generating firms in Guatemala were purchased for US$ 345 million by Actis, of the United Kingdom.
Actis is a private capital enterprise that invests in emerging- market infrastructure projects or in those that capture the growing purchasing power of the new middle classes.
It has US$ 4.6 billion in its portfolio, invested in 65 firms.
Only 9% of its assets are in energy, and 5% in Latin America.
The monies it manages mainly come from pension funds, investment funds, and sovereign wealth funds.
Actis is also the sole owner of Globeleq, which has electricity generating assets in Costa Rica, Honduras and Peru.
Contour Global and Southern Cross are examples of investment funds with more active strategies, that purchase ailing firms with the aim of regenerating them and selling them on at a higher price, and also participating in development and construction.
The first of these has generating assets in Brazil and Colombia, while the second owns a 780 MW gas plant in the north of Chile, and the Campanario power plant, also in Chile, which declared a suspension of payments in 2011.
Electricity sector assets controlled by investment funds are still isolated cases, although their presence has grown significantly in recent years.
Their comparative advantage is their ability to obtain funding, which is important in such a capital-intensive industry.
In contrast, when electricity firms are controlled by investment funds, rather than forming part of transnational companies, there is less opportunity for operational synergies and knowledge transfers within the enterprise.
If the presence of investment funds in the sector were to expand, it could produce a business model in which ownership of the assets (by the investment funds) is separated from their management ( in the hands of the electricity firms), in a system similar to that operated by some hotel groups.
Endesa’s expansion in Latin America began in 1992, when it was still owned by the Spanish State.
In that year, it purchased 38% of EDENOR, one of the leading energy distributors in Argentina.
Later it increased its interests in this country with other transmission and generating companies.
In Peru, it participated in the privatization of the energy distributor EDELNOR in 1994, as a minority shareholder in conjunction with Chilean firms; and in the two following years it purchased the generators Empresa de Generación Termoeléctrica Ventanilla S.A. (Etevensa) and Empresa Eléctrica de Piura S.A. (Eepsa).
In Brazil, where it faced competition in the privatization process from local and Chilean groups, Endesa was a minority partner in the consortia that acquired two major distributors in 1996 and 1998.
In 1997 and 1998, also in consortium with other firms, it purchased Cachoeira Dourada, the country’s first privatized generating company (658 MW).
In Brazil, it also constructed the interconnection line with Argentina (Compañía de Interconexión Energética (CIEN)), which began commercial operations between 2000 and 2002, with an investment cost of US$ 700 million.
In 1997 it entered Colombia in a consortium with Enersis purchasing the Bogota energy distributor (CODENSA) and the country’s largest generator, Empresa Generadora de Energía S.A. (EMGESA).
In 1997 Endesa took a stake in Enersis, the Chilean firm that had been privatized in the 1980s, and which since 1992 had built a network of subsidiaries in other countries of the region.
Lastly, in 1999, it took over 100% of Enersis (including Endesa Chile), thus not only consolidating its position as the leading firm in Chile, but also considerably expanding its market shares in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Peru.
Following these acquisitions, Endesa launched a group rationalization plan, with selective dis-investments to focus its strategy.22 Devaluation processes and energy crises, particularly the Argentine crisis in 2001 and 2002, undermined the firm’s results in the region and led to a new round of asset sales to reduce the debt.
As part of this process, Endesa sold most of its assets in other sectors, such as the Autopista del Sol highway in Chile, to focus on the electricity sector.
It is the largest firm in the sector in Chile (a 35% market share in generation and 32% in distribution), Colombia (22% and 25%, respectively), and Peru (28% and 19%, respectively).
Having moved on from the phase of asset consolidation and stalled growth in Latin America, Endesa now hopes to consolidate its position in these markets through organic growth.
In Chile, Colombia and Peru, it has 980 MW of new capacity under construction, with an investment estimated at 1.66 billion.
In its distribution businesses, the company aims to grow its customer base by 14% between 2010 and 2015.25 In addition to Endesa, Enel has other assets in the region owned by its renewable energy subsidiary Enel Green Power.
It also has a 20 MW wind power plant in Costa Rica, and it is in the process of launching geothermal energy operations in Chile, El Salvador and Nicaragua.26 In addition, the company’s plans to expand its wind power operations in Brazil and Mexico are at advanced stage.
Although the activities of Enel Green Power are dispersed among a large number of countries, its assets under the Endesa brand are concentrated in the main markets of South American; and, except for the atomized Brazilian market, in all cases it enjoys a position of leadership that enables it to pursue an organic growth strategy.
Under this plan, the firm aimed to exploit synergies in its installations and customer bases and also enter a faster growing segment.
Endesa took controlling stakes in several telecommunications firms in Spain and Chile, but was unable to achieve the desired objectives.
In 2005, it brought this strategy to an end and sold all of its shareholdings in this sector (Rozas, 2009). 24 Endesa operates the interconnection line between Argentina and Brazil, which is about 1,000 km long and had earnings before interest, tax, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) of around US$ 110 million in the last year.
It first entered the Latin American market in 1993, purchasing a power plant in Argentina.
In 1996 it formed part of the consortium involving the Brazilian distributor Light, EDF and other firms; and the following year it acquired an equity stake in Companhia Energética de Minas Gerais and it gained control of the Rio Grande do Sul distributor.
In the same year, it was selected to build the Uruguaiana power plant, Brazil’s first gas-fired plant.
In 1998, it participated in privatization of the São Paulo distributor (Eletropaulo), and in 1999 it acquired the Tiete hydroelectric plant.
In 2000, it purchased the distributor Electricidad de Caracas for US$ 1658 million, the Chivor hydroelectric plant in Colombia, and the Chilean firm Gener, which had various assets in Argentina, for US$ 1,319 million.
These acquisitions gave AES control over a large capacity generator in Chile and Argentina, and afforded it a strong presence in energy distribution in the large urban centres of Brazil.
In addition, in 1998, it bought an 80% stake in a distributor in El Salvador for US$ 109 million; and in 1999 it paid US$ 110 million for 50% of a generator in the Dominican Republic.
In 2001, the energy crisis and devaluation that occurred in Brazil coincided with an international loss of confidence in energy companies triggered by the electricity crisis in California and the Enron bankruptcy.
All of this caused major difficulties for AES (its share price plummeted from was forced to restructure to be able to service its debts.
In addition to selling many of its non-strategic assets,28 it had to renegotiate the debt acquired by its subsidiaries in Argentina, Brazil and Chile, in agreements that meant a reduction in its shareholding.
These operations did not reduce the importance of the Latin American market for the firm, but actually slightly increased it to 57.5% (ECLAC, 2005).
As a result of the crisis and restructuring, the pace of AES investment slackened during the last decade, although it built two coal-fired thermal plants in Mexico (460 MW) which came on stream in 2007.
Its assets in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela were nationalized in 2007.
Following a phase of downsizing and debt reduction, the firm is once again seeking organic growth alternatives in the region.
It is currently building two coal-fired power plants in Chile (788 MW) and a hydroelectric plant in Panama (223 MW). (c) Iberdrola: focused on Brazil and Mexico Like Endesa, the Spanish firm Iberdrola began its international expansion by participating in Latin American privatizations.
In 1992 it bought a generating plant in Argentina; in 1995 it acquired the main distributors in Plurinational State of Bolivia; and in 1996 it entered the Chilean market by purchasing the Tocopilla power plant from Chile’s National Copper Corporation (CODELCO) and the Colbún enterprise which was still State-owned.
Outside the electricity business, Iberdrola would henceforth only invest in the gas sector to supply its own combined-cycle power plants.
Nonetheless, it is currently one of the few electricity firms with an engineering subsidiary.
In addition to dis-investments in other sectors, in 1999 the firm sold its assets in Argentina, and in 2000 it divested its electricity generating firms in Chile.32 Since then, Iberdrola has targeted its international expansion outside the region, buying ScottishPower in United Kingdom between 2006 and 2007, and Energy East in the United States in 2008.
In conjunction with its operations in Latin America, these acquisitions make it a very geographically diversified enterprise.
It is the world’s largest wind energy producer, with an installed capacity of 62,613 MW in 20 countries, including Brazil and Mexico (Iberdrola, 2010).
In addition, it plans to continue developing hydroelectric projects and is participating in the construction of Belo Monte (over 11,200 MW capacity).
To reinforce this specialization in the larger markets, in 2010 it sold its assets in Guatemala to the Colombian enterprise EPM.34 (d) Gas Natural Fenosa: the search for synergies between gas and electricity distribution This enterprise was formed in 2009 when the Spanish gas distributor Gas Natural took over the Spanish electricity company Unión Fenosa.
The outcome, Gas Natural Fenosa, is the only enterprise analysed in this section which explicitly seeks synergies between the electricity business (particularly distribution) and gas distribution.
The firm’s assets in the electricity sector come almost entirely from Unión Fenosa.
The electricity firm started to participate in the region’s privatization processes several years later than Endesa and Iberdrola.
In later years, the firm divested assets that did not fit into its strategy.
In 2002, it sold Red Eléctrica de España (REE) the electricity distributor in the Plurinational State of Bolivia; and it sold its holdings in the Dominican Republic’s energy distributors to that country’s government.
The purchase of Unión Fenosa by Gas Natural, decided on shortly before the recent financial crisis, required it to sell assets in the region to comply with competition regulations; and it also had to reduce the level of its debt.
As a result, a new round of sales was launched, including EPSA in Colombia, for US$ 1.1 billion (2009); the combined-cycle power plants belonging to Gas Natural in Mexico, for US$ 1,465 million (2010), and the distribution companies in Guatemala for US$ 345 million (2011).
The firm’s total installed capacity today amounts to 2,182 MW and it has nearly 3.5 million customers in Latin America, from which it earns 39% of its profits.
In Mexico, it is the second largest private generator with 1,900 MW capacity in combined-cycle plants; in the Dominican Republic it has 198 MW; in Costa Rica 51 MW; and in Panama 33 MW.
As of late 2011, the debt reduction process had been completed and Gas Natural Fenosa again started to consider expansion possibilities in Latin America, with a declared growth plan of reaching 2,600 MW capacity in 2012.
Half of its business consists of electricity generation, while the rest is divided between sale and distribution of gas, infrastructures, and environmental services.
In 2002, it strengthened its presence in Chile by taking over EDELNOR, and it entered the Peruvian market by buying ENERSUR.
Its expansion strategy in the region, combining electricity and gas assets, made it one of the firms worst hit by the Argentine government’s decision to cut off natural gas supplies to Chile (ECLAC, 2005).
GDF Suez is currently the largest private-sector generator in Brazil, with 6,900 MW installed capacity.
In Peru, it is the second-largest private generator with 1,043 MW (14% of the country’s total generating capacity) and an investment programme of US$ 2 billion (GDF Suez, 2011).
In Chile it is the leading power generator in the north of the country, with 1,739 MW capacity.
In 2010 the firm inaugurated the Mejillones liquefied natural gas (LNG) terminal, with an investment of US$ 500 million, making it possible to import liquefied gas for the thermal power plants in the north of Chile.
In the same year, it inaugurated the Monte Redondo wind farm, with 48 MW capacity; and it currently has 330 MW of thermal generating capacity under construction.
The GDF Suez strategy consists of integrating its businesses in Europe and North America, and expanding into emerging markets, where it expanded its generating capacity by 2.6 times between 2007 and 2011.
In Latin America, it is currently building 5,900 MW of new capacity — more than what it is building in any other part of the world, and more than any other transnational is building in the region.
Of this new capacity, 4,400 MW consists of hydroelectric projects in Brazil, including the 3,750 MW Jirau plant, in which it has a 50% stake in partnership with Eletrobras and Camargo Correa.
This provides an example of the importance of entering into partnerships with local firms, particularly State-owned, to reduce political and regulatory risks.
GDF Suez is also one of a few electricity firms with major capacity in the engineering and construction area as a comparative advantage (through its Tractebel Engineering subsidiary).
In total, the firm currently has 10,282 MW installed capacity in the region (115,000 MW worldwide) representing 5% of its global sales.
Its current strategy of aggressively expanding its generating capacity in Brazil, Chile and Peru will certainly increase this sales percentage in the coming years.
In 2011, a total of 323 MW came on stream in Brazil, Chile and Panama, and its income in the region grew by 15%. (f) Électricité de France (EDF): disinvestment and tentative return Électricité de France, which is 85% owned by the French State, is one of the largest European electricity companies.
In 1992 it joined the consortium that was awarded the tender for the EDENOR distributor in Buenos Aires, in conjunction with Endesa.
In 2001, EDF bought out Endesa’s stake, which the latter was forced to sell as a result of its merger with Enersis.
Lastly, in 2007, it sold all of its generating plants in Mexico to Gas Natural de España for US$ 1.450 billion.
Currently, EDF still owns 90% of the Brazilian thermal plant UTE Norte-Fluminense (869 MW capacity), which represents less than 1% of its global activity.
Among transnationals with a presence in the region, EDF is probably the one that has concentrated its business most in Europe, with few prospects for aggressive international expansion.
In Latin America, it is developing the renewable energies segment (it has wind farms in Mexico with 67 MW installed capacity, to which a further 324 MW will be added in 2013); 36 and it has signed a co-operation agreement with Eletrobras to evaluate opportunities in Hydro and nuclear energy.
The new trans-Latin electric power companies The first trans-Latin enterprises in the electric power sector were the Chilean firms Enersis and Gener, which took advantage of the reforms and privatizations in other countries of the region to start their international expansion in the 1990s, before being absorbed by Endesa and AES in 1999 and 2000, respectively (ECLAC, 2005).
Today Colombia has three large transnationals: AES, in the generating segment; Gas Natural Fenosa, in distribution, and Endesa in both segments.
The other large firms in the sector are State- or municipal-owned, including EPM and ISA, which have embarked upon an international expansion process in the last few years 37.
EPM is wholly owned by the municipality of Medellín, and, apart from its electricity businesses (62% of group sales) it also provides water and gas services in that city, and has telecommunications businesses in Colombia and abroad.
In the electricity sector, it owns 23% of Colombian generating capacity, 25% of the distribution market and 6% of transmission.
Its first investment abroad involved the construction of the Bonyic hydroelectric plant in Panama, a project that encountered major difficulties and is still under construction.
Following this experience, EPM decided to purchase already constructed assets in its international expansion, a process that has gathered pace over the last two years.
In 2011 it acquired the distributors DELSUR in El Salvador and ENSA in Panama from AEI of the United States, making it the second-largest distributor in both countries.
These subsidiaries increased EPM’s customer base by 1.6 million, and produced US$ 1,597 million in revenue in 2011.
At the present time, in addition to dominating the transmission markets in Colombia (81%) and Peru (82%), it has a large stake in Plurinational State of Bolivia (34%) and in Brazil (16%).
In total, it operates a 38,989 kmlong high-tension transmission network, together with international connections between the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia, Colombia and Ecuador, and Ecuador and Peru.
It also has a construction and engineering subsidiary which sometimes implements its own projects or else acts as a contractor for other firms.
ISA is a special case among electricity firms, firstly because it focuses exclusively on the transmission segment and has not acquired generating or distribution assets;38 secondly, because it has targeted its expansion outside the electricity sector in telecommunications and highways.
In telecommunications, ISA began its international expansion in 2009 through the INTERNEXA enterprise, which has consolidated an 18,500 km fibre-optic network throughout Brazil, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
In 2010, ISA purchase 60% of the highway concession is owned by Spanish firm Ferrovial in Chile (900 km) for US$ 290 million.
These investments, and its plans to enter the gas pipeline market, make ISA a specialist provider of linear infrastructures, which, despite a presence in different sectors, operate under a similar business model, involving major initial investments, expropriation of many land plots and regulated income that is constant in the long-term.
The law prevents this expansion in Colombia, since firms cannot operate in several segments of the electricity sector, unless they were already operating in them prior to the 1995 electricity reform (such as EPM).
Both EPM and ISA have invested abroad with the main objective of gaining size to increase their profitability, since it was impossible for them to expand further in Colombia for regulatory reasons.
They have grown rapidly, often taking advantage of the departure of European or United States firms that abandoned their assets in the region.
While ISA has focused its expansion in the transmission segment and other linear infrastructures, EPM has targeted the more open markets of Central America, where it has consolidated a robust position in the distribution segment. (b) Eletrobras: in pursuit of electricity integration Eletrobras was created in 1961 as the leading enterprise in Brazil’s electricity sector in all segments.
During the deregulation and privatization processes of the 1990s, the firm had several of its functions taken away from it, but the State remains the majority shareholder.
It has a total of 12 subsidiaries in generation, transmission and distribution, with 42,302 MW installed capacity, including Brazil’s half of the Itaipú binational power plant.
In all, it is responsible for half of Brazil’s electric power generation and 56% of transmission lines (its distribution business is relatively minor).
Eletrobras does not yet have assets operating outside Brazil, but since 2008 it has pursued an internationalization strategy targeting new hydroelectric projects, mainly those that can sell part of their output to Brazil.
Given the complexity of hydroelectric projects on this scale (the announced investment in the Peruvian project is US$ 4.8 billion) and the political problems that can arise along the way, this is a very long-term investment programme, in which it is unlikely that all projects will ultimately be implemented.
The most advanced project is the Tumarín power plant in Nicaragua (253 MW), on which construction work began in late 2011; it is expected to come on stream four years later, with a total investment of around US$ 1 billion.
Moreover, the firm does not rule out expansion into other markets outside the region, and in fact in 2011 it attempted to achieve this by bidding for the Portuguese State’s share in EDP, which in the end was sold to a Chinese firm.
Apart from seeking to improve the firm’s financial sustainability, Eletrobras’ international expansion plans fulfil a policy function as the executive arm of international agreements on electric energy, specifically the Brazilian government’s plans to promote hydroelectric capacity in neighbouring countries, part of whose production would be consumed in Brazil.
In Central America, its investments have gone hand-in-hand with political cooperation agreements.
In addition to this diplomatic function, the firm has other roles in its own country, including responsibility for implementing the parts of energy plans that private firms do not find profitable (expansion of electricity coverage to remote areas) or excessively risky (nuclear generation).
It is also the preferred partner of private generators in the larger and more complex hydroelectric projects, such as Belo Monte.
The arrival of new Asian firms The recent expansion of Asian FDI into Latin America (see chapter I) has also been reflected in the electricity sector.
Electricity firms from Japan, the Republic of Korea and China have entered the region since 2006; and although their market share in Latin America is still small and confined almost exclusively to Brazil and Mexico, they have major growth potential.
In general, they have adopted a strategy of acquiring assets that other European and United States firms have sold.
The Japanese enterprise Mitsui entered the Mexican generation market by purchasing the Valladolid III power plant in 2006 (563 MW).
In 2010 it acquired Gas Natural’s plant in that country for US$ 1,465 million, which the latter was forced to sell when it merged with Fenosa in the previous year.
Its share of these assets represents total capacity of 1,646 MW, making it the country’s thirdlargest private generator.
Similar generating capacity is held by the partnership between Mitsubishi and Kyushu, two other Japanese firms with three generating plants that came on stream between 2001 and 2006.
Mitsui and Mitsubishi are large highly diversified conglomerates with a presence in many countries across the world, whereas Kyushu is exclusively an electricity firm with its business centred in Japan, but with generating assets in China, the Philippines, Taiwan Province of China, Singapore and Viet Nam, in addition to Mexico.
The three are private enterprises, unlike the other Asian firms with a presence in the region.
The first of these is Korea Electric Power Corp (KEPCO), a firm with few investments abroad, basically in other Asian countries.
In Latin America, they are building a 433 MW capacity combined-cycle plant with a total investment estimated at US$ 430 million, in partnership with Samsung, another Korean company, and the Argentine enterprise Techint.
In the case of Chinese firms, the only asset owner in Latin America is State Grid, the largest electricity transmission and distribution enterprise in China (in fact the largest electricity company in the world by sales), which in 2010 spent US$ 1.7 billion to obtain various electricity distribution concessions in Brazil (ECLAC, 2011a).
This has been State Grid’s largest acquisition outside China to date; and the firm has confined itself to acquiring ownership, while leaving the previous managers in their posts.
The other firm with activity in the region is Synohydro, which thus far has been limited to building power plants for third parties (always with financing from the Chinese State bank), although it has also announced its intention to purchase assets.
Lastly, the Chinese State enterprise Three Gorges Corporation in late 2011 paid US$ 3,516 million for the 21% stake in EDP that was still owned by the Portuguese State.
Although most of EDP’s assets are in Europe, this transaction, motivated by the financial difficulties faced by the Portuguese Government, made the firm a major player in the Brazilian market, where it has 2.6 million customers in the distribution segment and 1,746 MW generating capacity.
In fact two Brazilian firms in the sector Eletrobras and Cemig, also bid for that share.
New renewable energy firms All of the large electricity firms discussed thus far have developed some generating capacity using new renewable energy sources.
Nonetheless, the special characteristics of this segment (strong growth, rapid technical progress, and highly changeable regulatory frameworks) mean that the business model still differs from the rest of the sector, and it is largely controlled by specialized firms.
Many of the large electricity firms that invest in this segment do so through specialist subsidiaries, such as Enel Green Power, CPFL Renováveis or Iberdrola Renovables, which recently has been reabsorbed by the parent company for financial reasons.
The first characteristic that distinguishes the new renewable energies from the rest of the sector — specifically wind power, which is the most developed — is the smaller scale of the projects (see box IV.1), which lowers entry barriers.
These barriers are lowered still further if the project is mainly financed with debt, as is usually the case, thereby reducing the capital contribution necessary from the firm in question to no more than 30% of the total cost.
This level of leverage is possible because most wind farms have been developed with long-term PPAs, and because nearly all of the production cost is fixed capital which is invested at the start of the project.
In addition, a very large proportion of this initial investment represents the cost of components, which makes manufacturers extremely important.39 In a young industry In the case of photo-voltaic energy, the panels represent 60% of the cost of installation of a solar park.
In terms of wind power, the turbines account for 70% of the cost (BNDES).
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimates between 71% and 76% subject to rapid technical progress, these manufacturers have a growth strategy that enables them to lower costs and attempt to internalize the technical progress that they themselves are making.
For that reason, many component manufacturers are also entering the power generation segment, such as Vestas, Alstom or ACCIONA in the wind power market.
In the photovoltaic solar segment, panel manufacturers such as Sun Tech Power started to invest in generation in 2008, and the trend continues Low entry barriers, combined with a trend among component manufacturers to also invest in generation, have produced a highly atomized sector.
In terms of wind power investments in Latin America, the leading firms are SN Power (Norway), ACCIONA, Abengoa and Gamesa (Spain) and IMPSA (Argentina), alongside Brazilian enterprises such as Renova Energia or CPFL Energia, in addition to most of the traditional electricity firms mentioned in the foregoing subsections.
This pursuit of scale among equipment manufacturers is generating excess capacity in the industry, which favours project developers and makes it possible to reduce the final cost of the energy produced.
In contrast, it imposes difficulties on the manufacturers as shown by the weak performance of the shares of these firms in stock markets.
In 2010 the WilderHill index, which tracks the return on shares in firms specializing in this segment, performed for the turbine, between 10% and 12% for connection, and between 7% and 9% for civil works (IPCC, 2011). 20% worse than general stock market indices.
In January 2012, the Danish firm Vestas, the largest producer of wind turbines in the world, announced redundancies among 10% of its workforce, and the closure of one of its factories.
The global dominance that Europe has held in renewable energy industry, in terms of investments in generation and in component manufacture, is now being threatened by China.
In the wind power segment, China is not only installing more generating capacity than any other country, but it has become the leading component manufacture (largely serving the domestic market).
In the case of solar energy, this country has developed a components industry targeting the export market (see table IV.7), because with an installed capacity of just 893 MW (compared to Germany’s 17,193 MW) it already makes 59% of the world’s solar panels (NREL, 2011).
Of the US$ 9 billion of R&D invested in this industry in 2010 (including biofuels), US$ 8.2 billion was targeted on developed countries.40 This global investment grew by 40% in 2010, even though the economic crisis caused a drop in private financing.
More than half of the investment in Latin America, or US$ 110 million, was concentrated in Brazil (Bloomberg, 2011).
By technologies, solar energy received the largest amount of R&D investment (US$ 3.6 billion) while wind power, which is considered a more mature technology, received US$ 1.3 billion.
This makes the sector susceptible to medium-term consolidation, although it is still unclear whether the large electricity firms or some other type of enterprise will be the protagonists of this.
Moreover, this is the only segment of electricity sector in Latin America that is completely dominated by private enterprises, with a clear majority of European firms and some Latin American ones, mainly from Brazil.
Although State enterprises only have a marginal presence, this does not mean that the development of renewable energies in the region is unrelated to explicit government policies in some countries, as discussed in section E.
Asia (Japan, Republic of Korea and Australia) invested US$ 4.7 billion, Europe US$ 2.0 billion and United States US$ 1.5 billion (Bloomberg, 41 The most powerful wind turbine currently operating has 5 MW capacity, but several manufacturers are developing models that will reach a capacity of 10 MW.
The most powerful wind turbine currently operating has 5 MW capacity, but several manufacturers are developing models that will reach a capacity of 10 MW.
The recent development of renewable energies in Renewable energies, particularly wind power, have taken off in Latin America in the last two years, somewhat later than in the European countries that are the pacemakers in this industry.
The vigorous growth of generating capacity has been concentrated in Brazil and Mexico, and has mostly been promoted through investments by transnationals, particularly European ones.
The previous section showed that the renewable energy business model means that electricity firms see it as different from the rest of electricity sector.
For most of the region’s governments, it is also a special sector that requires incentives and support policies (Coviello, Gollán and Pérez, 2012).
The reasons for this support, more or less intensive depending on the case, are as follows: (i) a desire to reduce reliance on imported fuels to produce electricity; (ii) the commitment to reduce CO2 emissions and other atmospheric pollutants; and (iii) the intention to develop local capacities in a highly dynamic industry with a high R&D content.
These considerations have motivated policies to support renewable energies which in some economies of the region have facilitated investments.
Brazil promoted wind power in 2004 with the programme of Incentives for Alternative Energy Sources (PROINFA).
Under this programme, capacity was auctioned to the best bidder in each of the technologies (biomass, minihydroelectric, and wind power) and this guaranteed the entrepreneur a long-term return to justify the investment.
Although the programme initially had difficulties in attracting projects, these were overcome and the targets set for installed capacity are now close to being attained.
Although implementation of PROINFA ended in 2011, since 2009 wind power generation has been promoted mainly through energy auctions open to all technologies in which it gained an increasingly large share.
In these auctions, wind power enterprises have benefited from the shortage of gas in Brazil, which makes thermal plants uncompetitive, and the fact that the auction reserves a quota for power plants that could come on stream within three years, a period that is too short for the large hydroelectric plants.
With these conditions and considerable support from the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES), which finances virtually 90% of the country’s wind farms, windpower capacity in early 2012 amounted to 1,500 MW of installed capacity (1% of the total) with 6,700 MW under construction and development.
As in many other countries, this is a highly atomized sector, where small firms from other segments, and even private individuals, have built wind farms.
Major investments in turbine assembly plants have been made by Alstom (France, US$ 28 million), General Electric (United States, which expanded its hydroelectric turbine plant to also run wind turbines), Gamesa (Spain, US$ 29 million), IMPSA (Argentina, US$ 78 million with expansion plans for a further US$ 169 million), and the ENERCON group of Germany.
All of these companies were set up in 2011 or are in the process of expansion; Vestas, Siemens and Suzlon are considering setting up plants also in Brazil.
Firstly, the charge for reliability — an extra cost that firms pay to have greater capacity in the system — is distributed equally between all generators, ignoring the fact that wind power, given its intermittent nature, ought to contribute more than other sources.
The vast majority of these projects adopted the self-supply modality, which means that the generator firms promoting the project enter into partnerships with large consumers to generate the energy that the latter purchase.
Although the first major wind farm in Mexico (Venta I, of 85 MW) belongs to the State enterprise CFE, subsequent ones were built mainly to supply large-scale customers such as the cement producer CEMEX (250 MW Eurus wind farm project) or Wal-Mart.
Unlike what happened in Brazil and elsewhere, in Mexico, wind farms have almost exclusively been largescale, all of them owned by large firms.
This has partly reflected regulatory factors (self-supply is used in Mexico, but capacity auctions in Brazil), but also owing to different development conditions of the wind farms on the ground and, in particular, in terms of relations with the affected communities.
Unlike Brazil, where land is generally owned by large-scale proprietors which sometimes are the same as those who are promoting the construction of a wind farm, in the centre and south of Mexico, land ownership is normally communal, with very incomplete titling.
For this reason, the process of obtaining land-use permits and management of the affected communities poses a potential obstacle to the development of wind farms in one of the zones of Mexico with the most wind resources.46 The potential for developing renewable energies in Mexico can also stem from electricity demand in the United States.
Mexican sector regulations allow the construction of plants (under any technology) to export electricity, and currently there are several thermal plants set up for this purpose.
The generator can store this virtual energy in its “‘bank”‘ for a 12month period.
The installation of large-scale wind farms entails negotiating permits with up to 400 different owners, many of whom do not have their ownership titles in order. of the output of the Cerro Prieto geothermal plant to the United States.
This makes wind power the only segment of the Mexican electricity industry that is clearly dominated by transnational private investors.
Uruguay is the country in the region that has invested most enthusiastically in wind power with a view to reducing the proportion hydrocarbons in energy generation.
Its objective is to have a generation structure that is 90% based on renewables by 2015, including 15% wind power and 13% biomass.
Since 2009, the government has held two wind power tenders for long-term PPAs with a capacity of 150 MW each.
Both were fully subscribed by a group of consortia, including many transnational firms.
In the first tender, the winning bids were in a range of between US$ 80 and US$ 85 per megawatt; but in the second, the prices fell to a range of US$ 62 to US$ 65 per megawatt.
Most of these projects are still in the construction phase, so wind-power capacity in late 2010 was just 40 MW.
Costa Rica has 119 MW installed and Nicaragua 63 MW,47 representing 5% and 6%, of each country’s generating capacity respectively.
In Honduras, the Globeleq firms, owned by the Actis Investment Fund (see box IV.3), in December 2011 started to operate the Cerro de Hula wind farm (102 MW, 6% of the country’s capacity).
In addition, there are major plans for the construction of wind farms in the Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Panama.
Chile was one of the first countries in the region to operate a wind farm, and thus far 202 MW has come on stream.
Despite the high price of electricity in Chile, which made wind power competitive, the development of this sector has been held back by the energy--contracting system.
The first wind farm to win a tender in Chile was Monte Redondo owned by GDF Suez, which was awarded a 14-year PPA, at a price of US$ 108 per megawatt; and in early 2012 another 150 MW wind farm signed an PPA with a mining company.
The fact that the zones of the country with an abundance of wind are not well connected to the transmission network considerably raises the costs of wind power projects.
In any event, wind farms are expected to be built as legislation comes into force making it compulsory to generate 10% of energy using non-conventional renewable sources by 2024.
The lack of wind resources, compared to hydro resources, has also held back development in Colombia, which only has one 110 MW wind farm that was developed more as a research project than as a business prospect.
In fact, wind power in 2011 has consolidated its position as a competitive alternative in a many of the region’s countries.
Unlike what happened in Europe, where this technology was developed on the back of public subsidies, Brazil, Mexico and other Latin American countries have offered the conditions needed for it to compete on price with other energy sources.
The most recent wind power projects presented in Mexico, Uruguay and Brazil have undertaken to sell their electricity at US$ 67, US$ 62 and US$ 56 per MW, respectively.
The reasons for this success are summarized below. (i) Natural resource: wind power has only taken off in countries with zones of strong winds that are also well connected to the transmission grid.
As Brazil has a grid that connects the entire country, it has been able to exploit its wind resources; Chile in contrast does not have such zones, and has thus far been unable to do so. (ii) Technical progress.
This has triggered a component price war which, in conjunction with the aforementioned technical progress, has substantially lowered the per-MW price of installed capacity.
In Brazil, for example, it is estimated to have fallen by up to 50% in local currency terms.49 (iv) Availability of financing: Countries that have developed wind power offered project financing facilities to wind farm developers, particularly through long-term PPAs, or access to privileged official financing.
The counterexample would be Chile, where, despite investor interest, the functioning of the electricity market does not make it possible to put forward projects that banks could finance. (v) Regulatory measures.
The cornerstones are long-term contracts that guarantee an income to the generator and considerably facilitate project financing, together with mechanisms that make it possible to cushion the variability of energy production.
In Mexico, this has been achieved through the energy bank, whereas in Brazil, the variability of supply is assumed by all generators through a reliability charge.
Both cases conceal an indirect subsidy to producers of this type of energy, since they do not fully internalize the intermittent nature of their production.
Other technologies have had much less spectacular development, although some have gained relative importance in the region.
Biomass generation is present, to a greater or lesser extent, in nearly all countries, but has developed most in Brazil (5% of electricity generation) and Guatemala (11%), and also in other Central American countries.
In the vast majority of cases, electricity is produced by burning the residues of sugarcane, for which reason its development is linked to this crop in particular, and, to a lesser extent, to the timber industry.
Development plans in this segment aim to keep generating plants operating throughout the year.
Small-scale hydroelectric plants, like biomass generators, have been developed continuously in many countries the region; but in some cases, such as Brazil or Uruguay, the development of this technology has faltered in the last two years because it has been unable to compete with wind power.
In countries where wind resources are scarce however, such as Chile or Colombia, this technology has continued to receive investment.
It has good development potential in Latin America (the resource is concentrated in zones of high seismic activity), but thus far it is only important in a few Central American countries and Mexico (2% of total generating capacity).
Mexico has the world’s largest plant (owned by CFE), with an installed capacity of 645 MW.
Although there are no major expansion plans on a regional scale, it could become an important energy source locally.
Photo-voltaic solar energy had hardly developed at all in Latin America by the second half of 2011, when the first parks were connected to the grid in Brazil and Argentina.
This segment is being driven by a fall in the price of solar panels.
In Europe, solar panels have recently reached a level of 1.2 Euros per watt (US$ 1.6) — a cost reduction of 70% compared to 10 years ago (EPIA, 2011).
At the end of 2011 Tsolar of Spain raised the financing to begin building a 44 MW plant in Peru, which will be connected to the grid in late 2012.
By that time, it is estimated at 131 MW of photo-voltaic plants will be functioning throughout the region, and by 2016 the figure could rise to 1,600 MW (Bloomberg, 2012).
The firms’ intention is, firstly, to improve their public image as major polluters and, secondly, to protect themselves against possible trade barriers on projects with a large carbon footprint.
The first case could include Wal-Mart in Mexico; the second includes CEMEX in Mexico and CODELCO (with a 1 MW solar park) and the Los Pelambres mining company in Chile.
Small-scale consumers could also have the opportunity to reduce their Mexico’s production will use clean energy sources, including large-scale hydroelectric and nuclear energy.
This provides the opportunity to consume electricity generated with renewable sources, for which a higher price is normally paid.
Worldwide there are over 6 million customers with these systems, of whom 2.6 million are in Germany.
More important could be the trend of international agreements on climate change mitigation and the potential inclusion of Latin American countries — thus far exempt — from emissions reduction obligations.
The reduction in CO2 emissions being achieved by using renewable energies is still a very small part of what the world’s governments have stated as their objective.
Although the details of emission reduction programmes in Latin America and other developing regions are poorly known, there is an unequivocal trend towards containing emissions that can only favour the medium-term expansion of renewable sources of electricity.
This expected growth of renewable energies will have implications throughout the electricity system, mainly in terms of backup capacity for intermittent sources and the adaptation of distribution grids.
The IEA estimates that for each 5 MW of capacity in variable renewable sources, 1 MW of flexible capacity is needed to ensure the system can deliver electricity at times of high demand (IEA, 2011a).
Worldwide, it is estimated that this will represent 8% of all non-variable capacity additions until 2035, and that this additional capacity (which will remain partly idle) will add between US$ 3 and US$ 5 to the per-MW cost.
The need for idle capacity in the system could be reduced by improving transmission grids and interconnection between regions and countries.
This will be all the more necessary the greater the distance separating production and consumption zones: for example, in the case of wind power in Brazil, concentrated in the north of the country, while consumption is mainly in the south.
Estimates of the additional cost vary between US$ 2 and US$ 13 per MW.
In addition, there is a further US$ 1 to US$ 7 per MW needed to improve the systemic balance through flexible generation, energy storage, or smart grids.
To contextualize these investments, it is worth noting that just 3% of all investments foreseen in transmission and distribution from now until 2035 will be destined for adjusting the increase in intermittent renewable energies.
These smart grids (in reality a continuous improvement in distribution grid possibilities) pose a challenge for transmission firms, which will need to make large investments in the future to deal with these changes (see box IV.3).
This is not a specific technological solution, but a set of solutions that allow for greater information exchange at all levels of the system.
There are two key components of smart grids: transformation of the distribution network from unidirectional to multidirectional, which allows for distributed generation; and management that is better adjusted to electricity supply and demand, which makes it possible to introduce intermittent energy sources, such as wind, solar, and pass-through hydroelectric, in a more reliable way.
Given their ability to increase efficiency in consumption and promote electricity generation with non-conventional renewable energies, smart grids are one of the most promising tools for making the electricity system more sustainable.
Although the distributors will be responsible for leading the necessary investment, the smart grid system will require collaboration from firms in other sectors, such as manufacturers of equipment for electricity grids, the information and communications technologies industry, and construction firms (IEA, 2011b).
In Europe, 75% of the €5.5 billion invested in smart grids over the last decade was applied to projects to introduce smart meters.
FDI flows into the region In 2012 FDI flowing into Latin America and the Caribbean hit a new record high of US$ 174.546 billion.
These figures were set in a complex scenario of falling international FDI flows throughout the year (13%), to levels close to those seen in 2009.
Macroeconomic uncertainty in the United States and the European Union lay behind this fresh drop in global investment, which was sharpest in flows to developed countries (22.5%).
The developing countries as a whole also saw a decline in inward FDI, although the drop was much more modest (3%).
The differing performances of FDI going to the developed countries and to the Latin American and Caribbean region reflected several processes.
First, the economic crisis and uncertainty in the developed economies has been displacing investment towards emerging markets.
Second, local conditions in Latin America are favourable and particularly attractive to global investors at present.
Natural resources, especially metals, are enjoying a long price boom, while the region’s domestic markets have seen several years of steady growth and offer business opportunities for services development (telecoms, commerce and financial services).
These figures differ from those set out in the 2012 editions of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean because they show the net balance of foreign investment, that is, direct investment in the reporting economy (FDI) minus outward FDI.
Although the United States and the countries of the European Union continue to be the largest investors in Latin America, investments made by firms from Latin American countries increased substantially in 2012, to 14% of all FDI entering the region in the past year.
Transnational corporations from the United States increased their share of FDI flowing into the region, while Spanish firms, which had ranked third in this respect in 2011, reduced their share heavily owing to divestments.
FDI flows to South America and the Caribbean both climbed (by 12% and 39%, respectively).
Flow to Central America were up as well, by a more modest 7%.
Inward FDI also rose significantly in Colombia (up 18%) and Argentina (a 27% increase).
Mexico saw a marked 38% downturn in inward FDI, to the lowest figure since 1999.
Brazil again received the largest share of FDI flowing into the region (38%), and Chile became the second largest recipient in 2012.
The sectoral composition of FDI entering Latin America and the Caribbean is particularly significant, because it indicates the extent to which investment is either driving change in the region’s production structure or entrenching existing specialization patterns.
In 2012, the sectoral distribution of FDI for the region as a whole was similar to the average for the past five years, although the share going to services (the largest destination sector) edged up to 44% of the total in 2012.
In South America (excluding Brazil), the pattern has been one of increasing concentration of FDI in natural-resource-based sectors (in particular mining), which are the prime FDI destination (51% in 2012), while manufacturing and services accounted for 12% and 37%, respectively.
In Brazil, the manufacturing sector represents a significant percentage of inward FDI, at 38% of the total in 2012.
However, this is lower than the average for the past five years.
By contrast, natural resources were still a relatively small draw for FDI in Brazil in 2012 (13% of the total).
Natural resources account for a smaller share of FDI in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, as well, and have tended to hold steady: 10% in 2012 and over the previous five years.
Manufacturing, conversely, despite the decline in absolute values in Mexico, was again the largest recipient of FDI (48% of the total).
In this group of countries, the primary sector receives a substantial share in some economies of the Caribbean, such as Trinidad and Tobago and the Dominican Republic.
In Mexico the proportion of FDI to this sector is very small because both mining and hydrocarbon extraction are in the hands of domestic groups.
These investments can have a significant effect on the entrenchment or diversification of production patterns, because of the substantial impact of FDI on host economies, measured approximately as the ratio of FDI to GDP.
The growing share of reinvested earnings —averaging 42% of total FDI flows over the past five years— in total FDI could be strengthening the tendency towards entrenching sectoral profiles.
In 2012, the reinvested earnings component rose again as a proportion of total FDI.
Transnational corporations have consolidated their presence in Latin America and the Caribbean over the years, especially in capital-intensive sectors, and have built up capital stocks that generate large income flows.
In addition, the expansionary phase of the business cycle under way in the region, along with high prices for raw material exports, has boosted returns on those investments.
Insofar as a proportion of those earnings are reinvested, they help to feed foreign investment growth.
Even if flows of FDI into the region continue to grow in the coming years, the flow of income on those investments will grow as well, reducing the net capital contribution to balances of payments.
This calls for examining the contribution of FDI to different dimensions of performance in the host economies, including their capacity to create employment.
In this connection, investments in expanding production capacity alone are estimated to have created three jobs directly for every US$ 1 million invested in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2003-2012 (no estimates are available on indirect job creation).
Again, the profile of investments is important in this analysis, since the employment content of investment projects varies significantly between kinds of economic activity.
Commerce and construction create the most jobs (seven per US$ 1 million invested), followed by the manufacturing industry and services (three jobs per US$ 1 million).
Labour-intensive manufacturing creates seven jobs per US$ 1 million invested; and engineering-intensive manufacturing (including the automobile industry) creates four, similarly to the food industry.
Other natural-resource-intensive activities (excluding food) are less employmentintensive, creating two jobs per US$ 1 million invested.
Call centres are strong job creators: 73 jobs per US$ 1 million.
Many studies draw attention to the notable job instability in this sector, however.
These activities also have low entry barriers and tend to change locations in order to take advantage of tax or wage benefits, because the labour component figures heavily in their cost structure.
Tourism-related activities (transport and personal services) have a higher employment component than more modern ones such as financial services and information and communications technologies (ICTs).
The arguments and evidence set out can inform the discussion of how important it is to consider not only the amount of FDI but also the features of investment projects and their alignment with the requirements of each country’s development agenda: more FDI does not guarantee greater job creation capacity. 2.
Trans-Latins Outward FDI by Latin American and Caribbean economies expanded in 2012 (18%) to an all-time high of US$ 49.133 billion, following historically high figures for the past three years.
These investments have come mainly from Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico, but in 2012 came almost exclusively from Mexico and Chile.
In these three years, trans-Latins have benefited from strong economic growth and investor confidence in the region, which has facilitated access to credit.
In 2012, amid shrinking global FDI flows, trans-Latin firms expanded, some thanks to business opportunities that arose as a result of asset divestments by European firms.
In fact, 7 of the 10 largest acquisitions by trans-Latins in 2012 consisted of assets bought from European companies.
Mexico was the region’s largest outward investor in 2012, with US$ 25.597 billion, more than double the figure for 2011 and far exceeding the previous high of two years earlier.
América Móvil was the prime stakeholder in this process, as it expanded its activities into Europe.
Chilean outward investment also reached a fresh record in 2012 at US$ 21.09 billion, mainly in South America and principally in the retail industry, forestry and transport.
Many Brazilian firms have continued to expand abroad, as well, and account for 7 of the 20 largest acquisitions by trans-Latins in 2012.
Apart from the annual flows of FDI, Brazil has the highest level of FDI stock —over US$ 200 billion— outside Latin America.
Firms from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Argentina also invested abroad, although on a smaller scale.
Data on outward FDI for the rest of the economies of the region are much more modest.
Transnational company profits: repatriation and reinvestment The profits made by transnational corporations operating in Latin America and the Caribbean have increased by a factor of 5.5 in nine years, swelling from US$ 20.425 billion in 2002 to US$ 113.067 billion in 2011.
This surge in profits —also known as FDI income— tends to cancel out the positive impacts of FDI inflows on the balance of payments.
The evidence for Latin America and the Caribbean shows, in fact, that in the past few years outflows registered as FDI income were almost as high (92%) as inflows in the form of FDI.
One of the hallmarks of the current stage of the globalization process is that FDI income is growing faster in developing economies.
Between 2002 and 2011, FDI income quadruped in developing regions and rose sevenfold in China, but only doubled in the United States, the European Union and Japan.
Latin America and the Caribbean is one of the regions where FDI has risen the most.
Two main factors underlie the surge in FDI income in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Although FDI flows into the region have increased steadily, the greatest impact relative to the size of the host economies occurred between 1996 and 2001.
As State-owned assets were privatized and many sectors were opened up to foreign investment, inward FDI stock rose from 11% to 25% of GDP.
During the decade that followed, this ratio continued to rise gradually to reach 30%.
The second factor was a rise in investment profitability, especially from 2003 on.
Patterns of FDI income by sector draw attention to the extremely high returns obtained by corporations in the extractive industries, especially metal mining, in the past few years.
This is also reflected in the distribution of FDI income by country (see figure 3).
Broadly, a first group of countries, in which a large part of FDI goes to mining, have seen returns on FDI well above the average.
At the opposite end of the spectrum are Mexico and some other countries in which FDI has gone mainly to the production of manufactured goods for export; here, returns on FDI have been considerably lower.
Other sectors, which target expanding domestic markets, have also achieved very high returns.
These include financial services in Chile and the automotive industry in Brazil.
In 2012 FDI income in the region was down 7% on 2011, owing more to the impacts of the economic slowdown in Brazil than to the slight drop in prices for raw materials.
Not all FDI income leads to a net outflow of foreign exchange from the economy, since about half is reinvested in the subsidiaries where it was generated.
In the countries of the region for which data are available, it is estimated that between 2005 and 2011 54% of earnings were repatriated and 46% reinvested.
This percentage varies from one country to another, but it held steady throughout that period, suggesting that the global financial crisis which broke out in 2008 had no effect on the proportion of profits that transnational corporations remit to their head offices, at least for the region overall.
FDI income has become one of the main determinants of equilibrium in the region’s overall balance of payments, reflecting the shift that occurred in the late 1990s in the region’s patterns of external financing.
Whereas the primary source for foreign capital used to be loans and portfolio investment, since 2000 most foreign capital flowing into Latin America and the Caribbean has taken the form of FDI.
As a result, FDI income is the main component of investment income and the main cause of the negative balance on the income account.
Between 2008 and 2011, on average, US$ 100 billion was generated in FDI income in the region each year, compared with a goods trade surplus of just over US$ 50 billion.
The countries of the region must now consider the implications of FDI for balance-of-payments sustainability and the economies’ external constraints.
In this regard, FDI acts at several levels: FDI flows represent income, but FDI income is an outflow.
At the same time, the operations of transnational companies in the economy also generate a surplus or a deficit on the trade balance, depending on whether they are export-oriented or not.
And, whereas the balance-of-payments impact of FDI income generated by mining activities is offset by exports, income from services and manufactures targeting the domestic market, although smaller in amount, can generate larger external disequilibria.
Another consideration is the FDI income entering the region’s economies from outward investments by transLatins.
For now, these firms are remitting just 11% of the income they generate abroad, but the gap has narrowed in the past few years and will likely continue to do so as outward FDI gathers momentum.
Nevertheless, this gap will not close for the entire region in the foreseeable future, and while almost all the Latin American and Caribbean countries receive significant amounts of FDI (and therefore generate FDI income), very few of them send outward FDI (or receive FDI income) to a comparable degree.
A further implication of the surge in FDI income is that transnational corporations should become much more significant in relation to host countries’ tax takes.
However, transnationals have a range of instruments at their disposal that enable them to transfer their profits to jurisdictions with more favourable tax treatment, perfectly legally.
This increasingly common practice erodes the tax base and has led to incentives to limit these instruments.
Thus far, only developed countries, mainly in Europe, have taken this sort of step, but the Latin American and Caribbean countries should join efforts to adapt domestic tax regulations and coordinate internationally to achieve a global pact to limit the more aggressive practices of transnational corporations.
Furthermore, the growth of outward investments by Latin American countries will, unavoidably, be another source of tax base erosion, insofar as local firms can resort to the same instruments to reduce their tax obligations.
The effects that high FDI income could have on the Latin American and Caribbean economies will not be temporary.
Although income may be expected to fluctuate with the domestic growth cycle and export prices, in the medium term it will remain much higher than it was a decade ago, because of the FDI stock built up in the region.
This calls for an examination of the role of FDI as a source of capital for these economies and its contribution to growth and structural change in the region.
Foreign direct investment in the agricultural and agro-industry sector in Latin America and the Caribbean Agriculture and agro-industry are currently the focus of a global debate on food security, energy security and climate change.
The world population is expected to reach 9 billion by 2050; to meet the demand for food, agricultural production will need to increase by 70% over 2006 levels.
All of these changes are creating challenges and opportunities in the agricultural and agro-industry sector, particularly in the case of grains, oilseeds, sugar cane and other flex-crops that can be used for human consumption, animal feed or making biofuels but compete for the same basic inputs: land and water.
The importance of agricultural FDI varies greatly from one economy to another.
It also makes up a substantial proportion in Guatemala (12.5%), Costa Rica (6.7%) and Ecuador (7.3%).
FDI targeting the agro-industry sector in these six countries averaged 8.3% of total inward FDI Studies and databases on agricultural land purchase and lease operations in the region disagree as to their scale and extent.
However, the sources examined do agree that the land market is growing quickly and that transLatin companies are playing a leading role.
The governments of the countries of the region have responded to this phenomenon by passing legislation seeking to limit the land ownership rights of foreigners.
Companies specializing in the production of agricultural commodities are mapping their strategies in order to integrate their operations along the value chain and optimize global raw materials exports.
This requires meshing agricultural production, logistics, the maritime freight business and industrial processing in order to reduce costs and produce competitively.
This approach is being followed by the world’s four major grain processing corporations (ADM, Bunge, Cargill and Louis Dreyfus), together with a wide range of other key but smaller transnationals (Glencore, Tereos, Mitsui Mitsubishi and Goldman Sachs) and emerging transnational corporations like the China-based Noble Group Limited.
The pattern across countries and agro-industry chains is to acquire domestic operations (via mergers and acquisitions) and, to a lesser extent, enter into joint ventures with local companies and set up subsidiaries.
Trans-Latin firms have tended to develop a certain specialization based on existing comparative and competitive advantages; this is the case of the Brazilian meat sector companies (JBS-Friboi, BRF Foods, Marfrig and Minerva), which have been able to position themselves globally through acquisitions in the Southern Cone of South America, the United States and Australia.
Apart from their competitive advantages, these firms’ internationalization process has been aided by a national development policy spearheaded by Brazil’s National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES), which has provided funding through a variety of instruments for purchases of firms abroad, acquisitions of local firms with subsidiaries abroad or the establishment of joint ventures with competitors.
The vertically integrated, internationalized business model to which many firms aspire is not within the reach of all of them, because not all are at the same level or have the same implementation capacity.
The specific characteristics of the different subsectors also have an impact on the degree of vertical integration at each point.
The major actors in the sectors analysed therefore fall into four general groups: (i) transnational corporations with market positioning advantages; (ii) foreign companies with limited market presence; (iii) trans-Latins; and (iv) domestic enterprises.
The public policy regime and the institutional framework in general play a decisive role in promoting FDI and absorbing its positive domestic economic impact.
The information set out in this study indicates that biofuel and meat industry FDI are driven not only by new market trends but also by the government incentives and regulations that have shaped foreign investor and trans-Latin company decision-making.
The impact of FDI in the agricultural and agro-industry sector in terms of innovation is another area for consideration.
The study confirms that FDI has had an impact on the biodiesel industry in Argentina and the meat industry in all the Southern Cone countries, whose export-oriented facilities are technologically superior to slaughter facilities oriented towards the domestic market.
The development of trans-Latin meat companies has also had a demonstration effect, inasmuch as operating in more developed markets (United States and others) has introduced these firms to new technology which is then introduced at home, and has even led to alteration of local standards and regulations.
This study clearly shows how extensively involved transnational corporations are in agriculture in Latin America and the Caribbean.
FDI accounts for 23% of ethanol output in Brazil; the figures are similar for soybeans in Argentina and the seed and fertilizer industry.
This level of penetration calls for a look at how accountable these companies are to their host countries.
Agriculture depends on fragile environmental balances, and many supply chains generate negative externalities that must be controlled.
The most obvious case is soybean mono-cropping in Argentina, but the sugar sector in Brazil and meat production throughout the Southern Cone also face formidable environmental challenges that require new responses by transnational corporations (and national ones as well).
It is estimated that there are about 15 million family farms in the region.
They control approximately 400 million hectares, of which 10 million hectares are defined as subsistence farms.
All this calls for rethinking forms of production and for firms to work with new environmental sustainability standards while building successful relationships all around (a win-win situation) and forging new production chain linkages with small growers and surrounding communities.
Agricultural and agro-industry FDI can open substantial development opportunities, not only for the main traditional players, but also for small and medium-sized producers who normally have few linkages with foreign companies.
It is therefore a challenge for governments to attract FDI that will also go to areas where there are small producers and help build virtuous circles of economic growth that can contribute to the stability of the region’s agricultural sector and further the well-being of the rural population.
If this is to happen, firms, whether local or transnational, must be aware that they are working with humankind’s common goods —air, water, soil, climate, genomes, local knowledge and cultures— which essentially belong to everyone and must be preserved for future generations.
This means assuming new commitments vis-à-vis the major global challenges, forming networks and coalitions of multiple public and private stakeholders, capable of generating new synergies to successfully meet these challenges and to contribute to a creating a new global governance based on solidarity, responsibility and democracy.
Concluding remarks FDI flows into Latin America and the Caribbean expanded for the third year running to reach a new record of US$ 174.546 billion.
This took place against a backdrop of heavily shrinking global FDI flows, making the result achieved in the region all the more significant.
FDI flows into the Latin American and Caribbean region are not expected to depart from the pattern of the past few years in 2013, with reinvestment of earnings by transnational corporations, which now represents almost half of inward FDI, similar to 2012.
Economic growth (an estimated 3.5%) slightly over the 2012 rate will sustain earnings reinvestments and new investments targeting the domestic market.
The recent fall in some commodity prices may dampen the strong growth of FDI in natural resources seen over the past few years, but will not halt projects already under way.
ECLAC estimates that FDI flows into Latin America and the Caribbean will be between 3% down and 7% up on 2012, this broad range being due to uncertainty over whether a recently announced large cross-border acquisition will materialize in 2013.
Setting aside the current conditions, sectoral patterns of FDI are leaning increasingly towards natural-resource exploitation, especially in South America, and are thus entrenching the region’s existing production structure.
Generally speaking, manufacturing accounts for quite a limited share of FDI flows, except in Brazil and Mexico.
There are no clear signs that FDI is making any significant contribution to generating new sectors or to creating high-tech activities in any of the countries.
Yet, changing the production structure is precisely one of the most important needs the region is called upon to address.
The factors that have attracted FDI to the region will, in all likelihood, continue to be important in the coming years.
Accordingly, attention should be afforded not only to the sums of FDI received, but, increasingly, to its characteristics and the nature of investment projects, on the one hand, and their adaptation to the needs of the countries’ development agendas, on the other.
It is therefore increasingly necessary to tap the region’s advantages as an FDI destination to improve the countries’ production matrices.
This could be achieved by making greater efforts to channel part of the profits from transnationals into funds for production development and by pursuing initiatives to direct FDI towards sectors which the countries view as priorities.
Introduction For the third year in a row, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean continued to attract growing flows of foreign direct investment (FDI).
The figures for 2012 were particularly significant because they were set in an international context in which global FDI flows dropped off substantially.
Economic growth in the region (3%) and high international prices for natural resources undoubtedly helped keep FDI in the region at levels comparable to last year’s.
Recent growth in FDI inflows (measured in current dollars) has, for the third consecutive year, come with a higher FDI to GDP ratio.
Although this ratio was not above 4% as it was between 1996 and 2001, FDI as a ratio of GDP for Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole neared 3%.
In keeping with a trend that has deepened over the past 12 years, reinvested earnings account for a growing portion of inward FDI in the region.
This trend is associated with an increase in revenue generated by FDI over the years and whose features, causes and implications need to be thoroughly examined.
As revenue increases, so does the capital being reinvested in the region, but it also pushes up the profits transferred to parent companies by subsidiaries of multinational companies operating in Latin America.
So, even if FDI flows continue to grow in the coming years, it is likely that the net capital contribution from foreign investment will diminish.
This calls for examining the contribution of FDI in more qualitative terms, looking at, for example, technology spillovers, generation of linkages, contribution to the creation of new sectors, local entrepreneurship enhancement and the quality and quantity of jobs created.
Section E provides a snapshot of the region’s countries as foreign investors, as well as the expanding trans-Latins.
Section F weighs some of the factors related to the employment impact of FDI.
Overview of foreign direct investment worldwide In 2012, global FDI flows fell 13% over the previous year, from US$ 1.6 trillion to US $ 1.39 trillion, just above the US$1.37 trillion posted in 2011 when the global economy was still reeling from the financial crisis.
The main factor behind the drop in 2012 was the 22.5% decline in flows to the developed countries compared with 2011.
Macroeconomic uncertainty in the United States and the European Union had a marked impact on their figures, with inward FDI to the United States down by 25.3% and flows towards the European Union economies off by 24.8%.
The developing countries as a whole also saw a decline in inward FDI, although the drop was much more modest (3.0%) than in the developed economies.
Foreign direct investment flows to the transition economies, Asia and the Pacific and the countries of the Middle East fell by 13.1%, 10.2% and 3.3%, respectively.
The transition economies were the hardest hit, owing to their proximity and links to the European Union.
Only two regions (Africa, and Latin America and the Caribbean) saw inward FDI increase, by 5.5% and 7%, respectively.
For Africa, however, the increase followed three consecutive years of decline, and Africa accounts for a far smaller share of global FDI flows (3.5% of the total) than does Latin America and the Caribbean.
With inward FDI falling at different rates, the share going to different groups of countries changed significantly.
The developed countries (which in 2011 accounted for 51% of global FDI) saw their share drop to 45%.
The United States, despite the fall in FDI inflows, is still the main destination for FDI: US$ 175 billion, followed by China at US$ 120 billion.
Most of the countries of Europe saw significant declines; the European Union as a whole posted the lowest level of inward FDI since 2004.
Mergers and acquisitions accounted for much of the decrease in FDI flows.
Transnational corporations based in developed countries cut back on these transactions across the board (56% decline); the value of mergers and acquisitions by multinationals in developing economies climbed 10.7%.
The trend was particularly negative in the case of transnational corporations in the countries of the European Union: the value of mergers and acquisitions plummeted 99.7%, from US$ 117.050 billion in 2011 to just US$ 310 million in 2012.
These patterns could signal extremely defensive restructuring strategies adopted by transnational corporations based in developed countries (particularly in Europe) as well as low levels of confidence in a very uncertain and complex macroeconomic and industrial context.
Among the developing economies, the value of mergers and acquisitions on the part of transnational corporations based in Latin America and the Caribbean (the trans-Latins) surged 50.9%.
Trans-Latins headquartered in Argentina, Brazil and Chile accounted for the largest share of these transactions.
Global FDI flows could edge up in 2013 because global GDP, gross fixed capital formation and international trade are expected to recover, albeit slightly.
Inward foreign direct investment and transnational companies in Latin America and the Caribbean In 2012 foreign direct investment into Latin America and the Caribbean hit a new record high of US$ 174.546 billion.
The figures for the region are particularly significant because they were set in a complex scenario of plummeting international FDI flows throughout the year.
As a result, the region’s share of global FDI flows climbed from 10% of A look at the subregions shows that growth was concentrated in South America (12%), the Caribbean (39%) and, to a lesser extent, Central America (7%), while FDI flows to Mexico declined by 38%.
Brazil still receives the largest share of FDI flowing into the region: 41%, despite a slight downtick in 2012.
The largest increases were in Peru (up 49%, to US$ 12.240 billion) and Chile (whose 32% jump, to US$ 30.323 billion, made it the second largest recipient of inward FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean).
Mexico saw a marked 38% downturn in inward FDI, which reached the lowest figure since 1999.
The figures for the region as a whole reflect a growing interest in natural resources and in the domestic markets of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
High international prices for many of the raw materials that are found in abundance in some countries of the region (especially those related to metal mining) favoured the growing flow of investments.
The return on investment in mining has remained high and has, for a number of years, outstripped the figure for other sectors.
The region’s continued economic growth over the past 10 years (with the exception of 2009) has led to an expansion of domestic markets that are increasingly attractive, particularly for the development of mass consumption services such as telecommunications, retail commerce and financial services.
Furthermore, against an international backdrop of economic crises and uncertainty in many developed economies, many transnational corporations are reviewing their strategies and seeking new opportunities to enhance their footprint in emerging economies.
The confidence of investors worldwide in the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean is noticeable in other capital flows, not just in FDI.
Macroeconomic stability and resilience in the face of the 2008-2009 global crisis have helped drive investment portfolio flows up.1 Over the past few years, portfolio investment and other investments2 had, together, outstripped FDI (see figure I.5).
However, the drop in other investments in 2012 pushed FDI, for the first time since 2007, back up to more than half of the cross-border capital flows into the region.
The rise in portfolio investment is attributable to the buoyancy and financial robustness of domestic markets and to low returns at the international level, which has spurred investment in emerging markets (ECLAC, 2011a).
While FDI in the region has been an important source of capital over the past two decades and has never posted a negative balance, portfolio investments and other investments have both shown high volatility over the past 20 years and have sometimes been in negative territory.
But it did change in those countries that posted the largest increases or declines in FDI.
As a rule, inward FDI accounts for a larger share in the smaller economies —as high as 17.4% in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and 14.3% in Saint Kitts and Nevis in 2012.
Chile stands out among the medium-sized and large economies, with an FDI to GDP ratio of 11.3% on the strength of a nearly four-fold increase in inward FDI since 2006.
Portfolio investments are transactions in marketable securities —public or private— such as stock and bonds, as well as money market instruments.
Investments that carry a significant degree of influence over investee management (in practice, when the shareholding exceeds 10%) are not regarded as portfolio investments but rather FDI.
A look at the three components of FDI (reinvested earnings, intra-company loans and capital contributions) in 2012 confirms the trend that began 10 years ago, with reinvested earnings accounting for a growing proportion (see figure I.7).
Brazil is not included because it does not record data on reinvested earnings.
Loans between group companies are a flexible way for allocating resources among subsidiaries and have made up 20% of total FDI flows over the past six years.
The share of reinvested earnings has been growing since 2002, and they have been the largest of the three components (42% of total FDI flows) for the past five years.
This is principally because of the consistent increase in the stock of foreign capital in the economies of the region relative to annual inflows.
In addition, the expansionary phase of the business cycle under way in the region, along with high prices for raw material exports, has boosted returns on that capital.
FDI income (which includes repatriated profits and reinvested earnings) has soared over the past 10 years and become a significant factor.
Chapter II examines in detail the features and implications of this trend.
The Brazilian economy is still the primary receiver of FDI in the region: US$ 65.272 billion in 2012, slightly (2%) below the record high posted in 2011.
This volume of investment, which is just about double the average for the past five years, is substantial even for an economy as large as Brazil’s.
It is equivalent to 2.9% of the country’s GDP and 16% of its gross fixed capital formation (SOBEET 2013).
In 2012, 81% of FDI was in the form of capital contributions.
The remaining 19% was from foreign loans to foreign-owned companies operating in Brazil;3 these loans jumped 5% over the past year and partially offset the 4% decline in capital contributions.
FDI flowing into Brazil is becoming somewhat atomized in that major transactions in excess of US$ 1 billion accounted for just 16% of total investments, versus 27% in 2011 (SOBEET 2013).
In 2012, 21% of Brazil’s inward FDI was in the form of capital contributions from the United States, primarily to the communications sector and for the acquisition of AMIL (Brazil’s largest health plan operator) by United States-based United Health Group.
The stream of capital from Europe and Asia was smaller than in 2011; flows from financial centres like Luxembourg and the Netherlands rose.4 The sectoral composition of inward FDI in 2012 differs from prior-year trends.
Services and natural resource-based activities account for a growing share as the portion going to the manufacturing industry shrinks.
Service-oriented FDI climbed 9% over the previous year and made up 48% of total investment.
This sector’s share grew significantly compared with prior years (36% on average between 2007 and 2011), owing to the acquisition of JPLSPE in the health sector (some US$ 3 billion) and the surge in investment in other services (particularly insurance, commerce and real estate), which are increasingly attractive thanks to improving income distribution in Brazil.
FDI to this sector contracted sharply in 2011 but rebounded in 2012, driven primarily by oil and gas extraction.
Two major transactions stand out: British Gas greenfield investments in Sapinhoa (one of the largest fields in the Santos offshore basin) and acquisition of a 30% stake in Petrogal by China’s state-owned SINOPEC (US$ 4.8 billion).
Of the remaining total FDI, the manufacturing industry took in 38%, down from 47% the previous year and even below the 43% average for the preceding five years.
The trend in industrial FDI (which dropped 19% over the past year) is the main reason for the slower pace of inward FDI to Brazil in 2012.
But the contraction of industrial FDI in 2012 does not necessarily reflect a trend reversal; it could rather be due to fluctuations in large-scale industrial project execution cycles like the new ThyssenKrupp steel plant.
The drop in investment flows to the food and beverage industry and metal and non-metal mineral products was not offset by rising investment in the chemical and pharmaceutical sectors, electronic goods manufacturing and paper pulp production.
These trends within manufacturing FDI are not enough to radically change the sectoral profile of industrial investment.
The largest acquisitions were in activities that, in both years, accounted for more than 40% of manufacturing FDI: basic metal industries and food production.
Other economies of South America FDI income in Argentina climbed 27% to US$ 12.551 billion, according to preliminary data.5 While capital contributions decreased by 9%, to US$ 3.708 billion, reinvested earnings reached US$ 7.984 billion, more than double the figure for the previous year.
A medium-term comparison shows that capital contributions were 7% higher than the average for 2007-2011 and reinvested earnings posted even sharper increases.
Brazil’s official statistics on FDI do not include reinvested earnings, so 100% of the country’s inward FDI refers to capital contributions and intra-company loans.
A good many firms based in these financial centres are, in turn, subsidiaries whose parent companies are based in other countries.
According to the specific literature, financial centres are called first country of origin, and where the parent company is based is called the ultimate country of origin.
Figures for intra-company loans (one of the three components of FDI) were not reported.
The sectoral composition of cumulative FDI in Argentina at year-end 2011 shows that the sector with the largest share of transnational corporations was the oil sector (20%), followed by mining (6%), manufacturing and agriculture combined (44%) and the service sector (30%).
Spain was the main country of origin of investments, followed by the United States, the Netherlands, Brazil and Chile (BCRA, 2013).
This distribution changed in 2012 with the nationalization of the 51% stake in YPF (Argentina’s largest oil company) held by Spain’s Repsol.6 Acquisitions and investment projects announced for 2012 are in traditional FDI sectors.
The largest acquisitions involved changes in ownership of subsidiaries of multinational companies in the financial sector.
For example, China’s Chongqing Grain Group acquired land for soybean production and is seeking to partner with the local group Molinos Cañuelas.
Both the agricultural machinery manufacturer John Deere and seed company Monsanto announced greenfield investments, as did companies that already have a local presence in the automobile industry (Daimler AG), food production (Unilever) and the mining sector (Barrick Gold).
In early 2013, the Brazilian mining company Vale announced its decision to shelve the Potasio Río Colorado potash project in Malargüe, in which it had planned to invest nearly US$ 6 billion.
The decision was likely driven by surging local costs and is also in line with the company’s global strategy to sell off peripheral assets and focus on its core iron ore business in Brazil.
First semester data for 2012 show that FDI largely targeted the hydrocarbon sector (63%), trailed well behind by manufacturing (12%).
Such is the case with mining and power generation and distribution, which are areas of interest to foreign companies that have been nationalized.
In 2012, two foreign companies accounted for nearly two thirds of oil and gas production in the Plurinational State of Bolivia: Brazil’s Petrobras and Spain’s Repsol.
In May 2012, YPFB authorized Repsol to begin exploration in new areas and cleared Petrobras to explore for oil and gas in three reserved areas (Astillero, Sunchal and San Telmo) in the department of Tarija.
FDI doubled between 2010 and 2012, making Chile the second largest recipient (after Brazil) of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean for the second year running.
According to Central Bank statistics, the Chilean economy has become key for transnational corporations operating in Latin America.
Nearly 26% of its inward FDI is subsequently invested outside the country by Chilean subsidiaries of foreign companies.
With some regional operations being consolidated and coordinated from Chile, it is seen as becoming an investment platform or an entry point to other markets in Latin America.8 Chile is the world’s largest producer of copper, so the mining sector was its top FDI destination, at US$ 15.096 billion (49% of the total).
In recent years, the high price of copper, together with declining ore grade and rising extraction costs have been strong incentives for stepping up investment in the mining sector.
The financial sector was the second largest recipient of FDI flows in 2012, with 18% of the total.
In 2012, foreign banks accounted for 40% of the system’s assets, led by Spain’s Santander (18.6% of the market) and BBVA (7%), This transaction has not yet been included in FDI flows for 2012 (as a disinvestment) because no agreement has been reached on compensation. 7 See La Razón, 30 January 2013.
Although some of the proceeds were used to capitalize its operations in Spain, Banco Santander announced a US$ 380 million investment plan for Chile for 2011-2013.
These funds have been allocated, among other things, for opening some 30 branches in major cities in Chile, enhancing customer service (especially for SMEs), and marketing.
In January 2013 BBVA sold its 64.3% holding in Provida (the largest pension fund administrator in the Chilean market) for about US$ 1.3 billion to the United States company MetLife.
In the manufacturing sector, the United States company Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (the world’s largest producer of hydrogen) acquired 67% of Indura for some US$ 903 million.
The transaction will enable Air Products and Chemicals to increase its market share in Latin America, mainly in industrial gases and welding equipment, and reduce its exposure in Europe.
By late 2012, construction had begun on power generation, transmission and distribution projects totalling approximately US$ 3.40 billion.
According to the Central Bank, the main countries of origin of investments in 2012 were the United States (19%), Spain (18%), Canada (12%) and Japan (8%).
By regions, 16% came from Latin America itself; investments from the European Union dropped off sharply, mainly because of disinvestments by firms based in the United Kingdom and Ireland.
As in previous years, about half of this figure went to the natural resources sector, particularly the oil industry (US$ 5.377 billion) and the mining sector (US$ 2.250 billion).
FDI received by these sectors in 2012 was similar to the previous year; inflows to other activities (primarily manufacturing and power) rose.
Much of this increase was due to the acquisition of the pharmaceutical company Laboratorio Franco Colombiano (Lafrancol) by Chile’s Corporación Farmacéutica Recalcine (CFR) for US$ 562 million and the purchase of Empresa de Energía de Boyacá (EBSA) by the Canadian investment fund Brookfield for US$ 415 million.
In 2012 Chile became the largest foreign investor in Colombia (excluding the oil sector and reinvested earnings) thanks to the two largest acquisitions made there as European companies sold off assets.
France’s Carrefour sold its supermarket subsidiary to Cencosud for US$ 2.61 billion.
Investment inflows to Ecuador totalled US$ 587 million; 39% was in capital contributions, 51% in reinvested earnings and 10% in intra-company loans.
Data for 2012 show a drop over the previous year that is in line with year-to-year fluctuations in investment amounts, with no clear trend.
The goal is to significantly increase FDI inflows to the country in a set of priority sectors: tourism, metalworking, energy, and services, among other industries.
This programme is part of a broader policy package aimed at changing Ecuador’s production matrix.
The four-year undertaking has allocated some US$ 18.5 million for increasing direct investment by between 15% and 20% and enhancing the production chain at the province level by identifying opportunities for production investment (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Integration, 2013).
In 2012, the main investment source countries were Mexico, China and Canada; the main receiving sector was natural resource exploitation.
Noteworthy among the investment projects announced in 2012 were those related to renewable energy production (US$ 322 million from Israel’s S.D.E.
Energy, Ltd. for producing power from sea waves), and US$ 100 million from Spain’s Isofoton, world leader in solar energy.
Although this represented considerable (27%) growth over the previous year, the flow of FDI still represents only 1.3% of Paraguay’s GDP.
In recent years, services have taken in a large share of FDI, particularly mobile telephony, the financial sector and call centres.
Among the investment announcements, Canada’s Rio Tinto Alcan confirmed its interest in investing up to US$4 billion in a power-intensive aluminum smelter in Paraguay that would be directly supplied by the binational Itaipu.
The Government of Chile has undertaken an ambitious public works and infrastructure concession programme, in which the private sector has been heavily involved through build-operatetransfer (BOT) agreements.
In terms of road infrastructure, over 2,500 kms of urban and intercity highways have been built or upgraded.
Spanish companies, in particular, have provided almost 60% of foreign direct investment (FDI) in construction (CIE, 2010).
As of 2008, some of these Spanish companies —Ferrovial, Acciona, ACS and OHL— began to rotate their assets, a very common strategy in this industry, selling off older assets in order to finance new projects, both in Chile and elsewhere.
At the same time, the deepening economic crisis in Spain forced a number of these companies to sell assets to pay down debt.
Together, these two factors have led to multiple changes of ownership and the entry of new actors into the sector (see table below).
Since 2008 Abertis has acquired the stock of ACS, Sacyr Vallehermoso and OHL in six major Chilean highway concessions, with a combined investment of US$ 1.3 billion.
The Colombian firm Interconexión Eléctrica SA ESP (ISA) had diversified geographically and by industry to enter the telecommunications and highway sectors in several Latin American countries.
Between 2010 and 2011, ISA paid some US$ 510 million for the entire share stock of the Spanish firm Cintra, a subsidiary of Ferrovial, in eight segments under concession of Ruta 5, the main highway joining the north and south of Chile.
In this process Atlantia paid over US$ 1.9 billion and became the largest urban highway operator in Chile.
Being mature, low-risk schemes that generate a long-term, stable cash flow, Chile’s tendered highways have attracted not only infrastructure management firms but also investment funds.
Canadian investors, which already had a track record in the Chilean infrastructure market, became very active in this area and have focused on the new urban highways in the capital, Santiago.
In 2010, the first such move was the purchase of 50% of Autopista Central by the pension fund Alberta Investment Management Corp. (AIMCo) from the Swedish construction firm Skanska, for US$ 850 million.
FDI flows to Peru surged in 2012, growing by 49% over the previous year, confirming the sustained growth path seen over the past decade and setting a new record high.
In 2012, inward FDI to Peru totalled US$ 12.240 billion (equivalent to 5.9% of GDP); this made the country the fourth largest recipient in Latin America, after Brazil, Chile and Colombia.
Replicating the pattern seen in recent years, reinvested earnings (US$ 8.263 billion) was the predominant component of FDI in 2012, followed by capital contributions (US$ 4.637 billion).
The high return on FDI in companies based in Peru (chiefly in mining) explains why a substantial part of production capacity expansion is funded with reinvested earnings.
There are no official data on the distribution of FDI by destination sector, but reports point to the mining sector as the largest recipient of FDI, followed by the expanding power and communications sector and the financial sector.
According to the Ministry of Energy and Mines, investment in the sector (largely related to foreign companies) came to US$ 8.55 billion in 2012.
The four companies investing the most account for more than half of that amount.
The main source countries for these greenfield investments are China (22%), followed by the United States (18%) and Canada (16%).
Copper and gold are the chief investment draws, at 64% and 13% of the total, respectively.
This is a key factor of the country’s economy, amounting to 4.1% of GDP.
This uneven growth path can be attributed to the dynamics of large-scale investment projects.
Sixty-one percent of investment in 2012 was in new capital contributions; 15% was from intra-company loans, and 23% was from reinvested earnings.
Three major projects stand out among the investment announcements made in 2012.
The IMPSA group launched the US$ 120 million Libertador I wind power generation project in the departments of Lavalleja and Maldonado, with an installed capacity of 50 megawatts.
This investment will help diversify Uruguay’s energy matrix and reduce its dependence on hydroelectric power.
The Spanish company Cementos Molins announced the 2014 start-up of a cement plant in Uruguay to supply southern Brazil; the US$ 160 million investment is expected to generate 200 direct jobs and 500 indirect ones.
And Donald Trump announced the launch of a US$ 100 million real estate development project in Punta del Este.
Discussions continue between environmentalist organizations and Uruguayan government officials about implementation of the Aratirí project.
At an estimated investment cost of US$ 3 billion, the project consists of opening a large iron mine and carrying out infrastructure projects that include a deepwater port.
The investment is to be made by the Zamin Ferrous mining group.
Environmental impact studies for the project are under way; they are particularly important because of its proximity to tourist areas.
The oil sector drew in 56%, with two diverging trends according to the nature of the business.
While the public sector (state-owned enterprises) invested US$ 2.25 billion, the private sector posted net divestments totalling US$ 442 million.
Mexico and Central America Mexico saw a sharp drop in investment flows over the previous year: provisional data for 2012 shown FDI flows of US$ 12.659 billion in 2012.
Over the previous 10 years, Mexico’s inward FDI had remained relatively stable (in nominal terms) at an average US$ 23 billion per year.
The contraction impacted most sectors, but almost half of the decline can be attributed to a specific operation: the US$ 4.10 billion IPO of a 25% stake in the subsidiary of Spain’s Banco Santander.
It is the product of a joint venture between leading companies in the world mining industry.
In 2012 most sectors saw lower FDI inflows, although there were some notable exceptions.
Manufacturing as a whole received 28% less FDI than in 2011, but the automotive sector recorded a 75% jump, to US$ 2.430 billion.
In the service sector, inward FDI to civil engineering projects increased over the past two years and totalled US$ 1.450 billion in 2012.
FDI to the commerce sector was also higher than the previous year and outstripped the average for the past decade owing to investments in supermarkets (see figure I.8).
In 2012 the manufacturing sector continued to be the strongest investment draw (56% of the total), driven by major acquisitions such as the US$ 2.34 billion purchase of paint company Comex by Sherwin-Williams of the United States.
Noteworthy among the greenfield projects was Brazilian steelmaker Gerdau’s US$ 600 million investment to build a new structural steel plant.
Caterpillar, a United States manufacturer of construction and mining equipment, also began construction of a new plant at an investment cost of US$ 500 million.
The Belgian group AB InBev has been unable to complete its US$ 20.1 billion acquisition of the remaining 50% of the shares of Grupo Modelo because the company has yet to address United States Department of Justice reservations as to the impact on competition in the United States beer market.
In 2012 most FDI flows continued to originate in the United States (58.5% of the total), followed by Japan (13%) and Canada (8%).
Spain, the second largest investor in Mexico in 1999-2012, posted a US$ 1.52 billion negative flow in 2012 owing to the Santander transaction mentioned above.
FDI flows in Central America have regained the momentum they had in the years before the 2008 crisis, with some countries in the subregion (Costa Rica, Guatemala, Honduras and Panama) reaching record levels of FDI in 2012.
FDI to Central America as a whole grew by 7% over 2011.
The special ties that Mexico and the countries of Central American have with the United States mean that business strategies involving investments in these countries seek to establish export platforms to leverage labour cost and location advantages.
In recent years, the high price of metals and petroleum products has attracted the interest of foreign investors in mining and energy production in this subregion (ECLAC, 2012).
Since 1999 these four sectors have accounted for only 9% of the FDI flowing into Mexico, chiefly to mining and telecommunications.
By contrast, they account for 26% of FDI stock in Brazil, 35% in Argentina and 45% in Chile.
By law, hydrocarbons and power transmission and distribution are reserved for the State-owned companies PEMEX and CFE, respectively.
Telecommunications and mining are open to competition and foreign investment; however, in practice they are dominated by large Mexican companies.
Reforms announced by the new administration and set forth in the Pact for Mexico could create opportunities for FDI in these sectors over the medium term.
Although these reforms seek to spur economic competition in all sectors of the economy, particularly in strategic ones such as telecommunications, transport, financial services and energy, the pact does suggest some actions targeting the hydrocarbons and telecommunications sectors.
The pact asserts State ownership of hydrocarbon resources and rules out the privatization of PEMEX assets.
However, the administration does commit to creating competition in the refining, petrochemical and hydrocarbon transport segments.
And it stresses the need to increase PEMEX’s production capacity, which could spur the signing of service agreements with foreign oil companies, a practice that has been approved since 2008 but has been little used.
Lastly, it aims to reform corporate governance at PEMEX to make it a “world-class” company that is able to compete.
In the telecommunications sector, the pact will boost competitiveness, strengthening the regulatory body and preventing companies from skirting regulations by filing for writs of protection (amparo), among other measures.
The aim is to enable the entry and development of other firms, changing the current supply structure.
The reforms announced in the pact still have to pass the legislature, although this process is at an advanced stage in the case of telecommunications.
These reforms could create opportunities for domestic and foreign companies in some segments of the hydrocarbon and telecommunications sectors’ value chains.
They could also encourage the main telecommunications company, América Móvil, to invest abroad, if it were forced to slow its investing in Mexico.
Panama is still the principal receiver of FDI in this subregion: US$ 3.020 billion (34% of the total) in 2012.
Although there are no official data on FDI-receiving sectors, data on mergers, acquisitions and investment projects announced in 2012 indicate that a large share of FDI went to services, especially logistics, energy and the construction industry.
Noteworthy among the announcements made in 2012 are the investment by Brazil’s GMR Energia in the energy sector, and the investment by Denmark’s AP Moller-Maersk in maritime transport logistics.
The Swiss company Glencore International increased its equity interest in the mining company Samref Overseas; the US$ 480 million investment was the largest that Panama received in 2012, underscoring the growing importance of the primary sector in the subregion.
The buoyant food industry (particularly the dairy sector) was on the receiving end of substantial investments: Colombia’s Grupo Nutresa acquired the Central American ice cream company Panamanian American Franchising Corp (AFC) for US$ 110 million.
Costa Rica maintained its position as the second leading destination for FDI in Central America (26% of the total).
According to official estimates, FDI totalled US$ 2.26 million, a 5% increase over 2011.
Costa Rica is consistently a strong draw for greenfield projects, primarily in the services sector, in keeping with the trend that began in 2011 with the liberalization of activities such as telecommunications.
This drove the share of FDI flowing to the manufacturing sector down from an average 46% during the past decade to 25% in 2012.
Forty high-technology greenfield projects in advanced manufacturing, life sciences and certain services accounted for 27% of inward FDI in 2012.
Infosys, based in India, will establish a service centre to serve the United States market and support its growing operations in Latin America.
EPC Ingeniería, the first Korean-owned service company in Costa Rica, located its new engineering and design centre there.
The German power project developer Juwi announced a US$ 155 million investment.
Other announcements included investments in information technology (software and technological services) and business services (Amazon, Honeywell, Thomson Reuters and Telefónica, among others).
According to preliminary figures, FDI flowing into El Salvador totalled US$ 516 million in 2012.
This is a 34% increase over 2011 and accounts for 6% of the investments made in Central America.
AES, a power generation and distribution company based in the United States, invested US$ 26.1 million in infrastructure in 2012.
Ubiquity Global Services, a business process outsourcing company headquartered in the United States, invested US$ 2 million in opening a call centre.
Taiwan-based Speedtech Energy Co. (which designs and manufactures solar and LED lighting products) and the Government of El Salvador signed a letter of intent for a substantial investment to begin operations in the country.
Competition policy issues kept some of the investments announced (like the purchase of Digicel by América Móvil) from moving ahead.
Despite being the largest economy in Central America, it ranked third among the receivers of FDI flows, at 14% of the total for the subregion.
Data by sector show that the main recipient sectors were natural resources (26%), followed by banking and commerce (19% each).
The largest project announced in 2012 was the nearly US$ 500 million that the Canadian mining company Tahoe Resources plans to invest for working a silver deposit.
South Korea’s Sollensys, which makes touch screens and cellular phones, announced a US$ 20 million investment to build a plant.
Colombian-owned Empresa de Energía de Bogotá will invest more than US$ 300 million in expanding the power transmission system.
In December 2011, Telefónica Guatemala announced a US$ 20 million investment in remodeling a number of its stores and opening two new locations as part of its domestic expansion strategy.
It took in US$ 295.4 million in 2012 (27.9% of total FDI for the year), and it is the economic activity that has received the most foreign capital over the past 10 years.
However, FDI targeting telecommunications dropped 21.5% in 2012 compared with the previous year, as investment in this sector slowed.
Most of the resources received were for expanding coverage by the main operators: Tigo and Claro-Digicel.
The manufacturing industry (24.8%) and the offshoring outsourcing industry (15.5%) also received significant FDI flows.
The main source countries for these investments were the United States (19.6%), Mexico (18.1%) and Panama (13%).
In 2012 Honduras did not receive any inward investments from its usual source countries, such as Guatemala and El Salvador.
The largest investments were from the United States (36.8%), targeting metal ore extraction and agriculture and livestock projects.
Panama accounted for 26.5% of total FDI in commercial banking; Mexico accounted for 18.8% of FDI in telecommunications on the strength of América Móvil’s investments in technology.
The Caribbean Flows of FDI into the Caribbean increased for the third year running, but remained below the high of 2008 for the subregion.
As in 2011, most of the rise in FDI took place in the countries with an abundance of natural resources.
For now, oil and gas are being exploited to an important extent only in Trinidad and Tobago, but there are major exploration activities in other countries, particularly Guyana, suggesting that this sector could become more relevant for the Caribbean economies in the future.
On a smaller scale, inflows into agriculture and forestry have risen in the countries that are land-abundant, Guyana and Belize.
FDI flows into the Dominican Republic grew 59% on the back of the acquisition by Anheuser-Busch InBev of Cervecería Nacional Dominicana, the country’s largest brewer, for US$ 1.237 billion.
Even without this acquisition, however, FDI in the Dominican Republic would have been up on 2011, driven by increased investments in electricity, manufacturing and mining.
This last activity continues to attract increasing amounts of FDI in the country (US$ 1.168 billion in 2012), owing mainly to the activities of Barrick Gold Corp., which operates the Pueblo Viejo gold mine.
The electricity sector received US$ 305 million, mostly for wind and solar generation projects.
Investment was also up in manufacturing in export processing zones, tourism and real estate.
All sectors gained from this surge, but natural resources received more than half of total inflows.
Two separate investments in sugar cane (including a cogeneration power plant) were announced for a total of around US$ 100 million.
Inflows were concentrated in the mining industry (bauxite and gold), as well as in telecoms.
Gold mining is currently conducted through small local operations, but companies from Canada are in the exploration phase, with a view to investing in large scale operations.
There are also prospects for oil exploration which, if confirmed, could boost FDI levels in the coming years.
Suriname reports FDI data only for the bauxite mining sector, which received US$ 70 million in 2012.
Bank of Baroda of India announced a US$ 33.5 million investment in Suriname in January 2012, as well.
The country has seen oil and gas exports decline in the past few years owing to lack of new investments, but contract awards for exploitation of oil fields, which are assigned by the government in a bidding process, have been picking up in 2012 and are expected to boost FDI levels in the coming years.
In the services sector, New India Assurance made an investment of US$ 44.4 million in 2012.
Because of a methodological change, inflows in 2011 and 2012 are not directly comparable with previous periods.
Those economies of the Caribbean which have limited natural resources received less FDI in 2012 than in the previous year, and less than half of the inflows received in 2006, 2007 and 2008.
Although tourism arrivals picked up again in 2012 after several years of decline following the financial crisis of 2008 (ECLAC, 2012), this has not been enough to entice investors into new projects.
Recent years have brought increasing investments in business processing outsourcing (BPO) activities, which the governments have been pursuing aggressively with generous tax concessions.
Investors have been attracted by low wage levels, relatively skilled, English-speaking populations, location advantages relative to the United States and much improved broadband connectivity following investments by newly arrived telecoms operators in the past few years.
The levels of investment in this industry are necessarily low, given its very low capital intensity, but the resultant employment creation is important for some of these economies, with Jamaica and Guyana having an estimated 3,000 jobs each in BPO centres.
In 2012, US$ 381 million of FDI flowed into Jamaica, 75% more than the previous year but still far lower than the annual average for the previous decade.
Both mining and tourism, which once accounted for much of FDI, have been receiving a fraction of the sums they used to.
Mining has been affected by lower aluminum prices worldwide, which reduced demand for bauxite, while the tourist sector is still absorbing the new capacity created by some large investments in 2003-2009.
In the past two years, telecommunications have been the largest recipient, as new entrants Digicel (from Ireland) and Columbus (from Canada) have captured the market from the incumbent Cable and Wireless (from the United Kingdom).
The Bahamas received US$ 595 million in FDI in 2012, less than half the level of the previous year.
A similar trend may be expected for Barbados, which has yet to report data for 2012.
Both these economies are highly dependent on tourism, which has been badly affected by the economic crisis since 2009.
While in the Bahamas the Baha Mar project has reached the implementation phase (see box I.2 in Foreign Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean, 2011), in Barbados a Four Seasons resort project that had to be abandoned after the financial crisis was reinitiated with assistance from the Government of Barbados and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB).
FDI flows into the economies that form the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) totalled US$ 465 million in 2012, a 5% increase with respect to 2011 although again far below previous record years.
Official estimates suggest that most FDI entering these economies goes to tourism and related activities, such as real estate and construction.
Some individual projects have been identified in this sector, such as a Park Hyatt Hotel in Saint Kitts and Nevis, with an estimated investment of US$ 64 million financed mostly through individual investments in exchange for Saint Kitts and Nevis citizenship.
Anguilla and Montserrat, which are members of OECS and associate members of ECLAC, are discussed in box I.3.
Haiti received US$ 179 million in FDI, practically the same amount as in 2011.
FDI flows into Haiti remain relatively limited owing to the economy’s small size, modest growth and poor competitiveness.
Nevertheless, low wages and preferential access to the United States market have attracted some investments in export-processing manufacturing, most recently in the Caracol industrial park.
Except for Guadaloupe and Martinique, which use the euro, all other economies either use the United States dollar or peg their currencies to it.
Besides their currency status, these economies vary widely in terms of size and economic activity.
Most are service-based and small, even for the Caribbean, but some are relatively large and therefore can be significant for corporate investment strategies in the region.
Guadeloupe and Martinique have larger economies (with GDP of around US$ 10 billion each) than any other English-speaking Caribbean country except Trinidad and Tobago and Jamaica but, as French overseas departments, they do not keep separate FDI records.
Puerto Rico is by far the largest economy and the foremost recipient of investments in the Caribbean.
Puerto Rico is attractive to international investors, particularly since it can act as a bridge between the United States market and the markets of Latin America and the Caribbean.
In addition, América Móvil announced a significant investment (estimated at US$ 240 million) through its Claro subsidiary and several companies announced expansions of their pharmaceutical facilities on the island (totalling an estimated US$ 390 million).
Bermuda also benefits from its status as an offshore financial centre and received several large investments during 2012, including the acquisitions of an oil and gas exploration company for US$ 196 million and of two different insurance companies, totalling US$ 492 million.
Two very large deals pending in the insurance and hospitality industries, respectively, may significantly boost the 2013 FDI figures, with their combined value of US$ 4.7 billion.
The economies of Dutch-speaking Aruba and Curaçao are both relatively dependent on tourism and thus rely on the international tides of tourism flows.
Accordingly, Curaçao’s FDI figures for the first three quarters in 2012 were similar (-3%) to the prior-year period.
However, the sale of LMA International NV, which was completed in the fourth quarter, is expected to lift the figure for the year overall.
In Aruba, the flow of investment was affected in particular by the closure of the Valero refinery.
Although the former refinery may be refurbished for different uses, it nevertheless represents a significant divestment.
Lastly, the two OECS members represent only a very small share of FDI in the subregion.
In Anguilla, FDI inflows fell to US$ 18.3 million, less than for any year since 2003, bar 2010, despite an uptick in tourism-related FDI.
While 2012 was thus not a good year, in 2013, the government signed a memorandum of understanding with AJ Capital of the United States for a US$ 20 million hotel investment.
Montserrat continues to receive little in terms of FDI, as volcanic activity persists on the island.
Patterns of origin and destination of foreign direct investment The United States and the countries of the European Union are still the largest source of investment in Latin America and the Caribbean.
However, 2012 saw a sharp rise in the share of FDI flows from the countries of the region, bringing them up to 14% of the total.
In 2012, transnational corporations based in the United States were the source of 24% of inward FDI in the region, a higher share than in the past five years.
A high percentage of inward FDI in the region cannot be identified as coming from a specific source economy.
This is because transnational corporations increasingly channel their investments abroad through subsidiaries in third countries.
In addition to the Netherlands, much of the FDI flowing into many countries of the region is registered as coming from the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands or Luxembourg.
A number of countries of the region do not disclose this information, or the data they do provide is incomplete or late.
For these two reasons it is especially difficult to estimate the share of the region’s inward FDI that is sourced in China.
Most of it is channelled through third countries and, in 2012, was concentrated in countries like the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Peru that do not report data.
Patterns vary widely among the subregions, though, and have consolidated over time.
In South America (without Brazil), the pattern has been one of increasing concentration of FDI in natural resourcebased sectors (in particular mining), which are by far the prime FDI destination.
Their share of FDI reached 51% in 2012 after averaging 44% over the previous five years.
This is reflected in the proportion of total inward investment targeting manufacturing and services (12% and 37%, respectively).
These percentages are lower than the average for 2007-2011, although the trend towards a higher concentration of FDI towards natural resources in this group of countries was already well established in 2011.
In Brazil, the manufacturing sector continues to account for a substantial percentage of inward FDI, at 38% of the total in 2012.
However, this is lower than the average for the previous five years.
By contrast, natural resources were still a relatively small draw for FDI in Brazil in 2012 (13% of the total), and services have surged to 48% of the total inflow of investment (compared with 44% in 2011 and an average of 34% in 2007-2011).
Natural resources account for a smaller share in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean as well and have tended to hold steady: 10% in 2012 and over the previous five years.
Manufacturing, despite the decline in absolute values in Mexico, continues to be the largest recipient of FDI (48% of the total).
The portion targeting services has In this group of countries, the primary sector receives a substantial share in some economies of the Caribbean, such as the Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago.
In Mexico the proportion of FDI flowing to this sector is not large, because both mining and hydrocarbon extraction are in the hands of domestic groups.
In all the countries of the region, agriculture (despite being an important sector) receives very little FDI.
Nevertheless, there are some activities and subsectors in which transnational firms have a substantial presence, as will be seen in chapter III.
Beyond the official FDI figures, data on mergers and acquisitions yield a more comprehensive picture of which countries are investing in the region and in what sectors.
Cross-border mergers and acquisitions targeting Latin America and the Caribbean totalled US$ 57.70 billion in 2012, 34% lower than the previous year.
This decline is due primarily to the 12% decrease in the number of deals and, especially, to the 65.7% drop in the value of acquisitions by multinationals from European Union countries.
The value of mergers and acquisitions by United States companies also fell (by 18.4%), as did transactions by companies in other regions of the world (60.1% decrease).
Such companies thus became the main source of mergers and acquisitions in Latin America and the Caribbean, although this increase did not offset the fall in the value of transactions originating in other countries of the world.
The drop in the total value of mergers and acquisitions was also reflected in the amounts of individual operations.
They were, on average, substantially lower than in 2011: US$ 78 million versus US$ 104 million, respectively.
The only deal in excess of US$ 5 billion in 2011 was Mitsubishi’s purchase of a 24.5% stake in Anglo American Sur, in Chile.
The trans-Latins and outward foreign direct investment from the region Outward FDI originating in the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean increased by 18% between 2011 and 2012, to stand at US$ 49.133 billion (see figure I.12).
Direct investments abroad from individual countries vary widely from year to year because the number of major trans-Latins behind these flows is still small and the aggregate figures are very project-sensitive.
Nevertheless, outward FDI flows from the region have held at historically high levels over the past three years.
During the past decade, the great majority of investments abroad originated in Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico.
In 2012, however virtually all of them were sourced in Mexico and Chile.
Trans-Latins have, over the past three years, benefited from the region’s healthy economic growth (which kept them profitable) and from investor confidence in the economies of the region (which facilitated their access to credit).
Although global FDI flows fell off in 2012, the trans-Latins have stepped up their pace of international expansion.
In some cases this was because other companies, mainly European ones, opted to slow their own investments and to shed assets.
Many trans-Latins took advantage of this scenario in 2012 to expand in Europe and in other markets.
This trend is clear in the list of major corporate mergers and acquisitions undertaken by trans-Latins in 2012.
Seven of the ten largest acquisitions were of assets held by European companies.
In some cases, the European company was taken over by a Latin American group or the latter purchased a controlling interest (as did Brazil’s Camargo Correa with Cimpor in Portugal).
But in most of these transactions, the selling company regarded the assets sold as peripheral or non-strategic ones that could therefore be sold to improve its balance sheet or undertake other investments.
Mexico was the country of the region that most invested abroad in 2012.
Outward investments from Mexico totalled US$ 25.6 billion, more than double the figure for the previous year and far more than the previous high two years earlier.
América Móvil, Mexico’s largest trans-Latin, was the primary (but not the only) driver behind this increase.
After focusing its international expansion efforts on Latin America, where, together with Spain’s Telefónica, it leads the telecommunications market (ECLAC, 2011b), in 2012 América Móvil decided to diversify towards Europe and acquired substantial stakes in telephone operators in Austria and the Netherlands, for a total of US$ 4.48 billion.
Half of its profits still come from Mexico, but its ongoing expansion abroad, now extended to Europe, and possible regulatory changes in Mexico (see box I.2) could bring down this percentage and contribute to the internationalization of profits.
Mexico does not publish disaggregated data on outward FDI that would allow a breakdown by destination sectors and countries.
In any event, data on mergers and acquisitions show that Mexican investments, while still chiefly targeting the United States and other markets in Latin America, are also venturing into Europe and other regions.
In addition to new acquisitions, Mexico’s major trans-Latins continue to announce investments abroad.
This is a new record and more than twice the figure for just two years ago.
Chilean companies are still focusing their expansion efforts on other South American countries; some have become regional leaders in the retail, forestry and transport sectors.
The most recent case is the merger of Chilean airline LAN with Brazil’s TAM, which had been announced in 2010 but was not completed until 2012.
The US$ 6.502 billion transaction via a stock swap created LATAM, a binational airline that is now the largest carrier in Latin America.18 Another Chilean company that consolidated its leading position in the region in 2012 is Cencosud, by means of new acquisitions in Argentina, Brazil and Colombia.
Chilean companies have benefited from several years of strong economic growth, both in the domestic market and in the main foreign markets where they operate (especially Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Peru).
Despite some recent acquisitions by Chilean companies in the United States and Europe, these groups are just starting to expand beyond South America.
Outward FDI flows from Brazil were negative for the second year in a row, at US$ 2.821 billion.
This is the outcome of the funding strategy followed by Brazilian trans-Latins: channelling foreign subsidiary loans to parent companies in order to avoid Brazil’s higher interest rates.
For this reason, the intra-company loan component of Brazilian investment abroad has been negative since 2009 and totalled US$ 20.562 billion in 2011.
This indicates that Brazilian companies invested less abroad than in previous years and that, in some cases, they have also increased the sale of assets abroad (divestments).
The mining company Vale and the oil company Petrobras (two of the largest Brazilian trans-Latins) are following an explicit divestment strategy involving the global sell-off of non-core assets, most of which are outside Brazil.
In 2012, Vale sold US$ 1.167 billion in overseas assets, including manganese operations in Europe, coal mines in Colombia and ore carrier ships.
Other major mining companies that are direct competitors of Vale, like Río Tinto and BHP Billiton, are following similar strategies to face rising costs and shrinking operating margins.19 This strategy will probably continue in 2013: Vale announced the sale of Sudbury Mines in Canada for US$ 1.2 billion.
In 2012 the company announced asset sales totalling as much as US$ 7 billion, but most have not yet been carried out.
Divestments during 2012-2016 are expected to amount to US$ 15 billion, including refineries in the United States and Japan and operating fields in Nigeria.
Petrobras’s divestment programme is so large that FDI outflows from Brazil should continue to be modest over the next few years.
Seven of the twenty largest foreign acquisitions by trans-Latins in 2012 were by Brazilian companies, including Camargo Correa’s purchase of a 40% stake in Portuguese cement manufacturer Cimpor.
Beyond annual FDI flows, Brazil has the highest level of outward FDI stock in Latin America: more than US$ 200 billion.
This figure is more than twice that of Chile and 50% higher than for Mexico, indicating that, on the whole, Brazilian trans-Latins hold more assets abroad than companies based in these other countries do.
In addition to Brazil, Chile and Mexico, other countries with high levels of outward FDI were the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (US$ 2.460 billion) and Argentina (US$ 1.089 billion).
The state-owned oil company PDVSA accounts for most of the FDI flowing from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Colombia, which for two years had ranked third in the region in terms of outward FDI, posted slightly negative outflows in 2012.
This does not indicate a radical strategy shift on the part of the major companies but rather a period devoted to the assimilation of assets acquired in 2010 and 2011.
Outward FDI for the rest of the economies of the region is much more modest.
LATAM is headquartered in Santiago and is majority Chilean-owned, although the Brazilian partners hold a majority on the board of directors.
Most of the smaller economies in the region do not report outward FDI, or the data are flawed.
While there is anecdotal evidence of FDI outflows from other countries, such as Guatemala (sugar cane sector) and Peru, official data are still incomplete.
Panama is a special case; with some foreign companies using it as a base for their operations in Central America and other countries of the region, it receives and sends transit FDI.
Panama does not report official data on outward FDI, but International Monetary Fund (IMF) estimates put the figure at some US$ 400 million over the past two years.
Although outward FDI levels are still very uneven among countries, the overall trend in the region is towards increased investment abroad.
This process is a natural counterpart to the increasing flow of FDI into these economies: stiffer competition from transnational corporations is forcing domestic firms to seek business opportunities in other countries.
Developing and transition economies, which already receive more than half of global FDI flows, accounted for a third of outward FDI worldwide in 2011.
Exceptionally, foreign investments by Mexican companies were more than twice the figure for FDI flowing into Mexico in 2012.
For all three countries, these percentages are sharply higher than for the previous period (2002-2007), even though Chile and Colombia also saw a surge of inward FDI during the period.
This latter trend is due to the funding strategy adopted by Brazilian trans-Latins, which has generated negative outward flows in recent years even as these companies continue to increase their assets abroad.
Although most of the countries of the region have rather modest levels of outward FDI, Chile, Colombia and Mexico are slowly approaching a more balanced ratio between FDI inflows and outflows.
The trend is the same in China, while in other large developing economies such as India and the Russian Federation, the ratio between inflow and outflow has been more balanced for more than a decade.
FDI and job creation in Latin America After the market reforms, most of the governments of Latin America were convinced that foreign direct investment was an engine of development with automatic positive impacts for the receiving economy.
Policies aimed at attracting FDI have therefore been a key outward development strategy instrument for many countries as a way to compensate for the lack of financial resources for upgrading, boosting production and, consequently, creating jobs.
This approach regarded quantity as more important than quality, so countries adopted strategies aimed at maximizing inward FDI (ECLAC, 2012).
For the labour market, FDI inflow was expected to have a beneficial impact on job creation, productivity, wages and working conditions in general.
But experience suggests that the impact of FDI on the economies of receiving countries 20 depends on the type of inward investment and the regulatory framework in each country (Lipsey and Joholm, 2005; Dunning, 1993).
One of the traits of FDI flows is the kind of strategy that leads parent companies to invest in the region.
The literature classifies these strategies as seeking (i) raw materials; (ii) access to domestic markets; (iii) export platform efficiency gains; or (iv) access to strategically important assets (Dunning, 2002).
These strategies are often associated with a certain sectoral profile, such as natural resource extraction, manufacturing, or services, and they impact the local labour market in different ways.
The FDI strategy focus has varied throughout the region over the past few decades.
In short, natural-resourceseeking investment has been concentrated in the countries of the Southern Cone and has surged in recent years owing to the high price of raw materials.
Market-seeking investment has focused on the larger countries, taking advantage of fast-growing economies and a middle class with more purchasing power.
In Mexico and Central America the primary strategy has been the search for export platform efficiency, mainly targeting the United States.
FDI flows also differ in how they gain access to local production networks and impact the production profile and local labour markets.
Foreign capital enters the picture mainly through (i) greenfield projects; (ii) privatization of public enterprises; or (iii) mergers and acquisitions of domestically-owned companies.
Generally speaking, greenfield investment is aimed at building production capacities, including new lines of business, that promote job creation.
But FDI can have negative impacts on employment when it seeks to change the ownership of existing production assets, which is often associated with restructuring and layoffs.
It can also lead to market displacement of non-competitive domestic firms, substitution of local suppliers with imports or the introduction of job-saving technologies.
When FDI targets capital-intensive sectors, even its positive impacts on direct employment tend to be modest.
There are also different patterns of FDI access to production systems across the region.
In South America it tends to be through acquisition or privatization; in Central America, greenfield investments are the primary route (Ernst, Berg and Auer, 2007; Chudnosvsky and López, 2007).
More productive enterprises would be in a position to pay higher wages and offer better working conditions in general.
Since the 1970s, the International Labour Organization (ILO) has been issuing recommendations aimed at promoting best practices.21 But many studies indicate that since the 1990s multinationals venturing into Latin America have tended to favour job flexibility and the outsourcing of certain tasks.
This contributed to precarious conditions in FDI impacts are usually classified in two kinds: (i) macroeconomic (capital formation, foreign trade, balance-of-payments financing and job creation) and (ii) microeconomic (productivity, innovation and linkages).
These arguments highlight the need for better, more broad-based knowledge that will help countries assess what types of projects would be more suitable for their local realities.
A better understanding of the impact of the various types of investments would improve the design of policies for attracting quality FDI (for example, through investment agencies) and strengthen the institutions that regulate labour markets.
These arguments also show that greenfield investments would be more likely to enhance the production capacity of an economy and expand labour demand.
But, as this section will explain, direct job creation capacity can vary widely across the economies of the region, even for greenfield investments.
The investment announcements in the Financial Times’ fDi Markets database make it possible to estimate, at least in terms of trends, the impact that greenfield FDI is likely to have on any given country’s labour market.
The analysis is based on an indicator of direct job content in investment announcements, which is an estimate of the expected number of jobs generated for every US$ 1 million.
Labour-intensity has remained relatively stable over the past 10 years, so the number of jobs created by these investments should track fluctuations in the international business cycle, as do investment amounts.
The countries of the Caribbean can be classified into two general groups according to the job content of inward investments.
In the group where FDI targets tourism-related activities, each US$ 1 million of investment is projected to generate about six jobs.
As mentioned above, inward FDI over the past 10 years was oriented towards tourism-related activities (mainly, hotels and transport services).
Here, investments skew heavily towards the financial sector, mining and some natural-resource-intensive industrial activities; every US$ 1 million can be expected to generate fewer than two jobs.
Comparing the countries of Central America and Latin America also reveals sharp contrasts in terms of the sectors and strategies that draw FDI to local production networks.
In Mexico and the countries of Central America, FDI patterns have a high job content, creating about four jobs per US$ 1 million of investment.
In Latin America (including Brazil) FDI is estimated to have modest effects on job creation, generating on average 2.5 jobs per US$ 1 million (see figure I.14).
Location factors such as proximity to major markets and the availability of resources, along with domestic production structure path dependence, explain why greenfield investments target certain sectors.
In the Caribbean and South America, nearly 60% of inward FDI was concentrated in extractive activities and natural-resource-intensive manufactures, while in Central America these represent less than 30%.
By contrast, in Mexico and Central America, engineering- and natural-resource-intensive manufacturing industries (including the automobile and food industries, respectively) accounted for 54% of the investment amounts announced for the period.
This point is of special interest to the ILO, which argues that it is not enough to create jobs and that job quality is also a concern.
It therefore developed the concept of decent work in an attempt to capture, in everyday language, the convergence of these four dimensions that define a good job: employment, labour rights, job security and representation.
But the sectors that receive the greatest investment in a region are not necessarily the strongest when it comes to employment.
Job creation by sector does not mirror investment configuration, as can be seen when comparing the three activities that have the strongest employment impact with the three that draw the largest investments.
In Latin America, natural-resource-intensive and engineering-intensive manufactures, along with commerce, account for 67% of the jobs created.
In the Caribbean, 65% of all new jobs are in natural-resourceintensive manufactures, personal services and call centres.
In Mexico and Central America, natural resource- and engineering-intensive manufactures generate 51% of the jobs.
It is only here that the sectors attracting the most investment create the most jobs.
These different patterns of investment amounts and job creation are likely to impact labour productivity in each of the economies.
A scenario in which sectors receiving higher amounts of investment are driving the job market would be more favourable than one in which the activities that draw less investment create more jobs.
The investment announcement job content indicator varies significantly across sectors of activity.
Commerce and construction create the most jobs (seven per US$ 1 million invested), followed by the manufacturing industry and services (three jobs).
Labour-intensive manufacturing creates seven jobs per US$ 1 million; for engineering-intensive manufacturing (including the automobile industry) the ratio is four jobs; this is similar to the food industry.
Other natural-resource-intensive activities (other than food) are less employment-intensive, creating two jobs per US$ 1 million invested.
And they tend to relocate in order to take advantage of tax or wage benefits because the labour component figures heavily in their cost structure (Novick and others, 2011; Del Bono and Henry, 2010).
Tourism-related activities (transport and personal services) have a higher job content than more modern ones such as financial services and information and communications technologies (ICT) do (see figure I.15).
Sectoral specialization has much to do with the job content of greenfield investments, but there are also other factors behind differences in the employment intensity of similar projects in different locations.
These are: the type of technology used, the type of multinational company (how complex its processes are and its role in the global supply chain), each country’s institutions, and the local macroeconomic context (relative prices), among others.
The arguments and the evidence set out herein can inform the discussion of how important it is to consider not only the amount of FDI but also the features of investment projects and their alignment with the requirements of each country’s development agenda.
In the early 1990s the volume of FDI in the two countries was fairly similar: in fact, in 1992 they both posted just above US$ 4 billion.
At that point FDI in Mexico began to grow faster than in Argentina, far outstripping it by 2010.
A breakdown of recent FDI flows highlights major differences across sectors in each of the countries.
Investment in export manufactures in Mexico is still heavily skewed towards offshoring outsourcing (the maquila industry) and is a springboard for access to the United States market.
This differs from FDI in Argentina, where the investment focus is on natural resources and services.
Market strategies prevailing among multinational companies in Mexico are consistent with this pattern: more than half target their sales at the regional market.
In Argentina, by contrast, 80% of the multinationals focus on domestic market sales.
As for integration in their respective value chains, most of the subsidiaries of multinational companies in Mexico buy and sell products or services from or to their parent company or other corporate subsidiaries.
In Argentina, on the other hand, only a quarter of the subsidiaries engage in intra-company sales or purchases; 40% of the multinational companies neither purchase nor sell products from or to the parent company or other subsidiaries.
Given their high degree of integration with their respective value chains, subsidiaries of multinationals located in Mexico have less autonomy.
In Argentina, on the other hand, two thirds of the subsidiaries have a high degree of decision-making autonomy, which also confirms their predominantly low degree of integration in the global supply chain.
Despite differing degrees of integration in value chains, a common feature revealed by the comparison is the frequent use of research and development (R&D) resources provided by the parent company on the part of subsidiaries of multinational corporations in Mexico (50%) and among those located in Argentina (67%).
Lastly, subsidiaries of multinational companies based in these two countries would be expected to have differential impacts on employment practices and labour relations stemming from their different positions in their respective value chains.
In this regard, unlike Argentina (where these companies have gradually adapted to the local labour relations system), in Mexico there is evidence of a predominantly involutional pattern with significant impact on trade unions.
Conclusions FDI flowing into Latin America and the Caribbean in 2012 grew for the third consecutive year to stand at a record US$ 174.546 billion.
This figure is all the more significant in view of the international context marked by plunging global FDI flows.
Inward FDI was boosted by sound economic growth over the past 10 years, as well high raw material prices and high returns on investment in the exploitation of natural resources.
The effects of the new uptick in FDI in 2012 are also reflected in the rising share of global flows going to Latin America and the Caribbean, which has reached 12%.
The trans-Latins continue to expand; their operations abroad surged to US$ 49.133 billion in 2012, which is 5% above the previous record high set in 2010.
This buoyant growth is also reflected in the composition of the region’s inward FDI by source.
The share coming from a number of developed countries (in particular those of the European Union) declined while investments originating in countries of Latin America and the Caribbean themselves climbed from 9% of the total in 2011 to 14% in 2012.
FDI patterns by destination sector are, increasingly, targeting the exploitation of natural resources, in particular in South America.
Overall, manufacturing accounts for a fairly small share of inward FDI flows, with the exception of Brazil and Mexico, and the latter saw a sharp decline in inward investment in 2012.
In the vast majority of the countries there is no clear indication that FDI is making a relevant contribution to the creation of new sectors or high technology content activities.
However, changing the production structure is one of the most pressing needs that the region must address (ECLAC, 2010 and 2012).
While the growth of FDI income helps generate a considerable flow of reinvested earnings in the receiving countries themselves, it is also pushing up outflows in the form of repatriated profits.
These are structural aspects related to the build-up of FDI stocks in the region over the past 15 years.
As such, they are deserving of the closer examination set out in chapter II.
The relationship between FDI and employment generation, as well as job quality, can also be complex, especially if the investments are channelled towards sectors whose impact on employment is quantitatively or qualitatively less positive.
The evidence presented in this chapter, while preliminary, indicates that several of the sectors that are the strongest FDI draws in the region are not, as a whole, making a significant contribution to employment, at least not in relation to the amounts being invested.
It is quite likely that the factors shaping inward FDI in the region will continue to be relevant in the coming years.
This calls for focusing not only on amounts, but also on the nature of FDI inflows and investment projects, as well as their alignment with development agenda requirements at the country level.
One of them could be based on channelling part of the revenue generated by transnational companies towards the creation of funds for financing production development policies (targeting SMEs, manufacturing, technology and other sectors).
It might ultimately be possible to combine the establishment of such funds with targeted policies for attracting inward FDI.
However, for this second option to be effective it will be necessary to identify projects that can actually help build local business capacities, boost innovation and create production linkages.
There is also a need to define an appropriate incentive system, because the prevailing structure in the region is one in which sectors with higher technology content and production synergies are less profitable.
Putting an incentive system in place also entails a high degree of institutional development on the part of the agencies responsible for defining and implementing it.
This in turn calls for a global production development project, shared and supported by economic and social stakeholders, that would guide FDI-related decisions.
Carrillo, Jorge (2010), “Modelos porductivos, el modelo de maquila y multinacionales”, Trabajo y modelos productivos en América Latina.
Carrillo, Jorge and others (2011), “Las filiales de la Argentina y México en la cadena global de valor”, Multinacionales en la Argentina.
Transnational corporation profits in the context of the balance of payments D.
Introduction Over the past decade the profits of transnational corporations operating in Latin America and the Caribbean have increased fivefold.
This surge reflects both the growing importance of transnational corporations in the region’s economy and their higher average returns, on the back of robust domestic demand and high prices for export commodities.
The magnitude of this change calls for an examination of the role of FDI as a source of capital for these economies and its contribution to growth and structural change in the region.
FDI has been on the rise in Latin America for two decades.
Before 1993, inflows to the countries of the region came to less than US$ 15 billion a year.
Then they began to climb, hitting new highs every year and reaching a record US$ 88.9 billion in 1999.
Since then, FDI inflows have fluctuated with the business cycle, but overall they have continued to trend upwards, surpassing US$ 165 billion in 2012.
To varying degrees almost all countries in the region have built up substantial FDI liabilities over the last 20 years.
Transnational corporations are present in almost all sectors of the economy and, in recent years, thanks to rising domestic demand and high export commodity prices, they have been very profitable.
This FDI income rose sharply throughout the region between 2003 and 2007 and has remained at a relatively steady level since then.
It is unlikely to drop back down to the levels seen 10 years ago, owing to the region’s large inward FDI stock.
Between 2006 and 2011, FDI income averaged US$ 92 billion annually, representing 92% of the value of FDI inflows during the same period.
In some countries (such as Argentina, Chile and Peru), capital inflows in the form of FDI are being completely neutralized by capital outflows in the form of FDI income.
In other words, the effect that the investments of transnational corporations are having on the balance of payments in Latin America and the Caribbean has changed substantially.
FDI can still be seen as a tool with the potential to shift the structure of the economy towards more productive and sustainable sectors and activities, but it is no longer possible to equate FDI with net inflows of capital that help to maintain equilibrium in the balance of payments.
In this context, the profits made by the subsidiaries of foreign companies can affect the sustainability of each country’s external balance.
The pattern of earnings varies by country depending on the predominant investment strategy.
The countries where earnings are highest are those where natural-resource-seeking strategies have been the prime driver.
In those countries, FDI income rises and falls in the short term in line with export commodity prices.
Other sectors have also experienced surges in the profits generated by transnational corporations, particularly some industries and services oriented towards the domestic market, such as the telecommunications and automotive sectors.
Depending on the structure of its FDI stock, each country in the region should take into account how the domestic and external environment affects the profits of transnational corporations and the external balance.
Another important factor to consider is whether these companies decide to reinvest these earnings in the countries where they were generated or repatriate them to the parent company.
The rise in foreign company earnings, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of GDP, has an increasingly significant impact in terms of countries’ tax revenues.
To avoid erosion of the tax base, the region’s countries should create mechanisms to prevent the transfer of profits generated in their economies to other jurisdictions with lower tax rates.
This presents an administrative, technical and political challenge to the world’s increasingly globalized economies and will require international coordination.
Not only has there been an increase in the FDI income that countries in the region generate and send to other countries.
With the expansion of the trans-Latins in recent years, there has also been an increase in the income that these countries receive as a result of the profits generated by their companies abroad.
This naturally attenuates the balance-of-payments impact of rising FDI income generated in the economy, but necessarily to a limited degree for two reasons.
First, a wide gap still separates the FDI income generated in the region (US$ 113 billion in 2011) from its FDI income inflow (US$ 17 billion).
Second, while almost all the countries in the region generate large amounts of FDI income, income inflows are concentrated in three or four economies.
Section B of this chapter charts this variable in the main regions of the world, noting that Latin America and the Caribbean has experienced some of the highest growth in the past decade.
Section C compares FDI income with other components of the balance of payments in the region to assess to what extent the profits of transnational corporations now determine the external balance.
Although the chapter focuses its analysis on FDI income generated in the region, it also quantifies other capital earnings (those generated in and received by the region), situating them in the overall context of capital flows and tracking them over time.
Thus it provides a better understanding of how the region’s external financing structure has changed over the past 20 years (becoming more dependent on FDI and less on other types of investment), bringing with it an expansion in FDI income in relation to interest on debt and negotiable instruments.
The aggregate figures for FDI income mask significant variations among the countries in the region and (where data are available) from sector to sector.
Section D groups countries according to the average returns on their FDI stock and analyses which sectors generate the most income from FDI in the region, among which the extractive industries stand out in particular.
Before setting out conclusions, section E reviews two specific problems caused by the accumulation of profits by transnational corporations: the difficulty of collecting taxes from these entities and disequilibrium in the balance of payments.
Trends in Latin America and the Caribbean and worldwide FDI income1 has increased dramatically worldwide over the past decade, especially since 2003.
This is attributable primarily to the increase in FDI flows since the 1990s, which has strengthened the role of transnational corporations in the world economy.
As FDI flows have shifted towards developing economies (see chapter I), much higher earnings have also been generated in these countries.
Thus, FDI income nearly quadrupled (at current prices) in developing regions between 2002 and 2011, while in the United States, the European Union and Japan, it increased just over twofold (see table II.1).
More important than those trends, however, is the balance between inflows and outflows: while inward FDI income far exceeded FDI income outflows in Europe, the United States and Japan (which are home to the world’s largest transnational corporations), developing economies sent abroad much more than they received.
Apart from Latin America and the Caribbean, East Asia and Africa are the regions where the largest increases in FDI income have been seen in the last decade (see table II.1).
Income from South Asia has grown faster than the average rate, although the total amount of FDI in the region remains relatively small for the size of the economies.
Despite having been overtaken by China, Latin America and the Caribbean is still one of the regions with the highest growth in FDI income in the past decade, in both absolute and relative terms.
From 1990 to 2002, the region’s FDI income barely doubled (at current prices), but since that year it has increased more than fourfold.
Despite a setback as a result of the 2009 crisis, growth rates picked up once again in the two subsequent years.
By comparison, from 2006 to 2011, the amount of FDI revenue generated in Latin America and the Caribbean was equivalent to 92% of its FDI inflows.3 The FDI income generated in a country is defined as the profits that foreign companies obtain from their subsidiaries in that country.
FDI income received by a country is defined as the profits that domestic companies obtain from their foreign subsidiaries.
In this document the terms “FDI income” and “transnational company profits” will be used interchangeably depending on the context.
In 2012 FDI income generated in the region declined slightly compared with 2011, but nevertheless remained high.
At an estimated US$ 105 billion, this was the second highest figure in history.
The decline was concentrated in Brazil, where FDI income shrank by 23% with respect to 2011 as the economic downturn impacted the results of transnational corporations that mostly serve the domestic market.
Transnational corporations in Chile and Peru also saw their profits fall slightly, while on the contrary in Colombia such companies saw their profits rise.
FDI income flowing into the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean (that is, the profits generated by foreign subsidiaries of the trans-Latins) amounted to US$ 16.139 billion in 2011 compared with the US$ 113.067 billion generated in the region.
The ratio between foreign-company profits in the region and profits generated by trans-Latins abroad is in line with the amounts invested in each case.
However, FDI income received by the region has grown at a similar pace to its FDI income outflow over the past decade, and at a higher rate during the past three years.
This reflects the fact that the international expansion of the trans-Latins began relatively late but has accelerated in recent years. 2.
Repatriation and reinvestment of profits Income from foreign direct investment can be used in two ways.
First, it can be reinvested in the economy where it was generated (usually in the same subsidiary).
Second, it can be repatriated to the parent company to be invested in other countries, distributed as dividends or retained as cash in the business.
While all FDI income is recorded as a debit (outflow) on the income side of the balance-of-payments current account, any share of this income that is reinvested counts as a credit in the financial account of the balance of payments, as one of the three components of FDI.
In the case of Chile, for example, 55% of the country’s FDI inflows in 2011 (US$ 9.589 billion) was not net income in the balance of payments.
This amount represents the portion of the profits of transnational corporations that was reinvested in the country and was therefore recorded as a debit in the current account and as a credit in the financial account.
In Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole, transnational corporations repatriate a slightly higher proportion of their profits (55%) than they reinvest (45%).4 Within this relative balance at the regional level, there are large differences between countries: Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela Colombia and Dominican Republic, stand out as having a lower percentage of reinvestment.
The high rate of reinvestment in Mexico (64%) is attributable mainly to the predominance of companies from the United States among its foreign investors.
The tax treatment of profits in the United States discourages companies from repatriating profits, which is why they keep an extraordinarily high proportion of their foreign subsidiaries’ profits offshore (see box II.1).
Repatriation rates are generally higher in Caribbean economies than in Latin America, with the highest rates seen in Barbados, Belize and Suriname.
Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago post average repatriation rates for the region, at 58% and 54%, respectively.
These companies had accumulated an estimated US$ 1.3 trillion in their overseas subsidiaries by the end of 2010, an amount which has undoubtedly increased in the past two years.
Of the businesses in the S&P 500 index (the 500 leading publicly listed companies in the United States) 89% are transnational corporations that generate on average 49% of their profits outside the United States.
In the United States, there is a fiscal incentive to reinvest profits abroad.
Transnational corporations from that country are taxed in the United States on their global profits, minus any taxes paid in the country where the profits were generated.
For example, a company that pays taxes in Mexico on the profits made by its subsidiaries at a rate of 30% must pay a further 5% in the United States on those same profits to match the rate of 35% that is applied in the United States.
However, the difference is paid only when the money returns to the United States, thus encouraging companies to keep their profits abroad.
Originally the tax rate on profits in the United States (35%) used to be in line with that applied in the main economies where the country’s transnational corporations were operating.
However, most of these countries have lowered their corporate rates over the past two decades, which now means that 95% of transnational corporations from the United States have to pay additional taxes to repatriate earnings.
Studies put this fiscal cost at an estimated 20% to 28% of profits generated abroad.
In accounting terms, the profits that are not repatriated are referred to as “permanently reinvested earnings” whether they take the form of productive assets (57% of the total) or are held in cash (43%).
Over the past decade many companies have been concentrating such income in low-tax jurisdictions, and today one quarter of all such profits are divided between only seven countries with especially low corporate rates; indeed, 12% of all non-repatriated profits of United States transnationals are located in Ireland.
On the other hand companies with a small tax liability in the event of repatriating profits to the United States tend to reinvest in high-growth subsidiaries, rather than maintaining large cash balances.
In short, the remarkable growth in reinvested earnings abroad by United States companies is partly driven by the business opportunities that arise overseas and partly by an attempt to reduce the tax burden; in the latter case, profits are held primarily in cash and do not contribute to building capacity in the receiving economies.
Whether measures should be taken to put an end to this incentive is currently a hotly debated issue in the United States.
The aims of such a move range from increasing tax revenue (such measures could raise up to US$ 360 billion) to promoting the investment of these funds in productive projects in the United States.
Implementing such a measure could influence corporate behaviour, result in substantial negative FDI flows from the United States and have serious repercussions for some economies in the region, such as Mexico, which receive a large proportion of their FDI from the United States.
These economies account for 66% of total FDI income in the region.
The percentage of profits repatriated to parent companies was almost the same before and after the international financial crisis.
The percentage of profits that were repatriated even declined slightly, from 54% in 2005-2007 to 52% in 2009-2011.5 This shows that the economic crisis in the United States and Europe did not force multinational companies operating in the region to repatriate a greater proportion of their profits from Latin America.
While some corporations have used the profits generated in the region to recapitalize parent company operations, this will have been offset by the expansion of investment in subsidiaries with the best growth prospects, thus boosting levels of reinvestment.
With the reinvestment rate holding steady during a period in which the income of transnational corporations has increased fivefold, the reinvestment of profits has skyrocketed in virtually all of the region’s economies, both in absolute terms and as a proportion of total FDI.
As described in chapter I, the reinvestment of profits has gained momentum, building up from only 10% of total flows in 2002 to 43% of total flows in the past five years.
The repatriation rate for Argentina was unusually high in 2008, as a one-off operation by YPF, a subsidiary of the Spanish company Repsol, led to a disproportionate surge in repatriated profits.
The worldwide uptrend in reinvested profits as a proportion of FDI began only after the financial crisis of 2008.
In effect, the drop in global FDI flows was seen most markedly in the capital component and inter-company loans, while the reinvestment of profits dipped in 2008 but sprang back in 2009 and 2010 (UNCTAD, 2012).
While all profits that are not repatriated are recorded as reinvested earnings, that money is not necessarily being spent in its entirety on new production capacity.
In recent years, there has been a marked increase in the accumulation of cash by the world’s leading companies.
It is estimated that the assets held in cash and short-term investments by the 100 largest transnational corporations worldwide increased by one third between 2008 and 2010, when their value surpassed US$ 1 trillion (UNCTAD, 2012), and presumably a good portion of this amount is held by overseas subsidiaries.
It is estimated that approximately half of the non-repatriated profits generated abroad by United States companies remain in liquid assets (Blouin, Krull and Robinson, 2012).6 C.
Transnational corporation profits in the context of the balance of payments Regardless of whether transnational corporate profits are repatriated or reinvested they are recorded as outflows for balance of payments purposes.
They have become the main component of the income balance, as well as one of the main determinants of the region’s aggregate balance of payments equilibrium.
The surge in FDI inflows and outflows of FDI earnings has to be analysed in the context of an abundance of capital at the global level at a time when Latin America and the Caribbean has ample access to external financing.
Global capital flows experienced unprecedented growth during the first decade of this century.
Cross-border capital movements peaked in 2007 at nearly US$ 12 trillion (20% of nominal global GDP), up from just over US$ 2 trillion (6.5% of global GDP) in 2002 (see figure II.4).
Developed countries have borne the brunt of this decline, while cross-border flows to emerging countries have soared, both in value and as a proportion of the total.
Cross-border flows to Latin America and the Caribbean followed a similar trend to global flows, but they did not plummet quite so dramatically in 2008-2009 and subsequently recovered more rapidly.
Indeed, FDI has exceeded portfolio flows and other investment every year except in 1994, 2007 and 2010, and has proved to be significantly less volatile (see figure II.5).
The United States is the leading direct investor in Latin America and the Caribbean, but the behaviour of firms from that country in this respect is not necessarily representative of other investors, for the reasons given in box II.1.
It is also to be assumed that most of these liquid assets are held by subsidiaries located in tax havens.
Financial integration is measured as total cross-border capital inflows (direct investment, portfolio investment and other investment) as a proportion of nominal GDP.
Foreign investment, both inflows and outflows, is classified into three categories depending on the type of investment: (i) Direct investment is the category of investment whereby an entity seeks to obtain a lasting interest in an enterprise and establish a significant degree of influence over the management of that enterprise.
In practical terms, a direct investor must own 10% or more of the enterprise’s capital.
All subsequent financial transactions (acquisition of new assets, bonds and notes, and commercial or financial loans) are also counted as direct investment. (ii) Portfolio investment refers to transactions in negotiable securities.
The main components of this type of investment are stocks, bonds and notes (public or private) and moneymarket instruments.
Stock transactions that are covered under the category of direct investment are excluded.
Financial derivatives, whether negotiable or not, are included in this category, although they are not commonly traded in Latin America and the Caribbean. (iii) Other investment covers commercial and financial loans, and deposits, including foreign exchange holdings.
This is a residual category of the financial balance that essentially refers to loans not included in negotiable securities (which are classed under portfolio investment).
The returns on these investments are reflected in the income balance, which is part of the current account, together with the balance of goods, services and current transfers.
FDI income reflects the profits made by the subsidiaries of transnational companies; portfolio investment income is the dividends or capital gains generated by fixed- and variable-income investments; and other investment income refers to the interest generated on loans and deposits.
While the sums of foreign investment received are recorded as positive entries, the income they generate is registered as a negative flow.
Conversely, investments made abroad by domestic companies are recorded as negative entries, while the income that those investments generate is recorded as positive (revenues).
During that period, average portfolio investment inflows to the region amounted to US$ 40 billion a year, against US$ 22 billion in FDI (both at current prices).
Thereafter, portfolio investment went through a period of decline that steepened between 2000 and 2004 when a wave of divestments was sparked by a series of emerging-market crises that began in Asia in 1997 and continued in Brazil and the Russian Federation in 1998 and in Argentina in 2001.
Even though the amounts of portfolio investment rose once again from 2007 (with the exception of 2008), averaging over US$ 90 billion a year, they remain lower than FDI inflows.
Furthermore, portfolio investment is much more concentrated than FDI in a few countries: Brazil, Mexico and Chile, followed at some distance by Colombia and Peru, receive almost all of these investments in the region.
The smaller economies of Central America and the Caribbean are virtually excluded from these investments, with the partial exceptions of the Dominican Republic, El Salvador and Panama.
The reason for this is that the region’s equity and debt markets lack the depth of their counterparts in the advanced economies.
Between 2006 and 2011, other investment averaged US$ 50 billion a year (just over half of the amount of FDI).
Investment flows originating in the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have a completely different structure, with a predominance of loans and deposits amounting to more than double the combined sum of FDI and portfolio investment.
Thus, the region’s funding capacity over much of the past decade, attributable to current account surpluses, has been used primarily to provide the rest of the world with loans and deposits and to accumulate reserve assets.
Almost all the region’s countries have significant outflows of loans and deposits in relation to the size of their economies, but in absolute terms the countries that stand out the most are Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil and Mexico.
The region’s portfolio investments abroad have shown very little momentum in the past few years, and are even lower (at current prices) than they were 10 years ago.
Only Chile stands out as a major investor in shares and negotiable securities abroad.
It accounted for 45% of all flows from the region between 2005 and 2010, owing to the creation of sovereign wealth funds in 2006 and 2007 (whose assets must be invested in top-rated fixed-income instruments) and pension fund investment activity.
While outflows of FDI income have surged, the income generated by foreign portfolio investment has risen only modestly, from approximately US$ 20 billion per year between 1997 and 1999 to US$ 30 billion at current prices over the past few years, which means that its share as a percentage of GDP has shrunk by one third.
Outflows of income generated by other investment (interest paid) are, in current dollars, lower now than in 1990 or in 2000, and slightly less than portfolio investment income outflows (see figure II.7).
Since then, they have fallen by more than half owing to the worldwide drop in interest rates (especially in the United States and other developed economies) and were surpassed for the first time by FDI income and even by portfolio investment income (see figure II.8).
Changing capital flows to the region over time have marked three distinct periods according to the predominant form of external financing.
Bank loans (other investment) were the main type of foreign investment until 1990, when this source dried up in the aftermath of the external debt crisis of the 1980s.
For a short period of time, until 1996, portfolio investment was the main component of foreign investment flowing to the region.
This was attributable to the conversion of a certain amount of bank debt into negotiable assets, the financial opening and liberalization of many countries in the region and an international context in which priority was given to portfolio investment in the economies that would come to be renamed the “emerging markets”.
This context changed dramatically with the crises that hit these markets between 1997 and 2001, and although portfolio investment in Latin America has picked up, and even reached record levels in 2005, it has not regained the top spot from FDI in terms of the amounts invested.
The patterns in income from the various types of investment are consistent with their flows.
While income from portfolio investments and loans and deposits grew modestly or even decreased over time (even at current prices), income paid to transnational corporations has skyrocketed.
In the 1980s, external debt interest payments accounted for 87% of the total investment income flowing from Latin America and the Caribbean, while FDI income represented a minor flow.
Towards the end of the 1980s this pattern was broken and a new framework emerged whereby portfolio investment income (sovereign bonds and private securities) played a central role in the outflows from the region.
Portfolio investment income began to increase in 1989, accounting for 26% of total investment income between 1994 and 2004 and mirroring the change in capital flows to the region described above.
Another change in the funding pattern, and thus in the flows of investment income, began to take shape in the wake of the emerging-market financial crises between 1997 and 2001.
In fact, between 2005 and 2011, they were equivalent to about 26% of the region’s outflows under the same heading.
The greatest difference is in relation to direct investment, where inflows represented only 13% of outflows.
This imbalance is consistent with the fact that Latin America receives more FDI than it sends; despite the growth in FDI outflows, this pattern is expected to continue in the coming years.
Furthermore, while FDI income outflows are significant for all countries of the region, inflows under the same heading are notable only in those economies with substantial direct investments abroad (Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico).
It is important to note that, in the past decade, Latin America and the Caribbean has been a net lender in the global economy: the current account for the countries of the region as a whole posted a surplus of US$ 12.2 billion (at its peak in 2003-2007, the cumulative surplus for this account was US$ 133 billion).
Even though the region has been able to maintain a healthy current account and, consequently, has the capacity to provide funding for other regions, its capital income outflows have remained higher than inflows.
In fact, the income sub-account has been the poorest performer for the region during the past decade, owing primarily to the outflows of direct investment income.
FDI stock and profitability The profits of transnational corporations in Latin America and the Caribbean have soared since 2003 owing to a combination of two factors: a substantial FDI stock and higher returns on that stock.
Chronologically, the first factor was the sharp increase in FDI flows to the region between 1996 and 2001, which tripled, in less than 10 years, the foreign capital accumulated in the region in the form of foreign-company subsidiaries.
In absolute terms, the region’s FDI stock has grown constantly, but at varying speeds.
This indicator is presented at current prices, so in order to appreciate its significance in the region’s economies it is helpful to view it as a percentage of nominal GDP (see figure II.9).
Thus, the role of FDI in the economies of the region increased significantly between 1996 and 2001 and later stabilized at about 30% of GDP.
The real FDI boom in Latin America and the Caribbean took place in the second half of the 1990s, more specifically, between 1996 and 2001, when many State-owned assets were privatized and many sectors, which until then had received little FDI, were opened up and deregulated.
It was during this period that transnational corporations began to expand their role in the region’s economies.
Their level of influence held steady in the years immediately after the boom (between 2002 and 2009) and has recently started to trend slightly up again.
Like FDI flows, the significance of FDI stock in an economy is not the same in all countries.
In Mexico and the countries of South America, FDI stock accounts for between 26% and 28% of the economy.
In the economies of Central America it represents about 40%; in the larger countries of the Caribbean, such as Trinidad and Tobago and Jamaica, it reaches 80%.
And in the economies of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) it as much as 200%.
As a result, the smaller economies are most vulnerable to the balance-of-payments impact of rising FDI income.
Even in those countries where the weight of FDI in the economy is lower than average, many important sectors are virtually dominated by transnational corporations.
The banking sector in Mexico, mining in Peru, telecommunications in Brazil and the automotive industry in the region as a whole are all examples.
This selective concentration of transnational corporations in different sectors has implications when it comes to explaining FDI income patterns for each country of the region, as will be outlined in the next section.
The second factor that has contributed to the increase in FDI income since 2003 was the sharp rise in the profitability of FDI in the region.
In recent years, the profits of large companies have continued to swell, despite worldwide economic uncertainty and stagnant growth in the developed countries.
In the United States, for example, corporate profits hit a historic peak as a percentage of national income in 2012.
Subsidiaries of transnational companies operating in the region have seen relatively high profitability in the past few years.
In spite of this decline in profitability, income has increased in absolute terms owing to the steady growth in FDI stock during the years of record inflows (see chapter I).
A similar decline in the average profitability of FDI had been seen a decade earlier, when it fell from 7% to 4% during the crisis in 1998-2001, pointing to the close relationship between profitability and the economic cycle.
These variations cause ups and downs in the FDI income generated in the region, but the overall amount will remain at a far higher level than a decade ago because average returns are unlikely to fall below 4% and the region’s FDI stock will not decrease in the near future.
This structural factor will ensure that in the coming decades the economies in the region will experience high levels of FDI income.
While FDI flows, as seen in chapter I, are highly variable, the fluctuations in FDI stock are much smaller.
Moreover, given the substantial reinvestment of profits outlined under heading 2 of section B, even if Latin America did not attract new foreign investors for a long period of time, its FDI stock could continue to expand.
There could indeed be a shift in the balance between outflows and inflows of FDI income, as has been seen to a certain extent in recent years.
But that change is as yet incipient and limited to only four of the region’s economies.
Thus, the level of FDI income and the imbalance between inflows and outflows will hold steady for the foreseeable future, although with significant differences between countries, as discussed in the next section. 2.
FDI income by country and sector The profits of transnational corporations have surged in the region as a whole, but this increase has not been spread evenly across countries.
While almost all countries have seen significant growth since 2003, there are notable differences in the amount of income they generate, how much that income has grown in the last decade and the relative importance of these revenues to the national economy.
In absolute terms, FDI income is highly concentrated in a small group of countries, in particular Brazil (with 29% of the total income generated in the region in 2011), Chile (17%), Colombia (13%), Peru (12%) and Mexico (9%) (see table II.3).
As expected, this distribution reflects the size of the different economies, the significance that FDI has for each of them and the different levels of return obtained by the foreign companies in each country.
This indicator, already used for the region as a whole in the previous section, measures the average profitability of FDI in an economy.
This revealed two groups of economies in the region with completely disparate trends (see figure II.11).
The first group is made up of countries where the strategy of transnational corporations has focused on the extraction of raw materials for export (Chile, Colombia, Peru, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and, to a lesser extent, the Dominican Republic).
These economies have seen average returns on FDI of over 10% in the past five years —and as high as 25% in the case of Peru— while the average for the region as a whole was 7.8%.
The figures for Guatemala and Paraguay are very high too, but this profitability indicator is more difficult to interpret for these two countries as they receive very little foreign direct investment.
Of this group of countries, only Chile and Colombia provide data disaggregated by sector, which clearly show how important natural resources are.
The vast majority of the FDI income generated in Chile comes from the mining sector, with returns of 25%.
Electricity, gas and water services were also highly profitable (12%), but fell far short of the returns achieved by mining.
At the opposite end of the spectrum are Mexico and some of the Central American economies (El Salvador, Nicaragua and, to a lesser extent, Costa Rica) where transnational corporations have largely adopted efficiencyseeking strategies in the production of manufactured goods for export.
The profitability of FDI in these economies is well below average and has grown very modestly in the last decade.
These low returns are due, on the one hand, to the sluggish growth of domestic demand in these economies compared with those of South America, which has adversely affected businesses in the service sector (accounting for approximately half of all FDI).
On the other hand, the manufacturing sector (40% of FDI) has a preponderance of export platforms that are highly integrated into global value chains and tend to operate with narrow profit margins.
In Mexico and Central America, data on FDI income are not disaggregated by sector, but it is possible to analyse the data reported by the United States companies that invest in these countries.
Of the profits reported by United States companies in Mexico in 2011, 39% were in manufacturing, while 25% were not attributable to any specific sector.
The percentage for manufacturing was even higher in Costa Rica (80%), Honduras and the Dominican Republic (more than 100% in both owing to losses in other sectors) and in El Salvador and Nicaragua (45% each).
In Ecuador, FDI has been concentrated in natural-resources extraction; however, the Government has reformed the oil sector to ensure that the public sector receives a higher percentage of the income generated.
The reform crystallized in 2010 when transnational corporations in this industry began to operate under provision-of-services contracts giving them a flat-rate payment based on the amount of oil extracted.
About half of the foreign companies in the sector accepted the new terms while the rest decided to liquidate their assets in the country (ECLAC, 2010).
These measures, which had been expected for some years, are behind the decline in FDI income since 2007 in Ecuador, which is one of the few countries in Latin America and the Caribbean to have experienced such a drop.
The returns on FDI are below average for the region in the Caribbean economies, with the exception of Barbados, where FDI income is very high (see figure II.12).
Among the Caribbean countries where data are available, Trinidad and Tobago is the only exporter of primary products (hydrocarbons).
Though its FDI income is above average for the region, it still falls far short of the level of the metal-exporting countries.
The other countries receive FDI mainly in the services sector, where stagnant tourist arrivals since the 2009 crisis and slower growth in domestic demand (compared with Latin America) have dragged down the profits of transnational corporations.
In absolute terms, the FDI income generated in these countries increased only very slightly during the last decade, unlike in Latin America (see table II.4).
Uruguay, for example, has seen the highest FDI income growth over the past decade, reflecting a rapid expansion in FDI inflows, in particular those received by the forestry sector.
Argentina and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela rank above average in the region in terms of profitability, but they stand out for having seen only very modest growth or even zero growth in FDI income in recent years (see table II.3).
The fall in profits in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela can be attributed to two factors.
First, the nationalization of foreign companies, especially in manufacturing and some services, has led to a decline in real terms in the stock of foreign capital in the country.
Second, in a process similar to that which took place in Ecuador, operating conditions for transnational corporations involved in oil extraction (the main destination of FDI) changed radically in the last decade.
Under the new conditions, transnational corporations must operate in partnership with the State-owned PDVSA; this, in practice, limits the profits that they can obtain from their concessions.
Sectoral data show that the services sector has generated the least income in recent years (25% of the total).10 The rate freeze for many public services has without doubt had an impact on the profits of transnational corporations, particularly in the energy sector.
Many transnational corporations operate in the electricity sector, financial services and trade, areas in which profits have been below average; indeed, only communications and transport have recorded above-average profits.
Of the income generated, 36% is from manufacturing, where the metallurgical industry stands out in particular, and 39% is attributable to the natural-resources sector, where mining and the extraction of hydrocarbons generated above-average profits (20% and 16%, respectively) between 2005 and 2010, although lower than the average calculated for the other countries in the region.
Within manufacturing, automotive companies repatriated more than US$ 12 billion in these three years, representing 16% of the total repatriated from Brazil and more than three times the amount of FDI received by the industry during the same period.
In this industry, all of the assembly firms and the largest producers of car parts are subsidiaries of transnational corporations that have been very successful in the past few years in Brazil.
The beverage industry (with strong growth in 2012 as a result of new acquisitions) and the chemical industry have also performed well.
Within the services industry, the finance sector stands out with more than US$ 7 billion, followed by the telecommunications, electricity and gas, and retail sectors.
Of these sectors, telecommunications is the only one in which transnational corporations dominate the Brazilian market.
In the other three, foreign companies compete with Brazilian companies for market share.
In terms of profitability, the automotive sector stands out once again, having repatriated an annual amount equivalent to 13% of FDI stock for the past three years —four times the national average and double that of the next most profitable sectors, such as paper and pulp (7%), electricity and gas (6%) and chemicals (6%).
The low level of profits repatriated from Brazil by mining and hydrocarbon companies (both in absolute terms and in relation to the amounts invested) is somewhat exceptional and can be attributed to two factors.
First, the country has an abundance of natural resources, but since Brazilian companies dominate the sector, only 17% of FDI stock is invested in the primary sector.
Second, FDI in the hydrocarbon sector is relatively recent and is focused on the exploitation of pre-salt oilfields that are still coming online.
The profits of the foreign companies in this sector are expected to increase as these sites are developed in the coming years.
The preponderance of FDI in non-export sectors in Brazil is the reason why the country scores above average for the region when measuring FDI income as a percentage of exports of goods and services, despite the fact that only repatriated FDI income is taken into account (see figure II.13).
Although this measure ignores other components of the balance-of-payments current account, notably investment income inflow, it does indicate what percentage of a country’s income from exports is used to offset FDI.
Being the largest economy in the region, exports account for a relatively small percentage of Brazil’s GDP; however, the country has attracted a lot of FDI in recent years, mainly in manufacturing and services aimed at its domestic market.
As expected, the profits of transnational corporations in each country are concentrated in the sectors where they have invested more: manufacturing in Mexico and Central America, and natural resources in the South American countries.
As shown above, the amount of profits, their growth and their relative importance in the economy vary greatly by country.
Differences of this magnitude can be explained, first, by the variations in the economic performance of the countries in recent years, by their production structure and, The sectoral data for Argentina does not match the aggregate data as they come from different sources.
If transnational corporations in Brazil were to follow a strategy similar to that employed by companies in other countries in the region, they would be reinvesting in their subsidiaries just a little less than the amount they repatriate to their parent companies.
If that were the case, total FDI income for the Brazilian economy would be about double that indicated in table II.3, that is, about the same amount as for the rest of the economies in South America combined.
Estimated FDI profitability in Brazil shown in figure II.11 would not have to be adjusted to the same extent as the FDI stock calculated for Brazil also excludes reinvested earnings. primarily, by the type of strategy that transnational corporations have chosen to apply in each country.
The natural resources sector has been the key driver of FDI income in the region.
Natural resources Sectoral data for Argentina and Chile, as well as the exceptionally high returns in other countries with strong extractive industries (Colombia, Peru and Plurinational State of Bolivia), point to the key role of companies that specialize in the exploitation of natural resources in the increase in FDI income in the region (apart from in Brazil).
This indicator is not completely objective since mining companies do not count their mineral reserves among their assets (oil companies do include these figures).
Therefore, the assets that are included in these companies’ balance sheets are understated and their average profitability is overstated.
The profits generated by the natural resources sector13 in Latin America have risen by a similar amount and within a similar time frame as FDI income as a whole, as shown in section A (ECLAC, 2012a).
In the mining sector, profits as a percentage of regional GDP nearly quadrupled during 2004-2009 in relation to the previous decade; in the hydrocarbons sector, the increase was about 60%.
While the latter is a considerable increase, the difference between the two sectors is attributable to rising maintenance costs in traditional hydrocarbon fields and higher development costs in non-traditional areas.
Although mining income has shot up at a much faster rate than hydrocarbon income in the region, the latter is still much higher in quantitative terms.
The income generated from mining and from oil and gas extraction counts as FDI income depending on the extent to which these sectors are dominated by transnational corporations.
Even though hydrocarbons are responsible for a larger proportion of income in the natural-resources sector, FDI income is concentrated in mineral-exporting countries because of the dominance of State-owned companies in the hydrocarbons sector.
In some cases this is due to a statutory monopoly (as in Mexico) or special sector regulations that grant a leading role to domestic firms, as in Brazil, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador (as mentioned above).
Even the countries that are more open to FDI in hydrocarbons, such as Chile, Colombia and Peru, also have State-owned oil companies.
In 2012 Argentina renationalized YPF, an oil company which had been State-owed prior to 1999.
Mining, in contrast, is an industry dominated in many countries by transnational corporations.
This is one of the main reasons why FDI income began to rise in 2003 and has remained high since then.
In the short term, changes in international prices immediately translate into variations in corporate profits in the sector (see figure II.16); this is why FDI income suffered a slight fall in 2012.
Income from the natural resources sector is the sum of revenues from mining and oil.
Each of these is calculated as the value of production at international prices minus the relevant production costs. 14 ECLAC (2012a) concludes that States obtain a larger share of the income generated by natural resources when they have State enterprises in the sector, in comparison with those who collect revenues solely through profit taxes, special taxes and royalties.
Overall, as a percentage, the revenues collected in Latin America are in line with international parameters, though they are somewhat lower in the smaller countries.
Latin America and the Caribbean in this new scenario While there is no doubt that the natural-resources sector is the main cause of the rise in FDI income in the region, it is far from the only one.
Proof of this is that profits have gone up in all developing economies, even in those where FDI in the primary sector has been very limited.
The clearest example of this worldwide is China, which has seen an even higher rise than Latin America and the Caribbean and where FDI has been concentrated in the manufacturing sector.
In Latin America, Brazil has seen a remarkable rise in FDI income, mainly in some areas of manufacturing and services.
Even in countries such as Chile, where most income is concentrated in mining, other sectors have also experienced higher-than-average rates of return in recent years.
Transnational corporations involved in the extraction of natural resources are not the only ones to have enjoyed record profits in Latin America in recent years.
Service providers and manufacturing companies have also taken advantage of the generally positive economic performance of developing economies over the past decade.
Indeed, the growth gap between developed and developing countries widened from only 0.1% of GDP in 2003 to 4% from that year onwards (ECLAC, 2012b).
The disparity is particularly notable between Latin America, which has maintained high rates of economic growth in recent years, and the European Union (the region’s main source of FDI), which has seen very slow growth since the 2009 crisis.
Major Spanish companies, which have significant assets in Latin America and face a severely recessionary domestic market, are among those that seen the most growth in their dependence on profits generated in the region (ECLAC, 2013).
The two largest Spanish banks (Santander and BBVA) generated almost half of their profits in 2011 in Latin America (ECLAC, 2012c).
The largest Spanish electricity companies also saw an increase in the percentage of their profits generated in the region up to 25% for Iberdrola and 39% for Gas Natural Fenosa.
In short, Latin America has stood out in recent years for its capacity to generate substantial profits for the transnational corporations that have invested there.
While the rates of return have reached historic highs in recent years and are likely to decline in the medium term, the absolute level of FDI income generated in the region will remain very high.
This will require rethinking the role that transnational corporations should play in the region’s development and of the policies that States should implement to that end.
Evaluating the significance of transnational corporation profits in the region’s tax base and considering the effect of increasing income on the balance of payments and on growth and development are two of the more immediate requirements. 1.
Transnational corporations and tax revenues There are no disaggregated data giving an exact figure for how much transnational corporations pay in taxes in Latin America and the Caribbean.
However, considering the expansion in FDI income in the balance of payments of almost all the region’s countries, transnational corporations account for an ever larger share of taxes on profits.
Today, they account for about 10% of tax revenues in the region, but this percentage should go up as the region adopts tax structures that more closely resemble those of developed countries.
Subsidiaries of transnational corporations contribute to tax revenues mainly through taxes on profits, in which respect they generally have the same obligations as domestic firms.
There are some important exceptions to this general practice of non-discrimination by origin (national treatment).
For example, in some cases foreign investors sign tax stability agreements upon entering the country (as in the mining sector in Chile), and in practice some major foreign companies are the primary beneficiaries of tax benefits aimed at specific sectors or activities.
Even when foreign companies are subject to the same tax rate on their profits as domestic firms, the mobile nature of international capital creates room for tax competition between countries to attract FDI.
Some studies have suggested that this tax competition has led to a loss of revenue, particularly for developing economies (Keen and Simone, 2004), although this does not seem to be the case in Latin America.
A more recent study (Abbas and others, 2012) concluded that in 1996-2007 Latin America was the only region in the world where the effective corporate tax rate did not go down but remained unchanged while revenues soared.
In fact, today Latin America has higher corporate tax rates than other regions of the world (PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2012).
In addition, in the aggregate companies pay a little more than the theoretical tax rate because they have to add other taxes that more than outweigh any savings they might make owing to exemptions in other areas.
The result is that the actual tax rate in the subregion is around 30%: the highest worldwide.
In short, there is little evidence of tax competition among Latin American countries to attract FDI, though there may be some in specific areas, such as export platform investments.
In the Caribbean, however, there is evidence of tax competition to attract FDI (Nassar, 2008): corporate tax rates have been reduced by 30% in recent years while tax holiday schemes have eroded the tax base.
The tax rate is applied to the profits that companies report in each economy, but transnational corporations have at their disposal mechanisms that allow them to transfer a portion of those profits to subsidiaries in other countries, thus reducing the taxes that they have to pay in a given country.
Transfer prices are charges for goods and services between subsidiaries in the same group.
They are an inevitable necessity in a world in which many major companies form value chains with their subsidiaries.
For example, they can be based on similar arm’s-length transactions or by allocating each party’s share according to its contribution to the production process.
In any case, companies can easily find ways to implement aggressive transfer prices that reduce profits in some countries (those with high tax rates) and inflate them in others (those with low rates or no tax on profits).
There are no official data on how widespread this practice is worldwide or on the effects it has on tax revenues in different countries, but available estimates point to a very significant impact.
It also seems clear that as businesses grow more globalized the use of these instruments is becoming more widespread.
Given the increased profits generated by transnational corporations in the region, and taking into account that the tax pressure in these countries remains above the world average, it is to be expected that transnational corporate profit-shifting to low-tax jurisdictions will have an impact on the revenues of the region’s countries.
In developed economies, the erosion of the tax base by transnational corporations is a matter of public concern, and governments, businesses and civil society are reacting to this problem (see box II.3).
In addition, burgeoning direct investment by Latin American entities abroad will just add another potential source of tax base erosion, since local businesses will be able to access the same tools to reduce their tax obligations.
For example, 8 of the 20 largest Chilean trans-Latins have subsidiaries in the Cayman Islands or the British Virgin Islands.
Since it opened, the company has paid only £8.6 million in taxes, despite having repeatedly stated that its subsidiary in the United Kingdom was successful.
Starbucks uses different strategies so as not to report profits in the United Kingdom, all of which are perfectly legal.
For example, the company pays an amount equal to 6% of its sales to another subsidiary in the Netherlands in license fees; it buys coffee from a subsidiary in Switzerland, which is then transported by another subsidiary in the Netherlands, where taxes on commodity trading are particularly low.
In addition, the United Kingdom subsidiary is funded entirely by intra-group loans at LIBOR plus 4%, which is much higher than the rate paid by the group on its debt with outsiders.
Cases like this have begun to be widely discussed in the United Kingdom and other European countries.
In the context of public spending cuts, organizations including UK Uncut, US Uncut and Citizens for Tax Justice believe that increasing the taxes paid by transnational corporations would ease the need for cuts in social benefits and would reduce public deficits.
At its meeting in Los Cabos in June 2012, the Group of 20 (G20) supported the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) initiative on tax base erosion, which is being followed by the tax authorities in many countries.
In January 2013 the OECD published a report on the subject, requesting international cooperation and concluding that the international tax system had not kept pace with changes in global business practices.
The problem is rooted in a tax system designed to support international trade and avoid double taxation.
Transnational corporations have taken advantage of these regulations to reduce their tax burden.
One possible way to tackle the problem is to use a simpler method of attributing profits to the countries where a company operates.
These solutions would likely have other disadvantages, such as giving priority to the locations that are more labour-intensive, and could even seriously distort companies’ recruitment strategies.
There are still many questions regarding the ability of governments and international institutions to significantly reform the tax system worldwide.
Meanwhile, it will be necessary to see what effect civil society campaigns can have in this area.
Many companies’ corporate social responsibility efforts are being negated by their reputation as tax evaders.
For some companies, however, paying their fair share of taxes is an explicit part of their social responsibility (Scheiwiller and Public pressure has forced the United Kingdom subsidiary of Starbucks to announce that in 2013-2014 it will voluntarily pay £10 million more in taxes than it is required to pay by law (The Economist, 2012).
Sullivan, “Apple reports high rate but saves billions on taxes” Tax Analysis, 2012; and “Wake up and smell the coffee” The Economist, 15 December 2012.
It is no coincidence that the profit-transfer practices of transnational corporations have become a matter of political concern as the European Union economies slide into recession and there is increased pressure on public finances.
It is therefore to be expected that the same concerns will arise in Latin America when the economic cycle changes, tax revenues fall and demand for public expenditure increases.
In the particular case of natural resources (mining and hydrocarbons), royalties are another fiscal instrument by which States can obtain a fraction of transnational corporation profits.
In fact, royalties are designed in part to prevent transfer pricing and other financial practices from unduly limiting the State’s revenues from national resources that are non-renewable and, in many cases, of great economic and political importance.
In 2001, ExxonMobil sold the mining company to Anglo American for US$ 1.3 billion, which reflects the profitability of the asset (ECLAC, 2003).
Nevertheless, royalties account for only a small share of the tax contributions that mining and oil companies pay in Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, 2012a). 2.
Transnational enterprises and balance-of-payments sustainability As discussed in section C, over the past decade the profits of transnational corporations have become one of the main components of the aggregate balance of payments in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It is therefore important to consider their potential impact on the economies of the region, both at present and in the future.
A country’s current account deficit will be sustainable and will not jeopardize economic growth if it can be funded on the international market (ECLAC, 2012d).
The growth rate to which countries can aspire without coming up against this external constraint depends on four variables: (i) the net exports of each economy; (ii) the terms of trade; (iii) capital flows between the economy and the rest of the world; and (iv) net payments to non-resident factors of production.
In addition to the influence of these four variables in the balance of payments, each country will face potential deficits from a different position, depending on its level of reserves, sovereign funds (if any) and degree of access to international markets, which is mainly determined by its credit history.
The combination of these conditions means that in the short term the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean are subject to very different external constraints.
The external shocks that periodically affect the region’s economic growth typically take the form of sudden changes in the terms of trade and capital flows.
As described in section C, capital flows tend to be less volatile if a larger share of them is in the form of FDI than in the form of portfolio investment and bank loans and deposits.
Although FDI flows vary greatly from year to year, these variations are never comparable to those suffered by other types of investment and are very rarely negative.
While FDI has become the main component of the financial account, FDI income is also the main component of investment income and the main cause of income balance deficits.
The earnings of transnational companies in the region (minus those generated by the trans-Latins abroad) are the main net payment to non-resident production factors and, therefore, have become a determinant of external constraints on the economies of the region (Abeles, Lavarello and Montagu, 2013).
Large FDI inflows, which are expected to generate high outflows of FDI income, should also generate an equivalent net export balance or contribute to structural change in the host economy that in turn changes the terms of trade, so as not to impact the external constraints on the economy.
High FDI earnings in sectors such as natural resources thus go hand in hand with high export flows, while FDI income in sectors that meet domestic demand do not have this export equivalent.
It is also necessary to consider how FDI income can be expected to react to an external shock.
The strong link between the profits of transnational corporations in the region and export commodity prices would suggest that a drastic drop in these prices, which would adversely affect the terms of trade of most countries in the region, would also trigger a decline in FDI income.
Beyond the natural-resources sector, FDI income can be considered a countercyclical variable, since outflows increase in times of vigorous economic growth and decrease in recessions when capital flows into the economy decline or turn negative.
While the income earned by direct investors is closely linked to the performance of the economy, interest on loans or bonds must be paid regardless of the current situation.
In short, while in the 1990s and early 2000s FDI inflows were seen as an indisputable boon for the balance of payments in many countries, their contribution to external equilibrium is now regarded as doubtful and, in many cases, negative.
Given the large stock of FDI in the region, this situation will undoubtedly continue in the medium term, alleviated to some extent in certain countries by the income produced by the trans-Latins.
The long-term impact on the economic cycle will depend on the type of investment received.
Conclusions The increased profitability of the operations of transnational corporations in Latin America and the Caribbean since 2003 is part of a global trend.
This is attributable, first, to the continuous rise of corporate profits in most countries, both in absolute terms and relative to GDP.
Second, because of business internationalization many companies are conducting an increasing proportion of their activities —and, therefore, generating an ever larger share of their profits— in third countries.
As a result, a growing portion of the business surplus is recorded in the balance of payments as FDI income.
In the long term, therefore, FDI income worldwide can be expected to remain at high levels.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, there will continue to be a significant imbalance between outward and inward FDI income.
Although in these economies inward FDI income is equivalent to only 13% of their FDI income outflow, inward and outward FDI trends have been narrowing the gap since 2009 (see chapter I); this pattern can be expected to continue in the near future.
However, the gap will not be closed throughout the region in the foreseeable future: while almost all the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean receive substantial amounts of FDI (and, therefore, generate FDI income), very few have comparable FDI outflows (are recipients of FDI income).
There are great disparities in the FDI income levels generated in the different countries in the region, depending on the prevailing business strategies in each.
In general, those countries where a large share of FDI has focused on the extraction of natural resources (particularly mining) have generated the most FDI income in the past decade.
Current FDI income levels in the region have thus been contingent on high export commodity prices; in the short term, significant fluctuations can be expected in line with price trends.
Because of this relationship, an external shock caused by worsening terms of trade would be buffered by a decline in capital outflows in the form of FDI income.
Given the substantial profits attained by transnational corporations in the region and the fact that a significant share of them are generated by exploiting non-renewable resources, ensuring that these companies contribute fairly to tax revenues is a matter of particular urgency.
The ability of transnational corporations to transfer their profits legally from the originating country to jurisdictions with more favorable tax treatment has caused concern among governments as to the potential for tax base erosion.
While initiatives to minimize erosion have so far been limited to developed countries, especially in Europe, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean should join efforts to adjust their domestic tax regulations and to coordinate on an international level to achieve a worldwide agreement to rein in the more aggressive practices of transnational corporations.
For the important case of natural resources, revenues raised by taxing corporate income should be supplemented with other fiscal instruments (such as royalties) and even with a review of the role of State enterprises in the sector.
Beyond the impact that these profits might have on countries’ tax bases, the level that they have reached over the past decade has meant that in recent years FDI as a whole has had an ambiguous effect on the balance of payments in the region.
In many countries, FDI inflows now pale in comparison with outflows of FDI income, making it all the more urgent to measure the impact of FDI in terms of its contribution to employment, exports, local value added and, in a more dynamic sense, structural change.
For FDI to continue contributing to these objectives, it will be necessary to maintain adequate incentives for productive investments.
But at the same time, it is important to recognize that the record profits of recent years can be challenged by public authorities and civil society, especially if it is perceived that transnational corporations are not contributing fairly to tax revenues, the creation of good-quality jobs and economic development in the broadest sense.
Governments should fine-tune their policies and regulations to strike a balance between investment incentives and the equitable distribution of profits.
Transnational corporations themselves should also be aware of this challenge and duly adjust their corporate social responsibility stance.
Finally, it is vital to remember two important elements that lie behind the figures for soaring FDI income in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The first is that almost half of these profits are reinvested in the economies in which they are generated and, even though these reinvested earnings continue to increase the financial liability of the economies involved, they also boost production capacity.
The second consideration is the growth of outward direct investment by some economies (Mexico and Chile in particular, but also Brazil and Colombia), which means that in the medium term FDI income outflows will be partially offset by the income generated by trans-Latins abroad.
Montagu, (2013), “Heterogeneidad estructural y restricción externa en la economía argentina”, Hacia un desarrollo inclusivo.
Global and regional patterns and trends in foreign direct investment in . griculture and agro-industry a 1.
Evolution of foreign direct investment flows in the agricultural and agro-industry sector C. oreign direct investment trends by subsector 1.
Conclusions, challenges and outlook FDI strategies in the agricultural and agro-industry sector, and kinds of companies Public policies for attracting, regulating and enhancing the positive externalities of FDI in the agricultural and agro-industry sector The new role of transnational and national corporations in agriculture and agro-industry Bibliography A.
Introduction Agriculture1 and agro-industry2 are currently the focus of a global debate on food security, energy security and climate change.
The world population is expected to reach 9 billion by 2050; to meet the demand for food, agricultural production will need to increase by 70% over the level recorded in 2006 (FAO, 2009).
Virtually all of the net population increase of 2 billion will be in the emerging and developing economies.
This demographic trend is accompanied by rising family incomes3 (see figure III.1) and an increasingly Westernized diet based on higher consumption of animal protein (see figure III.2) and more highly processed food.
At the same time, the rising price of oil, the pursuit of energy security and the commitment to mitigate climate change have led the governments of a number of countries to support the production and use of biofuels.
Maize and sugar cane have been ethanol feedstocks in the United States and Brazil, respectively, while canola (rapeseed) has been the biodiesel feedstock in the European Union.
According to World Bank estimates (2010), the total area under biofuel crops has grown at a dizzying pace in recent times, more than doubling between 2004 and 2008 when it hit the 36 million hectare mark.
All of these changes are creating challenges and opportunities in the agricultural and agro-industry sector, particularly in the case of grains, oilseeds, sugar cane and other flex-crops that can be used for human consumption or animal feed or for making biofuels but compete for the same basic inputs: land and water.
To respond to the increasing new food and biofuel demand it is necessary to address the physical, technological and institutional factors that limit the growth of agricultural supply.
The physical constraints (such as the number of hectares of land available for agricultural use) are relevant, especially locally, because worldwide studies (Roudart, 2010) indicate that there is enough land for expanding food production.
Estimates of agricultural productivity in Latin America and the Caribbean suggest that the region is closer to its potential than Africa but is still below the levels reached in other, more developed economies (GAEZ, 2013).
Therefore, a key objective is to increase productivity and achieve full potential.
This poses challenges in the spheres of science, technology and innovation for development and involves adopting new techniques that, in turn, mitigate environmental risks (not only those related to climate change, but also those associated with the rise in specialization, or mono-cropping, in many countries of the region).
The use of new technologies for controlling biotic conditions (genetically modified organisms are one example) raises new issues, as well, because weeds, insects and diseases adapt and climate change could make them evolve in unexpected directions and become resistant.
Another challenge is the slowing rate of growth of agricultural yields shown in empirical studies (Adlas and Achoth, 2006; Estudillo and Otsuka, 2004), to a degree that varies by geographical area and level of climate stress.
Pingali (2007) pointed out three factors to explain this downtrend in the major grains for human consumption: (i) land degradation due to more intensive farming; (ii) the rising opportunity cost of agricultural labour; and (iii) declining agricultural infrastructure and research investment.
For the purposes of this chapter, agriculture includes all primary activities related to the production of crops (that is, activities that seek to obtain agricultural raw materials) and livestock (cattle, sheep, pigs and poultry).
It thus includes all economic activities that have their basis in the exploitation of the earth’s resources, favoured by human action (FAO, 1997).
A common and traditional definition of agro-industry refers to the subset of manufacturing that turns out intermediate or end products derived from the agricultural sector.
Agro-industry therefore refers to processing agriculture, forestry and fisheries products (FAO, 1997).
This chapter looks at agro-industry activities in the areas of food (or agro-food) and agro-energy (specifically, the production of biofuels).
Mainly in the case of the emerging economies (such as Brazil, China, India and Indonesia, with a combined population of 3 billion and annual economic growth rates between 4% and 9%).
Between 1975 and 2000, public expenditure and investment in agricultural research dropped throughout the world; the percentage decrease is particularly significant in Latin America and the Caribbean.
With public spending on agriculture trending down, foreign direct investment (FDI) in the sector can play a very important role (particularly in low-income countries), not only by disseminating new technologies to achieve high yields while sustainably managing natural resources, but also by contributing to economic growth in rural areas (where much of global poverty is still concentrated).
Another factor that is putting pressure on agricultural supply is food waste.
According to estimates, approximately one third of the food produced is not consumed (Saravia-Matus and others, 2012).
In low-income countries, food loss tends to occur before or after harvesting; in high-income countries wastage is concentrated almost equally in supply chains (from farm to supermarket) and at the consumer level (Hodges and others, 2011; Gómez and Paloma and others, 2012).
Institutional factors can be a drag on the growth of agricultural supply, especially in the short and medium term.
This is what happens, for example, when exchange rate appreciation or agricultural price volatility (which reached record highs between 2007 and 2008) make agriculture less competitive, or when the export tax structure is a key factor.
In the longer run, increasing the area under cultivation is also constrained by infrastructure bottlenecks (such as difficulty of access and lack of irrigation systems or storage) and governance issues (like ownership rights).
Elliot, “Current trends in food retailing and consumption and key choices facing society” European Food System in a Changing World, R.
Owing to factors such as these, the World Food Programme (WFP) has noted that the world has gone from a structural food surplus to a structural food deficit (WFP, 2007).
This, together with the demand for biofuels, explains the renewed interest in controlling and securing access to natural and agricultural resources (land, water and nutrients).
At the agroindustry level, transnational food mega-companies are consolidating and a new generation of transnationals is emerging.
In short, technological and institutional innovations are needed to address the challenges involved in reversing the downtrend in agricultural yields, promoting land fertility conservation and the sustainable use of water, and developing agricultural production and trade infrastructure.
Despite technological and infrastructure constraints in Latin America and the Caribbean, land and water are available for increasing the area under production.4 However, this will require new and strategic investments that are environmentally and socioeconomically responsible and involve realigning institutions and supporting innovation.
Because the sector has been low on government investment and international cooperation agendas in recent decades, FDI flows to agriculture and agro-industry are playing a strategic role in meeting current demographic and climate challenges.
Section B puts the strategic value of FDI into context, discussing major trends and developments in agriculture and agro-industry in the region.
Recent investments in agricultural land worldwide are examined in order to understand the situation in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Section B goes on to describe the changing role of agro-industry in the global and regional food market, and it ends with a look at the macroeconomics of FDI flows to agriculture and agro-industry.
The second focus is on foreign investment in two major production subsectors: the agro-commodities cluster and the agricultural inputs sector (see section C).5 The goal is to identify linkages in the production of flex-crops to produce food, energy and fodder and track the flow of investments in seeds and fertilizers as key inputs for increasing agricultural yields.
This section seeks an understanding of the strategies followed by major transnational corporations in the region (including the trans-Latins) and the dynamics of the supply chains of which they are a part.
It therefore provides an overview of the production dynamics of each agro-chain and the business strategies involved, based on available statistics (often weak or incomplete), a review of the literature and field work done specifically for this report.
Lastly, Section D sets out the conclusions of the study, reviewing the dynamics of FDI in the region’s agricultural and agro-industry sector, the strategies behind FDI flows and the public policy instruments available to attract and regulate these flows.
The emphasis is on innovation, environmental responsibility and social inclusion of small and medium-sized producers, as well as on potential synergies for accelerating the growth of rural economies in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It has the largest reservoir of arable land in the world (576 million hectares, equivalent to 30% of the worldwide total ), 30% of the planet’s renewable water reserves, 25% of the world’s forest area (including 46% of its tropical forests) and 30% of the world’s biodiversity (Sotomayor and others, 2011).
The focus is on these issues because they are more directly linked to the challenges of food security, energy supply and environmental preservation.
Because of space limitations, other important sectors such as dairy products, coffee, cocoa, fruits, vegetables, non-alcoholic beverages, wine, beer, mineral water, baked goods and sweets are not discussed.
Global and regional patterns and trends in foreign direct investment in agriculture and agro-industry 1.
The emerging issue of investment in land The recent wave of information from academia and the media on agricultural land “mega-deals” throughout the world has helped propel agriculture onto the political and socioeconomic agenda, mainly in countries with inflows of this type of FDI (see box III.1).
The term “land grabbing” has drawn media attention and been a focus of academic and policy discussions over the past few years.
But sources and authors disagree on how to define and measure it and gauge its impact because there is no standard approach that is widely accepted in the literature.
In English, the term “land grabbing” has a negative connotation and refers to the purchase or leasing of large tracts of agricultural land.
In Spanish, the term has sometimes been translated as land ownership concentration and foreignization, but this does not provide an accurate picture of contested definitions.
According to the Land Matrix database, land grabbing is a matter of scale because of the size of the deals involved: as much as half a million hectares (which is unprecedented).
This database records and classifies transfers of more than 1,000 hectares of agricultural land anywhere in the world.
A recent FAO study (2011) defines land grabbing as purchases of agricultural land driven by foreign investors with the support of their governments.
It assesses the impact in terms of changes in food security levels in the countries where these investments are made.
According to Borras and others (2012), land grabbing is the purchase of land, regardless of the type of investor (including nationality) or whether it is for agricultural or non-agricultural use.
This definition explicitly includes the role of national and regional actors in land grabbing in Latin America.
None of these definitions include cross-border movement or migration because it involves the purchase or leasing of agricultural land on a smaller scale.
According to a World Bank study (2010), in 2009 foreign investors expressed interest in acquiring about 56 million hectares around the world.
The same study notes that owing to institutional constraints and lack of transparency in some deals, confirming that the investments actually took place and that the land was indeed put to agricultural use was possible for only 20% of the land in question.
Despite the difficulty in obtaining reliable data, according to the same source it is clear that interest in purchasing or leasing agricultural land has grown exponentially over the past decade.
Early this century, agricultural land was expanding by about 4 million hectares per year, but between 2006 and 2009 the average rose to 11.3 million hectares per year.
The World Bank (2010) has estimated that by 2030 an average of 6 million hectares of new land will be put into agricultural production each year.
According to the Land Matrix database (2012), between 2000 and 2010 about 50 million hectares were or had been announced as part of investment projects.
Although most such transactions take place in Africa, it is estimated that nearly 6.5 million hectares (13% of the worldwide total) correspond to land acquisitions in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Excluding forestry and conservation projects brings the overall number of hectares down to about 30 million, of which 4.3 million hectares (14% of the total) are in Latin America and the Caribbean.
A recent FAO study (2011) on agricultural land concentration and foreign land acquisition in Latin America and the Caribbean suggests that this phenomenon is in its infancy and is mainly concentrated in Argentina and Brazil.
In the study, which covers 17 countries of the region, the discussion of land grabbing is focused on States as investors in land.
The study looks at land deals that meet two conditions: they involve large areas targeted for the production of food, and at least one foreign government is among the actors or stakeholders.
Depending on the context in each country, the review extends to deals involving other crops and other investors.
It highlights codes of conduct or good practices aimed at mitigating negative externalities for the countries where the land deals take place and for the local population.
On the basis of the study it can be concluded that the region’s land market is growing briskly, especially since the 2007-2008 agricultural price crisis.
The total number of hectares (4.3 million) refers to 2000-2011, although the exact year of the deal could be determined for just 7% of this total. b Investors whose nationality is not specified in the Land Matrix database.
Santa Cruz thus accounts for 66% the 2.7 million hectares of land under cultivation in the Plurinational State of Bolivia (Urioste, 2011).
As noted above, much of the agricultural boom is directly related to the expansion of soybean farming, driven to a large part by land owners from Brazil who arrived in the Plurinational State of Bolivia in three waves.
The second, and largest, was between 1993 and 1999, when the government was promoting its Eastern Lowlands programme to encourage the use of very productive land and the development of infrastructure, thus expanding the supply of cheap fertile land (Urioste, 2011).
Lastly, since 2005 there has been a new wave of immigration from Brazil.
This time, however, it is not restricted so much to the soybean business but rather to the search for land for livestock (Urioste, 2011).
In addition to the Brazilians, recent years have brought reports of an equally large wave of immigrants from Argentina, although it is not known whether this relates to businesses with operations in Argentina or Brazil, private interests, or a combination of both (Urioste, 2011).
In addition to the high mobility of Brazilian farmers in the Southern Cone, there is an emerging trend: Brazilian growers are beginning to settle in Africa, drawn by similar agroecological conditions.
Since 2009, a number of major producers have been growing cotton, soybeans, rice and maize, among other crops, on land under concession from the Governments of Angola, Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, the Sudan and other countries (PIB, 2009; VOA, 2011).
This is taking place in the private sector, but it is associated with Brazil’s growing presence in Africa boosted by several government initiatives.
One of these is the Mais Alimentos programme coordinated by the Ministry of Agrarian Development (MDA), which is aimed at improving food and nutrition security in Ghana, Kenya, Mozambique, Senegal and Zimbabwe through lines of credit for the purchase of Brazilian agricultural machinery, which is particularly suited to family agriculture in Africa.
Offshoring agricultural activities is nothing new, but it is on the rise (Dirven, 2012).
The main migration flow is associated with the massive displacement of Brazilian farmers towards Argentina, Paraguay, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay.
Brazil was settled in waves once the population was established in the coastal areas, and the process continued towards central and north-eastern Brazil and then intensified in the south.
Because the country is much narrower there, settlers quickly reached the border areas with Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay.
In the 1970s these areas were sparsely populated, so it is not surprising that large-scale Brazilian farmers set up operations there and were followed by a large contingent of rural workers.
The process gathered momentum in the 1980s, leading to the current levels.
The largest contingent of small and medium-scale farmers went to Paraguay, drawn by the wide availability of land.
Smaller numbers moved into Argentina and Uruguay because less land was available and the cost was not as low.
The triple interaction between agroindustrial modernization, the gradual closing of the agricultural frontier and relatively flexible controls over the movement of persons allowed large contingents of itinerant workers to drift from one country to another across extensive stretches of the border (Galeano, 1997).
As new land was deforested, territory settled and an array of services set into motion, the Brazilians have consolidated a large-scale production model that is heavily industrialized but not very diversified; this has changed the production landscape and Brazil’s economy.
Although Argentina has laws that bar foreigners from settling in border areas, many small-scale Brazilian growers have done so.
But they have not radically changed the nature of the rural economy.
This is not the case in Uruguay, which is exposed to pressure on two fronts: from Argentina and Brazil.
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, one of the most recent cross-border movements has been in the department of Santa Cruz, which saw a surge towards the end of the twentieth century.
This department is one of the country’s richest, and in the past two decades its growth has outpaced the national rate.
Much of this growth has been fuelled by a boom in agricultural activity, which accounts for 56% of the department’s foreign trade.
Its main products are oilseeds, sugar, hides, timber, cotton, and vegetable oil and alcohol products (Urioste, 2011).
Modern Based on a review of the data used in the FAO study (2011), Borras and others (2012) conclude that at least 10 countries of the region —in addition to Argentina and Brazil— are seeing a surge in agricultural land deals.
According to these authors, the differences in how the data are interpreted lie in how agricultural land deals are defined and in the scope of the term “land grabbing”.
Borras and others (2012) emphasize that a large part of land deals in the region are being handled by trans-Latin companies with contacts and representatives in the country in question.
The figures from Paraguay provide an idea of the scale and pattern of agricultural land purchases.
Borras and others (2012) note that between 2006 and 2010, 1.8 million hectares of land were acquired by foreign companies, bringing the area under foreign ownership in Paraguay up to almost 6 million hectares.
Urioste (2011) stresses that of the 5.5 million hectares used to produce some kind of food, about 1 million hectares are in the hands of foreign nationals.
The existence of a similar dynamic in other countries (with deals that are not in the Land Matrix database) would mean that the data in figure III.4 might be understating the scale of land acquisition in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Moreover, the fact that the purchase of land by foreign nationals is defined and measured in different ways shows that it is more important to focus on trends rather than on exact numbers.
In any case, these differences cast light on the ongoing discussion of investment in and acquisition of agricultural land, which must be put into context in order to avoid comparing sources that use different methodologies.
The nature and interests of investors involved in the acquisition of land have changed, too.
On the one hand, the ranks of traditional investors (agricultural and agro-industry companies) whose primary goal is to ensure inputs for the production of food or fodder are being joined by a growing group of companies venturing into biofuel production.
On the other hand, public enterprises and mixed consortia financed by sovereign wealth funds (especially in Asian and Middle Eastern countries) are playing an ever larger role as they seek, among other things, to secure access to natural resources so as to offset their own limitations, avoid the impact of international agricultural price volatility or enhance their countries’ food self-sufficiency.
In addition, the financial crisis and the commodity price boom made investing in land and agro-commodities more attractive for investment banks and pension fund managers.
As a result, the actors interested in investing in agricultural land have grown more diverse; the long-term consequences remain to be seen.
Evidence submitted by Borras and others (2012) and Land Matrix data indicate that in Latin America and the Caribbean, trans-Latin companies operating in a variety of sectors account for most of the agricultural land deals where the origin of the investors is known.
However, the presence of these new actors and their interests should not be overlooked; even though their operations in the region are still incipient, their growing presence in the future could change how land and natural resources are used and have significant medium- and long-term impacts.
In that regard, it should be borne in mind that 37% per cent of the investments in purchasing or leasing land are from investors whose origin is unknown. 2.
In this new phase, the influence of the major agro-industrial processing and distribution transnationals is growing as they draw ever closer to the end consumer by managing globally recognized brands that go beyond food.
In addition to the consolidation of food industry mega-transnationals,7 a new generation of transnationals is emerging.
It includes new Asian commodities giants, Latin American transnationals (the agro-food trans-Latins) with an increasingly high global market profile, and much smaller, flexible and decentralized companies with high-quality (specialty) products.
The list of the 500 largest companies in Latin America and the Caribbean (América Economía, 2011) includes 51 agro-food companies (or agro-industry firms whose products target the food market).
Of these 51 companies, 23 are from Brazil, 15 from Mexico, 4 from Argentina, 4 from Peru, 3 from Chile and 2 from Colombia.
Brazil’s JBS-Friboi ranks first in the agro-food sector and is the ninth largest company in the region (see table III.2).
Of the 51 Latin American and Caribbean agro-food companies on the América Economía list, at least 21 are trans-Latins8 whose growth is based on successful mergers and acquisitions strategies not only in countries of the region but also in Canada, Europe and the United States (see point 1 in section D).
The strategy for growing through agro-industry mergers and acquisitions is favoured by the tighter regulation —national and global— of food production and distribution (and, more recently, by policy incentives for producing biofuels) because setting up subsidiaries and joint ventures or acquiring local enterprises creates economies of scale that make it easier to comply with these regulations.
From the point of view of economic content, food tends to be transformed into services: agricultural raw materials account for less than 20% of the value of the final product.
The rest comes from activities associated with industrial processing, packaging, shipping, marketing, financial services, insurance and taxes.
The reason for this trend is that in the new knowledge economy, food manufacturers not only sell food, but intangible goods and images as well in order to meet growing consumer demand for health, beauty, longevity, vitality, well-being and identity (Barrera, 2010).
At the international level, mergers and acquisitions in the agricultural and agro-industry (food processing) sector rose sharply worldwide during 2007-2008 (UNCTAD, 2009).
The net value of these transactions in the agricultural sector amounted to US $1.8 billion in 2007 and US $ 2.1 billion in 2008.
It is estimated that, in 2002, 27% of global food production was concentrated in the 100 largest transnational food corporations, mainly from the United States and Europe.
The same is true of the large transnational mega-companies that supply agricultural inputs (see point 2 in section C).
By contrast, it is still too early to tell whether biofuel mega-production will follow a similar trend.
In any case, the entry of companies such as BP and Shell could help reshape this sector in the same way if they decide to invest more in this area.
Companies were classed as trans-Latins if their web pages gave information on investments in the region (as of 15 January 2013).
Sales Ranking In short, the rearrangement of agro-industry chains is the result of mergers and acquisitions strategies employed by transnational corporations in order to compete in the global market.
These operations are influenced by competition among companies in each production sector and by multilateral agreements and policy instruments implemented by national governments.
These political and institutional frameworks are in turn very much determined by the dynamics of world agriculture.
For example, it is likely that rising agricultural prices in 2007-2008 curbed a general trend towards deregulation, as evidenced by the stalled Doha Round of World Trade Organization (WTO) talks.
Between 1989-1991 and 2005-2007, global FDI flows towards primary activities (agriculture, hunting, fishing and logging) and agro-industry operations (food, beverages and tobacco) quadrupled, driven by a number of factors including the liberalization of trade and capital flows, the consolidation of free trade agreements and the growth of emerging economies (UNCTAD, 2009).
The share of FDI going to the agro-food industry (food, beverages and tobacco), primarily from developed countries, did not change significantly during this period and went from 98% to 95%.
Meanwhile, the percentage of FDI towards the primary sector in developed countries plummeted from 91% to 52% because some developing countries began to generate important flows in this area (Rama and Martínez, 2012).
The UNCTAD report (2009) on FDI in agriculture stresses that, in relative terms, these flows are not significant in Latin America and the Caribbean and accounted for just 0.47% of the total between 2005 and 2007.
However, during this period these flows were important for some countries, ranging, for example, between 6% and 10% of the total in Ecuador, Peru, and Honduras and between 1% and 3% in Chile, Costa Rica and Brazil.
Moreover, all of these countries were listed in the top 20 recipients of FDI in agriculture among the countries considered in the study, and the region ranked second after Asia and Oceania as an FDI destination (UNCTAD, 2009).
The study shows that in South America, investment was concentrated in grains and oilseeds, fruit and meat, while in Central America and the Caribbean it was concentrated in fruit and sugar cane.
According to the study, the main draws for such investments include the structure of the economy, the diversity of agricultural land and national public policies.
This suggests that not all countries in the region have the same potential for boosting their agricultural sector or attracting FDI flows.
Noteworthy among the countries with the most potential are Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay, which have water in abundance and vast areas of available land.
These countries are seeking to leverage these resources so as to become major exporters of agricultural and agro-industry products, as indeed they already are in sugar, coffee, soybeans, wheat, orange juice, poultry meat, beef, tobacco, ethanol and biodiesel, among other products.
At the other extreme are the countries of the Caribbean, where the shortage of available land and slow growth in the sector have turned them into food importing countries.
Between these two extremes are the countries of Central America, Mexico and the Andean countries, many of which are constrained by, for example, more limited integration into the global market or a more fragmented agrarian structure with a high proportion of smallholders.
National statistics from the countries of the region on FDI flowing into the agricultural and agro-industry sector vary widely in availability.
In some countries, the data are not recorded separately; in countries where flows are recorded, they are grouped according to different criteria.
For example, some countries report agricultural FDI together with other primary activities (such as fishing).
Others include mining sector flows in the same account (Guatemala is one example).
In addition, FDI in agro-industry operations is often grouped with other industrial processes.
For this reason, analysing data on FDI in this sector poses a challenge that can be addressed only partially.
The analysis set out in this section is restricted to the countries that have statistics for agricultural activities or agro-industry operations.
The importance of agricultural FDI varies greatly from one economy to another (see figure III.6).
It also makes up a substantial proportion in Guatemala (12.5%), Costa Rica (7.3%) and Ecuador (7.2%).
As agricultural prices spiralled up in 2007-2008, the countries for which data are available saw rising FDI flows to the agricultural sector, particularly in Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Peru and Uruguay (see figure III.7).
Data on FDI by economic sector in Colombia and Ecuador include the fisheries subsector.
Data on FDI by economic sector in Central Bank of Chile national accounts only began to be issued in 2009.
Data prior to 2009 are estimates provided by the International Trade Center.
FDI targeting the agro-industry sector in these 10 countries averaged 8.3% of total inward FDI between 2005 and 2010 (US$ 517.217 billion), with the lowest percentages in Chile (0.3%) and Colombia (0.4%) and the highest in Uruguay (27.0%) and Argentina FDI flows to the agro-industry sector (see figure III.10) are growing at the fastest pace in Mexico and Brazil.
While the amounts of FDI flowing into the agricultural and agro-industry sector in Latin America and the Caribbean are not large compared with inward flows in other sectors, they do (especially those targeting agriculture) have a direct impact on rural economies and region-wide.
That impact can spread out to a large part of the population —especially in rural areas, where the population depends on this activity and where, in Latin America and the Caribbean, the poorest households tend to be (Rodríguez and Meneses, 2011).
Food-biofuel-fodder agro-commodities clusters Agro-commodities are agricultural products that are traded in large volumes on a global scale; their properties are standardized in the market because they are usually used as raw material for other production processes (Gibbons, 2009).
This section looks at a subgroup of agro-commodities which are termed “flex-crops” because they can be used for a variety of purposes (to make food, fodder or biofuels).
For this reason they are at the heart of the ongoing discussion about food security, energy supply and maintaining the environmental balance of the planet.
Diagram III.1 shows the interrelated uses of flex-crops in different sectors and their linkages in various markets.
Flex-crops, regardless of whether they are intended for producing food, fodder or biofuel, compete for the same basic agricultural inputs (land, water, seeds, fertilizers and fuel).
There is also a linkage between the biofuel market and the energy market, because the agro-energy business (like other alternative energies) will be profitable if fossil energy sources become less competitive or government policy promotes the use of cleaner energies, creating a synergy between agricultural markets and energy markets.
Another connection that has always existed but has grown stronger in recent years is between the financial markets and agricultural activity, especially in the wake of the 2008 financial crisis when rising agricultural prices drove international portfolio investment to diversify into this sector.
As will be seen, FDI in land, along with mergers and acquisitions in the flex-crop sector, are largely shaped by strategies in which the linkages described in diagram III.1 play a fundamental role.
Diagram III.1 Agricultural product uses and linkages to the inputs, food and energy markets Financial market (expansion of investment portfolios and financialization of agriculture) Food market (grains, oilseeds, sugar cane, beef, pork, poultry) production Agricultural inputs Fodder production Land, water, environmental services, seeds, fertilizers, energy, work, etc.
These crops are often called flex-crops because they can be used for making biofuels in addition to their traditional uses as food for human consumption and as fodder.
They account for a large part of total production in the region and, in the case of sugar cane and soybeans, worldwide. (i) Overview of agricultural production and the role of Latin America and the Caribbean Surging demand for grains, oilseeds and sugar cane in recent years is perhaps one of the major developments in global agriculture.
Latin America and the Caribbean is playing a leading role in both production and consumption.
In 2010, the countries of the region accounted for a large part of the global output of the agro-commodities examined in this section (see figure III.11), producing more than 50% of the world total for soybeans and sugar cane (as biofuel feedstocks) and fodder sorghum (important for the production of animal protein).
As can be seen in table III.3, a large portion of the world planted area is in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Growth of the area under cultivation between 2006 and 2010 took place largely in the Southern Cone; soybeans and sugar cane were the two crops that saw the most expansion (adding 5.3 million hectares and 2.8 million hectares, respectively).
The biggest increases were in Brazil: almost 100% in the case of sugar cane and 25% in the case of soybeans.
Argentina accounted for 53% of the region’s increase in the number of hectares planted in soybeans.
Latin America and the Caribbean produced 33.1 million tons of it in 2010.
Wheat production is concentrated in Argentina (44%), followed by Brazil (18%) and Mexico (11%).
In both Argentina and Brazil, the marketing chain is dominated by transnational companies specialized in the export of agricultural commodities.
Four transnationals (ADM, Bunge, Cargill and Louis Dreyfus) control as much as 90% of the world grain market.
The international press has dubbed these four multinationals or the “ABCD of food” (The Guardian, 2011).
It is not surprising, therefore, that the same companies operating in the wheat market in these countries also trade in the other agro-commodities discussed in this section.
In Argentina (the largest producer in the region and one of the top 10 worldwide), 8 companies alone accounted for almost 90% of wheat exports.
For example, in Argentina in 2001 Bunge acquired La Plata Cereal, one of the country’s largest food companies, with operations in wheat and soybean processing, the industrial production of fertilizers, and port facilities.
With this acquisition Bunge improved its position in the wheat chain and became the largest soybean processor in Argentina.
The top exporters were Argentina and Brazil, with 17.5 million tons and 10.8 million tons, respectively.
The main foreign investors in maize production are agrochemical companies seeking to plant genetically modified maize and companies interested in using maize to make ethanol.
In Mexico, Monsanto, DuPont and Dow requested government authorization to plant 2.5 million hectares of genetically modified maize in different parts of the country.
Investment plans are being reviewed because the area involved is so large and because a number of scientists have put forth arguments stressing the risks entailed, given that Mexico is a global repository of maize genetic diversity (for more information on this deal, see point 2 of section D).
In Argentina in 2012, Monsanto announced a US$ 329 million investment to set up two experimental genetically modified maize facilities in Córdoba and Tucumán.
It is expected that operations will start in 2013 and produce enough seeds to plant 3.5 million hectares.
After this investment come five other facilities to grow maize and make biofuel (ethanol), and the German agricultural equipment company CLAAS is planning to set up a factory in the area.
The nature of the investments reflects both the versatility of this crop and the growing demand for biofuel production.
In Argentina there were nearly 11 projects (currently being processed) that could sharply increase the production of maize for ethanol in order to raise the ethanol content of gasoline from 4% to 10%.
One of the key players in this field is Bio4 (in Córdoba), a company that produces 80,000 tons of maize ethanol.
Maize and sorghum ethanol output is expected to rise to 1.3 million tons by 2015.
Investments in sorghum are increasingly combined with investments in other crops, especially other grains.
Investment in sorghum is combined with the construction of silos and fodder processing plants.
Another case, which was reported in the press and recorded by Land Matrix, is the Saudi conglomerate Al-Khorayef, which in 2011 signed an agreement with the government of Chaco province in Argentina for a US$ 400 million investment in growing sorghum and other crops on 200,000 hectares.
Also in 2011, the Indian- and Malaysian-owned Walbrook Group investment firm invested in close to 600,000 hectares in Argentina to be operated under a sublease arrangement (Iberoamerican Observatory of Asia-Pacific, 2011).
The purpose of the investment is to meet the demand for grain in countries such as India with scarce water resources and a large population.
They are the underpinning of emerging integrated agroindustries that can produce soybeans, raw oil, refined oil, flour, pellet feed and biodiesel.
For this reason, soybeans have drawn the interest of foreign and domestic investors in the region.
They are part of a highly complementary crop rotation production system alongside wheat and maize, forming a production complex with a specific technical rationale.
It is for this reason that the production modernization trends for soybeans are seen in the other crops in the rotation.
In 2010, Argentina had 18 million hectares planted under soybeans and produced 52.6 million tons, of which 13.6 million tons (US$ 4.99 billion) were exported as beans.
Thanks to advanced crushing equipment (solvent extraction), Argentina’s soybean crushing plants are large and highly automated, which makes them very competitive compared with their peers in Brazil and the United States.
With the exception of Argentina, most soybeans produced in the region are exported unprocessed.9 Argentina’s soybean market has been changing quickly since the 1990s, with transnational corporations gaining more of a foothold.
After Brazil’s Ceval bought the local company Guipeba in 1995, the family enterprise Oleaginosa Moreno was bought by the Swiss multinational Glencore in 1997.
During the 2000s, the largest crushing companies continued to invest and reached approximately US$ 450 million in 2005-2006, plus more than US$ 900 million in complementary investments in logistics and port infrastructure.
Leading this expansion was the transnational Bunge (currently the largest processor in the country, whose new facility was to have a daily processing capacity of 30,000 metric tons), followed by Cargill, local groups AGD and Molinos Río de la Plata and the European transnational Louis Dreyfus Commodities LDC).
By the late 2000s, 81% of crushing capacity was concentrated in five companies (Bunge, Cargill, Molinos Río de la Plata, Vicentin and LDC), four of which are foreign-owned (see table III.4).
This trend could steepen over the next few years, given the growing interest of Chinese enterprises in venturing into the sector.
For example, in 2011 the State-owned giant Heilongjiang Beidahuang Nongken Group Company tried to break into the direct production of grain and other food by leasing 300,000 hectares of land.
To this end it entered negotiations with the province of Río Negro for a planned investment of US$ 1.5 billion.
This operation has been on hold for the past few months because of political fallout from the deal.
The strategy for attracting investments seems to have been changed recently in order to focus on investing in industrial facilities and infrastructure (Nelson, 2012).
During the 2007 season, Brazil processed just 52% of its soybean output while Argentina processed 71% as soybean flour and oil.
Investors from other economic sectors recruit know-how, rent equipment and machinery, lease land and make intensive use of new technologies such as direct seeding and soybean double-cropping, as well as new inputs packages based on genetically engineered seeds (Roundup Ready, or RR, soybeans), partner herbicides (glyphosate) and fertilizer.
Although there are no systematic data, it is estimated that significant FDI flows are being channelled through the system to Argentina’s soybean sector.
This model has allowed the emergence of large producers that have expanded their operations in Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay.
Soybeans and soybean products are one of Brazil’s main agricultural exports, totalling 25.8 million tons in 2010.
Brazil has great potential for expanding the area planted with soybeans, which depends in part on the possibility of improving livestock grassland management because much rangeland is severely degraded.
Increasing the animal load from 1 head per hectare to 1.4 head per hectare could free up 30 million hectares for soybeans.
Producing areas are quite some distance from the ports, and inadequate roads, railways and waterways have driven the cost of freight up sharply (US$ 150 per ton from Matto Grosso).
That is why the federal government is promoting a major public works plan to improve infrastructure.
Another highly sensitive matter (involving soybeans and other crops) has to do with deforestation in the Amazon region.
To address this problem, environmental regulations are being tightened and government initiatives (such as the Land Registry and Agrarian Regularization Programme and the Satellite Monitoring Programme) are being launched to bolster enforcement.
In Brazil there are 101 soybean processing plants with a crushing capacity of 143,515 tons per day.
A number of foreign firms are long established in Brazil’s soybean market.
For example, the United States multinational Bunge, which entered business in 1905, bought Cavalcanti & Cia in 1923 and then acquired other firms to expand throughout Brazil.
The French multinational Louis Dreyfus has had interests in Brazil since the early twentieth century, and in 1942 bought Comércio e Industrias Brasileiras (Coinbra).
More recently, between 1995 and 2002, ADM (United States) acquired the soybean operations of the local companies Sadia, Granja Rezende and J.B.
A substantial portion of Brazil’s soybeans is exported in bean form, owing to two factors.
First, there is a tax (ICMS) on transporting production between states for processing.
Second, the importing countries, particularly China, have soybean meal and oil plants.
Many of these plants are owned by the same transnationals that operate in Brazil, meaning that there is a good deal of intra-company trade.
This arrangement also works against the consolidation of major Brazilian companies in the global market.
Even so, Amaggi Exportação e Importação Ltda (part of the Maggi group) has been operating in Argentina since 2010, has representation offices in the Netherlands and controls the Norwegian company Denofa (which distributes non-GMO soybeans in the Scandinavian countries).
In 2010 the area planted with soybeans in the Plurinational State of Bolivia stood at 922,115 hectares; soybean output was 1.9 million tons.
According to data from the National Association of Oilseed and Wheat Producers (ANAPO), there are 14,000 soybean producers in the country; 2% (300 farms) are large, 20% (2,800 farms) are medium-sized and 78% (11,000 farms) are small.
Of the major producers, approximately 90% are foreign-owned, mainly by Brazilians and Argentines and, to a lesser extent, by Peruvians and by Mennonite and Japanese settlers who arrived in the 1950s.10 In 2005, Shanghai Pengxin Group acquired 12,500 hectares to grow soybeans, maize and sorghum.
It is estimated that 700,000 hectares are owned by Brazilian, Argentine, Peruvian and Colombian agro-industry firms, most of which is being used to grow genetically modified soybeans (Urioste, 2011).
These own an estimated 40% of the land under cultivation (Pérez, 2008).
The Bolivian vegetable oil industry has an installed storage capacity of nearly 800,000 metric tons per year, plus another 200,000 metric tons per year of capacity owned by service companies and individual soybean growers.
The industrial sector is export-oriented and operates through seven processing plants with a combined installed processing capacity of 1,916,000 metric tons per year.
During the 2010-2011 season, Paraguay’s planted area stood at 2.9 million hectares, production volume was 8.6 million tons and exports totalled US $ 2.29 billion.
Of the total soybean area, 87% is concentrated in farms with more than 100 hectares.
Ninety percent of Paraguay’s soybeans and grain is stored and shipped by the major multinationals operating in Brazil and Argentina.
In response to restrictions on exporting Paraguayan soybeans through the Rosario soybean oil complex imposed by the Government of Argentina in 2011, the international companies ADM, Bunge and Louis Dreyfus are investing US$ 280 million in setting up large export-oriented soybean oil plants in Paraguay.
These plants will push soybean processing capacity above the 4-million-ton mark and triple current export capacity to 760,000 tons of oil.
Paraguay is thus seeking to produce more than the European Union and take the place of the United States as the third largest producer of soybean oil, behind Argentina and Brazil (América Economía, 2012).
This growth has been fuelled by Argentine soybean producers, drawn by the low cost of land (between US$ 2,000 per hectare and US$ 5,000 per hectare of good quality land versus US$ 10,000 per hectare in Argentina) and the lack of export taxes.
Argentines make up 54% of all soybean growers in Uruguay; six companies, most of which are partially or wholly foreign-owned, work approximately 25% of the agricultural area.
Uruguay does not process soybeans; exports are highly concentrated in foreign companies.
In the mid-2000s, the five largest accounted for 77% of exports: the United States firms ADM (21.5%) and Cargill (18.6%); Argentina’s Agronegocios del Plata (15%) and Pérez Companc (11%); and Uruagri (10.6%), which is owned by the France-based Dreyfus Group (Zibechi, 2008).
Palm oil The region’s top producers of oil palm fruit are the Central American countries (36%), Colombia (26%), Ecuador (15%) and Brazil (11%).
In Colombia and Guatemala, investment in palm oil has been led by local enterprises and, to a lesser extent, by foreign companies (see table III.5).
Company profiles in Colombia show that most of the palm oil output is used for making biofuels.
According to the same source, in Peru the company Pure Biofuels (based in the United States) acquired 74,000 hectares to produce biofuel palm oil.
Sugar cane In 2010 the region produced 990 million tons of sugar cane.
The region’s largest producer is Brazil (75% of the regional total); half of this output is for domestic production of ethanol (see figure III.12).
In most cases output is for domestic consumption; only the surplus is exported because the sector is still protected (MECON, 2011).
In Brazil, the main draw for FDI in sugar cane is the policy for promoting the use of ethanol that has been in place since the 1970s, although investments did not skyrocket until the mid-2000s.
Since then, Brazilian companies have consolidated their position and restructured operations with the aim of capturing investment flows towards the sector.
Their strategy included the sale of shares on the Brazilian stock exchange, which provided an opportunity for foreign investors to acquire majority and minority stakes.
As a result, the foreign-owned sugar mills that were processing less than 1% of the sugar cane produced in Brazil were handling 12% by 2008.
Including the sugar mills in which foreign shareholders have a minority holding brings the proportion up to 23%.
At the national level, one third of the industry is controlled by the groups Cosan, Crystalsev and Copersucar (GRAIN, 2009).
Another sector heavyweight is Monsanto, which in 2007 partnered with CanaVialis and Allelyx to develop varieties of sugar cane that are genetically engineered to be glyphosate-tolerant.
In late 2008 Monsanto purchased the two companies for US$ 280 million and began to grow sugar cane directly.
Another company that gained media attention was India’s largest sugar refiner and alcohol distiller, Shree Renuka Sugars, which acquired 130,000 hectares in Brazil in 2010 (GRAIN, 2009).
To address them, a number of programmes and regulations have been implemented in Brazil.
Among the most ambitious ones is the Agro-environmental Protocol of the State of São Paulo, signed in 2007 by the private sector and the government.
The protocol seeks to end the practice of burning cane fields by mechanizing the harvest, as well as to protect waterside forests, control erosion and promote best practices in land use.
In Tucumán, most growers work less than 50 hectares (91% of the growers cover 28% of the area).
In Jujuy, farms with more than 500 hectares make up 89% of the sugar cane area and are owned by 15% of the growers).
In recent years, the trend has been towards greater integration and concentration of sugar cane operations, entailing increased crop mechanization (MECON, 2011).
The five main economic groups involved in growing sugar cane produce more than 65% of the total (see table III.6).
Other countries with substantial FDI transactions related to sugar cane growing are Cuba and Guatemala.
In Cuba, the Brazilian company Odebrecht Agroindustrial will be the first foreign company to own one of the Cuban sugar mills that were nationalized in 1959 (La Nación, Argentina, 10 November 2012).
Odebrecht is part of Grupo Odebrecht, which specializes in large infrastructure projects and is also in charge of the US$ 800 million Mariel port construction project.
A stake in Odebrecht Agroindustrial (14.97%) is owned by the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) and the firm has conducted operations in Angola in addition to Cuba.
Since 2011, it has been engaged in discussions with the Sudanese sugar company Kenana for building an ethanol plant as work proceeds on a port facility (ANBA, 2011).
The sugar agro-industry is one of the most dynamic in Guatemala, growing at an average annual rate of 11% over the past few years.
The Grupo Pellas acquisition in Guatemala was controversial because of social tension and conflict as to the use of land.
Ethanol from sugar-rich crops like sugar cane and maize makes up 82% of the total; 18% is biodiesel from oilseed crops like soybeans, canola (rapeseed) and palm oil.
According to OECD- FAO data (2012), global production of bioethanol and biodiesel is expected to almost double by 2021 and will be largely concentrated in Brazil, the United States and the European Union.
By 2021, biofuel production is forecast to be consuming a growing proportion of global sugar cane (34%), vegetable oil (16%) and coarse grain (14%) output.
As for Latin America and the Caribbean, ethanol production in Brazil dates back to the 1930s and received a boost in 1975 with the launch of Brazil’s Alcohol Fuel Programme (PROALCOOL) (BNDES-CGEE-ECLAC-FAO, 2009).
In 2010, Brazil produced 27.5 billion litres of ethanol; 15% was exported and the rest went to the domestic market to cover more than 50% of the country’s gasoline consumption (REN21, 2009).
Other countries, such as Costa Rica, Guatemala, El Salvador and Trinidad and Tobago have been producing ethanol for a number of years, spurred by preferential access for their exports of hydrous ethanol to the United States (often after first importing it from Brazil in dehydrated form).
Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay are starting to produce ethanol; Mexico does not have enough production capacity to meet domestic demand despite having the technological know-how for producing sugar-cane ethanol.
Production is expected to continue to climb in the coming years in view of the European Union’s target of replacing 10% of fuel consumption with biodiesel by 2020.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, Argentina has a consolidated industry that, at 13.1% of global output in 2010, ranked second after the United States (14.3%).
Argentina produces biodiesel primarily for the external market, although since 2010 the petroleum companies are subject to a 5% biofuel blending mandate under Law 26.093.
Other than Brazil and Argentina, the other countries of Latin America and the Caribbean still play a very limited role in biofuel production (Dufey and Stange, 2011).
Therefore, the paragraphs below focus on FDI flows towards ethanol and biodiesel production in Brazil and Argentina. (ii) Foreign direct investment in biofuel production in Latin America and the Caribbean Brazil has a long history of innovation-driven technological development combined with regulatory policies to encourage the use of ethanol in the automotive sector (BNDES-CGEE-ECLAC-FAO, 2009).
A key part of this policy makes a certain level (20%, rising to 25% as of May 2013) of anhydrous ethanol obligatory in gasoline and requires the design of vehicles able to use hydrous ethanol, which is used in the pure state (flex-fuel vehicles).
Other part of these policies sought to deregulate the sector in the 1990s, when policies setting prices and production volume, subsidies and financial support were removed so that the sector would operate under market conditions.
This objective has been fully attained, but the transition to the new situation entailed a profound restructuring of the chain.
Many foreign companies took advantage of this to establish operations in Brazil by acquiring existing production plants.
Among many such transactions between 1995 and 2002 were the purchase of Guarani by Béghin-Say (France and Italy); the purchase of Usina Portobello by Glencore (Switzerland); the purchase of Usina Cresciumal and Luciânia by Luis Dreyfus (Coinbra) (France); and the purchase of Univalem and seven other plants by Tate & Lyle (United States) (Benetti, 2004).
This process continued in the following years, as the purchase of new enterprises and the creation of new units gathered momentum.
But the global economic crisis that began in 2008 brought a slowdown and times of greater caution that persist to date (Pinto, 2011).
Between 2003 and 2008, Cargill ventured into the sugar business by purchasing a 64% equity stake in the local company Cevasa, followed by the purchase of 43.7% of Usina Itapagipe Açúcar e Álcool, which was sold to Bunge in 2010.
Bunge also entered the sugar sector during this period, purchasing Usina Santa Juliana together with the Triunfo group in 2007.
In 2008, Bunge acquired sugar marketer Tate & Lyle and thereby became one of the country’s major exporters.
That same year it acquired a 60% equity interest in the Monte Verde plant and built the Pedro Afonso plant; in 2009 it purchased Moemapar, a holding company that is part of Grupo Moema, which owns a number of plants.
With a processing capacity of 20 million tons of sugar cane per season, it ranks fifth in the sector.
The United States company ADM bought part of the assets of Grupo Cabrera, which at the time owned a plant under construction (CCEA) as well as a greenfield plant project (Jataí) that ultimately was not built.
During this period there was much other movement in the sector, where other transnational corporations as well as investment funds are active (Pinto, 2011).
In 2008, 23.27% of Brazil’s production capacity was wholly- or partially-owned by foreign companies.
The proportion increased in the following years, gauging by the large number of projects in the construction phase at that time (see table III.7).
According to industry analysts, this process is likely to speed up considerably.
Projections provided by representatives of the Brazilian Sugarcane Industry Association (UNICA) indicate that within the next five years, 40% of Brazilian production will be in foreign hands, with the major global petroleum companies accounting for more mergers and acquisitions than agricultural groups.
Indeed, at the World Ethanol Conference held in Geneva in 2010, companies such as Shell, BP and Petrobras announced millions of dollars in investment in the sector, as they believe that biofuels are the “most realistic” option for complementing petroleum over the next 30 years.
According to the same sources, these investments could reach US$ 20 billion over the next few years.
Petrobras announced that it would partner with foreign groups to invest US$ 3.5 billion in the ethanol sector in order to expand production by 193% and exports by 135% in the coming years.
Petrobras has already signed an agreement with the French multinational Tereos to turn Guaraní, controlled by the latter, into a sector leader by investing US$ 2.4 billion before year-end 2013.
Shell has plans to invest US$ 12 billion in a joint venture with Cosan to create the first multinational in the sector (Chade, 2010).
This operation was authorized by Brazil’s antitrust regulators in December 2012 and led to the creation of Raizen, which will produce and sell more than 2 billion litres per year of ethanol made from Brazilian sugar cane.
In addition, Raizen will distribute more than 20 billion litres per year of other industrial and transport fuels through a network of some 4,500 Shell service stations and thus become the third largest fuel company in Brazil.
Along the same lines, the British oil company BP acquired 100% of Brazil’s Tropical Bioenergia in 2011 and announced, in December 2012, its intention to invest US$ 350 million in expanding production capacity.
The plants are Catanduva and Potirendaba, with a capacity of 4.6 million tons and 3.4 million tons per year, respectively. (Catanduva also has a refinery for producing coarse sanding sugar and refined white sugar.) The purpose of the operation is to increase sugar cane processing volume (both ethanol and sugar) from 740,000 tons to 1.34 million tons.
In another recent high-profile operation, Brazil’s Copersucar and Eco-Energy of the United States were to merge their international ethanol trading operations to achieve a 12% share of the global market (Fedebiocombustibles, 2012).
Biodiesel production in Argentina leverages the country’s competitive advantages for growing soybeans, and, to a lesser extent, other oilseed crops like sunflowers, maize, sorghum, canola (rapeseed), safflowers and castor beans.
According to official data, biodiesel exports reached a record 1.7 million tons in 2011, with an approximate value of US$ 1.5 billion (Hilbert, Sbarra and López Amorós, 2012).
Most industrial facilities were built after 2007, making this an industry in the development phase.
Like the vegetable oil industry, the biodiesel industry is based on a very small number of companies, many of them with modern technologies, a high degree of innovation and a large processing capacity (Adreani, 2008).
Unlike Brazil, Argentina has just recently rolled out a strategy for promoting biofuels by means of a law encouraging production and use (Law 26.093, enacted in 2006) and a sliding-scale withholding tariff on proceeds from soybean complex exports.
The sliding-scale withholding system encouraged exports, as did a US$ 300 per ton export rebate in the United States.12 In 2009, when the subsidy for products aimed at the external market was eliminated, the United States stopped purchasing Argentine biodiesel.
Production was therefore redirected towards European Union countries Agricultural production research programmes (direct seeding, genetics, agrochemical management, mechanization) developed by the National Institute for Agricultural Technology (INTA) and international seed companies have also contributed to the emergence of this industry.
Other factors have been an established vegetable oil industry and a developed infrastructure (ports and roads) network.
All of this paved the way for multinational biofuel companies to make a rapid entry, putting the sector in an ideal position for further development.
United States companies imported biodiesel from Argentina, modified it minimally, re-exported it to the European Union and collected the rebate.
In addition to these large companies there are small and medium-sized enterprises initially started up by the Government of Argentina.
There are some questions as to the future of FDI in Argentina’s biodiesel chain.
Agro-environmental impacts on natural resources and human health (toxicity, carcinogenic and reproductive effects, mutagenic impact and food contamination are some of the issues discussed in the academic literature on the prolonged use of glyphosate), together with positive effects such as the widespread use of direct soybean seeding, which reduces erosion and improves soil management.
Another concern is the socioeconomic impact of the soybean expansion model in Argentina, which is based entirely on genetically modified seeds (Roundup-Ready) that are tolerant to the glyphosate used for weed control.
In addition, soybean expansion leads to mono-cropping, displacement of beef and dairy livestock farming to marginal, lower-yield land and the depopulation of rural areas.
Argentina has begun to develop an ethanol industry based on maize and sorghum, drafting legislation (Law 26.334) seeking to bring the ethanol content of petrol up from the current 4% to 10% by 2014 as new industrial plants are authorized over the next few years and the local automotive industry makes the requisite technical changes.
Developing Colombia’s biofuel industry is part of a State policy geared towards producing bioethanol for domestic consumption while generating benefits for rural areas and providing alternatives to growing illegal crops.
Ethanol production in Colombia has been driven by the major sugar mills located in the south-west of the country (Proexport Colombia, 2012) with an installed capacity of more than 1 million litres per day from 40,742 hectares planted in sugar cane.
Ethanol projects under development by foreign companies are expected to start operating in the next few years, increasing daily capacity by 1.5 million litres.
Among these companies, Israel’s Merhav is to invest an estimated US$ 300 million and expects to produce 376,000 litres of ethanol per day.
According to Fedepalma, there are 54 crude palm oil extraction plants in Colombia with an installed production capacity of 1.8 million litres per day.
There are also seven biodiesel refineries in the country, of which two are owned by foreign companies: Odin Energy Santa Marta Corporation (Japan) and Clean Energy (Great Britain), which together make up 14% of daily installed capacity.
Maple Energy plc is an energy project development company that is listed on the Lima and London stock exchanges and has assets and operations in Peru.
In July 2012 it launched an automotive ethanol project (Maple Ethanol) developed with an investment of more than US$ 275 million.
The project includes one of the most modern biofuel plants in the world, with the capacity to process up to 5,000 tons of sugar cane per day and produce 35 million gallons of ethanol per year.
To supply the plant, the company owns 13,500 hectares in Piura Region, which are gradually being changed over from uncultivated land to a highly productive sugar cane plantation with drip irrigation and mechanical harvesting.
The company has pledged to provide technical and credit support for planting sugar cane on 1,250 hectares of land owned by neighbouring farmers who want to voluntarily switch over from growing rice, and to buy the sugar cane produced on 1,000 hectares owned by growers in the area surrounding the complex (Proinversión Perú, 2012).
The Maple Ethanol project is an example of the trend that is leading energy sector companies to venture into ethanol production.
As for Guatemala, in 2007, Spain’s CIE Automotive, through its subsidiary Bionor Transformación, acquired a 51% equity stake in Biocombustibles de Guatemala, which is engaged in jatropha research and development13 and in making biodiesel from jatropha seed oil and used vegetable oil.
The firm also bought, for US$ 3 million, the San Francisco-La Canoa farm in Chiquimula Department, which has 473 hectares under cultivation.
In 2009 the United States company Sirona Fuels invested US$ 103.7 million in Haiti to launch a jatropha production programme that would mean 1,367 jobs for small growers who will retain ownership of their land while receiving technical assistance and support from the company for the purchase of inputs.
The investment has a high social impact: the company partnered with the non-profit 3C Missions to coordinate a support centre for nearly 1,000 orphaned children.
The Sirona Fuels investment in Haiti is an example of the potential for agricultural investments to contribute to job creation in rural areas and support vulnerable groups.
Besides helping improve the socioeconomic conditions of this group of growers in Haiti, the company has enhanced its socially responsible image in the market.
Jatropha (Jatropha sp.) is a seed oil plant that grows in most tropical countries.
These innovations increased beef production by some 15% over the past decade, to nearly 65 million tons in 2011 (ECLAC-FAO-IICA, 2012).
Population growth and changing consumption patterns in emerging countries, especially those where income has been on the rise, have contributed substantially to this growth.
A few countries dominate the production of beef cattle, sheep and poultry: 75% of the global cattle herd is concentrated in India (324.4 million head), Brazil (197.5 million head), China (104 million head), United States (91.4 million head) and the European Union (85.7 million head) (USDA, 2012).
Four Latin American countries (Argentina, Brazil, Colombia and Mexico) have cattle herds equal to 28.8% of the world total (see figure III.13).
Both production and consumption are concentrated in these countries, although they do maintain trade flows in international markets because of the variety of cuts required for different markets.
Brazil is the fourth largest producer of pigs worldwide (behind China, the European Union and the United States), with 3.2% per cent of global output.
Brazil is the world’s third largest producer of poultry meat (after the United States and China), with an output of 12.8 million tons in 2011.
Combined, Brazil, Mexico and Argentina account for 21.9% of the world total.
Brazil is the leading exporter (34.4%), together with the United States (33.9%).
The main importers of poultry meat are Japan and Saudi Arabia, with almost 20% of the worldwide total. (ii) Leading companies in the meat chain The position of the United States as the leading producer of beef and pork rests on four major multinational corporations (Tyson Foods, Cargill Meat, JBS USA and National Beef).
Together, these firms account for 67% of the beef cattle slaughter volume and more than 50% of the swine slaughter volume worldwide.14 JBS USA and Smithfield Foods are the United States affiliates of the Brazilian group JBS-Friboi, which is the largest transnational meatpacker in the world.
JBS USA is the top meat exporter in the United States and a major player in the United States market as well, where has a 22% share.
With this purchase, JBS sought to enhance its position in the United States market, build synergies and cut costs.
These large transnational groups produce and market almost all the traditional animal species (beef cattle, swine, sheep and poultry).
Their production strategies are geared towards vertical integration of the meat chain, seeking not only greater production efficiency but also, above all, consistent quality standards in keeping with animal safety regulations and environmental requirements that are increasingly stringent and uniform across countries.
There is a direct link between the production of agro-commodities for fodder and the production of animal protein.
The major recipients of FDI in the region’s meat chains are Argentina and Uruguay, and to a lesser extent, Mexico, Paraguay, Colombia and Chile.
Meat chains (beef, pork and poultry) can generally be broken into four major phases: technical support and services for the primary producers; breeding, grow-out and finishing; processing; and trading (see box III.3).
Identifying the main market actors in each phase shows the role that trans-Latin companies play in FDI in the meat chain in Brazil and other countries of the region.
Brazil became a major exporter of beef after the mad cow disease (bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE)) crisis in Europe in the early 1990s.
Brazil’s meat market is now dominated by four agro-industry groups: JBS-Friboi, Marfrig, BRF and Minerva, whose origins, strategies and investment flows are discussed below.
With approximately 135,000 employees, it has production and distribution facilities in Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Mexico, Paraguay, the United States and Uruguay,15 in addition to trade offices across all continents.
In 2011 the firm’s 286 production units had a daily slaughter capacity of 149,800 head (beef cattle, swine and sheep), plus 7.2 million birds in the United States alone.
Twenty-four per cent of the slaughter volume is for export; 64% of the net profit is from the beef business.
According to the group’s 2011 annual report, 24% of net profits are generated in South America, 73% in Australia and the United States, and the remaining 3% in other regions of the world.
JBS-Friboi began operations in 1953, with a small facility with a slaughter capacity of five head daily.
Between 1981 and 2002 the company began to expand aggressively through acquisitions and greenfield investments that boosted its capacity to 5,000 head per day.
Growth has soared since 2004, thanks to the purchase of a 50% stake in BF Brasil, the creation of JBS S.A. and the acquisition of Swift Armour S.A. (Argentina’s largest producer and exporter of beef).
Years later it expanded operations in Argentina through the acquisition of two refrigeration companies (Venado Tuerto and Pontevedra) and two additional units (Berazategui and Caroya).
Together with Australia’s VION Food Group, JBS-Friboi purchased the lamb processor Tatiara Meat Company, and it entered a partnership agreement with Brazil’s leading dairy product company, the Bertin group.16 With these acquisitions, JBS-Friboi consolidated its international platform across all segments of the meat chain.
Along the way, US$ 80 million in financial support from Brazil’s National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES) was key to enabling JBS-Friboi to start globalizing its operations by buying Argentina’s Swift Armour for US$ 200 million.
This funding enabled BNDES to acquire a 31% stake in JBS-Friboi through the former’s investment management arm BNDESPAR.
In Argentina, JBS-Friboi has a slaughter capacity of 3,750 head per day (Bisang and others, 2008).
This merger was not completed until 2011 and involved the takeover of Italy’s Rigamonti and the acquisition of the refrigeration company Canelones.
Companies in related fields (suppliers of fertilizers, seeds and mineral salts) are equally important.
The volume of business in Brazil’s animal husbandry sector stood at some US $ 1.46 billion annually in 2008.
Of this total, supplying foot-and-mouth disease vaccines alone accounted for nearly 16% per cent, with sales of US$ 234 million (324 million doses) in 2008.
Another 30% of vaccine output is absorbed by the swine and poultry industry, with antiparasitics, antimicrobials, biological supplements and other products making up the rest.
As is the case with other components of the meat industry chain, the sector is highly concentrated.
The five largest companies account for nearly 66% of total sales (Consoli and others, 2009).
In terms of production volume and revenue, supplying grain for producing concentrate feed is without doubt the most important economic activity in this stage of the chain.
In 2008, grain production for animal feed in Brazil reached 59 million tons, representing 8% of global output.
About 80% goes to the poultry and swine industry (55.7% and 25.9%, respectively).
Only 12.5% is for beef cattle, which are raised on Brazil’s vast pasturelands.
Only a very small proportion is feedlot-raised, although this type of production has been growing strongly in recent years.
Breeding, grow-out and finishing (formation of raw materials) Breeding and finishing operations prior to slaughter involve small and medium-sized “independent” producers who primarily target the domestic market, as well as integrated or contract farmers who work under an agreement with the processor.
It is estimated that 68% of the entire swine herd is integrated with the industry under some kind of contract, while the remaining 32% is essentially subsistence pig farming.
As in the pig industry, the poultry and beef cattle industry is extensive, although productivity varies among the producing areas in the country.
Beef production is spread over the southern states of Mato Grosso and Mato Grosso do Sul, the state of Goias in the central region and the state of Pará in the north.
Brazil’s vast natural pasturelands make extensive livestock farming less costly and therefore more widely practiced in these areas.
However, intensive livestock operations in feedlots have been growing despite the higher cost (soybean and maize prices have been rising in recent years) because little land is needed and the risk of changing seasons is minimized, especially when the pasturage is not good.
In addition, operations of this kind are more production technology-intensive, which makes for higher per-area yields.
The Brazilian livestock sector is facing major environmental challenges because it has traditionally operated in agricultural frontier areas where there are many informal producers.
A recent National Institute for Space Research (INPE) study noted that this activity takes up 62.2% of the deforested areas in the Legal Amazon (Dias de Aguiar, 2012).
This is on top of pressure from crops like soybeans and sugar cane in regard to the use of grasslands for agriculture.
This, plus consumer demand for sustainable meat and concern among NGOs and government agencies over deforestation and the invasion of indigenous lands, is behind a drive to rearrange this chain.
The private sector has established a working group on sustainable livestock farming under The Global Roundtable for Sustainable Beef, in order to develop new protocols and environmental standards.
This is a major undertaking, because in addition to commitment by companies, it requires addressing the lack of information on property lines and the problems arising from legal insecurity of land tenure.
The State must be involved in dealing with these issues (Sampaio, s.f.).
Processing Beyond the differences between the poultry, swine and beef cattle production systems, the industrial processing of meat essentially comes down to two steps.
The first involves the chilling plant where the animals are slaughtered; the second is the facility where fresh and frozen cuts are prepared for commercial distribution, both at the domestic level and for export.
Marketing At the end of the chain is a complex network of supermarkets, fast-food chains, food service companies, butcher’s shops and exporters seeking to deliver a quality product to the end consumer.
This concern as to meeting consumer demand for high quality, healthier and environmentally friendly products has led large meat industry operators to venture into the marketing stage of the chain as well, particularly by establishing production partnerships with marketing chains.
For example, as Grupo Marfrig entered the United States market it acquired Keystone Foods to ensure that its products were placed in the fast-food chains McDonald’s and Subway, among other companies belonging to Keystone Foods.
The Brazil Foods group (BRF) dates back to 1934 and the Perdigão marketing firm, which was acquired by eight pension funds in 1990.
The entry of these pension funds entailed a drastic change in company management and paved the way for its consolidation as a transnational.
Just five of the eight original funds retain a stake in the company, holding 27.5%.
In May 2009, a partnership agreement between Perdigão and the food producer Sadia led to the birth of Brazil Foods.
The merger made the group the tenth largest company in the region, with annual revenue of nearly US$ 10 billion and some 130,000 employees.
For the US$ 722 million operation to be cleared by Brazil’s anti-trust Administrative Council for Economic Defense (CADE), BRF had to sell off 10 plants, 4 slaughterhouses and 8 distribution centres, among other facilities.
In 2011 BRF expanded its operations in Argentina by acquiring a 69% stake in the poultry company Avex S.A. through its subsidiary Sadia Alimentos S.A. for US$ 55.3 million.
BRF has plans to invest in building a processing plant in the United Arab Emirates and set up a joint venture with China’s Dah Chong Hong Holdings Limited to market its products in China (BRF, 2011).
It dates back to 1986, with the opening of a frozen meat, vegetables and fish distribution centre in the state of São Paulo.
Between 2000 and 2006 the group used leases and then acquisitions to take control of beef processing plants, mainly in the states of Mato Grosso and São Paulo.
In 2006 the group launched its globalization strategy by purchasing Argentine Breeders & Packers (AB&P),17 a 50% stake in Quinto Cuarto S.A. (Chile’s largest meat importer), and the Tacuarembó processing plant in Uruguay.
Expansion speeded up the following year with the purchase of three additional refrigeration companies in São Paulo (Promissão II, Kilo Certo and Pampeano) and the takeover of refrigeration companies La Caballada and Colonia S.A. in Uruguay.
These latter two acquisitions turned Marfrig Group into the largest meat exporter in Uruguay.
Between 2006 and 2007 the group took full control of Quinto Cuarto and acquired Chile’s Frigorífico Patagonia S.A., which processes and markets lamb.
In Argentina, the group acquired Mirab S.A., which, through its subsidiary Mirab USA, is the main processor and distributor of beef jerky in the United States, and it purchased Quickfood S.A., specializing in the production of meat for hamburgers.
In Brazil, Marfrig began its pork production operations by acquiring the processor Mabella.
In 2008 Marfrig Group entered the poultry meat market by purchasing the Brazilian company Moinhos Cruzeiro do Sul and expanded its presence in the pork segment by acquiring Carroll’s Foods.
That same year it bought the By 2008 Marfrig Group controlled five slaughter facilities in Argentina with a capacity of 2,760 head per day (Bisang and others, 2008).
In 2009, it acquired the Peruvian affiliate of France’s Doux-Frangosul (turkey division) and SEARA Alimentos, a Brazilian subsidiary of the United States-based Cargill (12 industrial plants in the poultry and swine segment and a port terminal).
That same year, Marfrig took a 51% stake in Grupo Zenda, headquartered in Uruguay, which produces leather for the automobile and aviation industries.
In 2010, the Marfrig Group consolidated its position as a world-class food producer by acquiring the United States company Keystone Foods (a food service provider to major restaurant chains), with a presence in 13 countries and 54 production units.
Through this subsidiary, in 2011 Marfrig set up a joint venture with State-owned COFCO in China, with the aim of meeting the growing demand for food in that country.
Thanks to these acquisitions, Marfrig has become the world’s fourth largest meatpacker (and third largest producer of beef) with 106 meatpacking units, 14 tanneries and 30 distribution centres and more than 90,000 employees across all continents.
As with Grupo JBS, support from BNDES has been key for transforming Marfrig into a world-class Brazilian transnational.
To this end, BNDESPAR pledged to acquire a US$ 1.4 billion share offering, the proceeds of which would be used to fund the purchase of Keystone Foods and Ireland’s O’Kane Poultry (BNDES, 2010).
The Minerva Foods story began in 1957, but it was not until 1992 that the São Paulo-based company was incorporated under the name Indústria e Comércio de Carnes Minerva Ltda.
The company grew rapidly in 2006-2007, extending its operations throughout Brazil by leasing or buying slaughter units.
In 2008 it entered a joint venture with Ireland’s Dawn Farms Foods that enabled the company to build the Minerva Dawn Farms processing plant at a cost of US$ 44 million.
The first cross-border operation took place in 2011, with the acquisition of Uruguay’s Frigorífico PUL and Carnes Ana Paula (production capacity: 1,400 head per day). (iv) he meat chain in Argentina Argentina’s meat industry has undergone extensive reorganization since 2005, when foreign competitors (mainly from Brazil) started to buy major Argentine beef slaughter facilities.
These acquisitions gave the foreign companies more than industrial facilities: a country image, a gene pool, preferential access quotas for external markets (like the Hilton Quota in the European Union), distribution chains and established trademarks in the domestic market.
These acquisitions took place during a period when output and exports were expected to surge while domestic consumption held steady.
The scenario changed when the government set domestic reference prices and started to require export permits.
This period also saw a decline in exports, which was exacerbated by the drought and sustained expansion of the soybean area that moved many farms into marginal areas.
Cargill sold FINEXCOR to a local group in 2010; Tyson sold its shareholding to CRESUD that same year.
Other relevant stakeholders have put their plans on hold, given the importance of the domestic market and the production potential of Argentina’s livestock sector.
These are still FDI pull factors and point to a possible trend reversal in the coming years.
In fact, improving domestic prices in 2010 led to the holdback of cows to rebuild the cattle herd.
For white meat (both poultry and pork), the situation is very different because in both cases there are emerging, high-potential industries that are still largely Argentine-owned.
For the poultry industry, which is more concentrated, coordination and integration are easier, feed (concentrate) is cheap, and technology, genetics, health, internal and external markets and government support have enabled it to start growing exports: from 16,600 tons in 2000 to 250,000 tons in 2011 (USDA, 2012).
The pork industry is growing and has a high production potential based on good health standards and high technology.
Argentina’s domestic supply of pork still falls short of demand, forcing it to import about 50,000 tons in 2010 (Ministry of Agriculture, 2010), which indicates that expansion in the coming years will be geared towards import substitution. 2.
The agricultural inputs sector According to Pavitt (1984), innovation in agriculture is essentially determined by suppliers of inputs, material and equipment.
For this reason, it is important to examine how FDI is impacting the supply of agricultural inputs.
By contrast, in recent decades public institutions have not been as active in promoting new agricultural technologies as this role is increasingly filled by a few (but very large) transnational seed and agrochemical companies.
In 2007, just 10 companies accounted for almost 90% of agrochemical market sales of fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides and other products (see table III.10).
But a substantive change took place with the introduction of hybrid maize in Mexico, when the Mexican Government opened the Office of Experiment Stations in 1940 to replicate the progress that researchers in the United States had been making in this area since the late nineteenth century (Matchett, 2005).
In the first few decades of the twentieth century, the world’s genetic improvement programmes were run by national and international public entities that, because of their nature, did not have intellectual property strategies to protect their investments.
The scenario has changed considerably in recent years, with a shift to programmes developed by private companies that market their seeds under the protection of intellectual property and trademark use laws.
Plant varieties are protected under the 1961 International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants, which established the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV) to which most of the countries of the region belong.
This institutional framework has been key for attracting domestic and foreign private investments to the sector because gene development has long lead times (10 years or more) and funding hinges on legal formulas for effective ownership of outcomes.
This institutional and legal framework led to a significant rearrangement of the global seed industry.
Upjohn’s purchase of Agrow in 1968 set off a wave of consolidations from which a handful of major international corporations emerged.
Some of them are from the chemical industry (Monsanto, Dow, BASF and DuPont) and others from the pharmaceutical industry (Syngenta, Bayer), but all of them specialize in producing genetically modified seeds and supplying complementary inputs, particularly herbicides and pesticides.
The region benefited from this growth thanks to areas specializing in the production of hybrids and to the development of counter-season production, which began to surge in the 1980s (Le Buanec, 2008).
Argentina’s seed market went from US$ 210 million in 1979 to US$ 950 million in 2007; Brazil went from US$ 570 million to US$ 2 billion and Mexico from US$ 150 million to US$ 350 million. (ii) Foreign direct investment in the seed sector International seed companies have followed two strategies in the region.
One has been to set up operations or partner with local actors to conduct crop improvement programmes.
The highest-profile case is Monsanto, which shifted from producing agrochemicals to producing genetically modified seeds.
Either directly or indirectly through licensing arrangements, it supplies genetically modified soybean seeds to growers in the region, especially in the Southern Cone countries.
The technology package associated with this seed is based on direct seeding and the use of the weedkiller glyphosate.
Both the RR seed and glyphosate are Monsanto products, but in Argentina, for example, the seeds are distributed by its licensee Asgrow, which in turn was acquired by Argentina’s Nidera.
Monsanto has thus managed to control an embedded technology that has stirred up more than a little controversy (Motta, 2013).
This strategy has also been criticized as over-specialized and leading to levels of mono-cropping that have displaced other crops and alternative activities (such as cattle-raising) and caused depopulation of rural areas, biodiversity loss and other environmental impacts and risks, including for human health.
Monsanto has interests in Mexico, too, where it invested some US$ 20 million to expand a seed plant in Sinaloa.
The company reports that it plans outlays of up to US$ 10.5 million in the area.
Most of the investment is for producing genetically modified maize seeds for planting 2 million hectares (the project is still pending as it is being reviewed by the Government of Mexico).
Another country of interest to Monsanto is Guatemala, where it has invested heavily in the seed market (United Nations, 2011).
In addition to its core business of producing and supplying seeds, Monsanto is developing hybrid vegetables and fruit in Guatemala in the framework of the SHIELD programme designed by Seminis.
The transaction included the Brazilian company’s entire marketing, production and research platform, which had at the time been operating for 35 years and had a solid background in hybrid seed development. (b) Fertilizers (i) Production and consumption in Latin America and the Caribbean The fertilizer market is based on three primary nutrients.
It is obtained through chemical processes that make ammonia from natural gas.
The most heavily traded nitrogen fertilizer worldwide is urea; the main exporters are the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Qatar.
The other two main nutrients are potassium and phosphorus; they are obtained from phosphate or potash rock deposits found in just a handful of countries in the world, such as Canada, the Russian Federation and some European countries.
The use of chemical fertilizers in agriculture in the region spread slowly starting in 1950, when technicians involved in the Green Revolution and the agrarian reform began to promote it.
By 2008, total global consumption stood at 165 million tons, with China as the largest consumer (29.8% of the total), followed by India (14.5%), the United States (12.1%) and Brazil (5.7%).
The use of fertilizers in the region is shaped by three major food-producing countries: Brazil, Argentina and Mexico.
Fertilizer consumption in Argentina has grown by 900% over the past 20 years and ranges between 2.5 million tons and 3.8 million tons.
Most of the soil in Argentina still has a good supply of soil potassium, but this is not the case with nitrogen or phosphorous.
Argentina does not have many natural gas fields at a price that would enable it to compete with other countries in producing nitrogen fertilizers, although its huge shale gas reserves could change the situation.
Argentina does not have commercially exploitable phosphate rock deposits, although it has potassium in its soil as well as mineable potassium salt fields for producing a large volume of base raw material for export (CIAFA, 2010).
Of the 8.9 million tons produced domestically, 6.7 million tons were phosphate fertilizers because Brazil has phosphate rock deposits, especially in the state of Minas Gerais.
Nitrogen fertilizer output has been declining along with the volume of urea produced by Petrobras (which owns two of the country’s three plants).
The single potassium chloride plant in Brazil accounts for 100% of production, although new fields are being explored that could change this situation.
Brazil has phosphate mines that would enable it to become self-sufficient in 5 to 10 years, but these operations need to be optimized.
Potential potash mines have been discovered in the Amazon area, although their viability depends on environmental requirements that are difficult to meet.
Petrobras controls natural gas operations; availability could climb with the new shale gas deposits in south-eastern Brazil and thus provide the State with a guaranteed supply of raw material for producing nitrogen fertilizers.
The availability of raw materials, together with prospects for developing Brazilian agriculture, could attract investment to the sector.
Mexico’s fertilizer market has not grown significantly over the past few years, although the mix of fertilizers has changed.
Sales in 2005 totaled 4.3 million tons, of which 1.3 million tons were urea, which is not produced domestically.
Mexico has always imported all of the potash fertilizers it uses, but importing nitrogen fertilizers is a relatively recent development.
The high cost of natural gas resulted in the closure of urea and diammonium phosphate plants between 1999 and 2001.
Since then, Mexico has imported 100% of its supply of both products (Martínez, 2006). (ii) Foreign direct investment in the fertilizer sector The market is dominated by five large transnational companies, which in 2007 accounted for 33% of global production.
Under a law enacted in the early twentieth century to promote United States exports, the companies are authorized to sell their products abroad as a single entity and to define prices in consultation with the other party.
Privatization of Brazil’s State-owned fertilizer industry between 1992 and 1994 involved the transfer of ownership of five companies that had been managed by the State since the 1940s: Indag, Arafertil, Fosfertil, Goiasfertil and Ultrafertil.
These sell-offs laid the groundwork of the market as it is today, where Brazilian companies and foreign ones coexist and the latter predominate.
IAP acquired a 35% stake in Indag and was subsequently sold to Bunge, which also acquired Arafertil.
This privatization involved creating the holding company Fertifós (formed by Brazilian fertilizer companies).
Since 2004 these companies have had a single corporate identity, Fosfertil, which in 2007 had a 13.6% share of sales in the domestic market.
Between 1997 and 2000 Bunge acquired some of the firms that set up Fertifós; because Fosfertil shares have been traded on the stock exchange, Bunge currently holds a 12% equity stake in Fosfertil.
Fertifós, after a series of mergers and acquisitions, has also become majority foreign-owned: Bunge has a 52% stake; Yara Mosaic holds 33% and Yara owns 13% (Fernandes and others, 2009).
It has a physical presence in 50 countries and sales in 120 countries.
Yara is the global leader in nitrogen fertilizers, with a production capacity of 5.9 million tons of ammonia, 4.8 million tons of nitrates (ceric ammonium nitrate and ammonium nitrate) and 4.1 million tons of NPK.
Yara Trinidad manages and operates a threeplant ammonia production facility in Savonetta.
Most of the 1.3 million tons it produces annually is exported, making Trinidad and Tobago the world’s leading exporter of ammonia.
It is the world’s largest producer of phosphates, with an annual capacity of nearly 9.4 million tons–more than the following three producers combined.
At some 10.4 million tons per year, Mosaic ranks second worldwide in potash production capacity.
Mosaic has a 20% stake in Fosfertil S.A. en Brazil and a 35% ownership interest in a GSSP fertilizer plant in Argentina.
Profertil plans to invest US$ 60 million in a fertilizer plant in Argentina.
Mosaic operates five phosphate mines in Florida and four potash mines in Saskatchewan, Canada (including the world’s largest potash mine) and a potash mine in New Mexico.
Approximately one third of its output is shipped within North America, with the remainder exported around the world to some 45 countries.
Mosaic’s offshore interests form a production and distribution network in key markets around the world.
They include a 35% equity stake in a granular DAP facility in China.
Agrium Inc. (Canada) Agrium has an annual production capacity of 6.5 million tons of nitrogen fertilizer, 2.1 million tons of potash and 1.3 million tons of phosphate.
It has two nitrogen fertilizer plants that target international markets, one in Argentina and the other in Alaska.
As part of its efforts to diversify internationally, Agrium is investing in Egypt and expanding into China by purchasing a stake in the fertilizer company Hanfeng Evergreen.
PotashCorp (Canada) This firm accounts for 22% of the world’s potash production capacity.
In response to global demand, PotashCorp has announced projects for boosting its annual production capacity from 10.8 million tons in 2007 to 17.2 million tons in 2015.
Kali & Salz Group (K+S) (Germany) The group extracts potash and crude magnesium salts at six mines in Germany, with a total output of 8 million tons.
At 12% of worldwide potash output, it is the fourth largest producer in the world and the leading supplier in Europe.
Its company Fertiva is a major European supplier, with a particularly strong position in nitrogen fertilizers containing sulphur.
The firm’s focus is on the European market but it exports about 40 % of production overseas, mainly to Latin America.
Agrium is a major retail supplier of agricultural products and services in North America and South America.
In Argentina it operates through Agroservicios Pampeanos S.A. (ASP), a decentralized business made up of 15 units called agrocentres located throughout the country.
Soquimich produces natural nitrates from the lithium and boron fields it works.
SPL operates one of the largest open-pit sodium chloride mines, the Tarapacá salt flat (which measures 45 kilometres by 5 kilometres and ranges between 12 metres and 60 meters in depth.
Karikallio, “Consumption patterns and competition in the world fertilizer markets” paper presented at the 19th Symposium of the International Food and Agribusiness Management Association, June 2009.
Bunge Fertilizantes began to operate in Brazil in 1938, through the company Serrana.
Bunge bought IAP in 1997; in 1998 it added Elekeiroz’s fertilizer unit and took a partial equity stake in Takenaka, owner of the Ouro Verde trademark.
Bunge Fertilizantes was born in August 2000 when Fertilizantes Serrana became part of Manah, which had itself been acquired by Bunge in April of that same year.
By 2007, the company had a 31.1% share of the domestic market; it is now the largest fertilizer company in South America.
Mosaic took over the structure of Cargill Fertilizantes when the latter merged with IMC Global worldwide in 2004.
Cargill had been operating in Brazil since 1994 and had a liquid fertilizer plant in Monte Alto along with a blending facility in Candeias that it added in 1998.
The company acquired a controlling shareholding in Solorrico in 2000 and in Fertiza in 2000, both of which were traditional companies in the sector.
It is Brazilian in origin but sold a 20.6% stake to American International Group (AIG) in 2004.
Yara arrived in Brazil in 1974, first acquiring just the domestic company Trevo and, subsequently, Fertibras in 2006.
Among them are Copebrás (4.5% of the market), owned by AngloAmerican and Brazilian-owned Fertipar (4.5% market share).
As this background information shows, the sector is going through a profound restructuring and transnational corporations are making inroads.
Bunge, Mosaic and Yara dominate domestic production and are reproducing, on a local scale, their fierce competition in the global market (Fernandes and others, 2009).
Fertimex (a State monopoly established in 1977 that controlled all operations in the local market and sought to promote consumption through a subsidized pricing policy) was privatized in 1992.
The company’s industrial units were acquired by groups of domestic and foreign investors that are currently operating in a free market where each company makes its own decisions.
In 2005 there were five ammonium sulphate plants (Univex, Agrogen, Fertirrey, Fegusa and Fesur), as well as two superphosphate plants (Rhodia and Agrogen).
The largest company in the market is Profertil, which is controlled by the transnational Agrium alongside YPF.
Bunge is another important actor; in 2009 it acquired the Campana (formerly, Pasa) nitrogen fertilizer plant from Petrobras, which had purchased the plant from Pecom Energía (Pérez Companc) in 2003.
Like the other actors in the market, Bunge imports other types of fertilizers, particularly phosphate fertilizers.
Cargill has a nitrogen fertilizer plant in Ramallo and supplements this operation by importing phosphate fertilizers.
This picture could be changed by the Río Colorado potash deposit that Brazil’s transnational mining company Vale do Rio Doce owns and plans to develop.
Although press sources report that it might be postponed because of the current global economic situation (La Mañana de Neuquén, 2012) it could, once built, turn Argentina in a major producer of this type of fertilizer.
FDI strategies in the agricultural and agro-industry sector, and kinds of companies (a) nvestments in land Studies and databases on agricultural land purchase and lease operations in the region disagree as to their scale and extent.
A FAO study (2011) concludes that Brazil and Argentina are the only countries with widespread land grabbing.
Other authors contend that it is taking place in other countries of Latin America and the Caribbean as well, if the investor profile is expanded to include other types of private and local actors (Borras and others, 2012).
However, the sources examined do agree that the land market is growing quickly and that trans-Latin companies are playing a leading role (FAO, 2011; Borras and others, 2012; Land Matrix, 2012).
Trans-Latin companies (which are the result of mergers between two or more regional firms, or of cross-border operations by firms headquartered in one Latin American country) conduct negotiations through their contacts in the host country.
According to Borras and others (2012) this is what keeps many transactions from being detected, because they are conducted in the name of companies or corporations that are registered in the country in question.
In the Land Matrix database, most of the investors identified in the region are from Latin America (48%), followed by investors from North America (21%).
A smaller percentage of the transactions involve investors from East Asia (14%), Europe (10%) and the Middle East (7%).
According to a FAO study (2011), trans-Latin firms (chiefly, ones based in Brazil or Argentina) have a substantial presence and operations in countries such as Chile, Paraguay, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay.
In Central America, companies based in Mexico and other countries of the region have the larger footprint.
Available sources also agree that most investment in land is for growing flex-crops, seeking to meet the rising regional and global demand for food, fodder and biofuels.
The governments of the countries of the region have responded to this interest in acquiring agricultural land.
A clear example is Argentina, where Law 26.737 limits land ownership rights of foreigners (or companies that are majority-owned by foreigners) to 15% in rural areas.
In Brazil, Law 5.709 regulates land purchases by foreign nationals and has been amended several times in the past few years.
This issue is regulated, particularly, by ruling GQ-181 AGU of 17 December 1998, which is currently under review in response to the recent land rush, much of it illegal and on which there is little information (Hackbart, 2008).
Other countries, such as Colombia, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Uruguay, are also discussing similar bills aimed at curbing foreign ownership of agricultural land.
International agencies such as FAO have put forth a set of voluntary guidelines to encourage investments in land that are environmentally responsible and promote social inclusion and the socioeconomic development of rural populations.
This issue should be made an explicit part of bilateral agendas between countries, as the governments of Australia and China (DFAT, 2012) have recently done by establishing consultation mechanisms and integrated information systems in order to make foreign investments in agriculture more transparent and legitimate.
These mechanisms are very useful benchmarks for the region, in view of the agricultural cooperation proposal announced by the Chinese Premier during his visit to ECLAC in June 2012, which called for, among other things, creating a forum of ministers of agriculture of China and Latin America and the Caribbean.
One example of FDI in agriculture are planting pools (also discussed in the FAO study), which have expanded out from Argentina to the other Southern Cone countries except for Chile.
The ephemeral nature of these operations (leasing land and machinery, recruiting technical personnel for short periods) makes it difficult to quantify the FDI mobilized, although the figures point to a sweeping trend that could change the face of agriculture in the region.
This approach is being followed by the world’s four major grain processing corporations (ADM, Bunge, Cargill and Louis Dreyfus) together with a wide range of other key but smaller transnationals (Glencore, Tereos, Mitsui Mitsubishi and Goldman Sachs) and emerging transnational corporations like the China-based Noble Group Limited.
These companies’ operations are also increasingly global in scale, in response to geographic, strategic, geopolitical, financial and regulatory factors.
Burgeoning international trade in food products requires diversifying sources of supply and working in different geographical markets.
On the other hand, competition between companies calls for strategies that involve breaking up supply chains into a network of firms and industrial plants.
Among the noteworthy geopolitical and financial factors are political decisions by governments, which play a key role in guiding FDI.
The most paradigmatic cases are Brazil’s fuel alcohol programme PROALCOOL created by the ethanol industry with the participation of major foreign companies, and funding from public banks (BNDES), which facilitated the expansion of Brazilian trans-Latins in meat chains.
The pattern across countries and agro-industry chains is to acquire domestic enterprises (via mergers and acquisitions) and, to a lesser extent, enter into joint ventures with local companies and set up subsidiaries.
This trend is a reflection of the longstanding presence of the major transnationals in the region, which has made them familiar with local markets.
These mergers and acquisitions are driven by an interest in expanding operations or quickly gaining a foothold in the local market without having to go through all of the stages involved in creating a new company and starting from scratch.
In addition to providing ownership of a business that already has a market share, this decreases the number of competitors.
In these cases the foreign firm determines the most efficient mechanism for absorbing local knowledge so that the staff recruited can use that know-how in keeping with the company’s strategic objectives.
When this knowledge cannot be hired directly because it is too costly, shared ownership can be a more efficient solution than setting up an affiliate.
Such is the case with some transnational corporations with a longer track record in the region that have opted for partnering with local groups so as to expand their organizational boundaries, gain access to local knowledge and thus reduce their exposure.
In the area of agricultural inputs, corporate dissemination strategies are crucial in creating a market for the technology packages that growers use, although logistics infrastructure and industrial capacities also play a leading role.
The situation is different in the case of the fertilizer industry because it is essentially an extractive industry where the possession of mineral deposits plays a key role.
That is why that the main actors are transnational corporations specializing in the production of fertilizers (plus Cargill and Bunge, which entered the sector to optimize their grain production operations).
Although there are no exact figures, it has so far been limited to a handful of companies setting up operations in the region, such as Noble and Kuok in the ethanol sector.
On the other hand, some Brazilian companies in the meat sector (Marfrig and BRF) seeking to venture into the Chinese market have partnered with Chinese enterprises (COFCO, Chinwiz and Dah Chong Hong Holdings Limited).
This limited but growing trend can also be inferred from official Chinese government figures, which show that Chinese agricultural FDI worldwide increased from US$ 834 million in 2008 to a cumulative US$ 2.61 billion in 2010.
This figure contrasts with the cumulative US$ 44.66 billion in FDI in the mining sector as of 2010 (Ministry of Commerce of China, 2011).
The expansion of these firms has been guided by offensive strategies (seeking economies of scale, regional market knowledge and access to new distribution channels) and defensive strategies (occupying key positions before competitors, avoiding being absorbed by transnational corporations).
There is also some sectoral specialization based on existing comparative and competitive advantages.
Examples are the Argentine grain millers expanding into Brazil, and Brazilian meatpackers investing in Argentina, Uruguay and elsewhere in the region.
Agro-food trans-Latins follow expansion strategies that range from specializing in regional and niche markets to buying and selling shares in order to become part of transnational corporate global networks.
The greatest agro-food sector success story is the Brazilian trans-Latins in the meat industry chain.
They have become global leaders, as can be seen in their acquisitions in Southern Cone countries and in the United States and Australia.
This makes it possible for them to meet the requirements of the new global food paradigm while expanding their markets.
In this business model, integrating the entire process from farm to final delivery to the consumer, combined with insourcing, helps yield high profits (transforming food from a commodity into a service generates more value added), economies of scale (as markets expand and become integrated) and consistent output quality (as phytosanitary and environmental regulations are standardized).
The vertically integrated, internationalized business model is not within the reach of all companies because not all are at the same level or have the same implementation capacity.
The specific characteristics of the different subsectors (such as those examined in this chapter) have an impact on the degree of vertical integration at each point.
The agricultural input market is oligopolistic in that a handful of companies account for more than 70% of worldwide sales.
Because of their track record and early arrival in the industry (many of these companies are more than a hundred years old), these companies are at an advantage when it comes to creating value, owning the value created along the chain and influencing the operations of correlated businesses (Teece, 1986; Jacobides, 2006).
With the passage of time, these companies have consolidated their position of power in the markets on the strength of their high degree of integration and globalization.
This gives them considerable influence over all their transactions, such as contracts with direct and indirect suppliers (growers and shippers) and buyers (distributors and end consumers).
Their position allows them to innovate and create more value as they build relationships of dependence with customers and suppliers.
The grain ABCDs and major agrochemical companies are not only very vertically integrated (towards the consumer) but also have substantial horizontal influence in that they control a significant portion of the markets correlated with grains and agriculture.
In the medium to long term, the major petroleum companies (such as Shell and BP) are expected to surge into the biofuels sector.
While they have not followed the same path as the ABCD traders or major agrochemical corporations, their size and resources could put them in a strong position.
Nevertheless, for the time being the smaller foreign companies are the ones that are gaining ground in the region’s ethanol and biodiesel markets. (ii) Foreign companies with limited market presence Together with the major transnationals, other foreign companies with smaller market shares operate in the region’s agro-industry sector.
Companies that have entered agreements with local governments to gain access to agro-commodities (such as the Saudi conglomerate Al-Khorayef with 200,000 hectares of sorghum and other crops in Argentina) or tap into new markets on the strength of their economies of scale (like Noble Group Limited’s investment in sugar and ethanol in Brazil).
These are all major companies, but they do not have the advantages that enable the large transnationals to influence the organizational structure of their sector, influence competitors’ strategies or leverage their position in the chain. (iii) Trans-Latins Brazil’s trans-Latin companies in the meat chain exemplify successful strategies for vertical integration and insourcing.
The four major Brazilian meat sector companies (JBS-Friboi, BRF, Marfrig and Minerva) have been able to position themselves as regional leaders with a large global footprint.
Their growth is due in part to policies providing support from public entities, coupled with the country’s obvious competitive advantages.
Other examples in the region, albeit on a smaller scale, are Argentina’s oilseed mills, which have been making inroads into regional markets, and Brazil’s grain company Amaggi Exportação e Importação Ltda., which operates in Argentina and Europe.
While there are key players with market positioning advantages (like the ABCDs and other meat industry heavyweights such as Tyson Foods), there is an emerging trend in the region, driven by trans-Latins following the new global food paradigm and its vertically integrated and internationalized business model.
The Brazilian trans-Latins in the meat industry are the clearest expression of this trend.
While different in nature, planting pools are another part of this trend, which is spreading throughout the Southern Cone.
Beyond the ephemeral nature of these endeavours, planting pools are transnational in scope and are having a significant impact on agriculture in some countries because their business model adjusts in keeping with locally available resources.
The same is true of spontaneous cross-border movements by growers setting up operations in neighbouring countries in search of access to new land.
Although both trends involve little or no vertical integration, they are wide-reaching in geopolitical, economic, social and environmental terms. (iv) Domestic enterprises Because of the cultural nature of food products, small and medium-sized domestic enterprises subsist alongside major international and trans-Latin corporations as well as other foreign companies operating in the domestic market.
They exist because their broad knowledge of the domestic market enables them to meet that market’s specific needs.
Agricultural producers (except for planting pools) tend to operate in the local market, as do slaughterhouses and meatpackers, wheat flour mills and biodiesel plants.
These companies, which are always smaller and not internationalized, are being forced to innovate and comply with new quality standards to be able to compete with foreign companies and thus maintain their market position.
This enables them to influence the organizational structure of the sector and have an impact on the strategies of competing companies.
In addition to large industrial facilities for processing raw materials, such operations have ports, infrastructure and distribution channels.
Foreign companies with limited market presence Businesses with technology and innovation capacity, but with limited influence in their chain.
Biofuels Mixed (vertical integration can be stepped up as larger, international companies come in).
Meat chains High, especially forward, because they possess distribution channels and trademarks.
For the latter, their advantage comes from possessing gas, phosphate and potash deposits.
Integrated all the way from research and development to sale of embedded technology to the farmer.
Domestic enterprises Growers of all sizes, and agribusinesses that operate only in the domestic market.
Public policies for attracting, regulating and enhancing the positive externalities of FDI in the agricultural and agro-industry sector FDI has the potential to impact economic growth endogenously if it generates production returns through externalities and technological and organizational spillovers.
The public policy regime and the institutional framework in general play a decisive role in promoting FDI, absorbing its positive domestic economic impact and building the knowledge base that economies need in order to achieve this end (Cimoli and others, 2009; Mello Jr., 2007; ECLAC, 1998; ECLAC, 2002).
The information set out herein indicates that biofuel and meat industry FDI is driven not only by new market trends but also by the government incentives and regulations that have shaped foreign investor and trans-Latin company decision-making.
The factors that draw transnational firms are generally well-known: advantageous location, defence of a strategic position, access to strategic local resources, and a dynamic market that makes it possible to produce at the lowest cost and sell on a large scale.
This means that foreign investors weigh the income level of the target country’s population, the degree of urbanization, trade agreements, comparative advantages, economic incentives and the quality of institutions.
The factors that discourage investment include fragile public institutions, an uncertain legal framework and the concomitant political risks, as well as small market size and export constraints.
This is in addition to the legal instruments and technical standards that allow FDI to flow in consistently and transparently.
Some countries have foreign investment regimes in place to ensure legal stability and generate tax incentives for foreign investors; legislative decree 600 in Chile and legislative decree 662 and Law 27.360 in Peru are examples of this.
For other countries, schemes that are domestic- and foreign-investor neutral, like Uruguay’s investment promotion and protection law (Law 16.906), are essential for creating a favourable climate and drawing investment into the country.
Another institutional aspect that stimulates FDI is the guarantee of free convertibility of profits into foreign currency and the absence of barriers to the movement of capital.
These general factors run along with others that are directly associated with the energy and food sector.
Biofuel legislation has greatly influenced the development of this industry in Argentina, Brazil and Colombia.
The meat industry depends directly on health regulations and the existence of health and trade agreements with other countries and blocs, which are essential for exporting.
Grower development and technological support programmes are essential for making improvements in the early stages of production.
Investment project banks that help identify new FDI opportunities are also useful in a sector that is complex, heterogeneous and geographically dispersed.
To ensure that FDI will generate benefits for the receiving countries, government action (particularly in low-income economies) is crucial for attracting and regulating FDI that will bring socioeconomically inclusive and environmentally sustainable technological innovation and spillovers.
This is relevant above all for the new types of investors who have different levels of bargaining power and are venturing into the sector to ensure access to scarce natural resources such as water and land.
The pitfall is that the lower-income countries are precisely the ones that most lack the technical and managerial capacities needed for crafting policies and regulations that would attract quality FDI. (b) Innovation and FDI in the agricultural and agro-industry sector The impact of FDI in the agricultural and agro-industry sector in terms of innovation is another area for consideration.
Transnational corporations have tended to keep their research and development operations in their home countries (or in other developed countries where there are centres of excellence and research), with their foreign affiliates limited to planning for innovation adoption (Rama and Martínez, 2012).
The case of ethanol in Brazil is an exception: the entire technological development effort is entrusted to teams of Brazilian scientists.
The recent arrival of transnationals in this sector could have a positive impact on the development of second-generation (biomass) ethanol because the technology is not available and research is being conducted through partnerships between domestic and foreign firms.
Often, merely setting up new industrial plants in a given country can have a potential spillover effect.
FDI has three types of spillovers for domestic enterprise productivity and innovativeness: horizontal, backward and forward (the latter two are usually referred to as vertical spillover).
Horizontal spillover shows up in three ways (Havranek and Irsova, 2012). i) There is a competition effect when domestic firms respond to FDI flows by improving their procedures and end products for the consumer.
FDI figures indicate inflows of foreign direct investment, minus disinvestments (repatriation of capital) by foreign investors..
These figures differ from those set out in the 2014 editions of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean because these publications show the net balance of foreign investment, that is, direct investment in the reporting economy (FDI) minus outward FDI.
Among the larger economies, Mexico recorded the steepest fall in inflows, with a drop of 49% to US$ 22.795 billion.
This can be explained by a number of one-off factors, including the fact that the 2013 FDI figures were inflated by the US$ 13.249 billion acquisition of beer maker Grupo Modelo by a European firm.
Brazil continues to be the largest recipient of FDI in the region, though inflows slipped by 2% to US$ 62.495 billion.
Chile remains the third 1 The Central Bank of Brazil has recently changed its data collection methodology (see chapter 1).
Estimates included in this summary use the previous methodology, which is comparable with previous years.
FDI to Central America fell by 2%, while FDI to the Caribbean fell by 5%.
The biggest increases in the region were reported by Barbados (5,119%), Paraguay (230%) and Antigua and Barbuda (66%), while the greatest decreases were seen in Suriname (97%), the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (88%) and Grenada (64%).
The sectoral distribution of FDI in 2014 also differed substantially from previous years.
In some economies, such as Colombia, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, the natural resources sector continues to receive a large share of FDI, but even in these economies that share is waning.
The reason for this is the decline in the prices of minerals, which has been occurring since 2012, but is only now starting to affect FDI inflows.
The price of oil dropped by half in the latter months of 2014, after remaining stable for several years.
There is some evidence that the technology intensity of FDI in the region is increasing: FDI in medium-high and high technology sectors now accounts for some 60% of total inflows, although with large differences between countries.
Mexico receives the highest share of such FDI, followed by Brazil, owing mainly to large investments in the automotive sector (medium-high technology), which is having a transformative impact on those economies.
With respect to the source countries of investment, the Netherlands is now the largest investor country in Latin America, accounting for 20% of inflows that can be attributed to source countries.
This chiefly reflects the Netherlands’ position as by far largest investor in Brazil, since it is the source of 29% of flows into that country.
Its investments account for a large share of total FDI in Mexico (29%), Colombia (14%) and Central America (33%).
Spain is the third largest investor in the region, having nearly quadrupled its share to 10%.
Spain has a particularly strong presence in Mexico (18%), Colombia (13%) and some of the Central American economies.
Two large acquisitions by Spanish companies in 2014 are evidence of the recovery of Spanish inflows after several years of weak inflows.
Official FDI from Asia to the region is minimal, accounting for some 6% of total flows in 2014, of which one sixth comes from China.
The same factors behind the overall drop in FDI inflows to the region also explain the lower FDI outflows since the vast majority of trans-Latin corporations invest within the region.
Outflows from Colombia and Mexico dropped markedly in 2014, whereas outflows from Chile increased.
Brazil’s FDI outflows have been negative for four years running, owing to large inter-company loans that seek to bypass the high cost of capital in the country.
Despite the fall in outflows from Mexico, Mexican trans-Latins continue to dominate the list of cross-border acquisitions.
Peru became the third largest investor abroad in 2014, with outflows of US$ 4.452 billion.
Summary and conclusions The proportion of profits that transnational corporations reinvest in the same economy remained more or less stable at 50%, while they repatriate the rest.
The downtrend in the average profitability of FDI seen since 2008 continued, reaching 5% in 2014.
Total FDI income declined by 16% to US$ 103.877 billion, as the economic slowdown and lower prices of export commodities reduced profits across most countries.
Despite this drop in 2014, FDI income is still the largest negative item in the current account for most economies in the region.
This has become a source of concern because over the previous decade the trade account has deteriorated significantly, generating growing current account deficits that in 2013 and 2014 reached 2.7% of GDP for the region as a whole.
This deficit has to be financed through capital inflows, of which FDI has been the largest and most stable type.
In fact FDI is now the largest external liability in the region and as such it will continue to generate large flows of FDI income in the near future.
In other words, FDI is not a free form of capital and countries should therefore attempt to direct these flows to projects with the capacity to transform their production structure.
FDI flows into Latin American and the Caribbean will likely decline again in 2015.
The region’s slack economic growth —projected at around 1% for the year— will continue to act as a brake on domestic-market-seeking investments.
Conversely, Mexico could well receive more investment in 2015 thanks to the large number of projects announced in manufacturing and to regulatory changes making it easier for foreign firms to enter certain segments of the services market.
Investment is expected to continue slipping in mining, regardless of international price trends, and in hydrocarbons, owing to the drop in the oil price in the latter months of 2014.
Accordingly, ECLAC estimates that inflows to the region overall will be down by as much as 10%.
Foreign direct investment in the Caribbean FDI is very important for the Caribbean, where FDI inflows in many economies make up a much larger share of GDP than in Latin America.
The Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago are the largest recipients in the Caribbean, absorbing 37% and 23% of total inflows, respectively.
At the other extreme, Cuba and Haiti receive only small amounts of FDI, despite their large populations.
Of the economies in the Caribbean, the Dominican Republic’s FDI inflows are the most balanced in terms of distribution between natural resources, manufacturing, tourism and other services.
The inflows of many other economies typically depend more heavily on a particular sector.
The Bahamas and the members of the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), for example, receive the bulk of investment in the tourism sector, while inflows to Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago are driven primarily by natural resources.
Latin America Haiti Suriname Summary and conclusions received the majority of FDI in the transport and telecommunications sector on the back of significant investments in the expansion of telecommunications services.
The tourism industry is a key sector, attracting the bulk of investment in many countries in the Caribbean.
The transformative impact of tourism investment is constrained by the limited capacity of many economies to provide the inputs required by the tourism value chain.
To address this constraint, governments should encourage home-grown investment in secondary services, as well as agriculture and small-scale manufacturing, to increase spillovers from the tourism industry.
Countries in the Caribbean should also remain vigilant regarding the fast rise in tourist numbers to other regions, which may leave some ambitious expansion plans without the market necessary to support them.
Significant FDI takes place in the hydrocarbons sectors of Trinidad and Tobago and Suriname, where oil is an important export product.
The mineral that attracts most FDI in the region’s mining industry is gold.
Guyana and Suriname have substantial operations in the gold mining industry, but the largest mining investment in the Caribbean is the Pueblo Viejo gold mine in the Dominican Republic.
The construction of the mine has been completed, so it is not currently receiving significant inflows of FDI, but it has had a positive impact on the country’s current account and may open the door to further investment in the future.
The Dominican Republic, being the largest economy in the region, also attracts significant investment in the export-oriented manufacturing sector, particularly from the United States.
Haiti is also slowly entering this market, but from a very low base.
Export-oriented services play a much larger role in the rest of the Caribbean.
Business process outsourcing (BPO) is a key export-oriented service in several economies, while others focus on higher value financial services.
There are currently 40 educational institutions that target the North American education market, with significant spillover benefits for local economies.
One major constraint on market-seeking FDI is the small size of the subregion’s markets.
However, some firms manage to operate profitably by treating the Caribbean as a single market, rather than a collection of small markets.
In other sectors, much of the market-seeking FDI is from small firms seeking niches in the different economies.
Several major trans-Caribbean conglomerates are also actively vying for share in the different markets.
These companies use their conglomerate structure to reduce risk by taking on different product and geographical markets.
While these trans-Caribbean conglomerates have typically focused mainly on the Caribbean, the sluggish economic growth in the subregion is now pushing them to look further afield and seek investment opportunities in South, Central and North America.
The subregion’s ability to attract significant FDI is attributable in part to a generous set of FDI promotion policies.
Currently, such policies target four areas: active promotion by an investment promotion agency; improving the overall business climate; reducing obstacles that are specific to foreign investors; and providing financial incentives, such as tax holidays.
Most governments focus on providing financial incentives since they are easily granted, while it is much harder to introduce structural improvements to the business climate.
Nonetheless, the complicated fiscal situation in many Caribbean countries should prompt governments to rethink their focus on such incentives.
This will be challenging, however, since competition between taxation regimes is used to attract the largest investments, and Caribbean governments will therefore have to work together to coordinate such policy changes across the subregion.
It is not clear whether existing FDI promotion policies have a positive or negative impact on economic development.
FDI certainly can have a transformative impact on a country’s economic situation, but only if the conditions are right for encouraging local spillovers by integrating FDI with local value chains.
Furthermore, FDI may promote growth in a country’s capital stock or help sustain temporary current account deficits, but since the relationship between FDI and capital stock growth is weak and outflows of FDI income have been increasing, neither of these potential effects would seem to be of benefit to the subregion.
While the Caribbean has attracted significant FDI over the years, it is not clear that the region has fully leveraged that investment.
Most governments could do more to harness existing FDI to encourage economic growth, while some economies, particularly Cuba and Haiti, which have to date received very small FDI inflows, would first have to attract those flows in order to perceive any significant positive impact.
Transnational corporations and the environment Despite the recent weakening of FDI inflows, transnational corporations have a very significant —and still growing— presence in Latin American and Caribbean economies, and their environmental footprint is therefore large as well.
Transnational corporations played a major role in establishing certain consumption and production patterns (including the rise in car ownership) which have long-term implications for the region’s environmental sustainability.
Their investment strategies can therefore have very significant implications regarding the environmental impact of economic activity.
It is not possible to measure the exact environmental impact of FDI, but since different sectors affect the environment in very different ways, the ecological impact of FDI depends to a large extent on its distribution across sectors.
Mining, for example, is one of the sectors that attracts most FDI to Latin America and the Caribbean, but it also has major environmental implications, emitting five times more greenhouse gases per dollar of output than the economy-wide average, while generating significant environmental liabilities that have sparked conflicts with local communities throughout the region.
Mining activities in Latin America have also become more energy-intensive during recent years because of declining ore grade in ageing deposits.
Some heavy industries also have a large environmental footprint, whether in terms of their greenhouse gas emissions or the average pollution abatement costs that they incur.
By this last measure the steel, paper and pulp, and chemical industries are the heaviest polluters.
Lastly, agriculture is another sector with a large environmental impact (it is, in fact, the largest source of greenhouse gas emissions in the region), although it is not an FDI-intensive sector.
Foreign direct investment can thus be expected to have a more serious environmental impact in countries where it is concentrated in mining and heavy industry, though the actual impact of each investment is contingent on government regulations (and their enforcement) and the actions taken by companies.
Large international corporations are increasingly considering their environmental footprint and taking steps to mitigate it, over and above local regulatory requirements.
On average, they engage in more initiatives of this type than Latin American companies and could lead by example in this regard.
However, it is difficult to gauge the impact of such voluntary actions, and many of them are in fact little more than marketing strategies.
Many of the initiatives that have a real impact on the environment are those that also bring financial benefits to companies, such as actions to improve energy efficiency.
Looking to the future, substantial investments will be required to make the economies of Latin America and the Caribbean more environmentally sustainable.
Worldwide, it is estimated that current investment falls as much as US$ 1 trillion short of that needed to meet the sustainable development goals on climate change and water and sanitation services.
To cover this gap, the private sector will need to make a larger contribution in developing countries and transnational corporations will be key stakeholders in this process, since they hold considerable assets in Latin America and the Caribbean and have the technological and institutional wherewithal needed to enhance sustainability.
FDI has great potential to supplement domestic investment, but opportunities will need to be translated into workable business models.
Investments in infrastructure are crucial for improving the region’s environmental sustainability, but experiences to date have had mixed results.
For example, many foreign investments in water and sanitation services had negative outcomes; on the other hand, the governments of the region have managed to attract large investments to the renewable energy sector.
FDI is also one of the key mechanisms for transferring green technologies to Latin America and the Caribbean and other developing regions.
Most of the research and development that leads to the creation of such technologies is carried out by transnational corporations based in developed countries, though some innovation also takes place in the region.
The development of second-generation ethanol (by domestic and foreign companies in Brazil, with the support of the government) is an example of a homegrown technology with the potential to reduce the environmental impact of transport.
Summary and conclusions All the region’s countries have environmental policies, but they are seldom coordinated with investment promotion efforts.
Still, almost two thirds of investment promotion agencies claim to consider the environmental impacts of FDI and, despite limited room for manoeuvre, many have programmes to attract FDI based on green criteria, with a strong focus on renewable energy (see figure 4).
Governments should aim to ensure consistency between FDI promotion policies and other policies that have a bearing on the environment, such those on energy, transport, industry and urban development.
Conclusions Bibliography Introduction Foreign direct investment (FDI) in Latin America and the Caribbean fell by 16% in 2014 to US$ 158.803 billion,1 reversing a growth trend that had lasted more than a decade (aside from brief dips in 2006 and 2009).
Business conditions deteriorated and the profits of transnational corporations did not reach the heights of previous years.
FDI outflows (or foreign investments by trans-Latin corporations) were also down in 2014, totalling US$ 29.162 billion.
As a proportion of the size of the regional economy, FDI inflows in 2014 were in line with the previous decade’s average of 2.6% of GDP.
This indicator shows that, after a short spell of very high inflows around the turn of the century, FDI has stabilized in relation to GDP, despite growing significantly in nominal terms, peaking at a record high of US$ 189.951 billion in 2013 (see figure I.1).
FDI figures indicate inflows of foreign direct investment, minus disinvestments (repatriation of capital) by foreign investors.
These figures differ from those set out in the 2014 editions of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean because they show the net balance of foreign investment, that is, direct investment in the reporting economy (FDI) minus outward FDI.
In 2014, FDI inflows suffered from sluggish economic growth across the region and lower export commodity prices.
The same factors were in play in 2013, but a single exceptionally large transaction (the acquisition of the Mexican brewer Grupo Modelo for US$ 13.249 billion) inflated the FDI figures for that year, masking the effects of the two factors.
The drop in FDI outflows is attributable to the same factors since trans-Latin corporations tend to invest mainly within Latin America and the Caribbean, where the investment conditions were unfavourable.
The adverse conditions hit the natural resources sector hardest, in particular mining.
The lower profits recorded by this sector were partially responsible for the overall drop in FDI inflows, as the value of reinvested earnings fell.
This has resulted in a substantial increase (55%) in its recorded FDI inflows.
However, at the time of publication, only the 2014 figures are available under the sixth edition methodology, meaning that changes in the data over time cannot be identified.
For that reason, in this chapter, all data concerning Brazil are represented by the fifth edition methodology unless otherwise specified.
The subsection specifically on Brazil includes and compared the results from both methodologies.
Overview of foreign direct investment worldwide In 2014, global FDI inflows decreased by 7% to approximately US$ 1.27 trillion, reversing the slight uptick of the previous two years.
However, the drop is less striking when the largest divestment of 2014, valued at US$ 130 billion, is excluded.
In that transaction, United States-based Verizon Communications reacquired the 45% share in Verizon Wireless previously held by the United Kingdom’s Vodafone in order to take full control of the mobile telecommunications carrier.
Without this transaction, global FDI flows would have been practically stable in nominal terms.
Consistently with the recent trend, developing countries increased their share of global FDI inflows to 56% in 2014 (see figure I.2).
Transition economies saw FDI inflows fall by 51%, accounting for a mere 3.6% of global FDI inflows.
The primary culprits of this stark decrease were the political uncertainty in Ukraine and the Russian Federation’s weakening economic performance, compounded by the sanctions against it.
Developed economies saw a small decrease of about 14% in inward FDI, attributable primarily to the Verizon deal, which caused a two-thirds fall in inflows to the United States.
If that deal had not taken place, inflows to North America would have decreased only marginally.
Inflows to the European Union, on the other hand, rose by 14% to US$ 267 billion, although this is still equivalent to only about one third of the inflows before the financial crisis.
Both France and Germany posted negative FDI inflows in 2014, owing primarily to intercompany loans and, in the case of France, to a single divestment.
FDI inflows to developing countries increased by 5% in 2014 relative to the previous year, with Asian economies receiving the largest share (US$ 492 billion).
In 2014, inbound FDI to Africa fell by about 3%, with a 17% decline in North Africa and a marginal uptick in Sub-Saharan Africa.
According to UNCTAD (2015), a 41% increase in mergers and acquisitions (M&As) indicates growing interest in African consumer markets.
Latin America and the Caribbean saw the largest fall in inflows among developing economies, with a 16% drop.
However, this was expected after the spike in inflows in 2013 (see table I.1).2 2 For the first time, in this edition the figures in table I.1 do not include the Caribbean financial centres, which partly explains why the overall numbers for all years reported are lower than those published in previous years.
Yet, even excluding the financial centres, developing economies were able to increase their proportion of global FDI inflows from 50% to 56%, the highest share ever recorded.
As fully revised data are not yet available, regional shares for past years have been corrected only for the inclusion of the Caribbean financial centres.
Other updates implemented by UNCTAD for those years for which full data are not available have been aggregated in the errors and omissions category.
This is only the third drop in FDI inflows since 2003 and the previous two, in 2006 and 2009, were quickly turned around by large increases in the following year.
FDI inflows grew from less than US$ 50 billion in 2003 to a peak of US$ 189.951 billion in 2013 (in nominal terms) on the back of high commodity prices, which boosted FDI in natural resources, and steady GDP growth across most of the region, which increased FDI in services and manufacturing for the domestic market.
Prices of the region’s key export commodities started to decline in 2012 and economic growth slowed in 2013, but FDI inflows continued to reach new highs in those years, in part because of the extraordinarily large acquisition of the Mexican brewer Grupo Modelo by Anheuser-Busch InBev for US$ 13.249 billion in 2013.
Excluding this single transaction, FDI inflows would have been flat in 2013.
The decline in inward FDI is taking place in a context of relative financial stability and stable capital flows in Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, 2014b).
In 2014, risk premiums remained stable and capital inflows held firm on the back of increased other investment inflows (typically bank loans and deposits) (see figure I.3).
For the past five years, portfolio investment and other investment have grown in importance and remained relatively stable.
Over this period, FDI accounted for just 47% of cross-border capital inflows, compared with almost 70% during the preceding decade.
Nevertheless, since portfolio inflows are concentrated in the largest economies, many smaller economies in the region rely more heavily on FDI for their capital needs.
This trend was sparked by the United States Federal Reserve’s 2013 announcement of its intention to begin withdrawing quantitative easing, and it continued throughout 2014, accelerating towards the end of the year.
The faster dollar appreciation was attributable to the falling oil price, which affected several economies in Latin America, as well as the United States’ improving economic performance and expectations of a hike in the interest rate set by the Federal Reserve.
Of the major currencies in Latin America, the Argentine and Colombian pesos suffered the greatest depreciation with respect to the dollar in 2014, falling by 31% and 24%, respectively.
The currencies of Brazil, Chile and Mexico depreciated by between 12% and 15% against the dollar, while remaining more or less stable against the euro.
Peru is an exception since the sol depreciated only slightly (7%) against the dollar and appreciated by a similar amount against the euro.3 The impact of such currency devaluations on FDI inflows is somewhat ambiguous.
On the plus side, they can reduce the cost of investments, particularly greenfield investments, that are expressed in local currencies.
Meanwhile, mergers and acquisitions, which are generally denoted in dollars, have become more expensive for European investors, but cheaper for investors from the United States.
A third consideration is that devaluation tends to reduce the returns on market-seeking investments, whose profits are expressed in dollars, and increase returns on export-oriented investments.
In short, the impact of currency fluctuations is uncertain and depends on several factors, including the type of investment, the origin of the investor and the specific local situation of the investment destination.
Overall, in the short term, devaluations are most likely to have a marginal effect, as FDI investment decisions are typically driven by long-term considerations.
Of the region’s six largest economies, only Chile recorded increased FDI inflows, while in Colombia they remained stable.
Brazil remains the largest recipient country in the region, having received US$ 62.495 billion in 2014, marginally less than in previous years.
Mexico, the second largest economy in Latin America, was also the second largest FDI recipient.
However, at US$ 22.568 billion, its recorded inflows fell short of the average for the previous decade, even in nominal terms.
On the other hand, the two-year average of US$ 33.384 billion is the highest ever recorded.
Peru recorded a drop in FDI inflows for the second year running.
While flows of FDI to South America, as well as Mexico, ebbed in 2014, flows to Central America and the Caribbean were practically unchanged (see annex table I.A.1). 3 Before 2014, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela maintained an official fixed exchange rate of 6.3 bolívares to the dollar which was significantly out of step with the parallel market rate.
In 2014, the government introduced two alternative exchange rates, which stood at 11.3 bolívares to the dollar and 50 bolívares to the dollar in November 2014.
The use of different types of exchange rates is limited to specific groups of importers and investors (ECLAC, 2014a).
Early in 2015, another regime was introduced with an exchange rate of 192 bolívares to the dollar.
In absolute terms, all three components of FDI inflows were lower in 2014 than in previous years.
Capital contributions fell the most relative to the other components, owing in part to their larger-than-usual share in 2013 following the Grupo Modelo acquisition mentioned above.
The share of reinvested earnings in FDI inflows had grown over the previous decade, owing to a significant rise in FDI income (ECLAC, 2013b).
Since 2010, however, FDI income has grown only modestly and the share of reinvested earnings in the region’s FDI inflows has stabilized at around 40% of total inflows.
Across the region, transnational corporations tend to reinvest approximately 50% of their earnings within the same subsidiary and repatriate the remaining 50%.
The proportion of earnings that is reinvested has remained almost unchanged over the years.
In 2014, 53% of FDI income was reinvested in the economies with information available.5 FDI income, the profits reported by transnational corporations in the region, totalled some US$ 103.877 billion in 2014, 16% less than in 2013.
In the last two countries, the profit downturn was concentrated in the mining sector.
In Brazil the heaviest drop in FDI income was in the automotive sector, which was hit especially hard by the worsening economic conditions and limited access to credit.
This sector had yielded particularly high profitability rates in Brazil over the past decade.
The largest drop was registered in Mexico (-38%), but this was due to extraordinarily high FDI income registered in 2013.
Average profitability, measured as FDI income divided by FDI stock, fell to 5%, which is slightly lower than the average for the previous two decades and represents a sharp reduction from the highs of over 9% reached between 2006 and 2008 (see figure I.6).
The decline in average profitability since 2012 was especially marked in countries with large FDI stocks in mining.
From 2006 to 2011, average annual profitability reached 25% in Peru and 15% in Chile, but since 2012, as prices of metals have declined and costs have risen, these profitability levels have reverted to more reasonable rates (see figure I.7).
Average profitability also declined, albeit less, for countries in which FDI is not concentrated in natural resources.
By contrast, transnational corporations in Panama have reported a rise in average profitability, and so did companies in Mexico, although from a low base.
State of) Thanks to the continuing rise of FDI stocks in the region, the considerable drop in average profitability over the past two years has led to only a small decline in FDI income.
FDI stocks are defined as the assets owned by transnational corporations in the host economy at the end of the year.
FDI stocks grow with new investments (either greenfield or acquisitions) and shrink with asset divestments or depreciation.
In nominal terms they have risen considerably over the past few years, reflecting the fact that FDI is the largest external liability for most economies.
FDI stocks have grown relative to GDP over the last decade, indicating that transnational corporations now have a larger footprint than ever before in the region.
This has not been the case, however, for Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador, Guatemala and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, which have prioritized national investments over FDI (with the exception of Guatemala) (see annex I.A.5). 2.
Distribution of FDI by sector For those countries with FDI data disaggregated by sector, the biggest change in 2014 was the slump in flows to the natural resources sector, which recorded its lowest share in FDI in the last 10 years at 17% of total inflows, down from 24% in 2009-2013.
Since manufacturing’s share remained at the same level as in previous years (36%, compared with 39% in 2009-2013), the greatest expansion took place in the services sector.
These averages obscure the large differences between the economies, which are shown in figure I.8.
In 2014, services exceeded a 50% share in Brazil’s total FDI for the first time, reaching 53%.
This was explained in part by the relatively large fall in the share of the natural resources sector, which shrank from 21% to 11% of inflows.
In Mexico, manufacturing absorbed more than 50% of FDI, owing largely to flows to the automotive sector, while the share of the services sector fell to 33%.
The major economies that do not report data disaggregated by sector include Argentina, Chile and Peru.
The last two of these have typically received significant inflows of FDI to the natural resources sector, but tentative information suggests that those flows also diminished in 2014 (see annex table I.A.2).
The natural resources sector consists of two components, each following a separate trend.
The first is oil and gas exploration and exploitation, which is mostly conducted through State-owned enterprises in Latin America, although the industry also receives large inflows of FDI.
The second is mining, which, owing in part to its more diversified product base, involves far more players, though —with the exception of CODELCO in Chile— none are large State-owned companies.
By the fourth quarter of 2014, the fall in global oil prices led to a 12% reduction worldwide in upstream capital expenditure (EIA, 2015), which is the fastest-responding segment in the oil sector and also the segment in which the bulk of capital investment takes place.
In fact, Anglo-Dutch supermajor Royal Dutch Shell announced a 40% cut in planned investments for 20156 and the United Kingdom’s BP intends to cut its investment budget by 20% (Adams and Energy Editor, 2015).
A significant decline in investment can therefore be expected in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2015 as projects are put on hold.
However, the rapid decline in oil and gas prices did not have an impact on the FDI figures for 2014.
The fall in prices in the mining sector began much earlier and, by contrast with hydrocarbons, mining investments tend to have long run-up times.
A global slump in mining activity was therefore foreseeable and, indeed, in 2014, all aspects of mining saw global declines.
Far fewer global milestones, such as the opening of new mines, were reached in 2014 than at the industry’s peak in 2010: 96 compared with 389.
The impact of commodity cycles depends on each country’s specific minerals base.
Copper is the most important mineral in Latin America and has suffered the largest and most consistent slump in recent years.
Chile, as the world’s leading copper exporter, should expect to be hit hard by this trend.
The price of gold, a major export from Chile, Mexico, Peru and Suriname, peaked between early 2011 and mid-2013, but has been stable since then.
The price of iron ore, produced mostly by Brazil in this region, plummeted by 50% between January and November of 2014.
Notwithstanding, the United Kingdom’s Anglo American completed its first shipments of ore from the new US$ 8.8 billion Minas-Rio operation in October (Walker, 2015).
Latin America clearly dominates in the copper sector, with more than 50% of projects (by value) under way in the region.
Chile is the largest single player, but Peru also has several large projects under development.
The region is also very active in gold and silver mining, with approximately 30% and 40% of worldwide projects, respectively.
By contrast, its involvement in iron ore and nickel projects is only marginal.
Projects in the pipeline are an important consideration, since they will be the target of investment in the coming years.
While the manufacturing sector may have seen a small drop in its share of FDI, it continues to be very important for many economies.
This is particularly the case since manufacturing investment tends to be less capital-intensive than natural resources investment and can thus create more employment per dollar invested (see chapter III of ECLAC, 2014b).
On the one hand, it can be market-seeking, which is the case in large markets and for specific products, such as cement, food and beverages and others.
These 6 See BloombergBusiness (2015). products have limited tradability and investments in such subsectors thus seek to take advantage of local markets.
On the other hand, investment in export-oriented manufacturing makes use of local strengths, such as low-cost labour, to produce products for export.
This type of manufacturing is particularly prevalent in Central America, Mexico and the Dominican Republic, from where many products are exported to North America.
Export-oriented manufacturing tends to materialize through greenfield projects undertaken by transnational corporations, whereas market-seeking investment more often takes the form of mergers and acquisitions.
Walker, “Pulling back across the board”, Engineering and Mining Journal, 16 January 2015. a These figures represent the value of mining projects that are currently under way, but at different stages of development.
The automotive sector can be the recipient of either type of investment.
It is a sector dominated by transnational corporations: all the assemblers in the region and the largest auto parts makers are foreign-owned.
Most production takes place in Mexico and Brazil and FDI inflows into the sector in both economies have grown significantly since 2012.
Mexico exports 82% of its production, compared with only 11% for Brazil.
Brazil’s automotive industry is integrated with its neighbouring Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) members.
More than 57% of Brazil’s automotive exports go to other MERCOSUR members.
Argentina is the only other MERCOSUR country to have a sizeable automotive industry (which has been growing in recent years).
Uruguay exports assembled vehicles to Brazil and Paraguay has specialized in the production of tyres, exports of which have averaged US$ 17 million a year since 2009.
Several companies announced new investments in Paraguay recently (in tyres and other auto parts), suggesting growth potential in the auto parts industry there in the coming years (see section D.2 for details).
For the first time in three years, services are again the largest recipient of FDI, absorbing 47% of inflows in those countries that report data disaggregated by sector.
The services sector is relatively diverse, and includes financial services, business process outsourcing (BPO), electricity generation, infrastructure and tourism.
Each of these receives significant FDI inflows, although the distribution differs significantly in each economy.
In the Caribbean, for example, BPO and tourism are particularly important, although disaggregated data are often not available.
These two sectors, which are not particularly capital-intensive, are pivotal for the Caribbean because of their capacity to create employment.
Chapter II addresses the Caribbean in more detail and explores some of the key features of BPO and tourism in the subregion.
The financial services sector is not generally considered to be capital-intensive, but it is a very valuable sector and one in which many mergers and acquisitions take place.
In recent years, other large takeovers have also attracted significant attention, and in general there is a trend towards consolidation in the sector.
At the same time, European and North American banks have announced divestments from the region in recent years, capitalizing some of their more profitable assets.
Transport infrastructure in general does not receive much FDI, with the exception of port- and shipping-related projects and a very small number of highways, mostly in Chile.
However, there appears to be a trend towards growing foreign investment in airports, as discussed at length in box I.1.
In fact, the gradual roll-out of fourth-generation (4G) technology requires a large and continuous stream of investment from international telephone operators.
In Brazil, telecommunications was the second largest services category in 2014, after commerce.
Mexico reported a significant negative inflow to the sector in 2014, owing to a single, one-off divestment by the United States’ AT&T, as discussed in more detail in section D.3.
In many Central American and Caribbean economies, some of the most significant investment announcements in 2014 concerned the expansion of 4G coverage.
Lastly, electricity generation was the fourth largest services sector in Brazil, with inflows of US$ 2.291 billion.
In Mexico, by contrast, inflows to the sector remained low, but a significant legislative change is likely to open up the sector to major investment in the coming years, including an announced US$ 5 billion investment by Spanish electricity giant Iberdrola.
In other economies, particularly in Central America, Chile and Uruguay, it is the renewable energy sector that is at the centre of attention, with numerous new wind farms and solar plants under construction.
Although Brazil has not posted the same robust economic growth as several other economies in the region, including Chile, Colombia and Peru, in recent times, all these countries are expected to see persistently strong growth in air traffic.
In the long term, Brazil is expected to rise from tenth to fifth position in the global ranking of most important airline markets.
This is reflected in the number of airport construction projects in the region: 318, according to the Centre for Aviation, in Latin America alone, which is 13.6% of all projects worldwide.
In terms of capital expenditure, however, the figures for Latin America are much less impressive: only 6.3% of total expenditure is scheduled to take place in the region, for an estimated total of US$ 34.2 billion.
This implies that the projects taking place in Latin America are relatively small-scale.
The region’s share in new airports is 12.7%, ahead of the Middle East (6.9%) and North America (2.4%).
Airports are an important category of infrastructure, since they require large investments and support other types of FDI and development.
Furthermore, airport infrastructure projects receive a relatively larger share of foreign investment than other infrastructure projects.
Traditionally, airports were run by the State, but the past 20 years have seen privatizations and the introduction of public-private partnerships and other forms of shared ownership.
One common practice is to award concessions lasting several decades to private operators.
For example, in Mexico most airports are managed by one of three large governmentowned corporations: Aeropuertos y Servicios Auxiliares (ASA), with 19 airports; Grupo Aeroportuario del Pacífico (GAP), with 12 airports; and Aeropuertos del Sureste (ASUR), with 9 airports.
In Brazil, the largest airports are run by consortiums of domestic and foreign companies.
Brazil has seen a wave of investment in airports owing to the 2014 World Cup and the 2016 Olympic Games.
The State operator Infraero has awarded concessions to consortiums for some of the country’s largest airports, while maintaining a minority stake in each of the concessions.
Inframérica, which includes Argentina’s Corporación América as one of the two consortium members, has maintained and operated Brasilia international airport since 2012 on a 25-year concession that included significant upgrades before the World Cup.
The same consortium also built and now operates the new airport at Natal, the only airport in Brazil in which Infraero does not have a stake in the concession.
Belo Horizonte’s 30-year concession was awarded in 2014 to a consortium that includes the operators of the international airports of Zürich and Munich, which has pledged to invest US$ 660 million.
While Brazil is the dominant air market in Latin America, other countries also receive significant investment in their airports.
El Dorado is operated by a consortium consisting of several local firms and Switzerland’s Flughafen Zürich.
Lima’s Jorge Chávez International Airport is currently in the first phase of a US$ 1 billion expansion plan to be completed by 2030.
The consortium operating the airport is led by Germany’s Fraport (70%), together with the International Finance Corporation (20%) and a local investment fund (10%).
Finally, the concession for the international airport of Santiago was awarded in early 2015 to a consortium consisting of France’s Aéroports de Paris (45%), France’s VINCI Airports (40%) and Italy’s Astaldi (15%).
Investments of approximately US$ 700 million are planned by 2030 to triple the airport’s capacity.
The table below shows some of the largest investments in airports currently under way.
Not all the investments in the table above are funded through FDI, but many of the airports in question are operated by transnational consortiums.
Taking into account the projected rate of growth in Latin American air traffic, the sector can expect to see further international investment, but only if governments are willing to relinquish control of national airports.
Airports are strategic assets and cooperation between the private and public sectors can help to boost FDI in airport infrastructure.
Technology intensity of investment The structure of the region’s economies varies greatly in terms of relative intensities of capital and labour.
This structure is largely the result of fortune and past economic policies.
For example, countries that are rich in natural resources are more likely to be capital-intensive than countries whose focus is on services.
The respective growth rates relating to labour and physical capital thus partly determine the growth rate of an economy.
However, another factor that drives economic growth is the capacity to improve productivity, primarily through innovation.
The different elements that contribute to the capacity to innovate can be measured and expressed as a share of GDP, as for physical capital.
This measure is referred to as innovation capital and by this indicator Latin America lags significantly behind many Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries.
Due to limitations in data availability, it is not always possible to estimate the exact figures for each economy and upper and lower bounds for each country are therefore indicated.
Brazil is far ahead of the other economies with respect to capacity to innovate, while Panama has the lowest level of innovation capital.
The factors used to measure innovation capital include investments in software and hardware, expenditure on research and development, expenditure on tertiary education and other forms of training, and number of patents filed.
Even though the data are standardized by economy size, larger economies tend to have more innovation capital.
The figure also shows that Central American countries have relatively low levels of innovation capital compared with South American countries.
Just as an abundance of natural resources can attract investment in natural resources, an abundance of innovation capital can help attract investment in high-technology sectors.
A wealth of innovation capital is, in fact, one of the factors that contributes to the potential productivity of high-technology investment.
Medium-high- and high-technology investments make up a large share of announcements in both Brazil and Mexico.
The automotive sector captures a large share of these inflows, primarily in these two countries (see boxes I.2 and I.4 of ECLAC, 2014b).
At the other extreme, medium-high- and high-technology investments account for less than 40% of the value of investments announced in Colombia, Panama and Peru.
This difference has to do with the structure of the economies —for example, the Panamanian economy is very services-centred— and it has implications for the impact of FDI.
Aside from Brazil and, to a more limited extent, Mexico, single investments can have a large impact on the total figures since the number of projects per country is limited.
The new Audi plant in Puebla, Mexico, illustrates the impact that more technology-intensive FDI can have.
Following the inauguration of a new, highly advanced plant some years ago, Germany’s Volkswagen Group, which owns the Audi brand, worked together with the local government and a local university to create a new training centre to be completed in 2015.
Since the plant employs some of the most advanced production techniques used within the multinational enterprise, it was decided to build a training centre in order to ensure that the staff would be qualified to use the most up-to-date new technologies.
Furthermore, in order to optimize efficiency, producers of intermediate suppliers are also trained at the centre.
As a result, Audi’s incorporation into the production structure will help raise the skill level of a large share of workers in the region.
In addition to the Volkswagen Group, the project also involves another German company, Siemens, which produces some of the electronics for Audi vehicles.
Lastly, figure I.13 shows the technology intensity of investment projects in the region as a share of the total value of all investment announcements for different time periods.
This figure again highlights that there are very few hightechnology investments in Latin America, with the share holding steady at around 4% of the total value of announced investments from 2008 to 2014, according to fDi Markets.
However, an encouraging pattern can be seen in the growing prevalence of medium-high-technology projects, whose share rose from 38% in 2008-2010 to nearly 56% in 2014. 7 fDi Markets is a database of investment announcements, and there is therefore no certainty that the announced projects will be completed.
Analysts from fDi Markets estimate the costs of investment projects when these are not published, which is both a strength and a weakness of this database.
It is a strength since it makes the database significantly more comprehensive than it would otherwise be.
The database categorizes each project under one of 53 sectors and one of 18 activities, with each of these combinations classified by technology intensity.
The especially large share recorded in 2014 is attributable to the great number of announcements in the automotive sector, particularly in Mexico.
Such a large number of announcements in a single year is somewhat uncommon and 2015 may be expected to bring a return to the lower average of previous years.
The share of medium-low-technology investment projects has dropped from 40% in 2008-2010 to 21% in 2014, owing largely to reduced investment in some heavy industries in certain large countries.
Finally, the low-technology category displays no clear trend, varying between 18% and 26% in the periods covered by the figure.
Largest investor countries The Netherlands has now become the largest single investor in Latin America and the Caribbean, accounting for 20% of all attributable8 inflows, up from 14% in 2013.
In Mexico, for example, the United States regained its position as top investor despite its share slipping from 30% to 29%.
In 2013, it had lost its top position to Belgium, owing to the takeover of Grupo Modelo by Belgium’s Anheuser-Busch Inbev.
In Brazil, the United States’ share of investment shrank to 13%, making the country the second largest investor after the Netherlands at 29% (see figure I.14). 8 Not all countries provide a disaggregation of FDI inflows by country of origin.
The dominant position of the Netherlands reflects its prominence in the Brazilian market, whereas in other countries, it plays a much smaller role.
Instead, Spain, which nearly quadrupled its share to 10% in 2014, is the largest European investor in other economies.
In Mexico and Colombia, Spain is responsible for approximately 18% and 13% of inflows, respectively.
The third large European investor, with 8% of total inflows, is Luxembourg, which is also particularly important in Brazil (10% of inflows).
Not typically renowned as economic powerhouses, the Netherlands and Luxembourg act as conduits for investment from other countries.
Ideally, these investment flows should be attributed to their original source countries, but this is not always possible.
The data available therefore show that these two countries, and Ireland to a lesser extent, continue to play a large role.
FDI from Asia increased in 2014, although this FDI cannot always be tracked easily or directly because some countries in Latin America and the Caribbean do not keep records on the origin of investment.
For example, table I.2 shows that three of the largest M&As in 2014 were completed by Chinese companies, including the largest acquisition recorded during the year.
However, two of these took place in Peru, whose central bank does not track the origin of investment.
ECLAC estimates that the region received FDI inflows of US$ 10 billion per year from China between 2010 and 2013.
This figure was probably even higher in 2014 in view of the aforementioned acquisitions.
Overall, FDI from Asia increased from 5% to 6%, with China’s share in recorded inflows to Latin America and the Caribbean increasing to 1% (see annex table I.A.3).
In 2012, the Government of Argentina introduced legislation to partially renationalize YPF, which was owned by Spain’s Repsol.
The compensation was decided only in 2014, with the Government of Argentina paying US$ 5 billion for Repsol’s 51% share.
Other divestments took place in several other countries, including Brazil, Colombia and Mexico.
Outward foreign direct investment FDI outflows from Latin America and Caribbean countries fell substantially for the second year in a row to US$ 29.162 billion in 2014, down by 12% with respect to 2013.
FDI outflows have always been volatile because they are concentrated in a handful of countries and a limited number of large trans-Latin corporations, making them very sensitive to individual acquisitions or large projects (see figure I.15 and annex table I.A.6).
The drop in 2013 and 2014 can be explained by the same factors that have eroded FDI inflows.
Since most outward investment from Latin American and Caribbean economies remains within the region, any worsening of investment prospects in the region also affects FDI outflows.
Furthermore, many of the largest trans-Latin corporations are in the extractive industries, which are reducing capital investment in response to lower commodity prices.
Traditionally, most of the largest trans-Latin corporations come from just four countries: Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico.
These four countries account for 90% of total outflows from the region over the previous decade (see table I.4).
The drop in outflows in 2014 was concentrated in Colombia and Mexico.
In Colombia, the bulk of outflows are invested in the extractive industries (46% of total), followed by manufacturing (21%).
Brazil has the largest stock of FDI abroad in the region, but for the fourth year running it reported negative FDI outflows in 2014 according to the methodology of the fifth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual.9 This does not mean that Brazilian companies are abandoning their investments abroad.
Indeed, in 2014 Brazilian companies invested US$ 19.556 billion in capital contributions, which is the highest figure since 2011, but received US$ 23.096 billion in net loans from subsidiaries abroad.
The result is a negative inflow of US$ 3.540 billion, similar to last year’s figure.
New investments in 2014 primarily targeted the financial services sector and telecommunications.
In 2014 Peru became the third largest investor country, behind Chile and Mexico, with outflows of US$ 4.452 billion.
Some of the largest Peruvian companies have been investing abroad since 2006, benefiting from strong economic growth in their domestic market, macroeconomic stability and better access to finance (Peru acquired investment grade status in 2008).
From 2006 to 2013 outflows averaged only US$ 1.4 billion a year, but several large acquisitions and projects in 2014 drove up outflows to a record high.
There is no official data on the sectoral distribution of FDI outflows from Peru, but the largest companies are chiefly in mining and food manufacturing.
Hochschild Mining specializes in underground mining for silver and gold and has subsidiaries in Argentina, Mexico and Chile, where it has recently acquired a project that will require investments of around US$ 1 billion.
Another large mining transnational is Minsur, part of Grupo Breca, which specializes in tin mining.
In food manufacturing the largest companies are Aje, Gloria and Alicorp, which have a presence in many Latin American markets.
In 2014 there were two large cement acquisitions: UNACEM bought a plant in Ecuador for US$ 517 million and Grupo Gloria bought a plant in the Plurinational State of Bolivia for US$ 300 million.
Peruvian companies follow a similar strategy to their counterparts in Colombia or Chile of seeking out markets in neighbouring countries.
Outflows from Argentina surged to US$ 2.117 billion, double the amount of the previous year; and outflows from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela totalled US$ 1.024 billion.
The State-owned Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA), the largest company in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, was rumoured to be looking for a buyer for its subsidiary in the United States, which operates three refineries with a capacity of 750,000 barrels per day (bpd).
FDI outflows from other economies are much more modest, although this is largely due to underreporting: almost half of the economies in the region do not report on outward FDI and many who do fail to record substantial flows.
Official figures from Central American countries are particularly low, with the partial exception of Costa Rica which registered outflows of US$ 218 million in 2014.
Still, there is evidence that some companies are expanding considerably in other countries, generally within Central America (see box I.2).
In early 2015, Banco Ficohsa of Honduras acquired the assets of Citibank in Guatemala, having acquired its Honduran assets in 2014.
Chapter II contains a more detailed analysis of outward FDI from the Caribbean economies.
However these investments are growing and are important for the subregion’s economies.
According to information provided by fDi Markets and Thomson Reuters (see Padilla and Gomes, 2015), Central American companies made 271 foreign investments between 2003 and 2013.
Panama, Costa Rica and El Salvador were the main investor countries and the largest number of transactions were recorded in business and financial services, the wholesale sector and food and beverages.
The Costa Rica case study also sought to identify the main consequences of businesses internationalizing in a small economy.
The quantitative effects include the creation of new jobs, more activities with a higher technology content and greater productivity, while the qualitative effects include technology transfer and improved goods and services.
The two largest corporate acquisitions by Latin American companies in 2014 were in the telecommunications sector.
Oi from Brazil carried out its announced merger with Portugal Telecom (valued at US$ 8.056 billion) and América Móvil increased its stake in Telekom Austria for US$ 6.110 billion (see table I.5).
Outward direct investments by companies in Latin America and the Caribbean are still largely concentrated within the region, but as companies grow and develop a significant number of them are starting to invest in other regions.
Most of the largest trans-Latin companies from Mexico invest in the United States, as do some of the largest corporations from Brazil and Colombia.
In recent years many companies have also been increasing their investments in Europe.
According to data from the European countries, FDI from Latin American countries has increased notably since 2009 (see figure I.16), reflecting the more readily available financial resources of Latin American companies relative to their European counterparts.
The first reflection of this shift was the divestment by European companies of valuable assets in Latin America in order to improve cash flows, but as the situation develops Latin American companies are also entering the European market.
Only between 2008 and 2009 was there a significant drop in inflows from Latin America, but this was consistent with the downturn in global flows.
Since 2003, approximately 31% of the incoming investment from Latin America went to Spain, while Belgium and Luxemburg accounted for another 25% and 15%, respectively.
The most important remitting countries are Brazil and Mexico, although this differs significantly between host economies.
Foreign direct investment inflows by country In Latin America, as in the Caribbean, just over half of all countries saw decreases in their inflows of FDI, while the rest experienced increases of varying degrees.
These two sets of countries epitomize the cyclical nature of FDI, with two of the three main risers belonging to last year’s largest fallers, and this year’s sharpest fallers making up last year’s fastest risers.
In other words, at the country level, extreme swings are common and often counteracted immediately.
Brazil’s share in total FDI inflows increased to 38%,10 somewhat above the long-run average of one third.
FDI inflows in Latin America and the Caribbean were even more concentrated than in 2013, with just five economies receiving some 80% of total FDI in 2014.
That top five include Colombia, which continues to receive large amounts of FDI, and Peru, where FDI inflows have dropped off somewhat from previously high levels. 10 Under the methodology of the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual, Brazil’s share is even larger: approximately half of total inflows for the region.
Under the methodology of the sixth edition, which Brazil has recently adopted, the country recorded FDI flows of US$ 96.851 billion. c See chapter II for FDI inflows from the Caribbean are disaggregated by country and discussed in more detail in chapter II.
Relative to the size of their economies, smaller economies tend to receive proportionally more FDI, which confers a particularly important role on transnational corporations.
FDI inflows are equivalent to as much as 10% of GDP in Panama, Chile and Nicaragua (see figure I.17).
Individual, one-off transactions can have a huge impact on inflows in different economies, particularly smaller ones.
The effects are more marked for mergers and acquisitions than for greenfield investments since M&As tend to take place at a single point in time, whereas large greenfield investments are more likely to span several years.
Caribbean economies have high FDI-to-GDP ratios on average, and are reviewed separately in chapter II. 1.
Brazil As noted earlier, the central bank of Brazil changed its data collection method recently from the fifth to the sixth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual.
The most important change this has entailed is that approximately US$ 24 billion of intercompany lending that was previously considered a negative outflow has been reclassified as a positive inflow, increasing both net inflows and net outflows by that amount.
Second, the inclusion of reinvested earnings, which Brazil did not previously treat as FDI, increases its incoming FDI by a further US$ 10.698 billion and its outgoing FDI by US$ 6.010 billion.
Unfortunately, so far, the data calculated under the sixth edition methodology is available only for 2014, which precludes long-term comparisons with preceding years.
To accommodate comparisons over time, so far this chapter has used the data according to the fifth edition.
Under the sixth edition definition, however, Brazil received US$ 96.851 billion in 2014, which implies that Brazil actually received approximately half of all inflows into the region as a whole.
Economic growth slowed from 2.5% in 2013 to 0.1% in 2014, but FDI inflows were affected little, reflecting the long-term confidence of foreign investors.
Still, the slowdown did cause FDI income (the profits made by transnational corporations in the country) to fall to US$ 25.105 billion, down 9% on 2013, according to the fifth edition methodology.
Under the newer methodology, FDI income reached US$ 35.803 billion, but again, there is no comparable number available for the preceding years.
The drop in profits was especially heavy in the automotive sector, which has traditionally been among the most profitable for foreign companies.
FDI income in this sector alone plummeted from US$ 3.29 billion in 2013 to only US$ 884 million in 2014, reflecting declines in vehicle registrations (7%), production (15%) and exports (40%).
This contraction was due mainly to more restricted access to credit and lower demand in Argentina, the sector’s leading export market.
Despite these troubles, the automotive sector received FDI inflows worth US$ 4.221 billion in 2014,11 a new record high, as most auto assemblers went ahead with the expansion plans announced in previous years (see box I.2 of ECLAC, 2014b).
In manufacturing, the coke, oil derivatives and biofuels sector was the largest recipient of FDI with inflows worth US$ 17.278 billion.
Other major manufacturing sectors include steel (US$ 4.692 billion) and chemical products (US$ 3.916 billion).
In services, the sectors that received the most FDI were retail (US$ 6.943 billion), telecommunications (US$ 4.167 billion) and financial services (US$ 3.170 billion).
The largest transaction in financial services was the acquisition by Banco Santander of a 14% stake in its subsidiary Banco Santander Brasil.
The Spanish bank made use of the opportunity provided by a depressed share price.
This operation by Santander, as well as increased investments by Iberdrola in electricity services, is behind the sharp rise in FDI flows from Spain, which reached US$ 6.356 billion.
In 2014, Spain was Brazil’s second largest FDI source country after the United States, excluding the Netherlands and Luxembourg, which act as a conduit for sizeable FDI flows from third countries.
In 2014, FDI from China climbed to US$ 1.161 billion on the back of increased investments in oil, electricity distribution and manufacturing.
In natural resources, FDI increased in mining, but dropped substantially in oil and gas exploitation.
In the successful auction of the Libra field in late 2013, Total (from France), Shell (United Kingdom/the Netherlands), the China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC) and China National Petroleum Corporation (CNPC) acquired rights to a 40% stake in the field and paid a signing bonus of US$ 7 billion.
Still, the effect of lower oil prices has been felt in Brazil, and foreign companies have grown more reluctant to increase investments in oil exploration and exploitation. 11 The sectoral figures are calculated on basis of the sixth edition methodology, but exclude reinvested earnings.
The inflows for which sectoral distribution is available total US$ 86.153 billion. 2.
Other South American countries FDI inflows to Chile increased by 14% to US$ 22.002 billion, despite falling investment in the mining sector, which is crucial to the Chilean economy.
A number of large M&As in other sectors compensated for the fall in mining investment.
The largest takeover in 2014 was the acquisition of Compañía General de Electricidad by Spain’s Gas Natural Fenosa for a total of US$ 3.3 billion, making the Spanish company the largest player in the Chilean electricity market with a 40% market share.
Furthermore, Brazil’s Itaú Unibanco acquired a controlling stake in Corpbanca for an estimated US$ 2.85 billion, although the deal is still subject to regulatory approval.
The electricity sector, in particular renewable energy, received large investments in 2014.
While wind energy accounts for the largest share of installed capacity with 836 MW, solar power is the fastest-growing area, surging from 4 MW at the end of 2013 to 402 MW at the end of 2014.
The foreign investments announced in this sector in 2013 included a US$ 1.4 billion investment in wind and solar by Mainstream Renewable Power of Ireland and a US$ 1.2 billion investment in hydropower by United States-based AES Corporation.
In 2014 Spain’s Abengoa announced a US$ 750 million investment in solar energy.
A number of other operators also announced plans in 2014 to build wind farms or solar plants, but not all of these plans will materialize, especially given the slump in international oil prices, which makes investments in electricity generation less attractive.
Despite the slowdown in mining investment in 2014, the sector remains extremely important for Chile.
The US$ 1.97 billion investment by Australia’s BHP Billiton in the Escondida mine announced in 2013 continued to be disbursed throughout 2014.
Similarly, the Sierra Gorda mine, controlled by Poland’s KGHM (55%) and Japan’s Sumitomo (45%), has accumulated some US$ 4.156 billion in investments in order to start operations, a significant portion of which was disbursed in 2014.
FDI in Colombia continues to diversify, with the natural resources sector taking a decreasing share of investment for five years in a row, reaching 40% in 2014.
Industry, communications, transport and business services received 45% of inflows, with the remaining 15% going to commerce, hospitality and other sectors.
The National Hydrocarbons Agency, however, forecasts that in 2015, some US$ 8 billion will be spent on exploratory drilling (Reuters, 2014), primarily by foreign companies, which would push up the share of natural resources in total FDI again.
Outgoing investment from Colombia fluctuates more than incoming investment, dropping by 49% in 2014.
For example, the US$ 1.32 billion takeover of Helm Bank by Chile’s Corpbanca, announced in 2012, was finally completed in 2014.
In telecommunications, Sweden’s Millicom expanded its assets in Colombia when its local telephone operator Tigo merged with UNE Telecom in 2014.
Equity International (United States) partnered with the local Terranum Group to acquire Decameron Hotels & Resorts for US$ 490 million, but since Decameron’s assets are spread throughout the region, this acquisition will not have a great impact on FDI inflows in Colombia.
In a market-seeking investment proposition, Chile’s CCU, which is partially owned by Heineken of the Netherlands, announced an investment of US$ 400 million to start producing beer and non-alcoholic beverages in Colombia.
This is a direct challenge to the United Kingdom’s SABMiller, which has dominated the Mexican beer market since its 2005 takeover of Bavaria.
To keep this decline in perspective, it should be mentioned that Peru has received very high levels of FDI in recent years relative to its previous trend and also to the size of its economy.
There is no official data on FDI by sector in Peru, but the mining sector seems to account for much of the decline.
In 2014 investment in mining (both domestic and foreign) fell by 11%, the first drop since 2007 after years of very rapid growth.
The fall was particularly marked in the acquisition of equipment and infrastructure.
Copper production was flat in terms of quantities and dropped by 12% in dollar terms, while gold production declined.
FDI had also increased over the previous decade in services and other market-seeking activities, but the slowdown in GDP growth in 2014 may make the domestic market less attractive for investors.
Lower metal prices, production problems at the mines and slacker economic growth combined to reduce FDI profitability in Peru.
FDI income earned by foreign companies in the country dropped to US$ 7.964 billion, the lowest level since 2007.
About half of these profits were reinvested, a similar proportion to previous years.
Reinvested earnings were the largest component of FDI (totalling US$ 3.978 billion), followed by intercompany loans (US$ 2.278 billion) and capital contributions (US$ 1.342 billion), which were significantly lower than in previous years.
Even the least developed economies produce it, since there is no lack of demand.
At the global level, however, the market is extremely concentrated, with only five companies —led by Anheuser-Busch InBev (Belgium), SABMiller (United Kingdom) and Heineken (the Netherlands)— responsible for over half of the world’s beer production (Barth-Haas Group, 2014).
Each of these companies is the result of multiple mergers and acquisitions as organic growth into new markets is almost impossible.
InBev itself has its origins in a 2004 merger of Belgium’s Interbrew and Brazil’s AmBev.
In Latin America, many of the largest M&As in recent years have been associated with beer.
The 2013 takeover of Grupo Modelo in Mexico by Anheuser-Busch InBev (valued at US$ 13.249 billion) was one of the largest ever recorded in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The table below ranks the largest mergers and acquisitions in the beer market in the last 20 years.
It shows that the global trend towards consolidation in this market led to two waves of large takeovers in Latin America and the Caribbean: around 2005-2006 and in 2010-2013.
As a result of these two waves of takeovers, local brewers play a significant role in very few countries in the region.
Only in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Costa Rica, Guatemala, Nicaragua and some Caribbean countries do locally owned enterprises have the largest market share.That is not to say that there are no locally controlled brands in other markets, but they often play second or even third fiddle to the large international enterprises.
The map below shows the top beer company in each economy in the region.
In addition to the global top five companies, local independent (often family-owned) enterprises are the market leaders in a small number of countries, the United Kingdom’s Diageo has the largest market share in Jamaica, andTrinidad andTobago’s ANSA McAL holds the largest market share in three smaller economies in the Caribbean.
These last two companies are not traditionally considered brewing companies, although Diageo does have significant experience in this area through its Guinness brand.
As the map clearly shows, Anheuser-Busch InBev is the dominant player in the Latin American market, while SABMiller is the market leader in a several economies in northern South America and Central America.The takeover of Bavaria in 2005 was significant because it gave SABMiller the largest market share in several medium-sized beer markets.
This dominance goes far beyond that of the other companies in other markets, varying from Anheuser-Busch InBev’s 69% market share in Brazil, 56% in Mexico and 77% in Argentina to Heineken’sa 88% market share in Chile.
It is typical for single brewers to dominate national beer markets in developing economies.
The largest players in Angola (SABMiller with 89%), Turkey (Efes with 83%), Nigeria (Heineken with 70%) and Thailand (Singha with 67%) all hold a dominant market share.
By contrast, in developed economies, market shares above 50% are very rare.
Some exceptions include Belgium, in which the domestic Anheuser-Busch InBev has a market share of 56%, Denmark (Carlsberg with 54%) and Republic of Korea (Oriental Brewery with 53%).
The implication of this intense market dominance in Latin America and the Caribbean is that competition is relatively stifled.
Since organic growth is difficult, existing market dominance practically guarantees a future market for a product, though this may not hold true as strictly for some larger markets.
Heineken, for example, announced a new US$ 480 million brewery in Mexico in early 2015.
However, as a general rule, the lack of competition shields companies from the pressure to innovate, which may not benefit consumers in the long term.The advantage gained by the buyer is also reflected in the high valuations of beer companies.
A list of the top 10 largest M&As of any type in Latin America and the Caribbean in the last 20 years would include several of those listed in the table above.
The value, and profitability, of these beer companies is incomparable with any other sector.
Peru hosted three of the five largest corporate acquisitions in Latin America in 2014, but these were ultimately transfers of ownership between foreign companies and had no net effect on FDI flows.
FDI inflows to Argentina dropped by 41% to US$ 6.612 billion —the smallest amount the country has received since 2009.
The main reason for this decline was the nationalization of YPF, which took place in 2012, but was not settled until 2014.
The government paid US$ 5.000 billion to Spain’s Repsol as compensation for the expropriation of 51% of YPF.
With the return of the majority share to Argentina, in practice, this implies a negative inflow in the balance of payments.
If it were not for this transaction, inflows into Argentina would have remained at a similar level to previous years.
Reinvested earnings make up the bulk of inflows and totalled US$ 7.365 billion.
Although recent data are not available, the sectoral distribution of FDI in Argentina seems balanced between natural resources, manufacturing and services.
The share of services has increased in recent years, but manufacturing is likely to have gained ground in 2014.
In October, Japan’s Toyota announced it had completed 60% of its US$ 800 million investment plan announced in 2013, while General Motors of the United States announced in 2014 that it would increase its earlier investment of US$ 450 million to US$ 720 million.
Lastly, Italy’s Fiat Chrysler announced the construction of a new engines plant in Argentina in 2013 at a cost of up to US$ 300 million.
According to industry specialists, Argentina has great potential for oil exploration, with the Vaca Muerta formation touted as a particularly abundant source of both shale gas and shale oil.
The government has announced several special benefits to oil companies willing to invest more than US$ 1 billion.
Since then, United States-based Chevron signed an agreement with YPF to invest US$ 1.6 billion to explore the Vaca Muerta formation and Russia’s Gazprom is rumoured to have offered US$ 1 billion of investments.
The Vaca Muerta exploration is expected to require a total investment of some US$ 15 billion.
Finally, the Anglo-Dutch company, Royal Dutch Shell and France’s Total announced an investment of US$ 550 million together with Gas y Petróleo de Neuquén, a local oil and gas company, in a different field.
Uruguay has received significant investment in its renewable energy sector —testament to this was the completion of several large wind farms in 2014.
The country is scheduled to source 90% of its energy from renewable sources in 2015 and is among the global leaders in the field, particularly with respect to wind energy.
Nevertheless, a new pulp mill was completed in 2014, representing the largest single investment the country has ever received.
The mill, a joint venture between Chile’s Arauca and Swedish-Finnish Stora Enso, cost US$ 2.27 billion, plus US$ 230 million for the related port, and has taken several years to complete.
A project by United Arab Emirates-based Zamin to develop an iron mine for a cost of up to US$ 3 billion has been under discussion for several years.
In direct relation to this, the Government of Uruguay has been promoting the idea of constructing a new US$ 1 billion port on its Atlantic coast, for which it is looking for investors.
FDI inflows to Ecuador increased by 6% to US$ 774 million, over two thirds of which was invested in the natural resources sector.
Manufacturing’s share shrank to only 14% of FDI inflows during 2014, while services fell from 43% to only 18% of inflows.
In October, contracts were awarded to a number of international companies to work with state-owned Petroamazonas in order to explore for new oil supplies.
The government expects that US$ 2.1 billion will be spent on such exploration over the next five years.
The Ecuadorian food and beverage market has attracted significant interest from foreign firms.
This acquisition was valued at US$ 400 million and Coca-Cola announced other plans in 2014 to invest up to US$ 1 billion in Ecuador over the next five years.
Arca Continental also announced its intention to invest a further US$ 80 million in a new industrial plant.
In the financial sector, Panama’s Promerica Financial Corporation, which already operated a bank in Ecuador, acquired 56% of Banco de la Producción, the country’s fourth largest bank.
Promerica already operates banks in many Central American countries, as well as in the Cayman Islands and the Dominican Republic.
After two years of very large inflows, FDI inflows to the Plurinational State of Bolivia fell by 63% to US$ 648 million.
In recent years, much of the investment in the country has gone to natural resources, particularly in the oil and gas sector.
In 2014, for example, PDVSA announced that it would invest US$ 200 million in a number of exploration and production projects.
Outside the natural resources sector, Peru’s Holding Cementero acquired full control of the Plurinational State of Bolivia’s largest cement maker, Soboce, by purchasing the remaining 51% stake in the company for an estimated US$ 300 million in December.
Several nationalizations and divestments have taken place in the Plurinational State of Bolivia in recent years.
Brazil’s Petrobras and France’s Total divested their stake in the major gas pipeline Transierra for US$ 133 million.
The buyer, Bolivian State-owned energy company YPFB, now controls a great majority of the gas pipeline.
The Malku Khota mine was nationalized in 2012 and its former owner (TriMetals Mining of Canada) is seeking US$ 386 million in compensation in an international arbitration court.
India’s Jindal Steel and Power was awarded US$ 22.5 million by an international court for its share in the El Mutún project and it is seeking a further US$ 100 million in damages.
Such nationalizations and divestments are considered to be negative inflows of FDI, thus leading to a reduction in FDI.
In previous years investment had increased owing to restrictions on foreign exchange: foreign enterprises were unable to repatriate their profits and therefore sought investment opportunities within the country.
This resulted in a property boom in Caracas as many foreign companies reinvested their profits in real estate.
The estimated 3% contraction in GDP growth in 2014 likely caused a concomitant drop in transnationals’ profits and thus a subsequent reduction in reinvested earnings.12 The oil industry continues to require significant investment and the government-owned Petróleos de Venezuela, S.A. (PDVSA) works with its foreign partners on operating production facilities.
In the automobile industry, where the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was until recently among the major players in Latin America, production slumped by about 75% between 2013 and 2014 owing to the limited availability of parts and a lack of access to foreign exchange (The Wall Street Journal, 2014).
Paraguay more than trebled its inflows, from US$ 72 million to US$ 236 million.
The country is making efforts to attract more investment and particularly to diversify away from infrastructure and agriculture, its traditional sectors.
One of the largest growth areas is the automotive industry, in which Paraguay takes advantage of its MERCOSUR membership to supply Brazilian and Argentine car factories.
Japan’s Fujikura is among the leading car parts manufacturers in the country, but recent investment announcements have also been made by Japan’s Sumitomo (US$ 15 million), Republic of Korea’s THN Corporation (US$ 40 million) and Italy’s Pirelli (exploratory stage).
Several Brazilian companies also announced expansions in 2014, including plastics manufacturer X-Plast with US$ 26 million.
However, the largest Brazilian investments are in the agricultural sector: meat processing company JBS announced a US$ 100 million investment in the construction of a new slaughterhouse in Paraguay, and Bunge has long been a major investor in the country. 3.
While this may seem like a very large drop, it is important to remember that the figures for 2013 were inflated by the takeover of Grupo Modelo by Belgium’s Anheuser-Busch InBev (see box I.3) for US$ 13.249 billion.
This was compounded by a US$ 5.57 billion divestment in the telecommunications sector (completed for regulatory reasons) in 2014, which is discussed in more detail below.
Without these two extraordinary events, FDI inflows in Mexico would have been above those of the previous decade and the two-year average inflow of FDI is in fact the highest ever recorded.
Aside from the telecommunications takeover, M&As actually played a relatively small role in 2014.
Individual companies, such as Spain’s Telefónica, have devalued their Venezuelan assets by moving from the official exchange rate to alternative ones, but the Central Bank of Venezuela continues to use the official exchange rate.
Telefónica has devalued its assets in the country by 7.450 billion euros over several years (El País, 2015).
United States-based AT&T was responsible for the divestment that resulted in a negative inflow in 2014 and was also involved in some of the other large transactions affecting Mexico in 2014.
In May, the company announced its intention to acquire DirecTV, the United States’ leading satellite television provider, for US$ 48.5 billion.
Since DirecTV is a major player in several countries, including Mexico, the acquisition had to be approved by regulators in these different countries.
In Mexico, regulatory approval was complicated by the fact that AT&T also held an 8.3% stake, and 24% of the voting shares, in América Móvil, another company that provides satellite television services.
AT&T maintained its faith in the Mexican market, however, as demonstrated by its November agreement with Grupo Salinas to acquire Iusacell, Mexico’s third largest mobile network, for US$ 2.5 billion.
This acquisition was completed in January 2015 and was therefore not included in the annual FDI inflows for 2014, whereas the US$ 5.57 billion divestment was.
All of this goes some way in explaining the fall in investment in Mexico, where the transport and telecommunications sector posted a negative inflow of US$ 3.753 billion in 2014.
The heightened activity in the telecommunications sector in Mexico is partially driven by new anti-monopoly legislation, under which the regulatory body may impose asymmetrical regulations and obligations on the “preponderant agent”, defined as a party with market dominance.
América Móvil is such a company, controlling 68% of the mobile telecommunications market.
The company can either reduce its market share by selling some of its assets or continue to be the preponderant agent.
In the first case, Bank of America estimates that such an operation could yield US$ 10 billion (Telegeography, 2014) and could give a platform to a new (foreign or local) player.
In the second case, the anti-monopoly legislation may make it more attractive for new players to enter the market anyway, as it did for AT&T.
In manufacturing, the automotive industry is key (see box I.4 in ECLAC, 2014b), with Mexico now the world’s seventh largest car producer.
Of all the branches of manufacturing, the automotive industry was the largest FDI recipient in 2014, absorbing US$ 4.308 billion of the US$ 12.87 billion total.
Mexico was the subject of a wave of new investment announcements from car makers from all over the world in 2014.
Inflows in the electricity sector are still small, totalling US$ 580 million in 2014, although this was higher than the average of US$ 253 million per year in the five previous years.
Spain’s Iberdrola announced investments of US$ 5 billion, of which it has already disbursed US$ 1.5 billion, including US$ 950 million in wind farms with 2,000 MW of capacity.
Furthermore, on the back of the reforms to the energy sector, IEnova, which is co-owned by United States-based Sempra Energy, plans to invest US$ 3.2 billion in domestic infrastructure projects over two years, while Canada’s TransCanada is involved in a US$ 1 billion pipeline construction project.
The services sector received approximately one third of all FDI inflows into Mexico in 2014, with financial services being the dominant subsector, attracting 25% of all FDI inflows.
The other services subsector with significant inflows was hospitality, which received some US$ 825 million in FDI in 2014, primarily in the hotel sector. 4.
In total, the subregion recorded inflows of US$ 10.480 billion, 2% less than the year before.
Once again, Panama was the largest recipient of FDI, accounting for more than 45% of the Central American total.
The largest rate of growth was observed in El Salvador, whose inflows nearly doubled between 2013 and 2014.
Costa Rica was the only country with decreased inflows in 2014, though it continues to be the second largest recipient (see figure I.18) Central America hosts a great deal of activity in the renewable energy sector.
According to consulting company IHS Technology, photovoltaic capacity in Central America rose from 6 MW in 2013 to 22 MW in 2014 and is expected to jump to 243 MW in 2015, with Honduras leading the way.
Investments in renewable energy, primarily by foreign investors, are already having an impact on the region’s energy balance, even though solar energy still makes up a very small portion of current electricity generation capacity.
Hydropower continues to be the pre-eminent renewable resource, wind energy also far outstrips solar energy, and even geothermal energy plays a part.
In the other sectors, services continue to be the leading recipient of FDI, though mining has been making strides in certain countries.
As discussed in box I.4, the expansion of the Panama Canal and the proposed construction of the Nicaragua Canal are spurring investment in logistics facilities and ports throughout Central America and the Caribbean.
FDI flows into Panama increased marginally to US$ 4.719 billion, which is the highest ever recorded and continues a nearly unbroken uptrend since 2009.
FDI income has also increased substantially over the same period and it too reached a new record in 2014.
Panama has the highest FDI-to-GDP ratio in Latin America and is positioned to continue receiving significant investment inflows (box I.4 below discusses the impact of the Panama Canal on investment in the country).
The share of natural resources in FDI has grown with the development of the Cobre Panama project.
Since this concession was acquired by Canada’s First Quantum Minerals in a hostile takeover, investment has continued, including approximately US$ 600 million in 2014.
The open-pit mine is expected to start operations in 2018 and total investment is estimated to be US$ 6.4 billion.
Even though specific data are not yet available, this single investment by First Quantum Minerals is solely responsible for increasing the share of natural resources in Panama’s FDI flows, which are traditionally dominated by services (90% of inflows between 2009 and 2012).
The expansion of the Panama Canal currently under way is leading to a further inflow of investment in the logistics sector.
Beyond the logistics sector, Panama is consolidating its role as a financial centre, attracting significant inflows and outflows of FDI in that sector.
Colombia’s Bancolombia is one of the major foreign players, strengthening its position through its 2013 takeover of HSBC Panama.
Since the country is involved in many offshore financial activities, it is no surprise that Panama hosts the regional or global headquarters of many international companies.
InterEnergy, for example, which is incorporated in the Cayman Islands, announced a US$ 427 million investment in a Panamanian wind power project with a total capacity of 270 MW.
The share of the manufacturing sector has been in decline for several years and received only 20% of FDI inflows in 2014.
The largest receiving categories were services and real estate, with 35% and 36% of inflows, respectively.
In 2014, both Mexico’s América Móvil and Spain’s Telefónica announced expansions of their 4G networks in the country.
These roll-outs tend to be expensive, but exact cost estimates are not available.
According to the Costa Rican Investment Promotion Agency (CINDE), companies committed to US$ 474.4 million of new investments in 2014, including US$ 127 million in the life sciences sector, which is a profitable sector for Costa Rica.
A sizeable new project has been announced by United States-based American World Clinics, which plans to construct a US$ 100 million health-care complex aimed at attracting medical tourists.
By virtue of its vital role in international trade, the size of the locks on the Canal imposed a practical maximum size limit on the ships used in transport, known as Panamax.The Canal’s role in enabling trade between the Pacific and Atlantic cannot be overstated.Today, around 5% of global maritime trade passes through the Panama Canal.
As shown in the figure below, the Panamanian economy relies much more heavily on transport, storage and communication than the rest of the region.
This is attributable to the large harbour, warehousing and transport industry related to the Panama Canal, which is responsible, directly and indirectly, for some 100,000 to 120,000 jobs.The Canal is the driving force behind much investment in Panama.
It continues to be the largest recipient of FDI relative to the size of the economy in Latin America and only a small number of Caribbean economies outperform it by this measure.
This success has been an important driver for the robust economic growth recorded in Panama in recent years, leading some analysts to refer to Panama City as “the Singapore of Central America” (The Economist, 2011).
The Panamax standard has become a severe constraint as many modern ships are too large to fit through the Canal.
In order to remain fit for purpose, a plan was proposed to add a third set of larger locks to allow larger ships to pass through the canal.
The US$ 5.25 billion project was originally due for completion in 2014, but is still under construction.
Although this is not an FDI project as such, many foreign companies are involved as contractors in the construction process.
Meanwhile, the Government of Nicaragua has plans to construct a competing canal,a which, with a length of 259 kilometres, will be more than three times as long as the Panama Canal.
If completed, it will be able to handle ships that are significantly larger than those that can fit through the expanded Panama Canal.
Officially, work started in December 2014 and is scheduled for completion by 2020 at an estimated cost of US$ 50 billion.
Several major Chinese companies will participate in the project, which is not, as yet, fully funded.
The project remains uncertain, but its completion would have a huge impact on the shipping industry.
In view of the expansion of the Panama Canal and the possible construction of the Nicaragua Canal, shipping in the Caribbean has a bright future.
These prospects have led to a large number of new projects throughout the Caribbean, with several economies seeking to set themselves up as logistics hubs in competition with Panama.
Finally, in Trinidad and Tobago, a consortium of companies from China committed in 2014 to the construction of both a new port (costing around US$ 500 million) and several new industrial parks (US$ 250 million).
Owing to their key role in international transport, the Panama Canal and, if it is completed, the future Nicaragua Canal have transformative potential, not just for the individual countries involved, but for the entire region.
An overview of the sceptics’ point of view can be found in Confidencial (2015).
Costa Rica is recognized globally for its efforts to reduce the use of hydrocarbons in energy generation.
In 2014, the country generated approximately 80% of its electricity through hydropower and, in 2015, it was lauded for having produced all its electricity from renewable sources in the first 75 days of the year, thanks to abundant rainfall.
In 2014, the Costa Rican Congress approved a US$ 958 million geothermal project, financed largely through loans from Japanese and European investment banks.
For the most part, electricity generation is controlled by government-owned ICE, but there are also several small private players.
The Orosí wind project, developed by the United Kingdom’s Globeleq, will have 50 MW of generation capacity and is currently under construction for at least US$ 109 million.
Finally, Sysco Corporation of the United States announced that it had acquired 50% of the privately held food distributor, Mayca Distribuidores, for an undisclosed sum.
FDI flows into Guatemala increased by 8% to US$ 1.396 billion in 2014, the highest level ever recorded.
For several years, the natural resources sector has received the largest FDI inflows, but this year the energy sector outperformed natural resources, receiving 24% of inflows compared with 23%, respectively.
Manufacturing’s share slipped to 13% and retail received 15% of total inflows.
Solway Group (the Russian Federation) is constructing a ferronickel mine at an estimated cost of close to US$ 300 million and has received permission to explore for other opportunities.
Finally, Canada’s Quattro signed an exploration and exploitation contract for a block in the North Petén basin in 2014.
Grup Marítim TCB of Spain broke ground on a US$ 252 million port enlargement in preparation for the expansion of the Panama Canal (see box I.4).
Finally, through its Tigo brand, Sweden’s Millicom acquired Cablefusión, one of its main competitors in the pay television market, to become a sector leader.
In Honduras, the inflow of FDI increased by 8% to reach a new record of US$ 1.144 billion, despite a significant divestment by Citibank of the United States, which sold its Honduran operations to local financial group Banco Ficohsa in 2014.
Banco Ficohsa also acquired the Guatemalan assets of Citibank, also for an undisclosed sum, in 2015.
Telecommunications operators in many countries in the region are upgrading their networks to make them 4G compatible.
In Honduras, for example, the Russian Federation’s VimpelCom is investing in expanding the 4G network of its subsidiary Wind Telecom.
Like other countries in Central America, Honduras is actively expanding its electricity generation capacity from renewable sources.
By 2018, Honduras is expected to install a cumulative 499 MW of new solar capacity.
To this end, SunEdison of the United States started construction in 2014 on a US$ 146 million, 82 MW photovoltaic plant in Choluteca.
Upower, another United States-based independent power producer, also started construction in 2014 on a US$ 190 million, 100 MW photovoltaic plant in La Gaceta.
Guatemala’s Cementos Progreso is working with a local partner to build a US$ 125 million, 60 MW, coal-operated power plant both to supply its own factory and to sell electricity to the national electricity company.
A project that could have a significant impact on future FDI inflows is the Nicaragua Canal (the continuing debate on that topic is covered in box I.4).
One of the largest investments in 2014 was the rapid expansion of Xinwei Telecom of China, which was awarded six licences to provide different services in the country, leading to expected investments of US$ 300 million.
As announced in 2013, Canada’s B2Gold is continuing to explore new mining options in order to expand its existing operations, which represents a continuous investment by the company.
Until now, Nicaragua has received less FDI in renewable energy generation than other Central American nations, though the United States-based Viaspace has invested in a 12 MW biomass power plant.
However, in 2014, the Government of Nicaragua announced that it aims to have 90% of its electricity generated by renewable sources, particularly wind and hydroelectric power.
The construction by a Brazilian conglomerate of the 253MW Tumarín dam is getting underway, but with ownership of the project shared between the State-owned electricity companies and foreign investors. 13 The largest project is the Reventazón dam, which is expected to cost up to US$ 1.4 billion and to have generating capacity of more than 300 MW.
However, this project is being developed by the State-owned Grupo ICE and is therefore not FDI.
A portion of that investment came from the ongoing investment by Sensity Systems of the United States, an LED manufacturer that committed in 2013 to building a US$ 490 million factory to supply the region.
Colombia’s Procaps acquired Laboratorios López, which is the country’s largest pharmaceuticals laboratory.
Hyatt Hotels of the United States announced that it would invest US$ 36 million in its first hotel in El Salvador, which is scheduled to open in 2016.
Italy’s ENEL, through its subsidiary Enel Green Power, announced a deal in December to sell its 36.2% stake in the La Geo geothermal joint venture to its State-owned partner INE for US$ 280 million.
This large negative inflow is offset by some major investments in the telecommunications sector, where inflows totalled US$ 334 million in 2014.
The year’s largest telecommunications investment came from Sweden’s Millicom, through its local Tigo brand.
Also in telecommunications, Jamaica’s Digicel announced a US$ 45 million upgrade of its network in early 2014.
FDI and the current account balance Over the past two decades, Latin America and the Caribbean posted a current account surplus for just five years (from 2003 to 2007).
Throughout the 1990s and from 2006 to 2014 the region registered cumulative current account deficits, which have widened a great deal in the past five years.
The other components have been more stable: the current transfers balance has been consistently positive, deteriorating only slightly over the decade, and both the income balance and the services balance have posted long-standing deficits.
The current account deficit deteriorated markedly in 2013 owing mainly to a sharp reduction in the goods surplus from 0.8% to 0.3% of GDP as imports grew more rapidly than exports.
The slowdown in export growth, which began in 2012, was caused by weak international demand from both developed economies and emerging markets (ECLAC, 2013a).
That weak demand drove down the prices of the region’s export goods (mostly commodities) to the extent that even higher export volumes could not offset the fall.
The deficit remained stable in 2014 because the drop in FDI income mentioned above was compensated by an equal drop in the goods trade surplus (ECLAC, 2014a).
A look at the data for the past decade reveals that the growth of FDI income has been possibly the strongest driver of the deterioration of the region’s current account balance.
That last amount represented 83% of total investment income from the region and more than double the value of the services balance.
From 2002 to 2007 the rapid growth of FDI income was offset by an equally large rise in exports.
In fact both trends were determined by the surge in commodity prices, which boosted both exports and the profits of transnational corporations in the extractive industries.
The global economic crisis of 2008-2009 hit exports much harder than FDI income in the region, and the disparity between the two has grown even more apparent in the past three years.
Other current account items, such as trade in services, remittances and other types of investment income, are certainly important in many economies, but the widening FDI income deficit and the deteriorating surplus on the goods balance have been the largest single factors contributing to the region’s growing current account deficit.
A large current account deficit can jeopardize economic growth if it cannot be funded on the international market (ECLAC, 2013b).
The capacity of each country to finance its current account deficit depends on its level of reserves, sovereign funds (if any) and degree of access to international markets, which is mainly determined by its credit history.
It is also important to analyse the dynamics of FDI inflows and FDI income in relation to the economic cycle.
While FDI is now the largest external liability of most countries in the region, it is not a liability on which the creditor can demand repayment, as opposed to loans and bonds.
This is one reason why FDI inflows are much less volatile than portfolio and other investments and very rarely turn negative in a crisis.
At the same time, FDI income expands with economic growth and contracts during downturns, producing a countercyclical effect on the host economy.
Events that can trigger a balance-of-payments crisis, such as terms-of-trade shocks, are likely to reduce FDI income as well.
While the prices of export commodities started to decline in 2012 and economic growth contracted in 2013, FDI income continued to reach new highs and declined only in 2014.
Although the average profitability of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean declined since 2008, as the FDI stock continued to grow, total FDI income actually rose, reaching its highest level in 2013 (see annex table I.A.5).
In other words, the size of the assets that transnational corporations have in the region and their continuing growth guarantee that the profits of transnationals remain large, despite a potential drop in profitability (see figure I.21).
The impact of FDI income on the external accounts varies significantly by country.
On the whole, the countries with FDI concentrated in the mining sector, such as Chile and Peru, posted the highest returns on FDI as commodity prices rose.
However, Brazil is one example of a country that has seen a notable rise in FDI income even though the transnational corporations operating there are not concentrated in the extractive industries.
Chile and Brazil are 14 Net FDI income is equivalent to the profits made by transnational corporations in countries in the region minus the profits made by trans-Latin corporations abroad. among the few economies for which there are data on FDI income by sector.
In terms of average profitability across sectors, the mining sector in Chile stands out for its returns of up to 25% in 2010.
But other sectors have also been very profitable, including public utilities (electricity, gas and water), which have achieved returns of 10% that same year.
In Brazil, mining and oil were not among the most profitable sectors for transnational corporations; rather, automotive manufacturing and cement production reached return levels above 10%.
While the earnings generated in the extractive industries are higher, the effects on the balance of payments may actually be milder if these income flows are offset by increased exports of commodities.
Export-oriented FDI can compensate for the profits it repatriates with the value of the exports it generates.
By contrast, FDI income in market-seeking activities may put more pressure on the current account as they are not offset by exports.
It is important to note that not all FDI income recorded as a debit in the current account leaves the country.
In fact, about 50% of FDI income is reinvested in the same economies —a proportion that has remained relatively stable over the years.
In 2009, when the financial crisis had an impact on FDI income, transnational corporations maintained their level of reinvested earnings and reduced profit repatriations (see figure I.22).
Reinvested earnings are recorded as both a debit on the current account and as a liability on the capital account.
This alleviates the pressure on the external accounts, but only at the cost of accumulating a higher liability in the form of FDI stock.
In fact, most countries in the region have been financing their current account deficits with large inflows of capital, mainly FDI.
As noted above, the ever-burgeoning FDI stock will have a long-term impact on the current account as FDI income swells.
In fact, taking into account capital inflows and profit outflows, FDI is already having a negative impact on the balance of payments in some countries in the region.
Of course, in the same way that transnationals’ profits in the region are marked as debits on the current account, the profits made by trans-Latin corporations abroad are registered as credits.
This should offset the negative effect on the current account of the repatriated earnings flowing out of the region, but so far it has had a limited effect: FDI income outflows total some US$ 100 billion, whereas FDI income inflows have yet to exceed US$ 15 billion and are concentrated in only a few countries.
Overall, the current account deficits posted in most Latin American and Caribbean economies and the role that FDI income has played in them highlight the fact that FDI, as is the case for other forms of external capital, carries a cost.
While FDI has been praised for its stability (it rarely turns negative), its persistent effects on the current account are significant.
In order to offset these effects, FDI should promote changes in the production structure that could boost exports in the future.
Even in industries where large FDI flows have clearly increased production capacities (such as the automotive industry), the shallowness of local value chains turns these industries into net importers as well.
That fall was somewhat larger than expected and has been amplified by a number of one-off events, mostly the Grupo Modelo acquisition in Mexico, which inflated the FDI figures in 2013, and the nationalization of YPF in Argentina, which was settled in 2014 and represented a large divestment.
The drop in commodity prices, which began in 2012 for metals and spread to oil in the second half of 2014, led to a sizeable reduction of FDI in natural resources in the region.
This represented an important change in the cycle, as FDI had been responsible, to a large extent, for the reprimarization of some economies in the region in the previous decade.
Falling investment in the natural resources sector was partially offset by increasing investment in the services sector, especially in market-seeking services.
The great majority of outflows still originate in a few Latin American countries and are directed towards other economies within the region.
Developed countries receive some investment from the trans-Latins, but the outflows to developing countries outside the region are very small.
Overall, trans-Latin corporations are not sufficiently diversified geographically to avoid being affected by the adverse economic environment in the region.
Although the average profitability of FDI has declined in recent years, FDI income is having an ever greater negative impact on the balance of payments.
FDI income was responsible for a large share of the current account deficit in 2014, which reached 2.7% of GDP.
Addressing that growing deficit requires a large capital account surplus, which can be partially funded through FDI itself.
In a context of subdued economic growth and lower international demand for its key exports, Latin American and Caribbean economies will need to attract FDI projects that can raise production capacity and help diversify their economies.
These economies receive substantial FDI flows relative to their size, and a large share of their economic activity is conducted by transnational corporations.
The ratio of inward FDI to gross domestic product (GDP) last year was 4.2% for the whole subregion and over 10% in several economies (see figure II.1).
By way of comparison, the ratio is 2.6% in Latin America and lower, if anything, in other developing regions.
Even compared with other small economies such as Pacific island States, Caribbean economies receive particularly high levels of FDI in relation to their economic size.
This chapter reviews the current state of affairs with respect to Caribbean FDI flows.
The next section provides some background on the Caribbean context, and it is followed by a section detailing medium- and short-run trends in FDI flows into the region on a country-by-country basis.
After this comes an analysis of some of the sectors that are most important for the Caribbean.
This chapter then discusses the extensive and costly use of FDI promotion policies in the region before addressing the importance of trans-Caribbean enterprises and drawing some conclusions in its final section.
This chapter also treats the Dominican Republic and Haiti as part of the Caribbean subregion, although in other analyses these economies are usually dealt with separately from the English- and Dutch-speaking Caribbean because of their large populations and different historical background.
Haiti is included because the small size of its economy and its economic vulnerability make it similar to other Caribbean countries.
The Dominican Republic also shares features with the other Caribbean countries, even if its economic size is disproportional to that of any of the other economies in the region (see map II.1).
Cuba is discussed in box II.1, but not included in the rest of the analysis owing to a lack of comparable data.
In addition to these countries, there are 13 other economies in the Caribbean that are associate members of ECLAC but not fully independent States.
The Cayman Islands and the British Virgin Islands operate as offshore financial centres for transnational corporations and, as a consequence, 1 There is a final group of economies that are not members or associate members of ECLAC.
This includes some of the Dutch Caribbean and some of the overseas regions and collectivities of France. register huge inflows and outflows of FDI that have little relation to productive activities in those economies.
Puerto Rico is the largest economy in this group and attracts large flows of FDI (more than the entire Caribbean subregion in some recent years), while many other countries do not record FDI inflows at all (see also De Groot and Pérez Ludeña, 2014, box 1).
Most economies in the subregion have experienced economic stagnation in recent years.
From 2008 to 2013, only Guyana, Haiti and Suriname had positive rates of per capita GDP growth (see table II.1).
Severe budget deficits in nearly all Caribbean economies have limited the policy space available for improving the economy through government action.
While Saint Kitts and Nevis had a budget surplus of 2.7% of GDP in 20142 and Jamaica nearly achieved a balanced budget, all other governments ran significant budget deficits, ranging from 1.3% of GDP (Haiti) to 7.7% (Saint Lucia).
The average national debt reached 78.6% of GDP in 2014, exceeding 100% in Jamaica and coming close to this figure in other economies such as Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados and Saint Kitts and Nevis.
Moreover, the private-sector response to the crisis was weak, leading to sluggish domestic investment.
This highlights the importance of FDI as a source of investment financing in Caribbean-type economies, where domestic private investment is strongly driven by public investment.
The report by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development on small island developing States (UNCTAD, 2014) on the occasion of the third International Conference on Small Island Developing States in 2014 discusses the challenges of attracting FDI to such economies.
Most of the economies included in its analysis are located in the Caribbean, and the challenges identified are very real, with many Caribbean economies vulnerable not only to natural disasters and climate change but also to international economic fluctuations.
FDI inflows into the subregion are very large for the size of its economies, making them sensitive to variations in these inflows, with the additional implication that their productivity depends on the productivity of the FDI concerned.
Next, in most of them, FDI is highly concentrated in specific sectors, such as natural resources in some countries and tourism in others, which increases exposure to sector-dependent shocks.
Finally, FDI is narrowly based in terms of origin, with a great portion coming from a limited number of countries, especially Canada and the United States.
As a result, shocks that affect these countries of origin are quickly transmitted to the Caribbean. 2 In 2013, Saint Kitts and Nevis had a surplus of 14.0%, which it was forced to accumulate as part of its consolidation effort to bring down its towering debt.
The activities of transnational corporations have much more impact on Caribbean economies than on those of large countries like Brazil, Chile or Mexico, even if the absolute amounts of FDI are small in comparison.
Investment decisions made in Europe, the United States or Asia can have large effects on the levels of investment, employment or tax receipts in Caribbean economies because of the relative size of individual companies in those economies.
Policies designed to maintain or attract FDI, including those aimed at making it easier to do business, are thus particularly important there because policy changes may affect individual companies’ decisions, directly impacting local economies.
Trends in FDI Taken as a whole, the Caribbean’s inflow of FDI shrank from US$ 6.322 billion to US$ 6.027 billion between 2013 and 2014, a decrease of 4.7%, compared with a decrease of 16% in Latin America.
However, this overall trend hides the fact that the Caribbean is a highly varied region where the different economies follow their own trends.
While most economies are highly dependent on services (tourism in particular), others, such as Belize, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, are primarily based on natural resources.
All sectors are open to FDI and there is a strong presence of transnational corporations in most of them, with the partial exceptions of financial services and agriculture.
FDI inflows peaked at more than US$ 3 billion in 2012, when the country’s largest beer company was acquired for US$ 1.2 billion.
Tourism was the largest recipient of FDI for many years, and although investments declined after the 2009 financial crisis, they picked up again from 2013.
Around the year 2000, the country also received large investments in public utilities in connection with a privatization programme that, at least in the electricity sector, was recently reversed.
FDI has also been important in developing export manufacturing, although the sums invested have never been very large.
The largest investment of the past few years has been in the Pueblo Viejo gold mine, acquired by Barrick of Canada.
Almost exclusively because of this project, FDI in natural resources averaged over US$ 700 million between 2008 and 2012, while the mine was being developed.
Transnational corporations’ profits have been high in the Dominican Republic as a consequence of strong economic growth and new mining exports.
At over 10% in the last decade, average returns are the highest in the Caribbean and the fifth-highest in Latin America.
Income from FDI was US$ 2 billion in the past three years, putting it almost on a par with FDI inflows.
Mexico’s América Móvil started to roll out a 4G mobile service during 2014; this has cost US$ 225 million to date, with a further US$ 750 million expected over the coming years.
Mexico is one of the largest investors in the Dominican Republic, with CEMEX opening a 1.5 MW solar energy complex to power its San Pedro cement plant and investing a further US$ 20 million in various other elements of the plant.
Another development in the electricity sector is that AES of the United States is planning to expand its power generation capabilities from 210 MW to 324 MW at a cost of around US$ 260 million.
In tourism, several hotels were opened or reopened by operators that included the United States-based Gansevoort Hotel Group, which opened a high-end property on the north coast for an investment estimated by fDi Markets at more than US$ 200 million.
A US$ 85 million investment in the Amber Cove port by British-American cruise company Carnival was also completed in 2014.
Furthermore, Spain’s Tradebe Port Services announced an expansion of its terminal for fuel oil and distillate products, estimated to require US$ 200 million of investment.3 Finally, Australian gold miner PanTerra warned that the performance of its Las Lagunas mine had been unsatisfactory, but stated that it was planning to undertake exploration in other areas as well.
The performance of PanTerra contrasts with that of the Pueblo Viejo mine mentioned earlier, which is operating as expected.
Haiti is one of the countries that receive the least FDI in the Caribbean, both in absolute terms and in relation to the size of the economy.
FDI inflows in 2014 dropped to US$ 99 million after four years in which they had averaged US$ 150 million.
There are many important sectors of the economy in which FDI is almost absent, for various reasons.
The extractive industries have never been developed, although Newmont Ventures of Canada and other foreign companies are currently doing exploration work.
There is also no heavy industry in the country, although the size of the economy (and its growth potential) would support a cement manufacturing plant.
The financial sector is dominated by local banks, and electricity production and distribution are handled by a State-owned company.
There is also very limited investment in agriculture by formal enterprises, whether local or foreign.
The sector that has received the largest amount of FDI in the past few years is telecommunications.
Two foreign companies, Digicel of Jamaica and Netcom of Viet Nam, have invested substantial amounts in expanding their networks and now offer both fixed-line and mobile telephony and Internet services.
Another large foreign investor is Heineken of the Netherlands, which bought local brewer Brana in 2011 and has invested in upgrading its facilities to meet the growing demand for beer and soft drinks.
FDI inflows into export processing manufacturing have averaged only US$ 6 million a year over the past decade, but are very important in terms of job creation.
The sector is focused on garment production for the United States market, and most investors are from Asia.
Tourism is another sector with great potential, but so far investments have been limited.
The largest project registered has been the construction of a Marriott hotel in the capital, estimated at US$ 50 million.
There are several projects to build large resorts in the country, including one recently announced by Carnival Cruise Lines for the construction of a port on Latortue island at a cost of US$ 70 million. 2.
The southern Caribbean FDI inflows into Trinidad and Tobago totalled US$ 1.394 billion in 2014, 30% less than the previous year.
The hydrocarbons sector has traditionally attracted the bulk of FDI in the country (over 80% since 2011).
The fall in oil prices since mid-2014 has created an uncertain environment in this sector, but major projects have continued despite these concerns.
The United Kingdom’s BP began construction of its Juniper offshore gas project in the fourth quarter of 2014, and this is expected to be completed in 2017.
Total capital expenditure for the project may be as high as US$ 2.1 billion.
Australia’s Range Resources announced a significant investment in oil extraction at the Beach Marcelle site in 2013.
The estimated US$ 100 million to US$ 150 million investment was supposed to start in 2014, but was postponed.
In the same sector, France’s Total divested a US$ 473 million share of its oil-producing fields to the National Gas Company (NGC) of Trinidad and Tobago in 2013, and this represented a significant negative inflow during that year.
Outside the extractive sector, Japan’s Mitsubishi announced the construction of a new methanol plant in 2013 for a total cost of US$ 850 million.
The original 2014 date for construction has since been postponed to 2015 at the earliest, and it is unclear whether the project will take place.
A US$ 63 million clay block factory, a collaboration between local firm ANSA McAL and Italian company SACMI, was opened in 2014.
Furthermore, the Government of Trinidad and Tobago signed an agreement with China in 2014 for the construction of a port in south-west Trinidad and for the development of seven industrial parks throughout the country.
The industrial parks are meant to service both the manufacturing and the services sectors.
The projects, which are expected to cost US$ 500 million for the port and US$ 250 million for the industrial parks, are subject to the approval of concessional funding from the Export-Import Bank of China.
Bermuda-owned Coco Reef spent US$ 9 million upgrading its properties during 2011-2012, but no other major foreign investments were recorded.
Trinidad and Tobago is responsible for approximately 90% of all outgoing FDI in the Caribbean.
National oil company Staatsolie also has a 25% stake in the Merian gold mine.
Canada’s IAMGOLD continues to operate the Rosebel gold mine, and in 2014 it also took an option on the nearby Sarafina mine.
On top of that, IAMGOLD has also completed the largest solar energy project in Suriname to date, a 5 MW project costing between US$ 12 million and US$ 14 million.
Alcoa, the United States-based aluminium producer, on the other hand, has reduced its operations in Suriname recently and is expected to divest its operations in 2015.
Downstream, Kaloti Jewellery Group of the United Arab Emirates has set up a mint house and refining facility, which opened in 2014 at an estimated cost of US$ 20 million.
There is investment in real estate, primarily from the Netherlands, which has a large Surinamese diaspora.
Otherwise, the agricultural sector attracts the largest share of investment, such as the takeover of 90% of the national banana company by Belgium’s Univeg for some US$ 30 million in 2014.
Two former plantations, Brokopondo and Victoria, have gone through several rounds of unsuccessful privatization and development over recent decades, but there are signs that the Investment and Development Corporation Suriname (IDCS) will soon be able to identify a foreign investor that may be able to exploit the land successfully in a joint venture.
In 2009-2010, Atlantic Tele-Network of the United States invested an estimated US$ 60 million in a fibre optic cable to Suriname.
In other sectors, such as services or manufacturing, it is difficult to see any improvement in the immediate future unless the country addresses its challenges in governance, ease of doing business and international connectivity.
FDI to Guyana increased by 19% in 2014 to US$ 255 million, contributing to a lower balance-of-payments deficit.
With 28% of inflows, the mining sector is the largest in Guyana, and in the bauxite, gold and diamond industries are particularly prominent players.
Although FDI in gold mining is expected to fall owing to lower prices, FDI in bauxite is expected to increase, with continued investment by companies based in China and the Russian Federation.
Bosai Minerals (China) has invested several hundred million dollars in recent years, but its relationship with the Government of Guyana has worsened recently, with US$ 100 million of planned investments not materializing.5 In 2013, RUSAL committed to investing US$ 20 million in the Kurubuka-22 bauxite mine.
Guyana Goldfields of Canada has invested heavily in the Aurora gold mine, which is expected to start production in 2015.
Outside of the mining sector, investors, particularly from China, have also made significant inroads into the distribution of consumer goods, for example with Haier Electronic Appliances’ US$ 10 million plant, opened in 2012.
As a result, the manufacturing industry received 12% of inflows in 2014.
The tourism industry, which is relatively small in Guyana, received 11% of inflows in 2014.
The sector should benefit from the opening of a US$ 51 million Marriott hotel, under construction since 2011 and due to open in 2015.
One of the largest planned projects of recent years has been the Amaila Hydro Power Project, estimated at US$ 850 million, but with the withdrawal of Sithe Global of the United States in 2013, its future is unclear.
The western Caribbean Inward FDI in the Bahamas was somewhat lower than the previous year, with a 9% decrease to US$ 374 million.
However, this was well below the annual inflows of earlier years, with a range of between US$ 750 million and US$ 1.05 billion from 2006 to 2011.
The country showcases some of the most ambitious tourism plans anywhere in the Caribbean, but also faces many of the associated challenges.
With 4,000 rooms, the Atlantis Resort is one of the largest resorts in the Caribbean.
Brookfield has promised to continue investing US$ 50 million per year there, but this shows the difficulty of guaranteeing profitability for such a large venture.
Baha Mar, another mega project, is scheduled to open in the spring of 2015 after a US$ 3.5 billion investment, the largest share of which has been financed by the Export-Import Bank of China.
The project will add another 2,200 rooms to the inventory and will further saturate the market in the Bahamas; it is not immediately clear whether this can sustain two mega hotel projects right next to each other.6 The Bahamas has had several run-ins with promising investments that turned out to be failures.
Cable Bahamas, for example, acquired four separate cable operators in Florida for close to US$ 100 million in 2013.
A final investment worth noting is the expansion of Cable & Wireless, which owns 51% of Bahamas Telecommunications Company and upgraded its network at a cost of some US$ 100 million in 2012 and 2013.
The 2010 transfer for US$ 1.36 billion of a Bahamian oil refinery from First Reserve to Buckeye Partners, both based in the United States, did not represent a new inflow of capital, but can be considered a vote of confidence in the country.
The sector classified as “other”received the most FDI in 2014, but tourism saw the largest increase, jumping from US$ 6 million in 2013 to US$ 104 million in 2014.
The rise in FDI could be considered a positive signal from investors in response to the government’s commitment to financial reform and its signing of an Extended Fund Facility with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
The project, estimated to require an investment of US$ 1.35 billion, is opposed by environmentalists but supported by both the government and much of the population.
A decision is expected in 2015 (see also box I.4 in chapter I).
CHEC is also the main force behind Highway 2000, a US$ 600 million project for a north-south highway which has been ongoing for about 10 years and is now projected to be completed by 2016.
Investments in mining, most relating to bauxite, have been declining over the past few years, dropping from a high of US$ 336 million (38% of FDI inflows) in 2006 to a mere US$ 26 million (4% of inflows) in 2014.
In the latter year, the Russian Federation’s RUSAL committed to building a coal-fired power plant in exchange for a two-year bauxite levy concession.
At the same time, China’s Xinfa Group has been in extensive discussions with the Government of Jamaica to invest up to US$ 3 billion in the redevelopment of Reynolds mines, together with an alumina plant and another coal-fired power plant.
The negotiations between Xinfa Group and the government have not yet been concluded.
One of the largest inflows of FDI in recent years is associated with the decision by Italy’s Campari Group to acquire the spirits business of Lascelles deMercado for US$ 415 million in 2012.
Tourism was the major recipient of FDI a decade ago, when a series of investments by Spanish companies increased capacity in the sector substantially.
After the financial crisis, the industry suffered from overcapacity and new investments declined to as little as US$ 6 million in 2012, picking up again only very recently.
Playa Hotels and Resorts invested an estimated US$ 150 million in refurbishments and construction at the former Ritz Carlton, which reopened in late 2014.
The United States-based Apple Leisure Group, which already operates two hotels on the island, is among companies rumoured to be considering new investments.
In addition to foreign investors, Sandals Resorts is investing in its home market by upgrading and modernizing existing properties.
The inflow of FDI into Belize increased significantly in 2014, rising by 48% to US$ 141 million, with real estate being the most important sector with 35% of inflows, followed by tourism with 21%.
Since 2005, tourism has been responsible for 28% of inflows, followed by real estate with 19% and financial services with 10%.
The two sectors of primary importance to Belize are tourism and agribusiness.
In the latter category, the country is one of the few in Latin America and the Caribbean to receive FDI inflows that are significant relative to the size of the economy.
One example of an international investor is United States-based TexBel Agricultural Investments, which is in the process of putting an estimated US$ 45 million into the development of coconut farming.
In retail, Jamaica’s GraceKennedy acquired the remaining third of its Belizean subsidiary for an undisclosed amount in 2012.
In tourism, Norwegian Cruise Line’s US$ 50 million investment in an environmentally friendly port will soon be forthcoming, while several other far-reaching plans for cruise terminals or resorts have occasionally been floated in the media, but without a clear path towards realization.
In 2014, Caye Chapel, an island which had been part of a bankrupt estate and ended up in the possession of Belize Bank, was finally sold for US$ 11.5 million to an unnamed Mexican hotel group and is expected to be developed into a new luxury resort.
On Ambergris Caye, a range of developments are at different stages of realization, but local critics say that several of them do not adhere to local and national regulations.
Environmentalists also worry about the speed at which Belize’s sensitive coastal range is being developed.
In 2011, large property on Long Caye Island was sold to Amble Resorts, which was planning to develop it into an eco-resort, but progress has been slow and it is unclear whether any investment has taken place.
Despite the absence of exact FDI figures, it is possible to examine some of the major policy issues relating to FDI.
The most important development was the introduction of the Foreign Investment Act in 2014, which updated legislation dating from 1995.
The aim of this legislation is to diversify the production structure, access advanced technology, substitute imports (especially of food) and promote integration into international value chains.
Another of the government’s objectives is to change the energy matrix through investments in renewable energy —a strategy that has been pursued in several economies in the Caribbean and Central America.
The law allows FDI in all sectors except education, health and defence.
More importantly, it establishes legal safeguards for investors, allows foreign investors to hold a majority share in an investment and introduces tax incentives such as an eightyear income tax waiver for investments in joint ventures with local institutions.
Compared with other investment regimes in the region, the law maintains several major restrictions.
First, all investments and divestments must be approved individually by the government.
Second, although most sectors are open to investment, the government produces a portfolio of priority projects, including, for example, joint ventures with local institutions (which receive special tax treatment).
It is still too early to assess whether the introduction of this legislation has incentivized FDI inflows to Cuba.
Investment opportunities may also be created by the ongoing changes in the relationship between Cuba and the United States.
United States President Obama’s announcement of a détente between the two countries on 17 December 2014 is likely to encourage investment in Cuba by enterprises based in the United States.
More importantly, it is also likely to lead to a large influx of foreign tourists to the island and to the investment in accommodation infrastructure this will require.
Toro (2015) shows that some 1.1 million Canadian tourists visit Cuba each year (out of a total of 2.9 million tourists), while most Americans have so far been debarred from visiting.
The number of tourists from the United States is likely to be even greater owing to its larger population and proximity to the island.
Cuba was a major destination for United States tourists in the 1950s, before the Cuban Revolution.
At present, the largest foreign investments are Statesponsored, such as the port facilities at Mariel, costing nearly US$ 1 billion, funded through the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) and constructed by Odebrecht (BBC, 2014).
Many of the other significant projects that have been undertaken in recent years are tourism-related.
Two Spanish hotel groups, Melia Hotels International and Hotusa, announced investments in new hotels in 2013, according to fDi Markets.
It is not clear whether those investments have actually taken place, however.
In general, information on investment in Cuba is not readily available, although it appears that activity is now on the increase.
A good example of the growing importance of the Cuban market is the opening of a sales office (for an estimated capital investment of US$ 19 million) by Spanish winery Bodegas Fernando Castro.
Spain is the leading investor in Cuba at present, followed by several other European countries, Canada and the BRIC countries (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India and China).
The newly opened Mariel port is likely to increase the involvement of Brazil in particular, while the fall in global oil prices will reduce the involvement of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the Cuban economy.
The United States could soon become a large source of foreign investment, not least from the Cuban diaspora.
Large hoteliers such as Marriott and Apple Leisure Group have expressed interest in the development of new properties in Cuba once the investment embargo is lifted.
The Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States and Barbados The Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) as a whole experienced a small decline in FDI between 2013 and 2014, although the total inflow was still the second-highest since 2010.
Most OECS member States saw small drops, with Grenada being a negative exception and Antigua and Barbuda a positive one (see figure II.2).
This set of economies is strongly dependent on tourism, with very little inward FDI in other sectors.
OECS members commonly rank as the economies with the highest FDI to GDP ratios in the world (see figure II.1).
Citizenship by investment (CbI) programmes are an important instrument in several OECS member States.
This is a type of programme whereby investors can obtain citizenship in exchange for a significant investment in the country (in most cases around US$ 400,000, sometimes less).
This method is appreciated by many investors, who use it to attract individual participants in large tourism projects.
CbI programmes are not unique to the Caribbean, but their use is more developed there than in other locations.
In 2014, Antigua and Barbuda saw a 66% increase in inward FDI, bringing inflows to the highest level since the beginning of the financial crisis.
The most significant announcement of 2014 related to the sale of some 1,522 acres of land to China’s Yida International Investment Group for US$ 60 million.
The company reportedly plans to construct several luxury hotels, 1,300 residential units, the largest casino in the Caribbean and many more facilities.
Estimates for outlays over 10 years vary between US$ 740 million and US$ 2 billion.
The project is expected to have an enormous impact on the island, both economically and environmentally.
Also in 2014, the United Kingdom’s Cable & Wireless Communications announced a plan to spend US$ 14 million upgrading the local telecommunications network operated by its regional subsidiary LIME.
Much of the investment that took place in Antigua and Barbuda before 2014 was also in the tourism industry.
This resort is to receive a US$ 125 million makeover to become a Beaches Resort, this being another brand operated by Sandals.
Since 2012, Pearns Point has been under development as part of a plan that should eventually cost around US$ 250 million.
Pearns Point is backed by developers from the Netherlands and is being primarily funded through Antigua and Barbuda’s CbI programme, which has helped with the effort to market it as a destination for overseas property buyers.
In 2012, Bau Panel Systems of Gibraltar, United Kingdom, held a groundbreaking ceremony for a factory that was to supply materials for a social housing project, but no progress was made thereafter.
In 2014, the new Antiguan Prime Minister decided to withdraw the government’s support for the project.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines experienced a 13% drop in FDI inflows to US$ 139 million.
Continuing time and cost overruns at Argyle International Airport, under construction since 2008 and set to be completed in 2015 at a cost of US$ 240 million, according to the most recent estimates, have been a burden on the overall economy.
However, once the airport is finally completed, it will improve the islands’ attractiveness to foreign investors, particularly in the tourism sector.
Among the largest current investments, Ireland’s International Investment & Underwriting (IIU) entered into a joint venture to operate and further develop the former Raffles Resort in 2010 at a cost of approximately US$ 120 million.
This property became the ultra-luxurious Pink Sands Hotel and opened in 2014.
The US$ 250 million Buccament Bay Resort opened in 2011 and was by far the largest resort at that time, with 368 rooms.
Its developer, Harlequin Hotels and Resorts of the United Kingdom, has since filed for bankruptcy, adversely affecting the individual small-scale investors behind it but not affecting operations at the hotel.
The government continues to hold out against the introduction of a CbI programme in the country on principle, despite the success of such programmes in other jurisdictions.
Looking to the longer term, SaintVincent and the Grenadines has welcomed investment in alternative energy sources in order to reduce its dependence on the import of diesel.
The fall in oil prices has lessened the need for such substitution, but the government is committed to continuing work on existing projects.
Iceland’s Reykjavik Geothermal and Canada’s Emera are still aiming to develop geothermal energy sources in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, with the aim of having a first plant operational by 2017-2018.
Finally, Cyprus-based currency trader Exness moved its operations from New Zealand to Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in 2014, an investment estimated by fDi Markets at US$ 31 million.
Saint Kitts and Nevis receives some of the most stable FDI flows of any OECS member state. 2014 saw a small drop of 13% from US$ 139 million to US$ 120 million.
The country makes successful use of its long-standing CbI programme compared with neighbouring States.
A number of projects are currently under construction, nearly all of them funded at least partially through the CbI programme.
The use of this programme means that it is not possible to identify the exact origins of the funds, but projects do tend to be driven by specific development groups.
Kittitian Hill, on which construction started in 2010 and whose first stage opened in 2014, has cost approximately US$ 90 million in total and is backed by investors from Switzerland and Trinidad and Tobago.
Koi Resort and Residences, the first phase of which is to be completed in 2016, is backed by a United States-based developer, as is Christophe Harbour, a large project that includes residences, a marina, facilities and several hotels.
The total investment committed to this group of projects is more than US$ 1 billion, of which some US$ 350 million had been spent by the end of 2014.
The largest employer on Nevis is the Nevis Four Seasons (Canada), which was damaged by hurricane Omar in 2008.
It reopened in late 2010 after a refurbishment costing some US$ 100 million.
Besides tourism, Saint Kitts and Nevis aims to attract investment in several other sectors, including international education, agriculture, financial services and renewable energy.
In this last sector, a second solar plant was opened in January 2015, funded jointly with the Government of Taiwan Province of China.
Speedtech Energy of Taiwan Province of China opened a US$ 1.5 million solar panel manufacturing plant in 2013.
Finally, Saint Kitts and Nevis also plays an important role in international education, with four universities using the United States curriculum currently located in the country.
Most investment has traditionally taken place in the tourism sector, and a CbI programme is under consideration.
As in other economies, many transactions taking place in Saint Lucia are not treated as new FDI inflows.
For example, the acquisition of Hess Oil Saint Lucia by Buckeye Partners of the United States in 2013 as part of a larger US$ 850 million package was a transfer of ownership between foreign parties: while it was a commitment to the island, it did not represent a new inflow of FDI.
The bulk of investment takes place in the tourism sector, in the form of new construction, acquisition and upgrading of existing infrastructure or gradual expansion of a property.
Examples of the first include the Harbor Club Hotel and dive centre, currently under construction by a Swiss investor at a total cost of some US$ 45 million, and Hotel Chocolat, completed in 2013 at a similar cost.
The second group includes the Rodney Bay Marina, purchased in 2006 by Island Capital Group of the United States and upgraded for an estimated US$ 40 million, and the Capella Marigot Bay Resort and Marina, which reopened in 2014 after a multi-million dollar refurbishment by its new United States-based owners.
An example of the final group is Windjammer Landing, owned by Canada’s EllisDon since 1989.
This resort is currently investing close to US$ 50 million in expanding and upgrading its facilities in order to be able to continue competing with other offerings in the region.
The large inflow of FDI into Grenada in 2013 appears to have been an anomaly, with inflows in 2014 dropping back by 64% to US$ 40 million, historically a more normal figure and the lowest of any OECS member State.
Like other OECS members, Grenada is primarily dependent on investment in tourism.
This means that individual projects, whether new developments or refurbishments, can have a significant impact on FDI inflows.
In late 2013, for example, Sandals LaSource Grenada Resort was reopened after a US$ 100 million refurbishment, which probably contributed to the surge of FDI recorded in 2013.
Grenada also provides a good example of the market power of large players such as Jamaica’s Sandals.
In return for its investment, Sandals received a 29-year corporation tax waiver and 25-year waivers on property taxes, customs duties on capital inputs and alcohol duty.
These concessions seem particularly generous given that Grenada is in partial default, having most recently defaulted on its debts in 2005.
Like other islands, Grenada is using its CbI initiative to attract investment, but it is not clear whether the grand ambitions of certain investors are realistic.
For example, British-Grenadian property developer Peter de Savary has been working for several years on a property development called Port Louis, which is expected to cost between US$ 500 million and US$ 700 million.
With GDP declining in four years out of six recently (ECLAC, 2014c), the island is looking to FDI to move the economy forward.
News reports from December 2013 implied that China’s ASCG and the Government of China were looking to invest some US$ 300 million in Dominica, including a US$ 70 million international hotel, hospital facilities and an international airport, but it is uncertain whether any of these investments will actually take place.
Even if they do, it is not immediately clear that the construction of an international airport is a worthwhile investment for the Dominican economy.
The Government of Dominica has been at the forefront of efforts to attract investment in geothermal energy generation.
Several companies have been close to committing to a definitive investment in recent years, but nothing has so far come of this.
A major challenge for the island is that its market is probably too small to make geothermal energy a worthwhile option unless it links its electricity grid to those of other islands, which would significantly increase the projected costs.
Jamaica’s Digicel acquired Dominican cable television and Internet provider SATTelecom for an undisclosed sum during 2014 after buying the mobile network of France’s Orange in 2009.
Finally, an agreement was signed with the United Arab Emirates’ Range Developments on the construction of a 125-room luxury hotel, with the country’s CbI programme being used to fund the investment.
So far, the island’s relatively liberal CbI programme has not led to a significant inflow of FDI.
The Central Bank of Barbados provides fairly disaggregated data which show that in the long run more than 60% of FDI is invested in real estate.
This is higher than elsewhere in the region, and is associated with the country’s attractions as a second residence.
Where other tourist accommodation is concerned, the island is at the mercy of international tourism flows.
One of the largest resorts on the island, Almond Beach Village, ended up in the hands of Massy of Trinidad and Tobago when it purchased Barbados Shipping & Trading between 2008 and 2012.
The property was close to bankruptcy and was finally taken over by a government agency in 2013 for US$ 53 million.
It was eventually resold for the same price to Sandals, which performed a US$ 65 million upgrade in 2014 in order to reopen in January 2015.
This is illustrative of the complicated relationship between hotel operators and the Government of Barbados.
Since Barbados is a financial centre, it can be difficult to differentiate transactions by enterprises that are truly based there from those that are only nominally Barbadian.
There was a good example of this in 2014 with the purchase of Columbus International, an international telecommunications operator based in Barbados, by Cable & Wireless Communications of the United Kingdom for more than US$ 3 billion.
At the same time, the slippage in Barbados’ sovereign debt rating may put its role as a financial centre at risk.
Barbadian behemoth Sagicor announced in early 2015 that it planned to move its headquarters because of the downgrading of Barbados sovereign debt by Standard & Poor’s.
In 2010, on the other hand, Canada’s RBC Wealth Management announced the construction of a new wealth management office at an estimated cost of US$ 31 million.
Many firms have made plans for Barbados, although with varying degrees of certainty.
For example, Guernsey-based Cahill Energy has announced the construction of a US$ 240 million waste-to-energy plant that aims to meet about 25% of Barbados’ electricity demand.
Sectoral analyses The Caribbean consists of several groups of economies, each with its own economic story reflecting its strengths and weaknesses.
There are some sectoral trends that are common to the whole subregion, and this section deals with those segments that attract the most FDI to it.
For many economies, the tourism sector is the largest earner of foreign exchange and the primary destination for investment.
In some economies, particularly Belize, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, natural resources (in the form of agriculture, mining or oil and gas exploration) are the most important attractors of FDI, while in others (the Dominican Republic and Jamaica) the natural resources sector plays an important but less dominant role.
The third category is export-oriented FDI.10 This is not a single sector, but includes both export-oriented manufacturing and various export-oriented services, such as offshore education and business process outsourcing (BPO).
The final category discussed in this section is market-seeking FDI.11 This also encompasses various sectors, mostly in services (banking, retail, energy) but also in small-scale manufacturing.
A sectoral breakdown of FDI inflows is possible in only a few economies.
As expected, natural resources are particularly important in Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago, but play a smaller role in the other economies.
Only in the Dominican Republic does manufacturing account for a large proportion of FDI, while transport and communications are particularly important in Haiti and Jamaica.
In recent years, these countries have received large investments in the telecommunications sector, corresponding to both network expansion and the setting-up of new networks.
A final observation is that the construction, commerce and hospitality sector accounts for a large proportion of FDI inflows to Belize, and for a slightly lesser but still significant proportion to the Dominican Republic and Jamaica.
As this sector is a a major driving factor behind tourism, it could be expected to play a key role in Barbados and the member States of OECS, however, this cannot be confirmed as data for those economies are limited.
This chapter, however, uses the perspective of FDI-receiving economies, where market-seeking and export-oriented FDI is a more logical dichotomy.
As an example, investments in the natural resources sector are resource-seeking from a corporation’s perspective, but would be considered export-oriented FDI from the perspective of the host country. 1.
Tourism FDI 12 The Caribbean is famous for its tourism, but the tourism industry in the subregion has struggled in the past few years.
According to the World Tourism Organization (UNWTO, 2014), the number of arrivals in the Caribbean has increased only modestly in recent years.
Not shown, however, is the growth of tourism in the rest of the world.
In the Caribbean,13 on the other hand, these growth rates were only 8.6% and 9.0%, respectively.
As a result, the Caribbean’s global market share of arrivals fell from 2.2% to 2.1% and its share of receipts from 2.6% to 2.2%.
From 2008 to 2013, more than half the economies included in our analysis saw reductions in visitor numbers.
To illustrate this, figure II.4 shows the tourism share of total foreign-exchange receipts and the ratio of tourism earnings to GDP.
The first includes Barbados, the Bahamas and all OECS member States except Saint Kitts and Nevis: in these countries, tourism is responsible for more than 30% of foreign-exchange earnings, and in many of them tourism receipts equal more than 20% of GDP.
The second group of economies includes Belize, Jamaica and Saint Kitts and Nevis, where tourism receipts make up between 20% and 30% of total foreign-exchange earnings and a substantial share of GDP.
These are economies in which tourism plays a significant role, but less so than in the first group.
The third group consists of Haiti, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, where tourism receipts make up only a very small portion of total earnings.
These are economies in which tourism currently plays a much smaller role.
The Dominican Republic is an unusual case and not included in any of these three country groups.
Tourism expenditures there represent 8% of GDP but nearly 25% of foreign-exchange earnings, partly because its economy is much larger and more diversified than others in the subregion.
At the same time, the industry supports some 200,000 jobs in the country (UNWTO, 2014) and plays an important role in its image.
Average annual change (percentages) 12 Tourism was also one of the topics of chapter III of ECLAC (2009). 13 This refers to the World Tourism Organization definition of the Caribbean, which includes all of the islands located in and around the Caribbean Sea.
Forecasts for global tourism (UNWTO, 2011) show that the Caribbean is expected to continue losing market share in the future.
The main reasons for this are saturation of the Caribbean market and the entry of more and more areas of the world into the tourism market.
The global growth rate of tourism between 2010 and 2030 is forecast at about 3.3% per year (down from 3.9% between 1995 and 2010), but the growth rate of tourism in the Caribbean is expected to decrease from 2.4% to 2.0% over the same period.
Only western Europe, northern Europe and North America are expected to do worse between 2010 and 2030.
So far, primarily thanks to the Dominican Republic’s strong performance, the region has been able to slightly exceed expectations.
In any case, relatively gloomy forecasts have not stopped FDI in the tourism sector from increasing significantly in recent years.
For the foreseeable future, the Caribbean can expect to see a significant increase in tourism-related investment, with the potential exception of the Dominican Republic (UNWTO, 2011).
There are many different types of tourism in the Caribbean, reflected in the various kinds of accommodation.
In terms of total amounts spent, mega projects make up a large share of investment in the sector.
The largest project in the region, Baha Mar in the Bahamas, scheduled to open in the first half of 2015, includes five different hotels and involved a total investment of approximately US$ 3.5 billion, largely financed by the Export-Import Bank of China.
In Jamaica, there may not be such large individual projects, but a major inflow of investment into the accommodation sector a decade ago has created a very large supply in resorts and resort-style hotels.
Many hotels in Jamaica are operated under management contracts by large international players.
This modus operandi is less common on other islands, although the Bahamas’ enormous Atlantis Resorts is another example.
The Dominican Republic is obviously the giant of Caribbean tourism when it comes to the number of tourists attracted.
Canada’s Blue Diamond Resorts opened a new 323-room luxury hotel in December 2014, while there are several very large combinations of resorts.
The Gran Bahía in Punta Cana, for example, has several thousand rooms spread over different hotels.
Luxury and ultra-luxury accommodation is an interesting sector in which there is a great deal of investor interest.
Many of the new operations in the luxury or ultra-luxury market are operated by individuals or small outfits.
Accordingly, many governments in the Caribbean focus on developing unique properties to attract high-spending tourists.
Some of these hotels charge up to US$ 2,000 per room per night.
Ecotourism has led to relatively recent additions to the Caribbean accommodation stock.
The concept of ecotourism is not particularly well defined and can encompass anything from eco-conscious microenterprises to large international corporations developing large resorts.
This type of accommodation has many advantages for investors and host countries alike.
Second, the negative impacts (see also chapter III) of tourism are reduced because of the increased environmental awareness.
Third, ecotourism also encourages increased engagement with the local economy (through suppliers and job creation), which can increase the local economic benefits of tourism inflows.14 The third type of tourism where FDI can play an important role is in the conferencing sector.
In Saint Lucia, for example, the Harbor Club Hotel is currently under construction by a Swiss investor spending at least US$ 40 million with the aim of creating the best business hotel in the Caribbean (and the only one in Saint Lucia).
This is also a field in which multinational corporations play an important role.
The advantages of this type of tourism are that it includes high-spending customers, which increases its impact, and that it may help to introduce destinations to potential future visitors.
The disadvantage is that spillover into the local economy is more limited, particularly where international chain hotels are concerned.
The fourth type of tourism is primarily FDI-driven: residential investment, whereby individuals from outside the region purchase property there.15 On some islands, this makes up a large share of FDI inflows.
Real estate investment is different in some ways from other tourism investment: beyond the construction phase, it may not have the same kind of spillovers in terms of job creation, for example.
However, in Barbados, for example, an active effort is under way to make sure that owners contribute their vacation homes to the accommodation market when they are not occupying them.
This real estate can thus still attract tourists who will make use of auxiliary services on the island.
Finally, in certain projects, such as Christophe Harbour (Saint Kitts and Nevis), holiday homes are part of a larger effort to make the overall project, which also includes luxury hotels, secondary services and a marina, financially viable.
In addition to the aforementioned types of investment in accommodation, two other forms of tourism FDI are important in the region, namely FDI relating to non-stay tourism and auxiliary services.
On many islands, non-stay arrivals far exceed the number of overnight visitors, but the impact on the local economy is much lower.
The islands are attempting to capture more of these tourists’ spending power through State investment in port and shopping facilities.
In Belize, for example, Norwegian Cruise Line is scheduled to open a new eco-friendly cruise terminal in 2015 at a cost of US$ 50 million.
In other economies, investment is mostly channelled into yachting facilities, as reflected by significant investments in, for example, the Rodney Bay Marina in Saint Lucia and marinas associated with hotels on various islands (such as Capella Marigot Bay and Marina in Saint Lucia and Christophe Harbour in Saint Kitts and Nevis).
Restaurants, tour services and other hospitality businesses tend to be locally run, for example.
The airline industry is, of course, an exception, and a highly integrated and integral part of the tourism industry (see box II.2).
Goddard Enterprises of Barbados, for example, provides airline catering services at many airports throughout the region.
A lack of airline capacity in the region is frequently cited as a reason for high transport and shipping costs and an obstacle to further developing some industries, such as tourism, and is due to limited economies of scale in the region and high per-unit operating costs.
Caribbean Airlines, the national airline of Trinidad and Tobago and by far the largest regional airline, was incorporated in 2006, replacing its predecessor, British West Indies Airlines.
Given the worldwide trend in airline mergers, 14 UNCTAD (2010) discusses the example of the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, which has specific guidelines on the use of local products and the employment of local people.
The discussion identifies guidelines that can be potentially useful for ecotourism in the Caribbean as well.
More often than not, this is not the case. 16 According to official estimates from the Central Bank of Barbados. it is not surprising that various airlines in the Caribbean have also merged; this has often involved large amounts of merger and acquisition FDI.
In the 2000s, State-owned Air Jamaica, another large regional carrier, experienced severe financial difficulties and the Government of Jamaica began looking abroad for solutions.
After discussions with the Government of Trinidad and Tobago, in 2011 Caribbean Airlines acquired routes operated by Air Jamaica as well as the airline’s fleet.
It also took on Air Jamaica’s debts and many of its assets, and rehired many of its employees.
Another important regional airline, especially for the countries of the eastern Caribbean, is Leeward Islands Air Transport (LIAT).
This airline is jointly owned by 11 Caribbean nations and services 22 destinations with a fleet of 16 mostly small aircraft.
The size of the tourism market in the Caribbean is directly dependent on the number of flights available to the different islands.
Particularly for some smaller markets, an additional daily flight can have a significant impact on the demand for accommodation.
At the same time, airlines only offer flights to destinations for which there is demand from travellers, which are those where there is sufficient accommodation to host tourists.
This phenomenon is familiar to the authorities, who make a great deal of effort to encourage both airlines and resorts to expand their businesses simultaneously.
Individual investor decisions can thus have a large impact on a country’s tourism capacity.
For example, Sandals’ recent expansion into Barbados is leading to an increase in air travel from Europe and North America because there is more accommodation available.
Other resorts, such as the Coconut Bay Beach Resort and Spa on Saint Lucia, work closely with airlines (in this case British Airways) to sell package deals that include both flight and accommodation.
Saint Lucia, where more than half of all incoming flights are intercontinental, benefits more than Saint Kitts and Nevis, where a mere 18% of flights are intercontinental.
Regional flights include all flights from other Caribbean economies, while in the case of Belize they also include flights from other Central American countries.
An unusual aspect of the relationship between the airlines and Caribbean economies is that, although airlines such as Delta Air Lines, United Airlines, American Airlines and British Airways have a great impact on the latter, they do not usually make significant investments there themselves.
It is the fourth most popular destination in the subregion for non-regional flights, mostly from the United States.
This is primarily because Haiti has a large population and a large diaspora, but it suggests that there may be an opportunity to further develop tourism.
Flight bottlenecks, often a problem in developing tourism, would not be an obstacle for Haiti.
From a theoretical point of view, the nature of the impact of FDI on recipient economies is not clear (De Groot, 2014a).
There are differences between tourism-related FDI in the Caribbean and overall FDI elsewhere.
First, the region is very dependent on inflows of foreign capital because it has a relatively low investment capacity itself, something that is exacerbated by risk avoidance among local banks and a shortage of entrepreneurs to seek out new productive activities.
Second, many Caribbean economies rely on the tourism industry for job creation, and without foreign investment it would not be so well developed.
A major transformative impact from foreign investment in tourism can be found in training and education.
In many of the economies, access to education is limited and investors find it challenging to hire workers with the required skills.
Workers in other countries, including the members of OECS, do not have a similar level of access to education.
As a result, many of the larger investors in the Caribbean have extensive training programmes for their staff.
Other examples of training provided by employers include extensive safety training, food and beverage service training, and soft skills.
While such training may not be equivalent to higher education, it has a substantial impact on the employability of workers.
However, foreign-owned businesses tend to be larger and have a stronger focus on consistently high service quality.
There may be limited spillovers for local establishments from large foreign-owned resorts.
Since many such resorts and hotels are full-service, tourists often tend not to venture away from them; they may be encouraged to participate in excursions, but since these are often run by the hotel, they have a limited impact on the rest of the economy.
Other businesses such as restaurants and local tour operators capture only a small fraction of tourists’ spending.
Of course, the resorts themselves require many inputs, including construction materials, furnishings, agricultural products and public services.
However, in many cases local sourcing of such products (with the obvious exception of public services) is very limited.
This is partly due to inconsistent product supply and quality and, in the case of technical equipment, partly a matter of preference, furnishings being a possible example, and partly due to the high costs of local production.
It should be a matter of concern to governments, however, that investors import agricultural products even when the same product is produced locally.
This happens in cases when local production cannot compete cost-effectively with imports or, more commonly, local goods of a consistently high quality are not available.
Governments should focus on improving the ability of domestic producers to supply the inputs required by large investors.
While the situation differs between countries, the capacity of local producers is often considered to be very low.
If local producers can develop the capacity to supply the tourist infrastructure sustainably, this can significantly increase local spillovers and the benefits an economy derives from tourism investment.
In some cases, a regional approach to scaling up production of agricultural and other products might be able to make them cost-competitive.
Another important consideration for governments is guaranteeing the quality of the workforce.
Finding qualified employees can be hard in the Caribbean, even if job types are relatively standardized.
This raises questions concerning the quality of the hospitality-oriented educational institutions that should provide the necessary basic qualifications.
Currently, the subregion relies on investors to provide training even when there is an opportunity for governments to take responsibility in this field. 2.
FDI in natural resources The primary sector is much less important in the economies of most Caribbean countries than in those of South America, but there are some major exceptions.
Belize, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago are very dependent on natural resources, while the Dominican Republic and Jamaica are more diversified but still host important operations in the extractive industries.
Furthermore, limited local capabilities mean that most investments in the extractive industries (this is less the case in agriculture and forestry) are conducted by transnational corporations.
The largest investments in natural resources are in oil and gas extraction in Trinidad and Tobago.
The country produces 81.3 thousand barrels per day (tbd), and the sector contributed 45% of GDP in 2014.
There are two State81 owned companies in the sector, Petronin and NGC, but the majority of investments are carried out by foreign companies.
These have been present in the country since the 1940s, and currently the largest are BP, BG and BHP Billiton, all of the United Kingdom, and Repsol of Spain.
Foreign companies negotiate separate production-sharing agreements with the government for each concession.
In recent years, 90% of total FDI in Trinidad and Tobago has been in the oil and gas industry.
Oil and gas is far less important in other countries of the Caribbean.
Still, there is production in Barbados (1 tbd), Belize (1.8 tbd) and Suriname (15 tbd) that is significant for the size of these economies, especially in Suriname.
In Guyana, large-scale mining is concentrated in bauxite extraction, with Bosai Minerals of China and RUSAL of the Russian Federation both having large investments.
Gold mining is usually carried out through small-scale operations, although the large Aurora mining project, owned by Canadian investors, is currently under construction, with an estimated initial capital investment of US$ 249 million.
In Suriname, bauxite production has lost ground relative to both oil and gold.
The Economist Intelligence Unit forecasts total investment inflows of between US$ 1 billion and US$ 1.5 billion in gold mining, targeting both the expansion of existing operations and the opening of new mines.
RUSAL and CEMEX are the largest companies, but investments have decreased in recent years.
In 2013, Nippon Light Metals began a US$ 3 million exploration for rare earths which, if successful, could lead to large FDI inflows.
The largest mining investment in the Caribbean has been the Pueblo Viejo gold mine in the Dominican Republic, owned by Barrick of Canada.
The company has invested a total of US$ 4.3 billion over several years.
During the construction phase of the mine in 2011 and 2012, FDI inflows in the sector reached over US$ 1 billion per year.
The mine started to produce in January 2013, but while there are plans for expansion, the company has shelved them due to the fall in the gold price and is currently focusing on cost reduction.
This single project has been significant for the country in terms of investment, exports and fiscal revenue.
In fact, the government demanded a renegotiation of the fiscal agreement with the company, which was finally completed in 2012.
This reduced some of the privileges previously granted to it and therefore raised the revenue the government will receive.
Agriculture is a sector that receives relatively little FDI in any country (see ECLAC, 2013, chapter III), and most countries in the Caribbean are not land-abundant.
Belize and Guyana are exceptions, and both have attracted the attention of investors from neighbouring countries like Barbados, Guatemala and Trinidad and Tobago looking to produce rice, sugar and other products.
Asian investors are interested in producing sugar and palm oil on large plantations, mostly in Guyana and Suriname.
Another example from Belize is the investment by United States-backed TexBel Farms in the production of both oranges and coconuts with a view to exporting to the United States.
Lastly, there are many foreign companies, particularly from Brazil and Asia, in the Guyana logging industry, but very little information is available on their operations.
While agriculture and logging are carried out mostly by local investors, extractive industries have largely been developed by foreign companies.
FDI in oil and gas has transformed the economy of Trinidad and Tobago, and mining investments have had a large impact on the Dominican Republic, Guyana and Suriname.
It is partly because of these sectors that this group of economies has outperformed the rest of the Caribbean subregion over the past decade.
With the reversal of the commodity cycle, FDI in natural resources is likely to fall over the coming years.
Alcoa’s announcement in March 2015 concerning the rapid divestment of its Surinamese assets supports this thesis. 3.
Other export-oriented FDI Export-oriented FDI is a form of FDI that seeks to exploit local production advantages in order to supply an external market.
The most common advantages that host markets display include low costs, connectivity and trade relations.
By and large, the Caribbean does not enjoy such benefits, so export-oriented FDI is relatively limited.
Tourism affects the balance of payments much as export-oriented businesses do, since it is a locally produced service sold primarily to foreign customers (namely tourists).
Thus, tourism brings an inflow of capital during the investment stage, but also during the operational stage.
Leaving aside tourism and mining, two forms of export-oriented FDI remain: manufacturing and services.
Export-oriented services, on the other hand, play a more important role in a larger range of economies.
This sector is able to make use of the relative cost advantage of labour in the Caribbean as compared with the United States and the fact that a large part of the Caribbean is English-speaking.
Specific sectors include finance, business process outsourcing (BPO) and education. (a) Manufacturing Manufacturing exports from the Caribbean economies covered in this chapter are very modest, the primary exception being the Dominican Republic.
Manufacturing exports from the Bahamas, Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago are largely confined to some processed natural resources (oil, pearls, sugar), as discussed in the previous section, and only in Barbados are there a few modest exports of pharmaceuticals and optical equipment.
Manufacturing exports from Jamaica have declined significantly over the past two decades.
The Dominican Republic, on the other hand, has a large export processing industry which was originally built around the production of apparel and has slowly diversified, mostly into the production of medical and pharmaceutical devices.
Some 78% of accumulated investment in the country’s export processing zones (EPZs) is foreign (CNZFE, 2014), coming mostly from the United States, and recorded FDI in the sector has averaged US$ 150 million in the past three years.
Investment, production and employment in this industry declined significantly from 2005 to 2010 as a consequence of Chinese competition in apparel manufacturing and the financial crisis in the United States.
Employment dropped by 41% between 2004 and 2009, and the industry reacted by diversifying away from apparel and increasing the value added of local operations, for example by providing complete packaging.
There has been a partial recovery since 2010, with employment growing but still significantly below the level of a decade ago.
Haiti is the other country in the Caribbean with an export processing industry, focused almost exclusively on garments.
The country suffers from low capacity and particularly high non-labour costs, but the garment industry remains competitive because of the advantage provided by the Haitian Hemispheric Opportunity through Partnership Encouragement (HOPE) Act of 2006 in the United States.
Almost all investments in EPZs in Haiti are foreign, predominantly from Asia but also from the Dominican Republic.
FDI in EPZs in 2013 was US$ 12 million, a significant increase over earlier years but still indicative of the modest size of the industry.
Overall, the scope for attracting large amounts of FDI into export-oriented manufacturing in the Caribbean is limited.
In different degrees, all the economies suffer from high energy costs, poor infrastructure and low capabilities.
Wages are generally higher than in Central America or Asia, and the generous tax concessions awarded to these industries are matched elsewhere.
The Dominican Republic has been the largest recipient of investments in this sector, but even there industry is struggling to accommodate the rise in wages that comes 17 By comparison, garments produced in the Dominican Republic or any Central American country have to be made with inputs from those countries or the United States.
In practice this means that manufacturers based in Haiti can source their textiles directly from Asian countries. with economic growth.
If the specific advantages of the HOPE Act are maintained, Haiti has the potential to attract more investments in this sector.
On a smaller scale, there are interesting examples of export-oriented manufacturers operating outside of the Dominican Republic and Haiti.
One is Lenstec of the United States, which has had a high-tech production facility for intraocular lenses in Barbados since 1996.
This can be seen as the poster child for FDI, creating relatively highly paid jobs and making use of Barbados’ high levels of education and relatively low costs and the fact that the population is English-speaking.
Another example is Nucor of the United States, which reassembled a mothballed steel plant from Louisiana in Trinidad and Tobago in 2005 and has since expanded it several times, producing steel for export.
Each of these cases involves investments that are small by international standards but substantial by those of the recipient economies.
Another distinguishing feature is that they focus on very specific strengths in these economies, whether they be the highly educated population base of Barbados or the availability of affordable gas upon which steel production depends in Trinidad and Tobago. (b) Business process outsourcing (BPO)18 By and large, BPO is the most important type of export-oriented service in the Caribbean.
BPO is an appealing sector in economies where wages are competitive but capital investment is relatively expensive.
It is also attractive for the host country because it creates a large number of jobs per million dollars invested (see ECLAC, 2014a, chapter III).
It is a broad sector that can include a range of segments of varying degrees of sophistication.
At the low end, there are call centres, but at the high end it includes technical support, accounting and even management.
The primary issue in attracting FDI in services is the ability to provide a product cost-efficiently, but worker education levels take on more importance when it comes to moving up the BPO value chain.
Thus, several companies in Suriname provide call centre services for the Netherlands, benefiting from linguistic and cultural familiarity and a relative cost advantage.
Similarly, Guyana provides primarily low-level call centre services to companies in the United States, again benefiting from a common language.
Somewhat higher up the value ladder, the Dominican Republic has several operators that offer bilingual services in English and Spanish and are thus able to capture a larger share of the market.
Jamaica’s BPO sector employs some 14,000 people, not only in call centres but also in firms providing extensive financing and accounting services (JAMPRO, 2014).
Cost, language and proximity to the United States are the primary attractions for investors.
One of the primary operators in this business-to-business sector is KM² Solutions of the United States.
Having originally started in Saint Lucia, it encountered physical capacity issues there and expanded internationally.
In Barbados, it employs around 750 people in a rapidly expanding business.
It benefits from the highly educated workforce in Barbados, as well as the language and cost advantages mentioned earlier.
At the highest end of BPO, although this goes beyond traditional BPO operations, Canada’s Gildan Activewear has substantial management operations in Barbados, where it has been running back office finance, marketing, production planning and international sales since 1998.
This is different from traditional BPO in several ways: first, the company is not outsourcing the services to another company, but simply operates its divisions from Barbados.
Second, it creates high-quality jobs that are well paid and make use of the highly educated local population.
Finally, while operators such as KM² are flexible when it comes to downscaling and upscaling (being willing to recruit and shed staff as needs require), Gildan’s commitment to the local economy is more permanent.
Altogether, such an investment thus yields significant benefits to the Barbadian economy. (c) Financial services Financial services are important throughout the Caribbean region.
While some economies, such as those of the British Virgin Islands and the Cayman Islands, are especially renowned for their financial services industry, others also attract significant investment.
This is not a capital-intensive sector, of course, so the total quantity of investment may not be large, but the quality and quantity of employment are substantial.
The existence of an active financial services sector may also have positive spillovers for human capital accumulation.
A necessary condition for the development of a successful financial services sector is a strong tax treaty network.
Since the 1980s, in response to the rising costs of (particularly) medical education in the United States, offshore schools have been set up, primarily in the Caribbean.
These schools focus mostly on the North American market and attract students by their relatively low costs and attractive locations.
They only have a marginal presence in the local education market and are generally operated as profit-making businesses.
Today, medical schools still make up the great majority of such establishments, although there are also offshore schools for dentistry and veterinary medicine.
Most schools have programmes that encourage local students to enrol as well, although the latter’s share of total enrolment remains low.
In secondary education, there are some foreign-owned establishments, such as the International School of Port of Spain, but these are not export-oriented, focusing instead on the domestic market.
As shown in figure II.6, Saint Lucia hosts the largest number of medical schools, with seven institutions.
The other OECS member States also host a substantial number (13 in total), while Guyana has two and a few other economies just one.
George’s University in 2014.19 Offshore education is a sector that offers many advantages to economies: it is not capital-intensive, but it does create relatively good jobs and attracts consumers who spend a significant amount of time and money on the island, benefiting the balance of payments.
According to the newly established (2011) American University of Barbados School of Medicine, there are also significant spillovers for tourism establishments, both from visits from family and friends and from the holding of medical conferences.
Governments do not have many incentive programmes for offshore education, even though these have the potential to attract more investment into this potentially beneficial sector, especially in economies that are not currently involved in it.
Market-seeking FDI Market-seeking FDI is defined as FDI whose purpose is to produce and sell a product in a specific market, rather than export it.
This is one of the main types of FDI around the world.
The first of these conditions is not applicable in the Caribbean, while the second only applies to a limited number of economies.
First, certain companies do not see the individual economies as their markets, but operate throughout the region, thus achieving an economy of scale that makes investment worthwhile.
Second, low levels of competition in individual markets make profit margins relatively high.
In many markets, there are only a few firms that offer certain products.
This applies not only to telecommunications, but also to building materials and certain basic foodstuffs.
Moreover, some market-seeking FDI in banking and food and beverages, for instance, centres on mergers and acquisitions to consolidate a market position.
In the Caribbean, the banking sector is controlled almost completely by market-seeking FDI, primarily from banks based in Canada.
The largest player is Scotiabank, which has been operating in the subregion since 1889, when it opened a branch in Jamaica.
It is now active in countries throughout the subregion, including the Dominican Republic and Haiti, and also has branches in Asia, Europe and North and South America.
As Scotiabank has a large banking network in the Caribbean, improved financial integration could be partially achieved by improving interoperability between its branches, which do not currently cooperate much across countries.
In telecommunications, there are just three primary players in the entire Caribbean.
The United Kingdom’s Cable & Wireless Communications descends from the original monopolist in most jurisdictions, where it now operates through its subsidiary LIME.
Furthermore, it owns shares of around 50% in operations in the Bahamas and Trinidad and Tobago.
LIME is in the process of expanding its network coverage, which involves significant investment flows.
Digicel, based in Jamaica, has operations in most economies as well, including Haiti since 2006, although the Dominican Republic is a notable exception.
During 2014 it was taken over by Cable & Wireless Communications for US$ 3 billion.
Finally, América Móvil is the largest player in the Dominican Republic through its Claro subsidiary, but it withdrew from the Jamaican market in 2011 by selling its assets to Digicel.
The energy market in the Caribbean is relatively fragmented, which is troublesome because of the small size of the individual markets.
Particularly in the eastern Caribbean, integration of the different networks would have the potential to yield significant scale advantages.
Several international players have Caribbean operations, although these are primarily focused on the larger markets.
One international investor that is also involved in smaller markets is Canada’s Emera, which controls significant assets in the energy markets of the Bahamas, Barbados, Dominica and Saint Lucia.
Caribbean Grains, a grain-processing company operating in several parts of the Caribbean, is one example.
It recently started operating a new flour and feed mill in Saint Lucia, in addition to existing assets in the French-speaking Caribbean.
For the company, operating in Saint Lucia has the advantage that it is the only grain mill in the country and can corner the market thanks to its first mover advantage.
Similarly, Trinidad and Tobago-based TCL Group has a number of subsidiaries in different Caribbean economies to supply cement to those individual markets.
Only a few economies in the Caribbean can claim to have markets large enough on their own to attract significant investment.
The Dominican Republic, Haiti, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago are among those that occasionally attract substantial amounts of purely market-seeking investment.
Of the leading beer producers, only Carib Brewery (Trinidad and Tobago) is still locally owned.
By increasing competition, it improves service delivery and reduces prices, thus increasing consumer surplus.
As discussed below, Caribbean investments are often associated with significant fiscal and non-fiscal benefits, the costs of which are borne by taxpayers.
Market-seeking FDI is intended to take market share from other (possibly locally owned) companies, and it is thus more likely than other kinds to crowd out domestic entrepreneurs, which makes the long-term impact on the balance of payments less clear.
While the immediate capital account inflow benefits the country, outflows of income from FDI in subsequent years can represent a permanent burden on the current account.
Looking beyond the impact on the balance of payments, market-seeking FDI can have positive impacts on the local economy through its effects on secondary suppliers, as well as the lower prices already mentioned.
FDI promotion policy20 As noted above, the level of incoming FDI in the Caribbean is relatively high by comparison with other regions.
Caribbean nations have an average FDI to GDP ratio of 4.2%, as compared with 2.6% in Latin America.
Small economies generally tend to have somewhat larger FDI ratios, as can be seen in figure II.7, but the Caribbean has attracted particularly significant amounts of FDI, even if there has been a decrease in inflows since the financial crisis.
Only the two worst-performing Caribbean nations, which in 2014 were Haiti and Suriname with ratios of 1.1% and 0.1 respectively, lag the global average of 1.9% (for 2013).
One of several reasons why the Caribbean is able to attract such large amounts of FDI is because of FDI promotion policies, both financial and non-financial.
It is difficult to quantify such policies precisely, but they appear to be more generous than in other regions. 20 This section is partly based on De Groot and Pérez Ludeña (2014) and De Groot (2014b).
Putting these two facts together could be construed as saying that the Caribbean’s policy of attracting FDI has been very successful, but such causality cannot be assumed without further proof.
After all, FDI inflows cannot necessarily be tied to the generosity of the incentives.
Moreover, even if there is a causal relationship between FDI promotion policies and FDI inflows, this does not in itself say anything about the impact of FDI.
Whether that impact is positive is a matter of ongoing debate, as discussed in De Groot (2014a).
Finally, even if incoming FDI does have a positive impact, a costbenefit analysis would be required to determine whether the region’s generous FDI promotion policies are justifiable.
De Groot (2013) outlines a methodology for analysing the impact of FDI promotion policies in the Caribbean.21 The first step is to determine the objectives of the policy (UNCTAD, 2012b).
These may be to increase employment or the capital base, but may also reflect a desire to improve the level of technology used in an economy.
To achieve these objectives, a policymaker may propose certain FDI promotion policies.
Different types of such policies are discussed below, but in principle they can include anything aimed at increasing the level or quality of FDI.
These policies exercise an influence on the level or quality of FDI, which then links back to the policy objectives.
Even though some policies (reducing unnecessary regulation, increasing judicial efficiency) may have positive non-FDI side effects that seem to justify them, only once all the corresponding linkages are confirmed is an FDI promotion policy truly justified.22 1.
Different types of FDI promotion policies in the Caribbean Bartels and De Crombrugghe (2009, p. 2) argue that FDI promotion policies “…are meant, at best, to shape —or even distort— the economic environment of the host country in order to attract and retain higher levels of value-adding FDI”.
FDI promotion policies can include a range of measures, which may be separated into four different types: • Policies that focus on improving the overall business climate, benefiting both domestic and foreign producers.
Examples of such policies include reducing bureaucratic hurdles to setting up a business, improving the judiciary by guaranteeing property rights, and increasing the level of security in regions that require this. • Policies that focus on removing or reducing obstacles specific to foreign investors.
They may include, for example, liberalizing migration policies for foreign workers, guaranteeing non-discrimination in government procurement between domestic and foreign suppliers or concluding double taxation agreements with other countries. • Active investment promotion by an investment promotion agency, focused on resolving information asymmetries between foreign and domestic investors.
Examples include the opening of trade offices in foreign countries, both to provide potential investors with marketing information and to assist such investors in overcoming the challenges of investing in a new area. 21 That model is inspired by Blomström and Kokko (2003), who discuss the conceptual framework in which FDI operates.
However, financially costly measures can also include generous grants or subsidies for the initiation or continuation of certain investments.
The first of these (improving the overall business climate) is likely to have the strongest impact on economic growth, since it stimulates both domestic and foreign investment.
This approach has long been used in the Caribbean and as a result many economies have very low corporate and income tax rates (there is, for example, no income tax in the Bahamas), but has rarely moved beyond the financial aspect of the business climate.
According to the Doing Business 2015 report (World Bank, 2014), most Caribbean economies do not rank high for ease of doing business.
The rankings of Haiti (180th) and Suriname (162nd) can be put in perspective by considering the rankings earned by war-torn nations such as Iraq (156th), Sudan (160th) and the Syrian Arab Republic (175th).
Clearly, the Caribbean is lagging the rest of the world in its efforts to lower bureaucratic hurdles and improve judicial efficiency.
A score of 60 thus implies that a country scores 40% below the top performer on the average subindicator.
The quality of governance in the Caribbean is relatively high compared with other regions at a similar stage of development.
Of the elements of governance discussed by Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi (2009), regulatory quality should be a particular area of focus for Caribbean governments since it directly influences the business environment in which foreign investors thrive.
Owing to the relatively small size of Caribbean economies, individual policy actions can make a significant practical difference in the day-to-day operations of foreign investors.
Thus, monitoring investor experiences and attempting to ameliorate the bottlenecks identified by investors continues to be an important task for investment promotion agencies.
Governments can also do more to encourage the building of local capacities.
Foreign investors are often attracted to locations where local markets can provide the inputs they need; and Caribbean economies tend to fall short in this respect.
While the level of education is relatively high, workers’ skills are not sufficiently developed to meet the needs of the labour market.
Similarly, many economies lack local producers of the intermediate inputs needed by investors.
In addition to increasing an economy’s attractiveness for investors, encouraging the production of intermediate goods also deepens the quality of local value chains and thus greater benefits are derived from FDI.
The second type of FDI promotion policy relates to foreign investors only.
In 1994, all Caribbean Community (CARICOM) members except Suriname signed a double taxation agreement between themselves.
As discussed above (see figure II.5), the size of tax treaty networks differs by country.
Although most countries have concluded double taxation agreements with their primary investment partners (the Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the United States), further strengthening the network of double taxation agreements could provide additional incentives for investors to consider certain investment locations.
With respect to migrant worker policies and non-discrimination clauses in government procurement, the region still lags.
Only Belize has specific regulations that allow foreign investors to benefit from eased migration restrictions.
Similarly, few of the subregion’s governments provide equal opportunities to foreign and domestic companies in government procurement.
She finds that only 38% of countries in the Caribbean stipulate competitive processes as a fixed rule, while elsewhere in Latin America some 58% do so.
The evaluation criteria used in public procurement are unspecified or insufficiently specified in 10 of 13 Caribbean countries, as against just 5 of 19 other countries.
Improving these non-financial features of FDI promotion policies could help to stimulate investment in, for example, infrastructure, which has benefits that are particularly likely to spill over into the rest of the economy.
Non-financial FDI promotion policies have the added benefit that they are less costly than financial ones.
Citizenship by Investment (CbI) programmes are another interesting example of a non-financial FDI promotion policy aimed specifically at foreign investors.
First pioneered by Saint Kitts and Nevis in 1984, and later adopted by both Dominica and Antigua and Barbuda, these programmes provide investors with citizenship in the target country in exchange for a relatively small investment (or donation).
In Saint Kitts and Nevis, this is a primary means of financing much investment in tourism infrastructure, with interested persons purchasing US$ 400,000 shares in new developments in exchange for usage rights and citizenship.
This programme is considered to have been very successful in attracting both short- and long-term investors, largely from Asia, the Middle East and the Russian Federation.
Since citizenship of OECS and CARICOM countries brings with it certain mobility rights in other States, such programmes can attract some ire from nearby neighbours, although these other nations may also benefit from such investments.
Second, one of the advantages of being a citizen of Saint Kitts and Nevis (or other CARICOM countries) is visa-free travel to many countries, particularly the United States.
The United States thus frowns upon the granting of citizenship to individuals who may pose a threat to the country.
Dominica, for example, only requires an investment of US$ 100,000, the cheapest in the world.
Grenada used to have a CbI programme that required investment of as little as US$ 40,000, but it was abolished after the attacks of 11 September 2001 in the United States.
Grenada’s new programme, introduced in 2013, is supposedly limited to investors who are specifically invited to apply.
A potential problem with CbI programmes may be that land purchases in small, land-scarce islands puts prices beyond the reach of the local population.
The third type of FDI promotion policy involves the role played by investment promotion agencies (IPAs).
This is a challenging aspect of promotion policy, since many of the economies involved are relatively small and thus cannot afford large information campaigns and may have trouble attracting qualified staff.
This is unfortunate, since the literature (for example, Harding and Javorcik, 2011) argues that the use of IPAs may be the most cost-efficient way of increasing FDI.
The approach taken to this by the Caribbean Forum of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (CARIFORUM) could be considered a blueprint for similar regions.
In 2007, it created the Caribbean Association of Investment Promotion Agencies (CAIPA), a single body that promotes the interests of all its 19 members.
This is done through two primary channels: first, in thus combining, its members can build capacity more effectively by jointly purchasing important inputs (such as informational databases) and holding training sessions; second, CAIPA takes a regionwide approach to promotion, recognizing that organizations often choose a region before settling on a specific country.
In this way, local IPAs do not have to take such a broad approach in their own activities.
Unfortunately, as in other regions, and some limited academic literature aside, there is little evidence from formal analysis of these agencies’ effectiveness and real impact on inward FDI.
There is also great variation between different economies in investor appreciation for the IPA.
An organization such as SKIPA (Saint Kitts) is a true one-stop shop that is able to provide the full range of investment-related services and is highly appreciated by the investors making use of it.
At the other extreme, there are countries where IPA services are merely an afterthought for another State agency.
The fourth and most important channel for FDI promotion policies are financial incentives.
Among the most typical financial incentives are the following: • Income taxes: All economies provide some relief from income taxes (except for the Bahamas, which does not levy income tax), but do so under very different regimes, with a 15-year full exemption being most common.
OECS member States, in particular, tend to provide full exemptions without time limits.
Some economies have very specific regulations for vehicle importation that may benefit specific individuals or businesses.
In Jamaica, for example, there is a tax exemption for the import of agricultural vehicles. • Property taxes: Property tax regimes differ greatly between economies.
In many OECS member States, on the other hand, investors are eligible for a 15-year full exemption. • Other financial incentives: In addition to the above, there are several other regulations in particular countries aimed at making economies more attractive to foreign investors.
Where they are in place, foreign investors are often exempted from exchange controls, and stamp duty on land purchases is also often reduced or waived.
Some of the economies in the region also provide specific training grants or research and development (R&D) subsidies (for example, Jamaica and Grenada), or even subsidies for renting office space (Barbados).
It is clear that the incentives available in the region are very generous; moreover, the conditions for qualifying for them are often not strict.
While they are sector-specific in certain countries (often focusing on tourism, manufacturing or agriculture), only a few economies have strict qualifying regulations.
Barbados, for example, requires financing sources to be external, while Belize requires companies to create employment, transfer skills and earn foreign exchange if they are to be eligible for any subsidies.
Many governments do state “preferences” with regard to foreign investment, although these are not necessarily hard requirements, and most have stated goals for employment creation or the generation of foreign-exchange inflows.
Many Caribbean economies provide a full tax holiday for investors in export-oriented activities.
Even the extractive industries, which in most other regions are subject to stricter tax regulations that often include royalties, benefit from incentives in the Caribbean.
Guyana levies a modest royalty (5%) on gold mining and none on bauxite.
The only major exception is the oil industry in Trinidad and Tobago, where private companies (most of them foreign) enter into revenue-sharing contracts with the government; these are negotiated case by case and provide the government with substantial income.
In Suriname, the national oil company, Staatsolie, also continues to play an important role in the exploitation of the country’s reserves, and any foreign participation is strictly under its leadership.
Besides the generous tax exemptions formalized in law, governments add discretionary waivers for individual companies.
As a result, there is often great uncertainty about the kinds of incentives available to investors and significant flexibility for decision-makers that does not necessarily enhance the effectiveness of incentive schemes.
In Haiti, this has been identified by investors as their foremost concern about the investment climate.
Increasing transparency in the allocation of financial incentives should be a goal in itself, since it would also lead to a more efficient distribution of scarce resources (Goyal and Chai, 2008).
The Government of Jamaica, for example, has taken a step in this direction with the Omnibus Tax Incentive Act, passed in December 2013, which replaces all existing tax incentives and bans further discretionary waivers.
Despite liberal incentives, FDI in the region has often shifted to locations outside it when these expire. 2.
The impact of FDI promotion policies The impact of FDI promotion policies is complex to analyse.
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to scrutinize the entire system, but it is worth looking at whether the FDI promotion policies in place are having the desired impact.
Of course, this is contingent on knowing what impact is being sought by governments in the region.
The following are the most important reasons identified by policymakers for pursuing such policies: • FDI is sought to decrease unemployment.
Unemployment rates are very high in some economies such as Saint Lucia, and in those cases the primary concern of policymakers is to reduce the unemployment rate, particularly for the young. • Policymakers in the region are worried that there is a degree of underinvestment in their economies as a result of their low investment capacity.
However, data from the United Nations Statistics Division (United Nations, 2015) show that the rate of gross fixed capital formation (GFCF) in the Caribbean is actually somewhat above that of comparable economies.
Moreover, as shown in figure II.9, the correlation between FDI and GFCF is very weak in most economies.
In only four economies is there arguably a statistically significant relationship between the two. • A third reason for attracting FDI is the hope that there will be technological spillovers from these investors in the local economy.
Such spillovers can help companies or even entire economies to climb up the global value chain. • The final major reason is that in the Caribbean, whose primary product is tourism, investments on the scale needed to keep accommodation up to the constantly rising standards of international rivals and thereby stay competitive require the participation of large international investors.
This also applies to the extractive industry, which in the Caribbean is likewise dependent on FDI inflows.
The question then becomes whether the FDI promotion policies currently in place actually address these issues.
However, investors do not rank financial incentives among the top reasons for investing in the region (CAIPA, 2013).
Rather, they are attracted by its strategic location, its educated and English-speaking workforce or the availability of a relatively large pan-Caribbean market.
At the moment, there is little hard evidence for the impact on FDI and economic growth of the generous incentives given by Caribbean governments.
It seems likely that policies to enhance the overall investment climate would have more success, and they would benefit domestic and foreign investors alike.
Also, given high levels of debt in the region, the opportunity cost of these incentives in terms of foregone public investment in infrastructure, human capital and the business environment can be quite high.
Goyal and Chai (2008) are among the few academics to have looked at tax incentives in the Caribbean, analysing tax regimes in different OECS members.
According to these authors, countries forego some 9.5% to 16% of annual GDP in tax incentives, without much noticeable impact.
They believe that investors are, in fact, not very price-sensitive, and that the removal of generous financial subsidies could yield potential revenue of between 7% and 13% of GDP.
Over and above, the use of tax policy to favour certain foreign-driven sectors over domestically run ones results in a cost transfer to these domestic investors, putting them at a competitive disadvantage.
The situation is made worse by the stressed public finances of most Caribbean countries, as seen in table II.1.
ECLAC (2014c) reports that the average budget deficit in 2014 was 3.9% of GDP (excluding the Dominican Republic and Haiti), with six countries having deficits of over 5%.
The total national debt reached close to 100% of GDP in Antigua and Barbuda and Barbados and 127% of GDP in Jamaica, further increasing these economies’ vulnerability.
At a time when many Caribbean countries are reducing their fiscal deficits, the incentives granted to foreign investors have to come from higher taxes on other constituencies.
These raise the costs of doing business in the economy and may even be pushing many local companies into the informal economy.
The impact of FDI promotion policies and the size of the benefits from FDI overall are the subject of a lively academic debate, as summarized in De Groot (2014a).
Import duties in the Caribbean are relatively high and, combined with the high costs of transportation to the region, impose a significant burden on business.
Particularly in the early-stage development of new projects, when many inputs are required, import duty waivers are critically important.
It is not clear, however, why a distinction should be made between local and foreign investors when these waivers are granted.
Rather, CARICOM ought to pursue cuts in common tariffs to reduce the need for waivers.
This is particularly the case when duties are levied on products that have clearly positive spillover effects, such as solar power generating equipment.
One complicating factor is that import duty waivers reduce incentives for local sourcing, which is among the primary benefits of investment.
However, when local companies are able to deliver consistently high product quality, they should be able to compete with imported products on this rather than on price alone.
Tax competition is leading to a race to the bottom in which tax advantages offered by one jurisdiction are matched by others competing for FDI.
This is more problematic in the Caribbean than in other regions because economies are often competing for the same projects, particularly in tourism and BPO.
It is difficult for governments to differentiate their own product offering in these markets.
Klemm and Van Parys (2012) analyse this form of strategic interaction in taxation rates and find that it is particularly marked in Latin America and the Caribbean.
In CARICOM, there are currently proposals to harmonize incentives that, if approved, will cap these at a common level to reduce the burden of financial FDI promotion policies without negatively affecting the level of overall FDI.
This could go a long way towards addressing the problem in the Caribbean region whereby the costs of attracting FDI may be larger than the benefits from such investment.
Bird (2000) argues that “[w]hy so many governments opt for incentives in the absence of any solid evidence that they produce economically significant results remains a puzzle to many economists” (p. 201).
He believes that with tax coordination across the region (admittedly a challenge), overall welfare could be increased.
The World Economic Forum (WEF, 2013, p. 8) describes investment subsidies as “a coordination failure among governments [that] are, like most subsidies, inefficient”.
Additionally, it argues that they divert attention away from truly hard decisions about measures to improve the overall business climate.
While doing so could help domestic and foreign investors alike, it is usually more difficult than offering incentives.
Furthermore, even if policymakers were eager, it is not certain that many of the economies in the subregion actually have the institutional capacity to make such changes. 3.
FDI and economic development in the Caribbean The relationship between FDI and economic development is ambiguous and the subject of much academic debate.
The previous subsection showed that thereis no clear causal link between FDI and increased fixed capital formation and that the Caribbean is not suffering from a lack of capital investment.
Furthermore, FDI may lead to the creation of jobs for the local population or value chains from which local enterprises can benefit.
One last hypothesis is that FDI may simply be necessary to compensate for the large current account deficits in the Caribbean countries.
Since unemployment is a serious issue in many Caribbean economies, jobs created by foreign investment would theoretically have a beneficial impact in terms of economic development.
However, it is not clear that foreign investors are better job creators than local investors.
Indeed, foreign investors are more likely to use foreign staff for the best-paid jobs and local investors may be better able to make optimal use of local labour market conditions.
This leads to a second point: the skills of many workers in the Caribbean do not match the needs of employers.
As a result, large employers, which tend to be foreign, are required to provide extensive training in order to build the skills they need in their workforce.
In this regard, therefore, FDI can be considered to impact positively on economic development since it works as a channel to improve the skill level of local workers.
Local value chains do not tend to attract much attention in the Caribbean, even though policy can play an important role, for example, in connecting local goods producers and foreign investors.
Currently, many foreign investors import a large share of their inputs, despite the high cost of doing so in the Caribbean.
They do so because of limited local capacity to provide those inputs.
While it is understandable that not every country can manufacture high-tech inputs, it would perhaps be feasible for these economies to aim to provide the agricultural inputs required by large hotels and resorts.
Investors argue that the local producers are not able to deliver goods of a sufficiently high and consistent quality, which should be a call to action for the governments of the subregion.
Policies that focus on improving the capacities of local producers to enter the value chains of these different industries would significantly enhance the benefits derived from inward FDI.
With respect to the balance of payments, as discussed earlier in this chapter, the impact of FDI can be ambiguous.
When the initial investment is made, whether in the form of a greenfield project or an acquisition, there is an inflow of foreign exchange into the country and an improvement in the capital account.
As the company makes profits, they are recorded as a debit in the current account (income from FDI).
Some of this is repatriated and some reinvested, whereupon it will be accounted for as a capital inflow again.
Profits are highest in Suriname, where they average around 18%, having been particularly strong during 2011 and 2012.
Barbados does not have complete data available, but profitability is also strikingly high for the years in which it does.
Investors in Belize, the Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago also make healthy returns of between 9% and 10%.
All other countries for which data are available, however, have very low profitability, particularly by Latin American standards (see chapter I).
This is partly down to the economic cycle, since tourism, the most important industry in many economies in this group, has been in decline in recent years.
The values in figure II.10 are FDI income divided by the stock of FDI in the country.
Thus, economies with very large stocks can have low rates of return but still register large outflows of foreign reserves.
The final column shows how average FDI income compareS with inflows of FDI in recent years.
In Belize, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, more foreign exchange leaves the country in the form of FDI income than is received as FDI inflows, while in Barbados and the Dominican Republic, FDI is almost neutral for the balance of payments.
Trans-Caribbean enterprises Inflows of FDI into the Caribbean get far more attention than outflows.
While nearly every country reports FDI inflows in its balance of payments, many countries do not consistently report the amount of outward FDI, so it is difficult to assess net FDI flows from the Caribbean.
Nonetheless, some Caribbean countries are sources of FDI as well, with companies investing not only in their home markets, but also in other Caribbean economies and countries outside the region.
Indeed, this outbound FDI has been ongoing for some time and has often had significant consequences.
The foreign subsidiaries of some trans-Caribbeans are very large and make their own investments in turn.
This also shows that FDI from the region can involve the acquisition of assets from parties based in developed countries.
All four derive very substantial proportions of their revenue from other countries, although revenue data broken down in this way are not available for all companies.
What prompted this move was a downgrade of Sagicor Life’s bond rating by Standard & Poor’s as a result of the downgrading of Barbados sovereign debt.
Overseas investments are important for a company’s bottom as well as top lines.
For example, Massy Group derives 41% of its before-tax profits from outside Trinidad and Tobago, with nearly all of this coming from Barbados, Guyana and Jamaica.
Most of the FDI undertaken by large trans-Caribbean companies is in the form of mergers and acquisitions.
This often leads to restructuring and streamlining of the existing operation, usually resulting in job cuts and other revenue-saving measures.
When a gap in the market exists, a greenfield investment is more likely.
For example, Sagicor Group made greenfield investments in subsidiaries in Belize and Panama to expand its insurance operations.
Large transnational Caribbean companies tend to be conglomerates, that is, groups of several corporations, some operating in entirely different businesses.
This structure is important for the Caribbean, which, even as a whole, is a small market.
Because of its economic and geographical properties, the Caribbean is especially prone to economic and environmental shocks.
Operating as a conglomerate is thus an important way of smoothing risks, since if one corporation’s business is severely affected in a downturn, it can be supported by other parts of the conglomerate operating in different industries.
When several corporations operate in related fields, conglomerates can also provide opportunities to form value chains.
Of course, this structure has its dangers too —if a conglomerate does not divest failing enterprises, its successful branches may be burdened by the need to support them in perpetuity.
Sandals Resorts is exceptional in the region in that it is not a conglomerate but a highly focused enterprise.
It is a giant trans-Caribbean company operating all-inclusive resorts throughout the region.
Based in Jamaica, the firm began operating in 1981 and continued adding resorts there before opening its first international resort in Antigua in 1991.
The opening of a resort can be a major boost for the local economy, stimulating tourism development and even bringing an increase in air travel as airlines respond to increased demand.
Investments can take the form of acquisitions, renovations and expansions of existing resorts, sometimes saving them from closing entirely, with all the negative impact this would have on the local economy.
Resorts also provide highly coveted jobs; when one opened recently in Barbados, about 5,000 people applied for 600 positions.
The Dominican Republic has no major foreign investments, despite being the largest economy in the Caribbean.
There are no official data on FDI outflows, but the few known foreign investments by companies from the country are in Haiti.
Grupo M, for example, has garment manufacturing plants employing 9,000 workers, while Grupo Estrella has several construction projects in Haiti. 1.
Investments beyond the Caribbean Economic growth in the Caribbean has been modest at best in recent years, as the subregion continues to recover from the 2008 drop in asset prices and resulting recession.
Jamaica, now undergoing a fiscal restructuring in close cooperation with the IMF, has been having particularly severe problems.
It is an important target market for many trans-Caribbeans, and its economic woes have negatively impacted businesses in the region.
Massy, for example, reported a 24% drop in its Jamaica-based business in 2013 due to both falling consumer demand and currency depreciation (see box II.3).
These economic factors, along with a drive to explore new and larger markets, have helped push Caribbean companies to invest outside the region, particularly in Latin America.
Goddard Enterprises is an example of a company with a significant amount of its business based outside the Caribbean.
Massy Group rebranding decisions have been influenced by a desire to broaden its activities in Latin America, as discussed in box II.3.
The Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is seemingly a natural target market for trans-Caribbean companies.
It is geographically close and has developed strong ties to many countries through bilateral agreements, the PetroCaribe arrangement24 and trade.
However, the country has recently been in an economic slump (like the Caribbean region itself), which could make it less attractive for FDI from the Caribbean.
There are questions about the future of the programme because of the fall in oil prices, which has had a large impact on the Venezuelan budget.
All the economies discussed in this chapter except Barbados and Trinidad and Tobago are parties to the PetroCaribe arrangement.
In 1932, this merged with Massy to form Neal and Massy Engineering Company.The firm continued to grow into a conglomerate, eventually becoming Neal & Massy Group, with more than 60 companies operating in the region.
Some of its most important acquisitions as it grew included Cannings & Company (of Trinidad and Tobago) in 1975 and Barbados Shipping & Trading Company in 2008.
International expansion and the diversification of industries under the group’s umbrella led executives to believe a rebranding campaign was needed.
In order to build brand image and recognition, in 2014 the different firms within the Neal & Massy Group were rebranded to Massy, and Neal & Massy Group itself changed its name to Massy Group.
Massy Group is a conglomerate of various subsidiaries operating in the automotive, distribution, energy and industrial gases, finance, industrial equipment, insurance, property, retail and technology sectors.These encompass dozens of different businesses and brand names now relabelled as Massy.
Some of these names are iconic in Trinidad and Tobago and the Caribbean.
During the rebranding process, many in the region have been learning for the first time how many brands and businesses are in fact part of Neal & Massy, now Massy.
The choice of the conglomerate’s new name, Massy, was made after consideration of thousands of candidate names.
It was chosen because it was familiar —many people already referred to some Neal & Massy companies simply as “Massy”.The heritage reflected in the original name is captured by the company’s new symbol, which includes both an “N” and an “M”.
In terms of strategy, the decision to bring all group businesses under the umbrella of a single name directly relates to the growth strategy of this pan-Caribbean conglomerate.
It increases synergies between the different components of the business, while retaining the risk-spreading strengths of the diversification strategy.
Elsewhere in the world, large companies tend to become more specialized with size, since they benefit more from dominating a single product than they do from winning a smaller share of more different markets.
The situation in the Caribbean is different in that even complete dominance in a single product market still produces only a very small base for a company.Thus, spreading across different product markets increases potential market size while at the same time reducing risk.
The unification of the company’s businesses extends beyond the use of a common name.
Massy is also taking steps to increase cooperation and improve integration between its different components and to encourage subsidiaries to work together.
For example, companies under the Massy umbrella sold automobiles (Neal & Massy Automotive), provided vehicle insurance (United Insurance) and provided finance for vehicle purchases (General Finance Corporation).
Now all these companies have been rebranded under the Massy name and steps have been taken to ensure that they communicate and cooperate with each other.
This could result in both increased revenues for Massy Group and more convenient shopping for customers.
The decision by Massy Group to brand all its products under the Massy name is also related to its intention to continue to focus on expanding into Latin American markets.
This was a factor in management’s decision to choose the name Massy as its branding focus.
Much FDI going from the Caribbean to the United States is designed to take advantage of Miami as a major goods and services distribution port.
Because transport and travel between Caribbean countries remains underdeveloped, Miami is an important hub for intraregional trade.
FDI in the United States can thus facilitate increased trade and investment with countries in the Caribbean.
Some FDI is also for access to markets in services such as insurance.
Digicel Group is an excellent example of a company that has used its strength in the Caribbean to learn and develop a new business model that can be applied elsewhere as well.25 The company now operates in most Caribbean markets and has aggressively pursued investments in markets outside the region, with operations in several countries of Central and South America.
It was in discussions to develop telecommunications networks in Myanmar, but failed in its bid to obtain one of two licences offered by the government.
Digicel’s expertise in developing mobile phone networks in small island countries has allowed it to branch out and operate in some South Pacific island economies as well, including Fiji, Nauru, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Tonga and Vanuatu.
It has even used its reach to fill a financial-sector niche: Digicel mobile money allows users to send and receive money and pay bills through their phones. 2.
The advantages and disadvantages of intraregional FDI Outbound FDI is sometimes portrayed negatively by the media and other institutions, particularly when it goes to developed countries.
It can be seen as the relocation of jobs and productive enterprises out of the home country, to the latter’s detriment.
Nonetheless, outbound FDI has several advantages for both employment and economic growth in the source country, and some of these advantages are particularly relevant to small island developing States. 25 Digicel’s operations are mostly in the Caribbean, with its headquarters in Jamaica; however, the founder is from the Republic of Ireland.
Investing in foreign countries can be a way for Caribbean companies to cope with the problem of small markets and the resulting low demand at home.
Expansion can lead to economies of scale, and thence increased production and distribution.
These economies of scale would be more difficult to achieve in a single Caribbean country or even the whole Caribbean region.
Caribbean economies are well known to be susceptible to both economic and environmental shocks.
A company which restricts itself to a small domestic market with wide fluctuations in supply and demand is unlikely to survive.
This is especially true in Caribbean economies, which have fairly open trade; domestic companies must compete with large, international ones, whether at home or abroad.
When a Caribbean company makes foreign investments, it opens up to a larger market than its domestic one.
This can directly lead to an expansion of production and employment in the home country if the company uses inputs from there.
Although trade is most commonly seen as a way for Caribbean nations to tap world markets through exports, FDI can achieve the same goal.
FDI within the region has, at least initially, zero net effect on the region’s balance of payments as a whole, something that has both positive and negative aspects.
With intraregional FDI, there is no initial transfer of capital to the region (although of course there is between countries within the region).
Similarly, profits, even if repatriated, stay within the Caribbean; for the region as a whole, this prevents a continued drain on the current account from profit repatriation.
Of course, that does not preclude a disparate share-out of FDI returns, depending on the capacity of individual countries to invest competitively in others.
Caribbean transnational companies may be more committed and better positioned to contribute to community development in the Caribbean than other sources of FDI.
Goddard, for example, highlights its contributions to the Caribbean in its annual report; these include a donation in pursuit of UNESCO World Heritage Site status for several areas in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and support for athletic activities in a number of Caribbean countries.
Sagicor has also funded community development projects throughout the Caribbean, focusing on education, health, community and youth involvement and sports.
ANSA McAL funds awards to recognize Caribbean achievements in key fields and maintains a foundation which champions various social causes in the Caribbean.
Massy Group sponsors activities to promote innovation, youth development, education, women’s empowerment, physical fitness and other goals.
Caribbean Airlines is involved in a number of community and charitable activities including, for example, backing for a paediatric cancer patient support organization.
This is not to say that foreign firms cannot contribute to social development in the Caribbean as well; BP, for example, contributes to several projects in Trinidad and Tobago.
Caribbean transnationals, as large companies which must compete internationally, can also be important for the development of human capital in the region.
They are probably more likely to train and hire local staff as managers than investor companies from outside the region.
Nonetheless, their ability to hire locals for some positions is limited by human capital constraints.
For example, there are few formal insurance education programmes in the Caribbean, so actuarial experts must often be hired from outside the region.
The choice of where to invest in the Caribbean may be strongly influenced by bureaucratic obstacles and the time required to set up a new business.
The region is subject to various economic and environmental risks, which investors must also take into account.
Furthermore, most of the markets are small, so industries with high entry or fixed costs may struggle to attain profitability.
Conclusions There is no doubt that FDI is playing a major role in the economic development of the Caribbean.
FDI inflows are very large compared with the size of local economies, many of which suffer from large current account deficits that governments are trying to compensate for with inflows of FDI.
In tourism particularly, the role of FDI cannot be overstated, since many projects require such substantial investments that local investors would not be able to defray them.
A similar argument can be made in the natural resources sector, although joint ventures between local and international enterprises are more common in that field.
Cuba and Haiti are the two exceptions in the Caribbean, receiving very little FDI for the size of their economies.
The likes of the Dominican Republic, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago receive substantially larger amounts of FDI than smaller economies, which reflects their economic size.
Over time, Guyana and Haiti have seen significant increases in FDI inflows, while the Bahamas and Barbados have experienced the largest falls.
With respect to the balance of payments, the impact of FDI is ambiguous.
While it is true that economies with temporary current account deficits may be able to offset them with a capital account surplus, many economies in the Caribbean have permanent current account deficits, and the continuous inflow of FDI that would be required to offset them would lead to a large build-up of foreign capital.
Furthermore, such inflows are then associated with outflows of capital in the form of income from FDI.
On average, outflows of income from FDI are equivalent to more than three quarters of FDI inflows in the Caribbean, and they are particularly substantial in Barbados, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.
The degree to which FDI crowds out local investment also affects its impact on the balance of payments.
A local investment will not give rise to an influx of capital at the time the initial expenditure is carried out and does not lead to significant outward current transfers compared with a similar amount of FDI.
Although local investment may seem more likely to have a beneficial long-term impact on the balance of payments than a similar amount of FDI, it is important to remember that FDI is often sought by countries because local firms do not have the resources to make the same types of greenfield investments that large multinational corporations do.
Besides the impact on the balance of payments, there is potential to positively affect economic growth in the different economies.
Many Caribbean economies have long been suffering from a lack of competitiveness, and FDI could help to transform them.
Empirically, it has not been shown that inflows of FDI lead to subsequent economic growth.
There are exceptions: particularly in the case of investments too large to be borne by local economies, such as in mining, the absence of FDI would hamper economic development.
In other cases, likewise, foreign investors may be able to invest larger sums within a shorter period, quickly providing employment opportunities.
In certain economies, furthermore, inward FDI has the potential to yield significant benefits.
This is particularly true of Cuba and Haiti, as developing countries that receive very little FDI.
In these cases, inbound FDI has the potential to be truly transformative in terms of employment creation, technological spillovers and economic growth.
The impact of the extensive use of FDI promotion policies in the Caribbean is a subject of debate.
The effectiveness of different policies of this type has not been sufficiently researched in the Caribbean context, making them difficult to justify at a time when many governments in the subregion are suffering from significant revenue shortfalls.
Exacerbating the harmful impact of FDI promotion policies is the arbitrary way they are applied in many jurisdictions.
Unfortunately, this is not always a relationship between equals in the Caribbean, with investors having substantially more bargaining power.
The result of such unbalanced relationships and of the fact that many Caribbean economies offer very similar products has been a race to the bottom between the different governments, which match one another’s incentive offers.
Caribbean governments should thus be encouraged to cooperate more energetically on reducing the FDI promotion policies available to investors, particularly those that do not seem to directly affect the variables which governments wish to act upon, such as employment creation.
Only if governments cooperate closely through forums like CARICOM and OECS can they stand up to the market power of some of the larger corporate players in the region.
If they achieve this, they will be in a position to use their resources more productively.
In particular, rather than having blanket fiscal subsidies, they could target specific sectors with reforms that can increase the local benefits of FDI.
With respect to tourism, for example, this means encouraging local companies to produce a consistent supply of high-quality inputs for the sector.
An underlying challenge is that FDI promotion policies would not be so necessary in the Caribbean if it were able to improve its business environment.
Investors are looking to optimize their overall business, and it is not uncommon for them to say that higher taxes would not be a problem if the business environment were better.
More effective government, less bureaucracy, better public services, a faster judicial system, better contract enforcement: all these would make it easier to do business, benefiting domestic and foreign investors alike.
If such improvements were to take place in the region, the call for further FDI promotion policies would not be as strong and would anyway be easier for policymakers to ignore.
FDI inflows into the Caribbean are likely to increase moderately in the near future, once economies are able to return to growth.
Since the region’s overall FDI figures are primarily driven by large investments in the natural resource sector, the future of the headline FDI figure largely depends on what happens to commodity prices in the international market.
Much also hangs on the degree to which Cuba and Haiti are able to start attracting significant investment.
These two economies are large by Caribbean standards and their entry into the FDI arena could have a large impact.
For individual economies, it is important to remember that what truly matters is not the quantity of FDI but its transformative impact.
Javorcik (2011), “Roll out the red carpet and they will come: Investment promotion and FDI inflows”, The Economic Journal, vol. 121, Nº 557.
Lim, Sung-Hoon (2005), “Foreign investment impact and incentive: A strategic approach to the relationship between the objectives of foreign investment policy and their promotion”, International Business Review, vol. 14, No. 1.
Conclusions Bibliography Introduction At the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (Rio+20), the participating countries agreed on the need to move towards a new form of consumption and production that does not endanger the environmental balance of the planet.
In this regard the success of efforts to reduce poverty and inequality, and to promote development, will be contingent on ecological constraints and environmental degradation.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, environmental problems are complex and encompass several dimensions (ECLAC, 2012).
The region is highly urbanized, with more than 80% of people living in cities.
While this is beneficial to the quality of life of much of the population, it has also created significant social and environmental problems, such as inadequate basic services and air and water pollution in many urban areas.
Despite considerable progress, solid waste management remains a critical issue in many neighbourhoods owing to the poor management of economic incentives, low collection coverage and a shortage of sites for final disposal.
Latin America and the Caribbean is also home to the planet’s greatest biodiversity, but this wealth is at risk of being lost.
The world failed to meet the 2010 Biodiversity Target adopted by the Convention on Biological Diversity, mainly owing to land-use changes and the consequent reduction, fragmentation and loss of habitats.
Large-scale export agriculture, tourism and unplanned coastal development all have a major impact on this process.
Deforestation is another key issue for in the region, which accounts for one third of global forest losses.
Having accelerated in South America between 1990 and 2005, the phenomenon has since slowed thanks to a number of steps taken in the Brazilian Amazon.
The degradation of desert and arid land is also causing biodiversity loss and is detrimental to the economic productivity of agriculture and related activities.
The region has plentiful water resources, but they are unevenly distributed and their quality may be degraded by urban growth and the expansion of certain economic sectors.
Chemical production is partly responsible for this degradation, since neither the industry nor consumers are willing to pay for the proper disposal of chemicals.
Although some institutional progress has been achieved in this sphere, and most countries have adopted strategies for the management of these products, some implementation problems remain.
The region is also experiencing the same climate change impacts as the rest of the planet, with the Caribbean and other coastal territories particularly affected.
The region’s per capita greenhouse gas emissions are slightly higher than the world average, and are largely accounted for by the energy sector (42%), agriculture (28%) and changes in land use (21%) (ECLAC, 2014b).
The post-2015 development agenda is structured around sustainable development goals (SDGs) which mainstream the concept of environmental sustainability.
The agenda also emphasizes that all actors, including the private sector, need to be included in efforts to achieve the SDGs.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, transnational corporations are a key actor: on some occasions they have been almost entirely responsible for the development of sectors with major environmental impacts, while also making a decisive contribution to the introduction of unsustainable consumption patterns (for example, private vehicle use), which will be difficult to reverse in the near term.
However, many transnational firms have the capacity to help introduce more sustainable practices, thanks to their experience in countries with stricter environmental regulations, more advanced technology, or greater exposure to civil society and international financial markets.
This chapter explores how business strategies can help or hinder the transition towards a more environmentally friendly production structure, with a particular focus on foreign direct investment (FDI).
Increased social and political demand for environmental protection has recently led to change in the relationship between FDI and the environment.
Technological advances have also expanded the range of solutions to many environmental problems, with transnational corporations the main proprietors of these technologies.
Lastly, FDI inflows into Latin American and Caribbean economies have increased over the past decade, and in some countries have been channelled more intensively into the natural resources sector, which has a potentially high environmental footprint.
Measuring the environmental impact of FDI is beyond the scope of this chapter, although the influence of production structures on these impacts, and the conditions needed to make best use of positive contributions by transnational corporations, are examined.
The chapter also reviews the environmental impact of transnational corporations from a broad vantage point, as well as how public policies are channelling this impact.
Consideration will be given to past actions (pollution and environmental liabilities, among others) and future prospects (how FDI can make the region’s production structure more sustainable).
Government policies are also analysed, with special reference to the convergence or divergence of environmental and investment policies.
Several boxes included in the chapter give a detailed account of recent environmental developments and corporate performance in specific sectors.
Production structure, corporate strategies and the environment As chapter I explained, despite weaker FDI flows in 2014, transnational corporations have been increasing their presence in most of the region’s countries for the past decade: it is only natural that their environmental footprint should increase too.
However, the magnitude of that impact, whether positive or negative, will not be directly proportional to the amount of investment received, but will depend on the production structure and regulatory framework of the country in question, and on business strategies relating to the location of investment, the development of clean technology or the adoption of other environmental measures.
Accordingly, transnational corporations are likely to have a limited impact in countries where FDI is concentrated in services or light manufacturing, and a significant direct impact in countries that attract FDI to heavy industries or the development of natural resources.
Transnational corporations have the capacity to situate polluting operations in countries with laxer environmental regulations.
In the same way as some transnational firms are accused of locating their activities in certain countries so as to minimize their tax burden or labour costs, so they stand accused of attempting to minimize their environmental protection costs by transferring their dirtiest operations to countries with more permissive environmental regimes (see section 2).
Transnationals can also use their greater technological expertise to promote environmental sustainability by introducing cleaner modes of production and helping to build local capacity in that sphere.
They can also make a positive contribution by showing greater willingness to undertake voluntary initiatives in favour of sustainability. 1.
Sectoral distribution and the environmental impact of FDI It is estimated that 42% of all inward FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean goes to the services sector, while manufacturing receives 32% and natural resources the remaining 26%.
However, countries differ significantly owing to their varied comparative advantages and production patterns.
Since these activities affect the environment in different ways, the ecological consequences of FDI are primarily contingent on the production structure of each country.
There are many dimensions to the environmental impacts of different economic activities, and therefore it isn’t possible to quantify them using a single variable.
Golub, Kauffmann and Yeres (2011) define the following environmentally relevant sectors: agriculture, extractive industries, manufacturing, construction, transport, and electricity, gas and water services.
This extremely broad definition only excludes services whose ecological impacts are mainly indirect, such as retail and banking.
By focusing on a single variable, it is possible to gain a more specific measurement of impacts on certain sectors.
For example, the sectors with the largest impact in terms of energy intensity (as an approximation of their potential contribution to greenhouse gas emissions) were paper manufacturing, steelmaking, cement production and mining.
Environmental degradation —often caused by mining or heavily polluting industries— is not necessarily a consequence of FDI, and would still exist if these activities were performed by local firms.
Moreover, in many economies (particularly small and medium-sized ones) transnational companies are the only enterprises with the capacity needed to develop certain industries, with the result that there is no way of distinguishing the environmental impact of the sector from that of FDI.
The sectoral concentration of FDI in a given production structure may be observed by comparing each sector’s share of the cumulative stock of FDI with its share of total capital.
In general, transnational corporations will tend to dominate sectors that have large economies of scale, are capital intensive, or which allow them to exploit their technological advantages, brands or patents.
Taking into account only the most polluting sectors, and compared with total investment, FDI was more highly concentrated in extractive industries, electricity, gas and water, and manufacturing, and less so in construction and agriculture.
The observations presented in figure III.2 cannot be extrapolated to all of the region’s countries, though some trends are indeed comparable.
Local investors predominate in agriculture, construction and transport in almost all countries.
Conversely, the relative importance of FDI in extractive industries varies greatly, being larger in Argentina, Chile, Peru and Trinidad and Tobago than in Brazil and Mexico.
The relative magnitude of FDI in the electricity and manufacturing sectors is also highly variable.
It is estimated that these six sectors account for 41% of FDI worldwide, 46% of FDI in developing economies (Golub, Kauffmann and Yeres, 2011) and 62% of FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean.
In other words, the sectoral distribution of FDI in the region means that the potential impact on the environment is high (in comparison with the world average).
One way of measuring them is to study the pollution abatement costs incurred by corporations (per unit of output, in the United States economy) (Mani and Wheeler, 1997).
According to 2005 data, six industrial sectors were identified as producing the most pollution: iron and steel, pulp and paper, industrial chemicals, leather, petrochemicals and non-metallic minerals (cement) (EPA, 2008).
Almost all are fairly intensive in capital, energy and land, and have high fixed costs.
By contrast, the manufacturing of textiles, garments, machinery, transport materials and professional and scientific instruments are subsectors that are deemed to have low environmental impacts.
By this criterion, the region’s two largest economies exhibit very different patterns.
In Brazil, natural-resource processing industries have developed most, while in Mexico labour-intensive and medium-high-tech industries such as machinery, automobiles and electronics have dominated.
For this reason, FDI flows to the most polluting industries are much stronger in Brazil, although total FDI in the manufacturing sector (US$ 17 billion per year in the past decade) is comparable to that received by Mexico (US$ 12 billion per year).
In Mexico, the polluting industries accounted for just 15% of FDI, compared with 49% in Brazil.
Much of the difference is due to the enormous investment inflows in the Brazilian steel industry in recent years (see figure III.3), though Brazil receives much more FDI than Mexico, both in absolute and relative terms, in almost all of the most polluting sectors.
Disaggregated data are not available for Central America and the Caribbean, but the absence of steelmaking and other heavy industries and the specialization in labour-intensive export manufacturing suggests that the environmental impact of industrial FDI in those countries is equal to or less than that of industrial FDI in Mexico.
These comparisons between countries are based on overall environmental impact patterns and might not reflect the impact of individual investment projects in these countries.
Even within the same industry, processes may have different (positive or negative) environmental impacts depending on national regulations, natural or social circumstances at the location, and individual corporate decisions.
One example is that of CO2 emissions per unit of electricity generated: in power systems that mainly rely on fossil fuels (for example, those of northern Chile or Mexico), electricity-intensive industries will generate many more indirect emissions than they would in countries where electricity is mainly generated from renewable energies (such as Brazil or Colombia).
Classifying environmental impacts in the services sector, which accounts for half of the region’s FDI, is more difficult since effects tend to be more indirect.
A good example is the retail trade, a service sector whose FDI inflows are among the strongest in the region.1 While its operations are not especially dirty, this sector can exert significant influence over the value chain of many other products.
In 2009, the Brazilian subsidiary of United States retailer Walmart signed a sustainability pact with other companies, designed to achieve specific internal targets such as increasing the energy efficiency of stores by 25% and reducing the use of plastic bags by 50% (a target that was reached in 2012).
Other goals involved the requirement that wood, livestock and soybean suppliers hold certificates guaranteeing that their production processes do not contribute to the deforestation of the Amazon.
The financial services sector also has significant potential to influence the rest of the economy.
For example, the “Equator Principles”2 were designed by international public banks to be applied in major infrastructure projects, but commercial banks have increasingly applied them to all large and medium-sized loans.
The 80 banks that adhere to these principles include the main foreign banks operating in the region (Citigroup, Santander, BBVA) and many of the region’s major financial institutions, notably those of Brazil (Itaú, Caixa Econômica Federal, Bradesco, Banco do Brasil and Pine).
In that country, a new regulation requires that banks assume responsibility for environmental impact studies in the projects they finance, thereby adopting the practice of the principal international banks.
For many of the region’s economies, mining and oil companies are likely to have the greatest environmental impacts.
Worldwide, the percentage of FDI allocated to natural resources stands at less than 10%, while in Latin America and the Caribbean it is 26% (Golub, Kauffmann and Yeres, 2011) and in countries such as Chile, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and Trinidad and Tobago, the figure exceeds 50%.
This trend has intensified with the reprimarization process of the past decade, which in many cases has been spurred by high levels of FDI in extractive industries, especially mining (see the section in chapter I on sectoral distribution).
Extractive industries are voracious energy consumers and are therefore responsible for considerable indirect greenhouse gas emissions.
These growing environmental impacts reflect the more intensive use of energy because of declining ore grade in working deposits.
Many of these corporations (both domestic and foreign) are striving to improve their energy efficiency and increase the use of renewable energies in their operations; however, this has not yet managed to reverse the underlying trend.
Environmental liabilities caused by extractive industries pose a more local, but no less important problem.
The management of these liabilities is at the heart of many of the disputes concerning heavy industrial operations by transnational corporations in the region.
Particularly problems have arisen in operations that changed hands without a sufficiently clear attribution of this responsibility to one of the parties, as in the dispute between Ecuador and Chevron.
More recently, Barrick Gold faced similar problems following a case of water pollution at its mine in the Dominican Republic.
In short, mining, hydrocarbons and other primary sectors such as forestry have a considerable environmental impact at the global and local levels (see box III.1), and in many countries these activities have taken place thanks to foreign investment.
In fact, environmental impact management is often a decisive factor when undertaking investment projects, beginning with the initial operating permit that is granted after the environmental impact assessment and continuing throughout the useful life of the mine.
In recent years there has been a proliferation of cases in which mining operations have been suspended and even cancelled because of protests by the directly affected communities or by national civil society.
The most common causes of contention are environmental (pollution, water use and the accrual of environmental liabilities), but complaints have also been made of human rights abuses, the displacement of communities, unfulfilled expectations of shared mining royalties and negative impacts on traditional production activities (Saade Hazin, 2013).
Such conflicts —which vary somewhat from one country to the next— abound all over the world, although Latin America accounts for a disproportionate number even taking into account the magnitude of the sector in some of the region’s countries.
The largest —in terms of investment— was the Pascua Lama case, in which Canada’s Barrick Gold Corporation called a halt to its mining operation on the Argentine-Chilean border in April 2013 after a court ruled that the company was responsible for reducing indigenous communities’ access to water.
The setback proved so serious for the company that it was forced to take an asset write-down of US$ 5 billion, although Barrick Gold is confident that it will be able to resume the project in future.
In Peru, communities and groups opposed to mining projects have more commonly opted for direct action, which in one case in 2013 paralysed the Yanacocha mine, under the majority ownership of Newmont of the United States, for several months and caused Peruvian gold exports to fall by 25%.
In Colombia, the Government halted coal exports by the Drummond Corporation, again from the United States, for reasons of marine pollution, and protests by residents have delayed several major projects such as those run by AngloGold Ashanti in Tolima department and Eco Oro in Santander department (The Economist, 2014).
In the Dominican Republic, another legal claim has been filed against Barrick Gold for use of public spaces in its Pueblo Viejo project.
One of the reasons for the increased number of conflicts is that mining investment in the region has boomed in the past decade.
As well as expanding their presence in traditional mining countries, corporations are seeking new opportunities elsewhere, leading to social conflicts with the potential to derail major projects.
In Uruguay, the Zamin mining company plans to invest more than US$ 1.0 billion to develop the Aratirí iron ore mine, but the determined opposition to the project from society could make it difficult to implement.
In Panama, in 2012 the Government cancelled mining concessions in the territory of the Ngöbe-Buglé ethnic group after a number of protests, although the Cobre Panamá project in the province of Colón remains on track.
In Costa Rica, environmental concerns have led to a near-total ban on large-scale mining.
Quite apart from the surge in mining investment, the number of complaints has risen because the affected communities are increasingly well informed and have more and more avenues open to them to make their voices heard.
Moreover, Governments are taking steps to improve access to information and justice and to increase participation in environmental issues by undertaking institutional reforms such as Chile’s General Environmental Framework Law of 2010 (ECLAC, 2014a).
Provisions on rights of access to information may also be included in international agreements such as the bilateral investment treaty signed between Uruguay and the United States.
Mining companies will be forced to adapt to civil society empowerment and growing environmental awareness, which are structural trends that will not change in the short or medium term.
Change is, however, taking place in the economic climate in which projects are implemented.
Over the past decade, FDI in mining has returned extraordinarily high profits, which in Chile stood at 25% per year between 2007 and 2011 (see ECLAC, 2013, chapter II).
It is possible that the perception that mining companies have reaped a windfall has fuelled the demands of civil society, though it is also true that the strong profitability of mining projects has allowed corporations to make real efforts to accommodate these demands, despite the additional cost involved.
In the current context of falling mineral prices and declining investment (see chapter I), corporations might adopt another strategy to cope with the rising number of environmental complaints, and ecological concerns —and alternative livelihoods to mining— may come into conflict with the need to save jobs in the sector.
Governments should mediate in these conflicts, with the ultimate goal of promoting responsible mining investments and penalizing those which do not respond to expectations of sustainable development in the region.
Foreign direct investment and the relocation of polluting activities Transnational corporations may have different strategies to national ones, since they have the ability to transfer production processes between countries, with one possible reason being the avoidance of costly environmental regulations.
This is known as the pollution haven hypothesis, and could be significant since almost half of FDI in the aforementioned dirty industries flows from developed to developing countries.
While environmental controls and restrictions in developing countries will presumably converge with the standards of developed countries, the asymmetry in environmental regulations will remain significant in the near term.
Proving or disproving this hypothesis is a complex task, given the multitude of factors that determine the location of investments.
The gulf between the environmental regulations found in different countries, as well as in their application and in conflict resolution mechanisms, does not explain the location of pollution-intensive activities (or only does so partially).
There are several reasons for this, the first of which is that the costs incurred by corporations in controlling environmental damage are relatively modest.
According to the Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures Survey, for manufacturing as a whole, current environmental costs in 20054 amounted to less than 0.5% of sales, while investments in treating or preventing pollution accounted for 4.6% of total investment (EPA, 2008).
In the case of energy-intensive industries, offshoring may be indirectly motivated by environmental policies.
Such industries include that of aluminium production in the European Union, in which climate change mitigation regulations increased production costs by 8% between 2002 and 2012 (Oliver, 2014).
Since 2007, almost half of European plants have closed and aluminium producers may have some incentive to relocate smelters to countries with lower energy costs.
This production shift may reflect intrinsic competitive advantages in energy production and help reduce global CO2 emissions if the plants relocate to countries with a range of renewable energies available (especially hydropower, as in many Latin American countries).
However, the relocation could also reflect disparities in countries’ climate-change-mitigation regulations, and could cause increased emissions if production were transferred to locations more reliant on dirtier energy sources.
Corporations wishing to take advantage of more permissive environmental regulations should consider that the existence of different production systems within the same enterprise entails extra coordination costs.
While it is difficult to generalize, transnational firms tend to homogenize modes of production among their subsidiaries in order to gain flexibility and economies of scale.
This would require that the most exacting environmental standards be applied in all countries (UNCTAD, 2010b).
Another important factor is that pollution-intensive industries such as steel, petrochemical and cement production also happen to be the least mobile, since they have high fixed costs and investments are recovered over long periods (Ederington, Levinson and Minier, 2005).
The cost of transporting cement is so high compared with the value of the product that its international trade is negligible.
The industry therefore responds exclusively to domestic demand patterns, with no space for expanding or reducing capacity according to environmental regulations.
Among these polluting industries, a trend has been observed whereby production is displaced from developed to developing regions, mainly Asia but also Latin America.
For example, the fastest growth in the region’s steel production capacity has been recorded at Brazil’s integrated plants, which emit six times more CO2 than semi-integrated plants.
Despite continual improvements to reduce its carbon intensity, heavy industry is expected to be a major emitter in future, and emissions will be a decisive factor in business strategies.
Many European and some Asian companies operate in the region, notably the steelmakers ArcelorMittal, ThyssenKrupp, Vallourec, Nippon Steel and Posco, and the cement manufacturers Lafarge and Holcim.Trans-Latin corporations, some with genuine global presence, also operate in these sectors and include the steelmakers Techint (Argentina), Gerdau and CSN (Brazil), and the cement producers Cemex (Mexico), Argos (Colombia) and Votorantim (Brazil).
While Brazil and Mexico account for 79% of the region’s total steel production, nearly all countries produce cement and little international trade is carried out this subsector.
Foreign direct investment figures show that steel production capacity is concentrated in Brazil, which has received the lion’s share of FDI in the industry in recent years (see figures 1A and 1B).
Demand for cement in the region increased by 6% and 5% in 2011 and 2012 respectively (the most recent years with data available), while demand from Europe fell; steel consumption followed a similar trend.
For that reason, European steel firms (ArcelorMittal, ThyssenKrupp and Vallourec) and cement makers (Lafarge and Holcim) have stepped up their investment in the region.
Companies certainly face different environmental regulations in Europe and Latin America, especially in terms of emission reduction commitments, but the clear displacement of demand to emerging economies makes it difficult to determine whether environmental regulations are responsible for the transfer of production capacity.
Although the corporations operating in Latin America and the Caribbean are not yet subject to any formal emission reduction obligations, they should now be preparing for future controls.
They have also urged governments to adopt a life-cycle approach when considering CO2 emissions, rather than focusing only on the industry that manufactures the product: this would allow the extra CO2 emitted in producing lighter steels to be offset against the reduced emissions from vehicles made from such steels, which would consume less fuel.
Through this strategy, the industry aims to guarantee its growth towards higher value-added products, even in a context of significant emission restrictions.
The European cement industry has also published a road map proposing a 32% reduction in its CO2 footprint compared with 1990 levels, using conventional technology.
With the application of more radical methods, such as carbon capture and storage, this reduction could be as high as 80%.a The scale of the emission reductions that Latin American steel and cement firms will be required to make, and their time frame for doing so, remain to be decided.
Nevertheless, there is little doubt that their future will be determined by their ability to adapt to a less carbon-intensive world.
Aside from upgrades to existing plants, which could reduce global emissions by an estimated 9% to 18% (IEA, 2007) there will be a trend towards investment in plants that use less carbonemitting processes.
Accordingly, a long-term shift in production capacity is expected away from high carbon-emitting coke blast furnaces towards gas-based direct reduction modules (whose emissions are lower), and semi-integrated plants (whose emissions are much lower).
This will be no easy transformation and the process will be slow and incomplete, even if it were accompanied by strong incentives, such as taxes on CO2 emissions, carbon intensity-based barriers to trade in steel or direct subsidies on investment in new plants.
This adaptation will also depend on each country’s relative abundance of coal, natural gas or electricity, as well as iron ore and scrap.
In Latin America there is a relative abundance of iron ore and a lack of scrap (with the exception of Mexico, which imports it from the United States), hampering the expansion of semi-integrated plants.
Efforts to reduce steel-industry emissions in Latin America and the Caribbean have been much more limited than those proposed in Europe, for example.
Transnational corporations, green technology and clean modes of production One area where FDI can benefit the environment is through the transfer of clean technologies.
Shifting Latin America’s production patterns towards sustainable alternatives, as well as replacing certain industries and products, will require the development and dissemination of new technologies.
Transnational corporations are key actors in creating and distributing this technology, and their investment strategies will determine the pace of adoption by the region’s economies.
There is no precise definition of a green technology, since different activities require different technological solutions.
Regardless of how they are measured, most of these technologies are still being created in developed economies and despite some progress by developing countries, they still lag behind (Krishna, 2009).
Between 1978 and 2005, a very small number of countries (Germany, Japan and the United States) accounted for most patents in climate change mitigation technologies (Dechezleprêtre and others, 2011).
Latin America and the Caribbean has limited capacity for creating these technologies.
According to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), between 1999 and 2011 the region’s six largest economies (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Mexico) filed fewer than 300 patents for green technologies, out of a total of 4,300.
While this percentage is increasing slightly, reflecting the growing importance of the environment as a focus of research efforts, both the percentage and the total number of green patents remain at very low levels.6 6 Brazil registered 2,503 patents, of which 170 were considered green technologies.
With technical capacity thus divided, it is no surprise that international technology flows tend to run in a NorthSouth direction.
Some 22% of recorded transfers of climate-change mitigation technologies were from OECD countries to developing economies;7 for technology transfers in general the figure stood at 16% (see table III.1).
South-South technology transfers accounted for no more than 1% of the total.
It may be supposed that transnational corporations generally have a superior level of green technology to local firms, if only because of their size and the sectors in which they operate.
Several studies have confirmed that in developing economies, foreign-owned companies are more energy efficient than their domestic counterparts (Peterson, 2008).
Many transnational firms base their competitiveness strategy on the ownership of clean production technologies, especially in medium-high-tech manufacturing sectors such as component manufacturing (Siemens, Alstom).
Some of these companies may exploit their advantages through the manufacturing and export of components —such as the Danish firm Vestas, a worldwide exporter of wind turbines produced in Denmark— but many others are obliged to invest in their destination markets.
In such instances FDI has a direct positive environmental impact on the region’s economies.
Foreign direct investment can also have an indirect positive impact where the introduction of cleaner technology is be transferred to local firms through production linkages.
There is little evidence of such technology spillovers in Latin America and the Caribbean, and the few studies carried out on green technologies confirm that potential is limited at present (Zarsky and Gallagher, 2009).
Transnational corporations’ superiority in green technology may reawaken perennial concerns over the region’s technological dependence.
If cleaner production systems are ultimately imposed (either by market forces or by government regulation), and these systems include advanced technologies owned by foreign firms and governments, then technological dependence will increase.
To avoid this situation, increased efforts should be made and mechanisms established to build local capacity in environmental technologies.
While multilateral climate change negotiations always mention the transfer of technology to developing countries, a method for implementing such transfers has not yet been developed beyond some specific and limited efforts, such as the request by some countries (notably China) that Clean Development Mechanism projects contain a technology transfer component.
One way of creating local capacity is through the research and development (R&D) activities undertaken by transnational corporations in the region.
Although on a much smaller scale than in the firms’ home countries, these activities are still significant: at least 20% of the “green” patents filed in Brazil in 2014 belonged to transnational firms such as Dow, Fiat and Whirlpool.
Specific examples of foreign investment in the development of clean technologies include the Alstom centre of excellence in geothermal energy in Morelia, Mexico, and the development of second-generation ethanol in Brazil by a combination of domestic and foreign corporations (including Shell).
In both cases, the transnationals are carrying out research on technologies that exploit the specific natural advantages of the host country: Mexico’s abundant geothermal energy and Brazil’s vast sugarcane crop.
If the region’s governments do not set environmental targets in certain key sectors (as they do in Europe and the United States), then foreign and domestic companies will not invest in developing the technologies needed to meet these targets.
The automotive sector provides a clear illustration of the relationship between environmental regulations and standards and investment in new technologies (see box III.3).
The sector is dominated by transnational corporations: all of the region’s vehicle assembly firms and the largest auto parts manufacturers are foreign owned.
The industry’s environmental sustainability is under scrutiny because of the direct impact of the vehicles it produces, rather than that of its operations.
In Latin America, road transport (gLeeneeSractheispp3e2r,%DeoafkCinOa2ndemMiscsAinodnrse,wdso,u2b0le10t)h, eangdloisbaolnaevoefratghee main causes of unacceptably high pollution levels in Lima, Rio de Janeiro (Brazil), Santiago and the continent’s other major cities.
Of the many dimensions to environmental sustainability in vehicles, tehmeismsioosntsimpeprokriltoamnteitsrethtreavreeldleudc.tVioanriooufsCaOlt2erannadtivoethteecrhpnoolllougtaienst seek to address this: reducing the vehicle’s weight, improving its mechanics, developing more efficient internal combustion engines, increasing the use of biofuels and introducing electric engines.
Automakers are allocating much of their huge research and development budgets to the design of vehicles that produce fewer and fewer emissions, though it is not yet known which technological solutions will ultimately prevail.
Automotive firms have two main technical objectives: to make vehicles more efficient and to meet the emission standards set by governments.
These standards were introduced for the first time in the United States and Europe in 1987 and 1992 respectively, have been updated several times, and are now applied in most of the world’s countries.
Governments may have different motivations for adopting emission standards, from fulfilling their emission reduction commitments to alleviating local pollution in cities.
Another reason relates to industrial policy: developing countries with automotive sectors that receive FDI have shown much greater inclination to set standards for polluting emissions than those that do not have an automotive industry.
This is because setting standards incentivizes innovation by the enterprises operating in the country.
Brazil, China, India and Mexico have all seen a jump in the number of patents filed by the sector after emission standards were introduced (Saikawa and Urpelainen, 2014).
The two countries that account for the bulk of the region’s vehicle production —Mexico and Brazil— receive extremely high levels of foreign investment in their respective auto industries.
The Mexican automotive industry is therefore largely insensitive to domestic environmental regulations and highly attuned to those of the United States.
Consequently the Mexican Government has little scope for influencing the technological development of its industry through emission standards, and has been unable to close the gap with United States standards.
By contrast, Brazil is noteworthy for an original policy based on the uptake of technologies that enable the use of ethanol in vehicles.
Between 2002 and 2005, in response to fiscal incentives, the country’s main automakers launched flexible-fuel or “flex-fuel” vehicles capable of running on either gasoline or ethanol.
This technology has been highly successful and is now incorporated into nearly all of the cars sold in the country, creating a boom in ethanol consumption.
However, in recent years the policy has been sidelined by the Government’s decision to keep gasoline prices below the cost of production as a means of controlling inflation.
This policy has had a heavy impact on ethanol producers, who decided to suspend their expansion plans as a consequence of falling demand.
Moreover, the latest incentives for the automotive industry are designed to strengthen local capacity and increase value added, rather than making cars less polluting; this contrasts with the State assistance that the industry received after the crisis in Europe and the United States.
There is a worldwide trend towards more efficient vehicles which, though potentially endangered by the recent fall in oil prices, will push corporations to innovate in this area.
For example, in 2014 Italy’s Pirelli announced that it was investing US$ 210 million in a “green tyre” plant in Brazil, which will produce tyres that help reduce fuel consumption.
However, explicit public policies are required if countries are to attract investment in innovative technologies such as flex-fuel engines.
McAndrews, “Carbon dioxide emissions fSrporminguerbr,a2n0r1o0a;dEt.rSanasikpaowrtainanLdatJi.nUArmpeelariicnae:nC, O“E2nrevidrounctmioennatasl a co-benefit of standards as a transport strategy strategies”, Transport Moving to Climate Intelligence, New York, of international technology transfer”, Environmental Science and 4.
Codes of conduct and voluntary initiatives by transnational corporations Investment strategies may include various actions in response to price signals and public regulation, but beyond such actions, corporations have considerable scope for decision-making that involves a greater commitment to looking after the environment.
One of the first things that firms can do is to compile and publish information about their environmental footprint.
The organization Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) registered a total of 4,102 sustainability reports in 2013, a tenfold increase on 2005.
In fact, there are now few large enterprises that do not publish these reports and, though they remain voluntary, efforts are being made to require companies to report significant aspects of their activity.
GRI also manages specific reporting criteria, which are used for the grading of corporate sustainability reports.8 Many firms are also choosing to count and report their greenhouse gas emissions.
In fact, most of the major transnational corporations already do so, albeit to different levels of detail.9 More than 4,500 corporations from 80 countries report their emissions through the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP), in which 80 of the largest firms in Latin America were asked to participate, although only 42, mostly from Brazil, responded (PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 2014).
Of these corporations, only eight were included among the world’s most transparent companies (according to the Climate Disclosure Leadership Index).
None of them figured in the Climate Performance Leadership Index that recognized 187 businesses in 2014, almost all of which were from developed countries, although one was from China, five from India and six from South Africa.
There are several reasons for businesses to calculate and report their carbon footprint, perhaps the most important of which is growing demand from financial markets.
CDP was set up on behalf of 767 institutional investors, representing US$ 92 trillion in assets, who wished to receive insight into companies’ climate performance.
Many businesses understand that the need to quantify, report and —in all likelihood— reduce emissions will soon be an inescapable legal obligation.
In the European Union, some 6,000 enterprises will be required to publish specific information on their environmental, social and governance performance as part of their financial reporting to investors.
In China, the Government will require that more than 20,000 businesses provide information on their greenhouse gas emissions.
Scope 1 includes emissions from company-owned facilities; Scope 2, those generated in the production of the electricity used by the company; and Scope 3, indirect emissions released at any point in the value chain as a result of the company’s activity (PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 2014).
This management tool, designed to help companies identify and control their environmental impacts,10 was employed by almost 11,000 businesses in the region in 2013, as compared with 3,000 in 2004.
Brazilian firms have been most active in seeking this certification, while Colombian businesses have shown the fastest rate of uptake in recent years.
There are no data on the prevalence of ISO 14000 certifications among the subsidiaries of foreign enterprises in the region, although in other developing countries it has been observed that firms from developed countries are more likely to obtain this certification (Tambunlertchai, Kontoleon and Khanna, 2012).
As with other corporate practices, the presence of foreign firms that have obtained ISO 14000 certification may serve as an incentive for local firms to follow suit (Prakash and Potoski, 2007).
Leadership by foreign enterprises was also found to have been a factor in the growth of sectoral certifications such as Responsible Care11 in the chemical industry (Garcia-Johnson, 2001) and the forestry sector’s commitment to fighting deforestation (CDP, 2014a).12 In many cases, companies are motivated to join these initiatives simply to improve their image, as part of their marketing strategy.
This kind of strategy will carry more weight in certain sectors, for example tourism, since it will help the company gain market share among the increasing number of consumers who are sensitive to such concerns.
Many institutional investors require that corporations reveal their exposure to environmental risks, sometimes because of ethical concerns, but increasingly because they believe that activities that are incompatible with the preservation of the environment are also financially unsustainable, since sooner or later governments will encumber them with taxes or restrictions.
In recent years and in view of falling oil prices, oil firms have seen some of their main investors deciding to divest13 in the belief that the hydrocarbons business could be rendered unviable by future climate-change mitigation activities.
The resulting index is highly valued by many institutional investors and therefore by the corporations themselves (Macedo and others, 2012).
As well as the advantages to be gained in their client and investor relations, corporations also mention cost savings as one of the main reasons for reducing their environmental impact.
In this regard, most actions taken by companies involve lowering their consumption of inputs or energy, which undoubtedly requires a management effort and an attitude change, but which delivers an immediate —and long-term— cost reduction.
The projects undertaken by the 187 leading companies in emission reduction enjoyed very high internal rates of return (CDP, 2014b).
In summary, there is a broad spectrum of voluntary activities whereby corporations can diminish their environmental footprint, and more and more firms are signing up to such initiatives.
While it is impossible to quantify their actual impact, an effort to standardize and oversee corporate carbon footprint accounting could provide sound data on CO2 emissions.
Until then, it will be difficult to avoid the suspicion that many such activities are public relations strategies without any real benefit for the environment.
Even where voluntary initiatives might have a material impact, or be used as a benchmark in policy design, they should never be taken as substitutes for public regulation.
The sector is responsible for 28% of the region’s total emissions (as against 13% of global emissions), while changes in land use, often associated with agricultural activity, account for further 21% (compared with 5% of global emissions).
Although emissions from changes in land use have fallen in the region over the past two decades, those from agriculture have risen by 20% (ECLAC, 2014b).
In the countries that reported data, FDI in agriculture stood at less than 2% of the total, with only Uruguay (22%), Guatemala (13%) and Belize (9%) posting higher figures (ECLAC, 2013).
Nonetheless, some subsectors, such as the sugarcane industry in Brazil, have attracted sizeable investments.
Originally developed under a State energy security policy, the Brazilian sugarcane industry was deregulated in the 1990s, leading to a deep restructuring of the production chain.
Larger enterprises, including many transnationals, entered the market and integrated its agricultural (the sugarcane harvest) and industrial dimensions (the production of sugar, ethanol and biomass electricity).
In 2008, foreign firms accounted for 23% of output, a percentage that has certainly increased since then.
The largest producers currently include energy companies including Shell and BP, and agricultural concerns such as Cargill andTereos, often in strategic partnerships with local companies.
The industry has also attracted FDI in countries such as Colombia, Guatemala and Nicaragua, albeit on a much smaller scale.
For transnational corporations —and energy companies in particular— sugarcane was a means of diversifying from fossil fuels, since controls on greenhouse gas emissions threatened their future development.
From this perspective, investment in Brazil would increase the global sustainability of biofuel production, since sugarcane ethanol is much more efficient than other types of biofuel (BNDES/CGEE, 2008).
The prospect of expansion also raised environmental concerns, since the levels of sugarcane production that some studies suggested were needed from an emission-reduction perspective would also create a demand for land and water that would be incompatible with other sustainability criteria (United Nations, 2014).
Moreover, a change in energy policy, which in recent years has prioritized low gasoline prices, led to a profitability crisis in the sector and halted its growth.
The Government of Brazil and the companies themselves have responded, through various initiatives, to environmental criticism of sugarcane expansion.
First, to reduce the potential impact of sugarcane crops on biodiversity, an agro-environmental zoning system was launched in 2008 to allow sugarcane plantations in certain areas (Secretariat of Environment/ São Paulo State Government, undated).
Second, to reduce environmental costs, in 2007 sugarcane companies signed a voluntary agreement to mechanize 90% of the harvest in the State of São Paulo (Brazil’s largest producer).
This target was met in the harvest of 2013/2014, dramatically reducing the environmental impact (mechanization eliminates the need for pre-harvest burning) and improving working conditions.
Away from Brazil, other corporations are taking steps to mechanize production, including Grupo Pantaleón, a Central American compAannoyththear tsihgansifmicaenatsiunrietidatiitvseCfoOr2eenmhaisnsciionngsthseinicnedu2s0t1r2y.’s sustainability is the development of second-generation ethanol.
This is an innovation in the industrial process that enables the extraction of ethanol from sugarcane cellulose, thus increasing productivity per cultivated hectare and reducing emissions.
The first second-generation ethanol plant was opened in September 2014 by the firm GranBio (the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES), which is promoting the development of this technology, holds a 15% share in the company).
The second plant was opened shortly afterwards by Raizen (50% owned by Anglo-Dutch energy company Shell).
Sugarcane production in Brazil and other countries has potential for expansion but can also lead to severe environmental impacts.
This has led to scrutiny of the sector by governments and ecological organizations, and leading to positive changes such as mechanization and second-generation ethanol.
Foreign direct investment, along with the development of national firms and the participation of public-sector organizations such as BNDES, has helped build the requisite capacity for making these improvements.
Looking to the future: foreign direct investment and sustainable development Reducing the environmental impact of activities will require a behavioural shift among companies and consumers, as well as plentiful investment.
Many of the necessary adjustments can be made with the current endowment of capital and infrastructure, but others will require radical changes in transport and energy infrastructure, irrigation systems and industrial plants.
Some of these changes involve significant investments in fixed assets that will only be recovered in the long run, while other solutions (for example, carbon capture and storage) are still in a development or pilot phase, requiring large outlays on research and development.
This section will explore the possible role of foreign direct investment in covering these requirements in the region.
Calculating the investment needed to make society’s activities more environmentally sustainable is difficult in the extreme.
Even when agreement exists over a specific goal (for example, reducing greenhouse gas emissions to a certain level, or extending sanitation services to a certain population), there is no single way of achieving that objective, with different paths requiring different levels of investment.
Moreover, some facilities are still at the edge of technical capacity and the cost of their mass installation is highly uncertain.
One effort to quantify global investment needs for sustainable development (in all its dimensions) was recently made by United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) in its publication World Investment Report 2014 (UNCTAD, 2014).
The report estimated that the investment required to meet the sustainable development goals (SDGs) in developing economies amounted to US$ 3.9 trillion per year, with the countries currently facing an annual gap of US$ 2.5 trillion.
The report also highlighted three specific environmental goals in which investment needed to be found: climate change mitigation and adaptation, biodiversity and ecosystem maintenance, and water and sanitation services.
Investing in the SDGs: An Action Plan, Geneva, 2014. a The investment gap relating to ecosystems and biodiversity is not included owing to an overlap with other goals.
Worldwide, the estimated annual gap between current investment and the investment needed to meet the environmental SDGs by 2030 ranges from US$ 680 billion to US$ 1 trillion.
While the public sector will always retain a key role, there is room for more private investment to help meet the sustainable development goals.
The private sector currently contributes 40% of investment in climate change mitigation in developing countries, though this figure may be expected to rise (in developed countries it stands at 90%).
Banks and pension funds hold total cumulative assets of US$ 8.8 trillion and US$ 1.4 trillion, respectively, in developing countries, while the assets of transnational corporations are in the same order of magnitude: US$ 7 trillion (US$ 2 trillion in Latin America and the Caribbean), plus US$ 5 trillion in cash holdings (UNCTAD, 2014).
Foreign direct investment also has a number of potential advantages as a source of financing for projects to enhance the sustainability of economies.
First and foremost, this type of investment is accompanied by knowledge, which is particularly important in investments that require capacity-building.
The region’s greatest success story of recent years relates to investment in power generation from renewable sources (see box III.5).
At present, just 22.1% of the world’s electricity is generated from renewable sources, mainly hydropower.
Wind power accounts for about 3% and solar photovoltaic energy less than 1%, though both are growing much faster than conventional energy sources.
In the past five years, investment in renewable energy has outstripped investment in fossil fuels, with wind and photovoltaic the fastest growing destination sectors.
In Latin America, hydropower is much more important (supplying over half of electricity), while the proportion and the growth rate of wind and photovoltaic power are in line with the rest of the world.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the countries that invested most in renewable energies in 2013 (not counting large hydropower plants) were Brazil (US$ 3 billion), Chile (US$ 1.6 billion) and Mexico (US$ 1.5 billion) (Frankfurt School/ UNEP, 2015).
In mid-2014, the generating capacity of Brazil’s wind power sector topped 5 GW, while estimated investment stood at US$ 7 billion, more than double the 2013 figure and comparable with 2011 and 2012 levels.
This increase in capacity was the outcome of a system of auctions in which wind power proved most competitive, thanks to steady winds in the south and north-east of the country.
Considering the size of their economies, notable investment efforts were also made in Uruguay (US$ 1.1. billion), Costa Rica (US$ 600 million) and Nicaragua (US$ 100 million).
In 2014, Uruguay’s wind capacity stood at 490 MW, a sixth of total power generation, and is likely to reach 1.2 GW by the end of 2015.
The Government of Uruguay has boosted the sector through subsidies, public-private partnerships and long-term agreements with the domestic electricity distributor.
At present, the most active country in photovoltaic power generation is Chile, which installed 308 MW of capacity in 2014 and is projected to add a further 1 GW in 2015; however, GTM Research forecasts that Mexico will be the leading market in the future.
The largest project under construction is Luz del Norte in Copiapó, Chile, operated by First Solar of the United States, and which will have a capacity of 141 MW when it comes online in December 2015.
Other significant operators include SunEdison, which has 155 MW currently in operation and a further 163 MW under construction in South America.
In Chile, SunPower is the market leader, while Italy’s Enel also has projects with a combined capacity of 169 MW pending completion.
Rising investment in new renewable energies has been driven by a combination of State support, favourable market conditions and foreign direct investment.
Most Latin American governments have now set renewable energy targets (shown in the table below).
Targets refer to grid-connected and off-grid respectively, and do not include large hydropower.
State aid (modest by comparison with that provided in Europe) has coincided with a sharp decrease in the cost of renewable energy.
In the past five years, the cost of solar photovoltaic energy has plummeted by 50%, while wind power became 15% cheaper thanks to technological advances and expanded input production capacity.
Latin America’s excellent resources make the region particularly suitable for the development of these technologies, as do the presence of geothermal energy (especially in Mexico and Central America) and biomass energy (associated with sugarcane production).
Foreign direct investment has played a central role in the rapid development of wind and solar photovoltaic energy in the region.
This would not have been possible without the technical and financial capacities that were developed in the United States and especially Europe, and then brought to the region by transnational corporations.
On the other hand, the growth of these industries in Latin America and the Caribbean provided a business opportunity for European (chiefly Spanish) companies at a time when European investment in renewables was on the wane.
Latin America has also had the opportunity to avoid the mistakes that some European countries made in the design of incentives.
Not all activities by transnational corporations in this sector are recorded as foreign direct investment.
The Spanish company’s contribution will be counted as imported goods and services.
In the wind power sector, many facilities are installed and operated by foreign firms, but are mostly funded by local banks through project finance.
For example, SunEdison of the United States is to build a 69.5 MW installation, with a total investment of US$ 130 million, part-funded by Corpbanca of Chile and BBVA of Spain.
Most investments in Brazil, including by foreign companies, are mainly funded by loans from the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES).
The electricity sector is dominated by three types of company: State-owned enterprises, private corporations (either foreign or national) and small businesses (again, either foreign or national) that operate in specific subsectors.
The latter are particularly active in power generation from renewable sources, and include many foreign investors.
Some of the region’s countries are taking advantage of the investment boom to develop industrial capacity in the sector.
The most remarkable case is Brazil, where access to credit from BNDES (practically the only source of funding for energy projects) is contingent on compliance with local requirements.
This policy has applied to the wind power sector for several years and is now being implemented in the solar photovoltaic sector.
Meanwhile, Trinidad and Tobago is planning to commence the production of photovoltaic panels.
In the Caribbean, electricity usage from renewable sources is currently much lower than in Latin America (as the table shows), despite inferior access to non-renewable energy sources and higher energy prices than the Latin American subregion.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines and Saint Lucia adopted new national energy policies in 2009 and 2010, respectively.
Some economies are interested in developing sources of geothermal energy, although doing so effectively may require the installation of electricity interconnectors between countries.
Much of the investment needed to ensure sustainability will be channelled into infrastructure.
Power-generation, transport and irrigation infrastructure will all have a profound impact on the sustainability of the region’s economies.
All of these sectors require substantial upfront investments that will be recouped over a lengthy period, with the result that foreign direct investment (and all private investment) is highly sensitive to current regulations and to investors’ perceptions of their long-term stability.
Almost all of the region’s governments are working to promote FDI in infrastructure projects, but in practice few countries have regulatory frameworks and markets with the potential to attract these inflows.
Foreign direct investment in infrastructure has been relatively limited in the region, except in some specific segments (such as airports and ports in general, and highways in Chile).
Railway construction and management has significant potential for FDI and can contribute to enhancing the sustainability of the region’s transport system.
However, efforts to attract foreign companies to this sector, especially for the high-speed lines planned in Brazil and Mexico, have not yet borne fruit.
In terms of energy infrastructure, besides the renewable power installations mentioned in box III.5, there is potential for increased investment in smart grids and energy storage; these are relatively new technologies whose uptake has been limited in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Worldwide, investment in these sectors has amounted to almost US$ 34 billion per year since 2011, almost half of which has been spent on research and development (Frankfurt School/UNEP, 2015).
The need for a smaller environmental footprint has also led to the emergence of new business opportunities in the transport and water-management sectors.
One recent study found that investment in clean technologies in developing economies could amount to US$ 6.4 trillion over the next decade (infoDev, 2014).
To make their economies more sustainable, the region’s governments must encourage FDI in these sectors, and should consider local capacity-building in new industries and sectors whose markets are expected to grow vigorously in the coming decades.
In Latin America, biofuels and water and sanitation are sectors with particularly interesting prospects.
Water and sanitation services is one of the sectors that has received least FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean, despite many countries having implemented privatization programmes that induced some foreign firms to enter the market.
Compared with other regions, Latin America and the Caribbean has achieved good drinking water and sanitation coverage.
In urban areas, which are most likely to receive foreign investment in this sector, the only countries where less than 90% of the population has access to drinking water are the Dominican Republic and Haiti.
There are greater shortcomings in sanitation coverage, which is still at very low levels in Haiti, Nicaragua and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (see table III.3).
Only when the foreign enterprise undertakes to operate the infrastructure (usually through a time-limited concession) is it counted as FDI.
The social return from covering these needs is clearly positive and more than justifies the investment, yet it remains difficult to find business models that are socially acceptable and which attract investors, particularly in the case of sanitation infrastructure.
In fact, a goodly number of the foreign firms that invested in the sector in the late 1990s withdrew in the 2000s, which illustrates the difficulty of finding a balance between public and private interests in a sector that is extremely sensitive to social and political pressures (Ducci, 2007).
When promoting investment in these activities, consideration should be given to the balance between the liberalization of goods and services and the regulation needed for investments to achieve their public policy goals.
It will also be very important to find the right combination of private financing and State support (either financial or regulatory).
In Latin America and the Caribbean, many governments have found a successful way to attract investment in power generation from renewable sources, and such efforts should be expanded to the other types of investment needed to meet the sustainable development goals.
Foreign direct investment has considerable potential in this regard, and the next section will review the status of the policies designed to capture it.
Environmental policy and investment promotion policy All countries have environmental protection policies, as well as institutions that promote and regulate foreign direct investment.
Yet despite the potential environmental impact of the activities carried out by transnational corporations, there is still little coordination between these two areas of public policy.
This section first examines the environmental dimension of FDI policies, and then reviews some case studies in which other policies have a direct impact on FDI promotion. 1.
Investment promotion agencies and environmental sustainability This section is based on information from a survey of the region’s investment promotion agencies,15 who were questioned on the importance they attach to environmental issues in their work, the specific instruments that they use, and their outlook for the short and medium term.
Ninety per cent of agencies indicated that climate change mitigation was important in their FDI promotion policies.
One a scale of one to five, with five being the most important, climate change mitigation received an average score of 3.7 points.
Other environmental considerations (local pollution, deforestation and others) were regarded as more important, returning an average score of 3.9 points.
The percentage of agencies that attributed maximum importance to climate change mitigation shot up from 17% in 2010 to 33% in 2014.16 Moreover, the percentage of agencies that attached little importance (2 points) to climate change mitigation in their policies more than halved, from 17% in 2010 to 8% in 2014.
Sixty-one per cent of agencies stated that they were actively seeking to attract foreign investments with a low environmental impact.
This is an improvement in comparison with 2010 when only 50% declared that they were actively seeking to secure low-carbon foreign investment.
Some of the questions were the same as those included in a questionnaire prepared by UNCTAD in 2010 (UNCTAD, 2010a).
The most important target sectors are power generation from renewable sources (23% of responses), agribusiness and forestry (21%), tourism (16%) and manufacturing (16%).
Regulatory standards and the promotion of renewable energy markets were the policy areas that investment promotion agencies considered most important in terms of the environmental impact of foreign investments (see figure III.7).
On average, the areas deemed least important were processes led by international donors (3.4 points), bilateral aid (3.6 points) and the creation of a carbon market (3.6 points).
The most important policy instruments used by investment promotion agencies to attract environmentally sustainable foreign investment were specific investment missions and the mapping of investment opportunities (both received an average score of 4.3 points), as well as the targeting of specific transnational corporations (4.2 points).
On the other hand, specific advertising was seen as least important in attracting environmentally sustainable FDI (3.4 points).
Most agencies expressed the view that the environment would gain importance as an issue in the medium term (in the next three years).
Only 26% of agencies said that it would be very important (score of 5) in the short term, although the figure rises to 47% in the medium term.
Conversely, the percentage of agencies that see environmental issues as less important (3 points) falls from 37% in the short term to 11% in the medium term.
Despite the seemingly evident trend towards increased environmental consideration in FDI promotion, investment promotion agencies are in fact severely constrained in their scope for action.
Environmentally sound FDI promotion activities are not necessarily coordinated with other policy areas, so that governments might incentivize power generation from renewable sources while simultaneously subsidizing fossil fuels, for example. 2.
Environmental policies and implications for FDI promotion: some case studies The region’s countries differ greatly in terms of the importance attributed to the environmental aspects of FDI promotion policies.
That said, some countries have clear policies that are focused on supporting the activities of firms with better environmental management.
This section provides information on the environmental policies of some of the region’s investment promotion agencies. (a) Brazil: environmental aspects of industrial policy Brazil’s investment policy is primarily determined by the Plano Brasil Maior (“Bigger Brazil Plan”), which establishes specific industrial development targets in a number of sectors, one of which is renewable energy.
Systemic, cross-sectoral measures, such as those on sustainable production, form the basis of efforts by the Brazilian Export and Investment Promotion Agency (Apex-Brasil) to promote the renewable energy sector.
As box III.5 notes, in recent years these efforts have focused on wind power, a sector that has received substantial FDI inflows in both generation and equipment manufacturing.
The first auction exclusively for solar photovoltaic energy projects was held in 2014, following the same structure as the auctions for wind power.
Apex-Brasil is presently in the early stages of considering investment promotion in the environmental goods and services sector.
Besides the activities of Apex-Brasil, many aspects of environmental policy have a bearing on domestic and international investments.
One of Brazil’s hallmarks is its high level of decentralization, with States and even municipalities having a significant say in environmental decision-making (one such example is the agreement between the State of São Paulo and the sugarcane industry, as mentioned in box III.4).
Another feature particular to Brazil is the power invested in the Public Prosecutor’s Office, which is independent of the other three branches of government and has the authority to bring charges over possible crimes.
On several occasions it has revoked environmental permits previously granted by the executive branch.
Environmental policy in Brazil places special emphasis on preserving biodiversity, particularly as regards the need to halt the deforestation of the Amazon.
Environmental zoning, established in 2008, was a highly significant development for companies operating in the agriculture and forestry sectors.
For example, the measures launched in 2013 to boost the automotive sector (see box I.2 in ECLAC, 2014a) proposed to develop local capacity, but passed up the opportunity to strengthen environmental standards in the sector.
On other occasions, the two objectives have been combined, as in the case of ethanol.
Based on its competitive advantage in sugarcane production, for decades Brazil has pursued a policy that supports the use of sugarcane bioethanol in road transportation.
This policy led to the development of flexible fuel vehicles, a homegrown technology that allows most new vehicles to be fuelled with either gasoline or ethanol.
Combined with the fact that 85% of electricity is generated from renewable sources, it may be concluded that Brazil has the least carbon-intensive energy mix of any major world economy.
As in other areas of economic policy, the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) plays a crucial role.
Two instruments are particularly relevant: environmental subcredits, which are compulsorily added to all large loans and which must be used to mitigate environmental damage, and the National Climate Change Fund, which is financed from oil revenues and is jointly managed by BNDES and the Ministry of Environment.
The bank is also very active in technology policy and has assumed a prominent role in the development of second-generation ethanol (see box III.4). (b) Chile: supporting opportunities in renewable energy Chile’s Foreign Investment Committee (CIEChile) endorses environmentally friendly activities, mainly electric power generation from renewable sources.
In this sector, CIEChile promotes investment opportunities in hydropower and non-conventional renewable energies such as wind, solar, geothermal and biomass, underpinned by the clean power generation targets set by the Government.
At present, hydropower accounts for 26.6% of the electricity produced in Chile, while only 6.3% comes from non-conventional renewables.
The National Energy Strategy 2012-2030 aims to increase hydropower generation to between 45% and 48% by 2024, while Law No. 20698 encourages the expansion of the energy mix to include non-conventional renewable sources, stipulating that 20% of the electricity sold in the country should come from these sources by 2025.
Beyond the power sector, CIEChile promotes the growth of environmental activities that are sustainable but which as yet account for a small proportion of the country’s economic activity, such as sustainable tourism and organic winemaking.
In this sense, the document states that “the goal is to attract sustainable investment and enhance the sustainability of inward investment in the country” (MCIT, 2012, page 4).
These sustainability guidelines are intended for the use of the country’s export, tourism and foreign investment promotion agency, Proexport Colombia (now ProColombia), and recommend the creation of a system of corporate sustainability indicators so that the agency will be able to identify investors that build sustainability into their operations.
Suggested criteria include: (i) respect for cultural and historical heritage; (ii) respect for biodiversity; (iii) responsible investment policies in developing countries; and (iv) responsible environmental and social management policies.
The document also outlines desired criteria for Proexport Colombia to take into account in relation to the nature of investor companies.
These should be: (i) enterprises with cutting-edge green technologies; (ii) enterprises that promote clean production and sustainable consumption; (iii) enterprises that encourage sustainable production linkages; and (iv) enterprises in possession of environmental and social certifications.
The above guidelines are proposed as part of a vision of the FDI initiatives that the country wants to attract in the context of its sustainable development, and are not binding on foreign firms wishing to launch operations in Colombia.
The Government is strongly committed to environmental issues, has set a target of 100% power generation from renewable sources, and aims for Costa Rica to be a carbon neutral economy by 2021.
The country has also established a moratorium on open-pit mining and oil exploration and production, with the result that investment has ground to a halt in these sectors even as FDI in mining is booming in the rest of Central America.
On the other hand, the country’s investment promotion agency, which claims to be actively seeking green investments, does not yet have any policy document establishing guidelines in this regard.
Neither were any “green sectors” mentioned among the industries that the agency does most to promote (information and communications technology services, high-tech manufacturing and light manufacturing). (e) Mexico: a climate change law that promotes renewable energies As in Chile, Mexico’s investment promotion agency, ProMéxico, focuses its sustainability efforts on promoting renewable energies.
Mexico has taken various steps to encourage these investments in order to diversify its energy mix.
In 2012, the General Law on Climate Change entered into force with the primary goal of cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 50% by 2050, compared with 2000 levels.
In 2013, the Mexican Congress approved a tax on carbon emissions caused by fossil fuel use, which along with a national emissions registry will form part of a future carbon market.
Both laws set targets: the first relating to proportion of electricity generated from fossil fuels, which will be limited to 65% by 2024, 60% by 2035 and 50% by 2050, while the second sets out the percentage that will be generated from clean sources, which should stand at 35% in 2024.
These targets will guide policies for the promotion of renewable energies, so that the requirements established under these laws can be met in good time.
To achieve the above goals, the Government is offering several incentives to domestic and foreign investors.
The document Guía de Negocios e Inversiones en el Perú 2014-2015 includes a comprehensive chapter on environmental sustainability.
ProInversión aims to attract and deliver investment in accordance with environmental objectives in six priority areas: water, air, biodiversity, forests and climate change, solid waste and mining and energy.
Some notable investment promotion activities have focused on water treatment, especially the construction of the Taboada and La Chira wastewater treatment plants in 2009 and 2010, respectively.
In August 2009, Proinversión awarded Spain’s Grupo ACS a 25-year concession to design, build, operate and maintain the Taboada wastewater treatment plant.
The facility became operational in 2013 and now treats 72% of wastewater from the cities of Lima and Callao.
With the aim of raising this figure to 100%, on 18 November 2010 ProInversión awarded a design-build-operate contract for the La Chira treatment plant to a consortium comprised of Spain’s Acciona and Peru’s Graña y Montero.
Construction commenced in June 2013 and is expected to last for 24 months.
The initial operating contract is for 25 years, with the option to extend the concession to 60 years.
Upon entering service, this second plant is expected to improve sanitary conditions in the neighbouring residential districts while helping to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and energy consumption (Guzmán, 2013).
Peru is also striving to attract investment in the petrochemical industry, through incentives and tax benefits for the development of petrochemical complexes in the south of the country.
These initiatives underscore the importance of finding the right balance between development and production on the one hand, and the environment on the other.
The Law was approved in a context of falling mineral prices and deteriorating investment prospects, and has been strongly criticized by ecological groups for relaxing environmental regulations and curtailing the powers of the Ministry of Environment and its attached institutions, the Agency for Environmental Assessment and Enforcement (OEFA) and the National Service of Protected Natural Areas (SERNANP).
In particular, the Law stipulates that the environmental fines applied by OEFA will be halved for a period of three years, during which time the Agency will prioritize the prevention and modification of environmentally harmful behaviours over the application of penalties.
Moreover, article 19 states that the proceeds of fines will be paid directly to the Treasury rather than to the enforcement agency, in order to avoid the perverse incentive that can arise in the imposition of monetary penalties.
The Law also simplifies the protocols and reduces the period for environmental impact assessments, stipulating that where the organization responsible for approving the environmental impact study requires binding or non-binding opinions from other public-sector bodies, these must be issued within 45 days.
Should the required opinion not be issued in time, the official at fault will be fined and the body responsible for approving the environmental impact study should allow the approval process to continue without taking the requested opinion into consideration (article 20).
Article 22 deprives SERNANP of the power to decide on processes of land-use planning and ecological economic zoning in Peru, which must henceforth be approved by Supreme Decree.
The article also sets forth that “land use may not be designated or excluded under ecological economic zoning or territorial planning”, a provision that leaves open the possibility of mining or drilling in ecologically protected areas.
Lastly, article 23 revokes the Ministry of Environment’s authority to change maximum permissible pollution and emission limits and environmental quality standards.
Again, the approval of changes to these guidelines will be subject to the issuance of a Supreme Decree. (g) Uruguay: environmental indicators for regulating incentives Uruguay offers an interesting case study, since it is the only country in the region that uses an environmental indicator to award tax benefits to corporations.
Decree No. 455/007 of 26 November 2007 states that foreign investments must be in keeping with the country’s strategic objectives, including that of cleaner production, in order to be eligible for the tax benefits laid out under Law No. 16906 on investment promotion and protection.
Furthermore, Decree No. 002/012 of 2 February 2012 sets out a new methodology for the evaluation of FDI projects based on specific criteria.
One of these is investment in cleaner production, defined by United Nations 19 The same provision is included under article 6 of Law No. 29690 promoting the ethane-based petrochemical industry.
Environment Programme (UNEP) as “the continuous application of an integrated preventive environmental strategy to processes and products so as to reduce the risks to humans and the environment” (UNDP, 1999).
Under the evaluation methodology, investors are assigned one point for every 5% of the total investment that is allocated to cleaner production.
Depending on the nature of the proposed investment project, companies may also opt for a sectoral indicator.
For example, in the agricultural sector, one of these indicators is investment in climate change adaptation and/or mitigation.
Again, the methodology gives one point (up to a maximum of 10 points) for every 5% of the total investment that is allocated to climate change mitigation.
Compliance with the indicator was high, since on average the companies were revealed to have implemented 89% of pledged investment in cleaner production.
Notable investments were made in professional, scientific and technical activities; financial activities; manufacturing and the supply of electricity, gas, steam and air conditioning.
Since the issuance of Decree No. 002/012 in 2012, investment in cleaner production and in climate change adaptation and mitigation has rocketed.
Foreign direct investment as a driver of intangible capital accumulation 9Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Executive summary Inflows of foreign direction investment (FDI) into Latin America and the Caribbean declined by 9.1% between 2014 and 2015, dropping to US$ 179.1 billion, the lowest level since 2010.
This performance reflected the drop in investment in natural resource sectors, especially mining and hydrocarbons, and the slowing of economic growth, particularly in Brazil.
Foreign direction investment in Latin America and the Caribbean In 2015, global FDI flows jumped by 36%, reaching almost US$ 1.73 billion, the highest level since 2007.
Most of this growth was accounted for by an intense wave of crossborder mergers and acquisitions mainly in developed countries, especially the United States.
While FDI flows to developed countries grew by 90% in 2015, developing countries recorded an increase of only 5.3%, and economies in transition saw a sharp contraction of 55%.
The increase in flows to developing countries is accounted for mainly by higher inflows to developing Asia (15%), while FDI flows to Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean fell by 31% and 9.1%, respectively.
In this scenario, the Latin American and Caribbean region is losing ground as a recipient of FDI, although FDI inflows to the region have stabilized at around 3.5% of GDP as a long-run average (see figure 1).
This percentage varies from one country to another and is associated with the size of the respective economies: in larger economies, FDI has a smaller weight in output; for example, in 2015 FDI represented 2.5% of GDP in Mexico, but almost 10% in Chile and Panama.
The performance of FDI inflows was uneven among the countries of the region.
Flows into Brazil dropped by 23%, although the country maintained its lead as the region’s main recipient of FDI, accounting for 42% of total flows into the region.
FDI into Mexico was up by 18% in 2015 to reach US$ 30.285 billion, one of the highest levels for seven years, with the largest investments going to the manufacturing sector, mainly the automotive industry, and telecommunications.
Falling prices for metals affected FDI inflows to Chile and Colombia, which were down by 8% and 26%, respectively in 2015.
In Argentina FDI inflows stood at US$ 11.655 billion, representing a rise of 130% over the figure for 2014, although this great difference reflected the fact that the nationalization of 51% of YPF, which took place in 2012, was accounted for in 2014, thus representing a major divestment that year.
Had this transaction not been included, the 2015 figure would have been similar to that of 2014.
Within the subregion, Panama was the largest recipient, with 43% of the total, followed by Costa Rica (26%), Honduras (10%) and Guatemala (10%).
The downward phase of the commodity price cycle affected the sectoral composition of FDI in 2015, with flows into the natural resources sectors losing ground.
In Central America, the natural resource share of FDI dropped from 13% to 8% between the same two periods.
On the other hand, the importance of the services sectors appears to be rising, especially telecommunications, renewable energies and retail trade.
FDI in renewable energies is substantial in Chile and in Central America, where this category of investment seems to be driving a shift in the energy mix.
FDI figures indicate inflows of foreign direct investment, minus divestment (repatriation of capital) by foreign investors.
These figures differ from those set out in the 2015 edition of the Economic Survey of Latin America and the Caribbean and the Preliminary Overview of the Economies of Latin America and the Caribbean, because they show the net balance of foreign investment, that is, direct investment in the reporting economy (FDI) minus outward FDI.
From 2010 on, the figures for Brazil include reinvested earnings; as a result, these figures are not directly comparable with those from before 2010.
In 2015, the United States again became the main source of FDI flows into the region.
For those flows that have a clearly identified origin, the United States accounts for 25.9%, followed by the Netherlands (15.9%) and Spain (11.8%).
The significance of the Netherlands in the statistics does not necessarily reflect a presence by Dutch companies in Latin American economies, since many transnational firms establish subsidiaries in the Netherlands, attracted by its tax advantages, and then go on to invest in third countries.
In Mexico, as in many Central American and Caribbean countries, the United States is by far the largest source of FDI inflows, accounting for 52%.
In the case of Brazil, 23% of flows come from the Netherlands, although the ultimate origin of many of these investments is unknown.
Outward FDI flows from Latin American and Caribbean countries declined substantially to US$ 47.362 billion, down by 15% from the previous year, as the expansion undertaken by the trans-Latin firms between 2007 and 2012 slowed.
By stock of investment abroad, Brazil and Mexico are the countries that invest the most beyond their borders.
In 2015, however, direct investment abroad by Brazilian firms fell more sharply than investments by other countries, and Chile became the largest source of direct investment within 11Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Executive summary the region, reflecting the rapid growth of the Chilean trans-Latins.
Outward direct investment by Mexican firms climbed sharply, to US$ 12.126 billion, representing a jump of 62% from the previous year.
Colombian firms have shown a noteworthy capacity to exploit external markets in recent years, with a growing presence in Central America.
In 2015 the stock of FDI in the region shrank, and FDI earnings dropped yet more sharply.
As a percentage of the FDI stock, profits reached their most recent peak in 2011, and then began to drop.
By country, the steepest falls in returns occurred in the mining economies (Chile, Colombia, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia), although these downtrend is not confined to these.
In conditions of shrinking FDI earnings, transnational firms have at least two options: to reinvest a smaller proportion of profits or to remit fewer profits.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the reinvestment rate is declining, and this can be a negative factor for the host economies.
In nominal terms, FDI inflows to Latin America and the Caribbean are showing signs of stagnation.
In 2015, FDI inflows posted no significant growth for the fourth year running.
FDI has been crucial in Latin America and the Caribbean to support the region’s model of integration into the international economy, with investments in natural resources, exports and modern services.
It has had, however, a moderate and somewhat limited impact in terms of technology content, innovation and research and development.
By adopting strategies to combine FDI attraction with policies to drive economic modernization and production diversification, the region would not only encourage transnational firms to establish in sectors with greater prospects for development and capacity-building, but would also facilitate these firms’ integration into local economies.
It would also enhance economic growth of a type that fosters social inclusion and environmental sustainability.
When FDI attraction and development policies are coordinated with each other, FDI can contribute to achieving the strategies the country has defined.
In this way, policymaking aims not only to attract FDI, but to create the conditions to absorb its benefits.
In the current global conditions, FDI flows into Latin America and the Caribbean will likely shrink again in 2016.
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) has estimated a 0.6% contraction in output, which will continue to dampen investment in supplying domestic demand at the regional level.
The South American economies will be the hardest hit, owing to their specialization in primary goods, especially oil and minerals, and their strong trade integration with China.
In fact, signs of a slowdown in China and low raw material prices have already paralysed investment in areas relating to natural resources exports.
Conversely, prospects are brighter for Mexico and Central America, with average GDP growth estimated at 2.6% in 2016, just below the previous year’s rate.
The upturn in the United States economy has led to new investment announcements, particularly in export manufacturing.
Overall, therefore, ECLAC estimates that FDI flows into the region could drop by as B.
Foreign investment in metal mining The metal mining sector presents certain characteristics that are key to understanding its dynamics and its close relationship with FDI.
On the one hand, it is highly concentrated, both in terms of international demand and production; on the other, the specific nature of the investment and production process, notably long project durations, extremely high capital requirements and high risk, mean that the vast majority of leading firms are transnational.
ECLAC estimates that FDI flows into the region could drop by as much as 8% in 2016. 12 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Executive summary In the past 15 years, global markets for the main metallic minerals have experienced profound changes, with huge swings in demand, prices and output.
International demand has seen strong shifts, with China’s rise to prominence a key factor.
China’s exceptional growth and its industrialization strategy caused a substantial increase in its consumption of metallic minerals.
Between the mid-2000s and 2015, China transformed itself into the world’s leading importer of iron, copper concentrates and bauxite, overtaking countries that traditionally had carried most weight in these markets, such as Germany, Japan and the United States.
Not only did the country import metallic minerals to supply its domestic market, but these imports also allowed it to satisfy international demand for metals and metal manufactures.
Changes in demand, together with China’s new position in the world economy, created a cycle of extremely high prices, before the onset of a downtrend that commenced in 2012 and which continues today.
This marked trend shift is chiefly due to slower growth in China and weak demand from developed countries, combined with increased global production capacity for minerals and mineral products.
Rising prices fuelled a steady increase in global metallic mineral production from 2003 onwards.
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean played an important role in this process, especially Brazil in iron ore production; Chile and Peru in copper; the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Guyana, Jamaica and Suriname in bauxite, and Mexico and Peru in gold and silver.
A high percentage of the world’s metallic mineral reserves is concentrated in Latin America and the Caribbean: 66% of its lithium, 47% of its copper, 45% of its silver, 25% of its tin, 23% of its bauxite, 23% of its nickel and 14% of its iron, among others.
Increased production coincided with a process of strong FDI inflows to metal mining in the region and the consolidation of some leading trans-Latin corporations such as Brazil’s Vale, Chile’s National Copper Corporation (CODELCO) and Grupo México.
The largest mergers and acquisitions in the history of the global metal mining sector took place between 2000 and 2015.
In value terms, approximately 16% of these transactions targeted Latin American and Caribbean firms, amounting to US$ 78.0 billion during the period.
Target companies in eight countries accounted for 92% of this total, with Brazil, Chile, Peru and Mexico clearly leading destinations for mergers and acquisitions.
Acquiring firms were more sparsely concentrated, with the main purchasers, in value terms, originating in Canada, China, the United Kingdom and the United States, while Australia also figured among the countries with the largest number of transactions.
China was remarkable for the completion of a large transaction: in 2014, MMG Ltd and partners acquired the Las Bambas copper deposit from Switzerland’s Glencore for US$ 7.005 billion.
Another important operation took place in 2011, when Norway’s Norsk Hydro purchased a number of bauxite extraction and alumina production assets from Brazil’s Vale for US$ 5.27 billion.
A new scenario of heightened uncertainty took shape with the onset of the downward phase of the commodity price cycle in 2012.
In a sector in which the minimum required rates of return have topped 15%, the average return on capital employed among the world’s 40 leading mining companies fell to 9% in 2014, a 10-year low.
This decline in profitability, both in the world and in Latin America, had repercussions for investment announcements in the metal mining sector, which in 2015 marked a low for the period 2003-2015.
Just eight projects were announced, amounting to US$ 674 million or 1.1% of total announced investment for the region, compared with 12.2% on average for the period.
A new scenario of heightened uncertainty took shape with the onset of the downward phase of the commodity price cycle in 2012. 13Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Executive summary In this new scenario, Latin American and Caribbean countries have fallen behind somewhat in the mining value chain.
During the mining boom, Chinese companies stepped up mineral extraction and demanded more minerals on the international market, as well as investing in refining and smelting and thus moving up the mining and metallurgy value chain.
By contrast, refining and smelting capacity in Latin American and Caribbean countries did not keep pace with rising mineral production, which helped create a pattern of growth in exports of mined minerals rather than refined metals.
The exploitation of natural resources for inclusive economic development entails huge challenges: from the essential requirement that the sector’s development is compatible with safeguarding the environment and the rights of peoples and communities, and the creation of production linkages and synergies with other sectors, to fiscal and monetary issues and infrastructure investment.
The favourable price cycle benefited the expansion of mining in Latin American and Caribbean countries, which in turn improved the availability of resources.
However, a quantitative analysis of linkages shows that mining is generally a sector with low spillovers in terms of demand for other economic activities.
Consequently, the main effects of mining in the region are apparent in the greater availability of fiscal revenues, and in exports.
However, a qualitative overview of metal mining suppliers in the region revealed that some domestic firms have found niches in which to export to third markets, which suggests that these enterprises have attained a greater degree of competitiveness.
If the expansion of metal mining in the region is conducive to the growth of highly productive and competitive domestic firms, then it would also be contributing to greater economic diversification and would be an example of how FDI can drive local business development.
Such impacts are of limited magnitude in the countries of the region, but progress has been achieved in some areas.
Chile is emerging as the Latin America country that has made most progress in developing sophisticated mining suppliers with the capability to export, albeit only a fraction of them do so.
In the current context, company strategies aim to reduce costs and minimize environmental impacts, and technological progress offers solutions to these problems.
The energy and water requirements of mining mean that technological development is fundamental for the growth of the sector, which needs cheaper, more sustainable sources of energy and water.
Attracting FDI to provide solutions in these areas may create an opportunity for growth that contributes to the creation of intangible capital.
The benefits of foreign direct investment in the mining industry are far from being automatically accrued.
International market dynamics dictate that investment is attracted to locations that combine the availability of mineral resources with stable regulatory conditions for their exploitation and an adequate infrastructure for exports.
The development of externalities, from the basic exploitation of natural resources to greater complexity and diversification, will depend to a large extent on local capacity (in terms of institutions, technology and access to energy, human capital and financing, among others).
In this context, a policy space is emerging for countries to promote the accumulation of local capacities linked to the development of a sustainable mining sector that drives production diversification.
The region enjoys comparative advantages in the exploitation of metallic minerals, and most countries have directly or indirectly encouraged FDI in the sector.
How to keep step with the expansion of mining activity through policies in support of the production sector, while securing the maximum possible benefit for inclusive and sustainable development, remains a major challenge for Latin American and Caribbean countries. 14 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Executive summary C.
Foreign direct investment as a driver of intangible capital accumulation The positive effects of foreign direct investment can foster development in recipient economies; in particular, they can supplement national saving through new capital contributions and stimulate transfers of technology and improve management systems to enable productive modernization.
These effects are not automatic, however, and the results obtained may not meet expectations.
Foreign direct investment flows have a variety of destinations that do not always entail the creation of new fixed capital; in other words, they do not translate directly into the formation of physical capital in the receiving country.
The dynamic of FDI flows and the trend of fixed capital investment follow different but related paths.
One simple estimate is that each additional dollar of FDI increases gross fixed capital formation by 34 cents.
This means that around one third of FDI flows actually contribute to fixed capital formation in the receiving economy.
Although FDI makes only a small contribution to gross fixed capital formation, transnational enterprises can play an important role in economic development by helping to transform economies through the creation of intangible capital.
The positive effects of FDI can be transmitted through technology transfer and skill development, while also encouraging local firms to enter value chains that increase their exposure to the international economy.
The amount of FDI flows is a limited measurement of its potential benefit in the receiving country.
The benefits cannot be taken for granted through spillover effects, nor do aggregate statistics adequately reflect certain characteristics of FDI.
This scenario again highlights the need to focus on the quality of FDI, particularly its capacity to contribute to the formation of intangible capital in the local economy.
There is consensus on the potential benefits of FDI, but harnessing them is not an automatic process.
The transfer and absorption of FDI benefits depends on the characteristics of the investment and the specific features of the recipient country.
The possibility of harnessing these benefits depends on the skill level of the labour force, the competitiveness of the local industry and its capacity to supply foreign firms, and the existence of an associated cluster.
Host countries must meet the challenge of capturing these benefits because, in the absence of the necessary conditions, foreign firms could become enclaves within those countries, and only a fraction of their benefits will be transferred to local economies.
FDI in the global economy is growing despite a recessionary bias B.
FDI in the global economy is growing despite a recessionary bias In a context of low growth and great uncertainty in the world economy, foreign direct investment (FDI) has been remarkably robust.
Underlying this outcome was an intense wave of mergers and acquisitions, especially cross-border transactions, and heavily focused on developed countries, especially the United States (Deloitte, 2015).
In 2015, cross-border operations represented 31% of all mergers and acquisitions worldwide (JP Morgan, 2016) (see figure I.2).
This strong growth was also determined by the levels of the previous year, which reflected a large divestment (in the amount of US$ 130 billion) in the United States.1 Excluding that transaction, FDI growth in 2015 would drop to 21%, which is still high but less spectacular.
At the same time, new announcements of greenfield investment projects suggested an upturn in this sector, although to a much lesser extent than in mergers and acquisitions.2 In 2015, there was an overall increase of 9% in the value of announced FDI projects, to US$ 713 billion (fDi Intelligence, 2016).
As with mergers and acquisitions, the rise in project announcements in developed countries offset a downtrend in investments by transnational firms in developing economies.
The new cycle of cross-border mergers and acquisitions has resulted from a combination of various factors that have given businesses the confidence needed to seek acquisitions that will allow them to cope with slow organic growth and limited improvements in operating margins.
As well, FDI inflows into the United States have also been driven by mergers and acquisitions designed to reduce the tax obligations of United States firms.
In fact, many of these firms will subsequently relocate abroad in order to avoid the high corporate tax rates in the United States (OECD, 2016). • Certain sectoral dynamics that are relatively independent of the macroeconomic cycle, especially on the part of “defensive” industries,4 such as telecommunications and pharmaceuticals, which have sought consolidation or new strategic assets.
In the first sector, the strong and growing consolidation of different segments has continued in an industry that is converging rapidly towards common platforms.
The pharmaceuticals industry, in addition to consolidation, is also attempting to replace patents that are beginning to expire and is placing new faith in segments such as biotechnology (JP Morgan, 2015).
These dynamics have offset the slowdown in certain more cyclical sectors, such as those related to commodities, which have been affected by the sharp fall in prices.
Recently, developing economies have seen their importance as FDI recipients increase, and in 2014 they accounted for 55% of worldwide flows (UNCTAD, 2015).
However, the sharp increase in FDI flows to developed countries in 2015 has shifted the regional distribution of these capital flows.
The first reveal only an intention to invest, one that may materialize over a fairly long period of time extending to several years.
While FDI flows to developed countries grew by 90% in 2015, developing countries recorded an increase of only 5.3%, and economies in transition saw a sharp contraction of 55% (see figure I.1 and table I.1).
However, in Hong Kong SAR an important part of this growth was accounted for by the merger and restructuring of Cheung Kong Holdings and Hutchison Whampoa into CK Hutchison Holdings, which did not represent any investment in new production capacity.
By contrast, Africa recorded the greatest decline —31%— among developing regions in 2015, concentrated primarily in the sub-Saharan region.
Lastly, Latin America and the Caribbean recorded the worst performance since 2010, with FDI inflows falling by 9% in 2015.
In both regions, the end of the commodities supercycle had an especially heavy impact on FDI inflows.
Despite these shifts and the effects of a few large-scale transactions, developing countries still accounted for one half of the leading recipients of FDI (see figure I.3).
A good proxy for analysing the dynamics of production investment is found in the announcements of new projects sponsored by foreign investors.
In 2015, as noted above, these investments were still showing signs of recovery, led by Asia and the Pacific region, which accounted for 45% of the total amount announced worldwide.
Although the United States and the United Kingdom still appear as major recipients of these resources, a number of developing countries are positioning themselves as important destinations for foreign direct investment.
In 2015, for the first time, India outpaced China, placing itself as the principal destination for new investment announcements, especially in renewable energy and in coal, oil and natural gas.
By contrast, Latin America and the Caribbean, along with Africa, recorded a sharp decline in new investment announcements, reflecting in particular the fall in commodity prices (fDi Intelligence, 2016).
In 2015, foreign direct investment fell by 9.1% In 2015, most countries in Latin America and the Caribbean switched to the methodology set forth in the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) for preparing their foreign direct investment statistics.
This process has meant some significant changes in the figures for previous years, especially in Brazil (see annex I.A1).
Excluding Brazil, FDI in the region showed a slight increase of 2.8% in nominal terms (see figure I.4).
In 2015, despite the decline in these inflows, Brazil maintained its lead as the region’s main recipient of foreign direct investment.
The greatest increase in FDI inflows in that year was recorded by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, up by 153% in the first three calendar quarters.
However, this outcome must be viewed in perspective: first, because it compares with the extremely low level of FDI inflows in 2014, and second because the US$ 1.383 billion in the first three quarters of 2015 amounts to less than half of the average long-term amount.
Among the countries receiving the greatest FDI inflows, Argentina recorded the strongest growth, at 130%,5 5 This performance is tempered by the fact that the 2012 nationalization of 51% of YPF showed up in Argentina’s external accounts only in 2014.
Without the impact of that transaction, FDI inflows in 2015 would have been very similar to those for 2014. 22 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I followed by Mexico at 18%.
On the other hand, Chile, Colombia and Peru saw inflows fall by between 8% and 26%.
At the subregional level, Central America increased its inflows by 6%, while the Caribbean showed a decline of 17% (see map I.1).
A more detailed look at the fall in FDI inflows to Latin America and the Caribbean reveals a number of interesting findings.
In 2015, as discussed in section A, the amount associated with cross-border mergers and acquisitions was especially low in the region.
This fact may offer a partial explanation for the decline in FDI inflows, but it could also indicate that that the creation of productive capital was relatively high during 2015.
Chapter III discusses more fully the characteristics of FDI and its contribution to productive capital creation.
Chapter II offers a detailed analysis of FDI in the mining sector.
Secondly, the decline in reinvested earnings may help to explain the shrinking of FDI inflows (see figure I.5).
In fact, the slowing of economic growth in various countries of the region has had a direct impact on business profits.
Moreover, many firms have not cut back on the repatriation of profits, and this has had a negative impact on the reinvestment rate in the recent past.
Map I.1 Caribbean (selected subregions and countries): 23Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter I Between 2010 and 2012, profit reinvestment averaged around US$ 25 billion a year, but then fell to US$ 2.3 billion between 2013 and 2015.
Intracompany loans also declined substantially in 2015, as a result of which the relative share of capital contributions, or equity investment, rose.
Although the statistics before and after 2010 are not strictly comparable, the share of capital contributions had been dropping systematically for several years, and consequently the results for 2015 could point to a shift in this trend. 2.
Less investment in natural resources Not all countries publish statistics on FDI inflows disaggregated by sector of destination: such statistics are available only for some of the bigger economies and for most Central American countries.
For this group of countries, the importance of the extractive sectors has been sinking steadily.
Among the countries for which this information is available, in Colombia the share of primary sectors in FDI declined from 51% in 2010-2014 to 31% in 2015 (see figure I.6).
In that latter year, the share of natural resources in FDI inflows was 13% in Brazil and only 3% in Mexico.
Among the services of greatest interest to foreign investors in the most recent period were telecommunications and renewable energy.
Business services also carry considerable weight in the FDI totals in many economies, while the role of financial services varies greatly from one country to the next.
First, the renewable energy sector is growing strongly and gaining importance in the region.
Second, the telecommunications sector is one in which foreign firms are dominant and investment needs are great.
Finally, the retail trade subsector is interesting for its high growth rate and the significant participation of trans-Latin firms.
As noted earlier, this information is not strictly comparable with the FDI inflows reported in the balance of payments.
Nevertheless, it reveals in greater detail the tendency of the medium- and long-term strategies pursued by transnational firms or their announcements of coming investments.
Over the entire period, announced investments for vehicle assembly and parts production rose from 4% to 15% of the total. • In services, two sectors stand out for their especially strong performance: telecommunications and renewable energy.
Between 2005 and 2015, announced investments in the telecommunications sector increased from 4% to 11% of the total, reflecting the rapid deployment of new infrastructure that has enhanced the coverage and quality of modern services in the region.
At the same time, announcements of renewable energy projects jumped from 1% to 20% of the total between 2005 and 2015.
In fact, renewable energies have been the most important target of new investment announcements in 2015.
During that year, in fact, Chile boosted its installed capacity by 580 MW.
Honduras too recorded a strong performance, adding some 500 MW to its generating capacity (Shumkov, 2015).
That country’s success has been the result of a generous policy of subsidies for capacity installed prior to July 2015, and this has meant a substantial boost in the share of solar energy in the Honduran energy matrix.
The first two countries are, of course, much bigger markets than Chile, and renewable energy commands a significant share of their energy mix.
However, because of the regulatory framework and the presence of large domestic players, there is less international involvement through FDI in those countries than in Chile or Panama.
Lastly, investment announcements in the renewable energy sector have increased in most countries, with the exception of Peru, where few projects have been announced in that sector over the last three years.
In 2015, 70% of the announced investments in renewable energies were targeted at solar energy projects.
Latin American governments have shown real enthusiasm for renewable energies as a way of diversifying the energy mix, particularly in non oil-producing countries, cutting generating costs and lowering the long-term environmental impact.
However, the local private sector’s response to the opportunities in this industry has been disappointingly weak.
For example, in Chile —one of the world leaders in terms of installed solar energy capacity— the industry is dominated by foreign companies.
As a way of capitalizing on the country’s competitive advantages and encouraging the creation of a production, logistics and technology platform of international reputation, the Chilean authorities have attempted to coordinate and strengthen local players involved in the solar energy sector, through a “smart specialization” programme.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, telecommunications has been one of the most important services sectors for channelling FDI.
There are at least three reasons for this phenomenon: (i) The telecommunications sector is very intensive in high-tech infrastructure and hardware, which entails investment on a very large scale.
The speed of technological change is obliging companies to invest continuously in order to keep abreast, as in the case of the recent transition from 3G to 4G in mobile telephony. (ii) It is a sector where competition is fierce and customer loyalty is fickle.
Under these conditions, firms must invest to the same degree as their competitors. (iii) Lastly, it is a sector with a large presence of transnational firms.
Within the region, only in Costa Rica, Mexico, Uruguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela is the local market dominated by a domestic firm.
In most Latin American countries, the market is dominated by two foreign companies: América Móvil (Mexico) and Telefónica (Spain) (see figure I.10).
In Latin America, a small group of firms is responsible for the bulk of investment.
According to data provided by the company, América Móvil has been investing around US$ 10 billion every year, including its home market, Mexico.
Between 2012 and 2015, the Spanish firm Telefónica, with its Movistar brand, has invested some US$ 22 billion in the region, while Telecom Italia has disbursed close to US$ 8 billion in Brazil, its main market.
This performance has been driven by capital originating essentially in three countries: the United States (41%), France (17%) and Chile (15%) (see figure I.11).
In the most recent period, however, the two leading source countries, and France in particular, have been losing ground.
In fact, the bulk of French FDI in Latin America’s retail trade sector has been accounted for by operations of the Carrefour supermarket chain (80% of the total announced), a company that has in recent years reversed its strategy of regional expansion.
In 2012, Carrefour sold its operations in Colombia for US$ 2.5 billion to the Chilean firm Cencosud, re-focusing its activities on Brazil and Argentina, where it has 876 stores.
Similarly, FDI from the United States in retail trade is concentrated essentially in one company —Wal-Mart— the largest company in the world according to the Fortune Global 500 ranking (Fortune, 2015).
In recent years Wal-Mart has accounted for 25% of all announced investments in the retail trade sector, and 61% of investments in the region announced by United States firms in this industry.
In terms of the geographical distribution of investments announced in the retail trade sector, the leading destinations are Brazil (38%), Mexico (20%) and Colombia (15%).
Market-seeking is the main motivation for FDI by the big retail chains.
Thus, when domestic conditions start to deteriorate, business interest also tends to fall off, as demonstrated by the decline in FDI in Argentina since 2010 and the recent drop in Brazil (see figure I.11).
One of the preferred strategies for large retail chains in pursuing their international growth has been to acquire local operators, thereby giving them swift access to new markets and familiarity with local customers and habits.
As to the origen of acquiring companies, the pattern is very similar to that of new investment announcements.
Between 2003 and 2015, United States firms accounted for 34%, by value, of mergers and acquisitions in this industry, followed by Chilean (28%) and Mexican (9%) companies.
The two biggest players are Wal-Mart and Cencosud, which together are responsible for 50% of the mergers and acquisitions completed in Latin America.
However, there are some differences between announced investments and M&As when it comes to the geographic destination of these operations.
The main destination was Chile, which accounted for 30% of the funds flowing into M&A operations.
In this particular case, the lead player is Wal-Mart: through various transactions it has gained control of one of the largest local supermarket chains, D&S, which operates under the trade name Líder.
Between 2011 and 2015, investments amounting to some US$ 60.279 billion were announced in the Latin American automotive and parts sector, concentrated essentially in three countries: Mexico (61%), Brazil (30%) and Argentina (5%).
Yet, the origin of investments reveals some important distinctions that reflect the different strategies adopted by transnational firms in the main markets of Latin America.
In Mexico, for example, investment announcements come for the most part from United States firms, pursuing the advantages of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
By contrast, in Brazil and Argentina it is European companies that are announcing investments, targeted at supplying the MERCOSUR market with compact vehicles.
At both extremities of the region, Japanese automotive companies are increasingly active, at least in terms of announced investments (see figure I.12).
These intentions are beginning to show real results: Japanese vehicle makers have recorded the greatest growth in production, thanks to completion of the announced new factories (see table I.2).
Between 2011 and 2015, General Motors of the United States was the most active in announcing new investments, amounting to more than US$ 8 billion, followed by Italy’s Fiat (US$ 5 billion) and three Japanese companies: Nissan, Toyota and Honda (see figure I.13).
For those flows that have a clearly identified origin,8 the United States accounts for 25.7%.
The Netherlands is the second most important source, at 15.9%, followed by Spain, at 11.5% (see figure I.14). 8 The designation “identifiable investment” includes only figures from countries that disaggregate their statistics by country of origin, and it excludes investments from unidentified countries as well as from so-called tax havens.
The figures exclude FDI for which the origin cannot be determined, ie, FDI of unknown origin or originating in tax havens.
In countries for which data are available, FDI of undetermined origin accounts for 5.9% of inflows.
The case of the Netherlands is particularly interesting, as its weight in the statistics bears little relationship to the presence of Dutch firms in Latin American economies.
This apparent contradiction reflects the fact that many transnational firms establish subsidiaries in the Netherlands, attracted by its tax advantages, and then go on to invest in third countries.
Although corporate taxation is high, the Netherlands offers advantages that can substantially reduce the taxes on profits and dividends obtained from subsidiaries in other countries.
The Dutch system also has a highly developed network of double-taxation, information sharing and investment agreements with other countries, offering significant tax benefits for financial expenses, and especially for loans between parent companies and their subsidiaries.
Lastly, there is the so-called “Dutch sandwich” that allows transnational firms to benefit from preferential agreements in place with tax havens such as the former Netherlands Antilles (El País, 2016).
Similar situations exist in Luxembourg and Ireland. 33Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter I Many transnational firms establish subsidiaries in the Netherlands, attracted by its tax advantages, and then go on to invest in third countries.
There are some major differences between the countries of the region in 2015.
In Brazil, 22% of identified flows comes from the Netherlands (although the ultimate origin of many of the investments is unknown), followed by the United States (14%) and Spain (13%).
In Mexico, as in many countries of Central America and the Caribbean, the United States is by far the main source of FDI inflows: the United States accounts for 52% of inflows to Mexico, followed by Spain (9%) and Japan (5%).
In Colombia, three countries are the source of slightly over half of FDI inflows whose origin can be identified: the United States (21%), Panama (16%) and Spain (14%).
An alternative and complementary way of analysing the origin of FDI flows is to consider large cross-border mergers and acquisitions (see table I.3).
Among the 20 largest transactions concluded in 2015, United States firms were the dominant buyers, and they were particularly important in the telecommunications sector in Mexico.
The largest transaction of the year was conducted by Telefónica of Spain, which took over the Brazilian firm Global Village Telecom, owned by the French company Vivendi, for a price tag of US$ 10.285 billion.
Next in rank was the purchase, through tender, of the concession to operate the Jupiá and Ilha Solteira hydroelectric plants in São Paulo by China Three Gorges Corporation (CTG), which is the operator of the world’s biggest hydroelectric project.
In Brazil, CTG is partnered with Energias de Portugal (EDP) in three hydropower stations and 11 wind farms.
Also noteworthy was the purchase of Columbus International, a Barbadian telecommunications firm, by Britain’s Cable & Wireless (C&W) in what was the biggest acquisition to date in the Caribbean.
Subsequently, in November 2015, Liberty Global announced its takeover of the assets of C&W in the Caribbean, for US$ 5.3 billion, but the transaction was not finalized during that year.
On the other hand, Latin America and the Caribbean saw little in the way of sizable divestments in 2015.
In fact, there were only three such operations for more than US$ 100 million, and the 10 largest totalled US$ 1.834 billion.
This stands in contrast to the US$ 15.242 billion of divestment in 2014, suggesting that there may be fewer incentives for investors to withdraw from the region.
Although it is falling, income from FDI is still important In 2015 the stock of FDI shrank,9 and earnings fell even further (see figure I.15).
As a percentage of the stock of FDI, profits reached their most recent peak in 2011, and then began to drop.
The collapse of profitability affects not only transnational companies, but firms in the Latin American economies in general.
In fact, the profitability of the 500 largest firms in the region has been declining for a decade now (see figure I.16).
During that time, the region’s best earnings came in 2006, when profitability stood at around 7.2%, or 5.3% excluding natural resources.10 Subsequently, in 2014, income fell to 2% (or 2.7% excluding natural resources).
In that year, profits were down in all sectors, compared to the 2010-2013 average, and the drop was particularly severe in the mining sector (see figure I.16).
This trend is beginning to be reflected in a loss of interest in certain resource-intensive activities, primarily mining, as a destination for FDI flows. 9 Between 2014 and 2015, the stock of FDI fell from US$ 1.91 billion to US$ 1.8 billion.
Among other factors, this outcome reflects the devaluation of many Latin American currencies.
Between the beginning of January and the end of December 2015, the exchange rate rose from 2.7 reais to 3.9 reais to the dollar, and this had a significant impact on the value of assets denominated in dollars. 10 As discussed in chapter II, the mining industry yields high profits: 24.9% in 2006.
The hydrocarbons sector, which also falls well outside the average excluding natural resources, recorded profits of 7.2% in 2006.
The sectors included in figure B are the eight sectors with the largest sales volumes, according to América Economía.
An analysis of the situation by country shows that the greatest declines in profitability occurred in countries with substantial mining activity (Chile, Colombia, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia).
Finally, profitability levels also reflect the characteristics of countries’ production and business structure.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the reinvestment rate is declining, and this can be a negative factor for the host economies (see figure I.18).
Nevertheless, from a longer-term viewpoint, it is important to assess the effects of FDI on the balance of payments.
While it is clear that FDI inflows have an initial positive effect, the subsequent outflows of profits from FDI will have a negative impact on the external accounts of the host economies.
Yet in that same year, while FDI declined by 9.1%, inflows of portfolio and other investments dropped by 59% and 51% respectively.
The current account of the balance of payments has been deteriorating gradually in recent years, and in 2015 it showed a deficit of 3.3% of GDP (see figure I.20).
Under this scenario, the income balance is the component with the largest deficit, and the one that produces the greatest net outflows of funds abroad.
Within this item, the biggest component is the repatriation of FDI income by firms to their parent companies abroad.
The situation is complicated by the steady deterioration in the goods balance, which historically has helped to finance the income balance deficit.
In absolute terms, the surplus on the goods balance was greater than the deficit on the income balance until 2006.
Since then, the goods balance has deteriorated swiftly, and the surplus disappeared in 2013 (see figure I.21).
This is represented by a white line on the graph. 41Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter I Lastly, when FDI inflows are combined with outflows of FDI income, their impact on the balance of payments becomes clear.
However, even if FDI inflows were to contract sharply, the existing FDI stock is of such a size as to produce income outflows that could be very significant.
At the present time, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Guatemala, Peru and the Plurinational State of Bolivia are already experiencing a negative impact from FDI on their balance of payments (see figure I.22).
Outward investment by trans-Latin firms is slowing In 2015, outward FDI flows from Latin American and Caribbean countries declined substantially to US$ 47.362 billion, down by 15% from the previous year.
Although the decline is real, it was accentuated by corrections and methodological changes introduced in the statistics, especially with the use of the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments and International Investment Position Manual of IMF (2009).
Adoption of the sixth edition sparked major changes in the statistics of Brazil, especially those concerning Brazilian investments abroad (see section D of this chapter for further details).
The impact of these changes can be appreciated from a comparison of regional figures with and without Brazil (see figure I.23).
Prior to adoption of the sixth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual, Brazilian statistics showed great volatility, and this had repercussions on the regional aggregates.
By excluding Brazil from the Latin American and Caribbean total, trends can be identified more clearly.
Trans-Latin firms took advantage of the sound conditions in their domestic economies and the opportunities that began to appear in some of the main regional markets, for example, with the resurgence of a number of transnational firms from beyond the region that had been affected by the international financial crisis.
Outward direct investment flows began to shrink in 2012, with the cooling of 42 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I regional growth and changes in the international commodity markets where some of the biggest trans-Latin firms were active.
In 2015, the collapse of commodity prices accelerated and countries’ economic conditions worsened.
Outward direct investment by Brazilian firms declined more sharply than that of their peers in other countries of the region (see table I.5).
Three countries account for over 85% of outward direct investment from the region.
In 2015, Chile was the source of the greatest outflows of direct investment, illustrating the vigour of Chilean trans-Latin firms.
Chile was followed by Brazil and Mexico, which were responsible for 28% and 26% of the total, respectively (see table I.5).
Figures for the stock of outward direct investment help to place the annual flow statistics in perspective (see figure I.24).
In fact, the stock of such investment reveals the rapid growth of the two countries that are home to the largest firms with international operations: Brazil and Mexico.
The change from 2014 to 2015 is calculated for the first three quarters of both years. d For the region overall, the variation between 2014 and 2015 for the cases of Trinidad and Tobago and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was calculated taking only the first three quarters of those years.
Chile thus became the largest source of direct investment in the region.
Capital outflows occasioned by investments abroad took the form primarily of deposits and loans extended by firms resident in Chile to their foreign subsidiaries: these amounted to US$ 10.621 billion (Central Bank of Chile, 2016).
The principal firms in the retail trade sector, which in the past have adopted ambitious globalization strategies, remained very active during 2015.
Falabella announced an agreement with Soriana, operator of the second-largest supermarket chain in Mexico, which will give it entry to the Mexican market through the chain of home improvement stores with the Sodimac trademark, and a financial services business.
However, there have also been some retreats: Ripley, for example, announced that it was abandoning the Colombian market because performance was falling short of expectations.
In second place was Brazil, which mobilized US$ 13.498 billion in outward direct investment.
In 2015, Brazilian firms were involved in six of the 15 largest M&A transactions by trans-Latin firms (see table I.6).
It should be noted, however, that four of the six operations featured the same firm, JBS SA, the world’s leading meat processing company, which made acquisitions in the United States, New Zealand, Mexico and the United Kingdom.
Moreover, JBS SA announced additional investments in the amount of US$ 150 million to boost its operations in Mexico.
In 2015, Camargo Corrêa announced investments of US$ 250 million in a new cement plant in Mozambique, and Votorantim Cimentos revealed its intention to invest some US$ 153 million in Turkey.
Moreover, some of Brazil’s biggest firms, such as Vale, have continued to pursue ambitious strategies for international expansion.
In 2015, outward direct investment by Mexican firms climbed sharply to US$ 12.126 billion, representing a jump of 62% from the previous year.
As noted above, the telecommunications firm América Móvil was particularly active, given the competitive and technological demands of the sector.
In fact, of the investments announced over the two years 2014-2015, América Móvil was responsible for US$ 6.166 billion, or 45% of the total.
The cement firm CEMEX, for its part, announced an investment of US$ 300 million in the Philippines, while at the same time announcing divestments of US$ 1 billion in Europe.
In general, Mexican firms have given priority to the United States market, and this trend continued in 2015.
Among the principal firms, the announcements of the Grupo Posada attracted particular attention.
Lastly, Colombian firms have shown a noteworthy capacity to exploit external markets in recent years.
They have a growing presence in the Central American market, which was the main destination for Colombian investment between 2000 and 2014 (accounting for 22.5% of all Colombian outward FDI), during which time Colombian firms built up US$ 9.231 billion in investment stock in the subregion (Cordero, 2015).
In 2015, outward investment from Colombia reached US$ 4.218 billion, up by 8% from the previous year.
Among the most important transactions were the purchase of the Chilean water company Aguas de Antofagasta by Empresas Públicas de Medellín, for US$ 967 million.
Lastly, there has been a notable process of integration among the smaller countries in the region.
In this regard, most of outward FDI from the Central American and Caribbean countries remains within the respective subregion.
As they have grown and become more competitive, they are now beginning to explore more distant markets.
Several recent transactions by Latin American firms in Europe illustrate this trend.
Between 2010 and 2015, according to figures from Bloomberg, trans-Latin firms have made acquisitions in the old continent amounting to US$ 49.310 billion.
Brazilian and Mexican trans-Latins have been the most active in this process, followed at a certain distance by Chilean and Colombian companies.
The favourite European host country for Latin American acquisitions has been Portugal, essentially thanks to its strong economic and cultural ties with Brazil.
Among the Brazilian companies that have been most active in the European Union are the telecommunications operator Oi, the Camargo Corrêa group and the Safra banking entity.
That venture, however, turned out to be more difficult than expected and in June 2015 Oi sold its share in PT Portugal to the French operator Altice, for 4.9 billion euros (€).
Between 2010 and 2012, Camargo Corrêa acquired more than 90% ownership of the Portuguese cement company CIMPOR, in a series of transactions for which it paid out more than US$ 7 billion.
In another series of transactions, Camargo Corrêa acquired all the shares of Grupo Tavex, the world’s leading denim manufacturer.
Some time later, however, the Brazilian group divested itself of Tavex operations in the United States, Mexico, Europe and North Africa, retaining only those in South America, which were generating around 75% of total sales.
In a number of operations conducted between 2012 and 2013, the Safra banking entity acquired the Swiss concern Bank Sarasin.
The most active Mexican firm in the European Union has been América Móvil which, after consolidating its position in the principal Latin American markets, has sought to position itself as a world leader through strategic acquisitions of European operators.
In 2012, it acquired an important share in the Dutch operator KPN, for US$ 3.301 billion, and between 2012 and 2014 if purchased around a third of the shares of Telekom Austria, for US$ 7.253 billion.
The fall in FDI was heaviest in South America In 2015, Latin America and the Caribbean experienced a decline of 10.0% in FDI inflows, and this had a particular impact in some countries of South America.
The regional figures were affected by the contraction of inward FDI in Brazil, Colombia and Uruguay, where it fell by 23%, 26% and 25% respectively.
The most notable increases occurred in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela (up by 153% between the first three quarters of the two years 2014 and 2015) and in Argentina (130%), followed by Suriname (69%) and Grenada (59%) (see table I.7).
These outcomes confirmed the cyclical nature of FDI: the two economies that showed the greatest increases in 2015 had recorded some of the sharpest drops in the previous year.
Due to methodological changes, data prior to 2010 are not directly comparable with data for 2010 and after. b The totals and subtotals include only the first three quarters of 2015 in the cases of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Trinidad and Tobago.
The variation between 2014 and 2015 for the region was calculated using 2014 data for the first three quarters for these two countries. c The 2015 data for Trinidad and Tobago and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela relate only to the first three quarters.
These figures confirm the persistent pattern of concentration within the region: five countries account for 84% of total FDI inflows.
In general, the smaller economies receive amounts of FDI that are larger in relation to their GDP, thus giving transnational firms a particularly important role.
In Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, for example, while inward FDI is modest in amount, it has a great impact given the size of the economy.
Some exceptional operations can have a great repercussion on inward FDI in certain economies, especially the smaller ones.
Mergers and acquisitions tend to have a greater impact on the annual FDI figures than new investments, because the first usually take place in a relatively short period of time, while large investments in new plant take several years.
Brazil: uncertainty hits domestic market investment in 2015 As noted above, the methodological changes introduced in Brazil have had an impact on the statistics.
In 2015, as measured according to the sixth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual, FDI inflows declined by 22.5%, to US$ 75.075 billion.
This drop was especially pronounced in intracompany lending, which fell by 52% (mainly because of a significant increase in amortization payments) in the face of a 33% reduction in reinvested earnings and a 4% increase in capital contributions. 49Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter I The analysis of intracompany lending reveals some interesting developments.
In recent years, the cost of capital in Brazil has been fairly high, and as a result many investments were financed through transfers from the parent company.
In fact, it is less costly to finance a business through the parent company than via the local market.
However, this trend seems to have shifted in 2015, when intracompany loans declined as a result of a sharp increase in amortization of those loans.
In other words, Brazilian subsidiaries of transnational corporations were prepaying loans provided by their parent company.
There are at least three explanations for these findings in 2015: a reduction in the relative cost of capital in Brazil, a dearth of investment opportunities in the country and falling investor confidence owing to political instability.
Between 2010 and 2015, reinvested earnings fell from US$ 34.865 billion to US$ 7.145 billion, lending support to the notion of a possible decline in investment opportunities in Brazil.
It is plausible to assume that transnational firms have been saving a portion of their profits for some time now, and that deteriorating economic conditions have convinced them of the need to reduce the weight of their loans in the country.
The sheer size of Brazil’s domestic market remains a key factor in the investment decisions of international firms.
Brazil has not been immune to the effects of collapsing commodity prices, which have affected sectors such as mining, that in recent years were a major attraction for FDI.
In 2015, mining experienced significant divestment, while the automotive, food and energy sectors saw a sharp increase in investment.
Of the 20 mergers and acquisitions completed during 2015, nine occurred in Brazil, including the two largest ones.
As this last transaction took place between two foreign companies, it did not involve any inflow of investment to Brazil, but merely a change of ownership.
As with the balance of payments statistics, the figures for announced investments have also declined.
In 2015, the majority of announcements were concentrated in financial services, while there was a sharp contraction in some sectors that were traditionally of great interest for FDI, such as telecommunications and the automotive industry, reflecting perhaps the deteriorating expectations for the performance of the Brazilian economy in the near future.
An analysis of the origin of FDI places the Netherlands and Luxembourg among the three main sources of investment, ranking first and third respectively.
As suggested earlier, transnational companies are using these countries to “triangulate” their investments, and to reap tax benefits in the process.
Consequently, it is difficult to identify the source for a very significant portion of the capital flowing into Brazil in the form of FDI.
The Andean and Southern Cone countries: the bottom of the commodity cycle Despite a slight decrease in inflows, Chile still recorded the third-highest amount of inward FDI among Latin American economies in 2015.
These capital flows declined by 8% to US$ 20.457 billion, a level similar to that for previous years.
Although information disaggregated by economic sector was not available at the time of publication of this document, other sources point to a continued contraction of investment in mining, which had been the most important sector for foreign investment in recent years.
There have been no major announcements of new investments in Chilean mining, and the sector is declining in importance as an FDI destination.
As of December 2015, there were eight projects under way for a total estimated investment of some US$ 15.122 billion, 27% of which came from foreign companies (Mining Council, 2015).
Foreign companies account for 74% of the estimated US$ 35.879 billion in investments now under consideration for projects down the road.
There has also been a notable decrease in cross-border mergers and acquisitions, the value of which dropped from US$ 6.748 billion to US$ 1.979 billion between 2014 and 2015.
In 2014, the respective shares of the energy sector, and of renewable energies, in announced investments were 45% and 37%.
A major project in this area is the construction of a power transmission line for the Interconnected System of the North (SING) and the Central Interconnected System (SIC).
The Spanish firm Red Eléctrica de España and the French ENGIE (previously known as GDF Suez) are in charge of these works, with an estimated investment of US$ 780 million.
The initiative, which is now in execution, involves a 500 kV power line, 600 km in length, that will come on stream in the second half of 2017 (pv Magazine, 2015).
According to the Ministry of Energy of Chile (2016), 2015 saw the completion of renewable energy projects that will introduce some 580 MW of generating capacity, to which will be added around 2,500 MW in 2016.
In January 2016, Chile had a total generating capacity of 19,971 MW, and the new renewable energy projects will thus have a great impact on the future energy mix and on price trends.
The project has a generating capacity of 141 MW, enough to supply 174,000 households, and it involved an investment of approximately US$ 370 million.
The Spanish firm Acciona has begun construction of an even bigger solar farm —El Romero— with a capacity of 247 MW and an investment of US$ 343 million, which is to begin operation in the second half of 2017.
There was a great deal of activity in the insurance market in 2015.
Talanx, Germany’s third largest insurance firm, has been seeking out strategic markets as a way of countering the economic stagnation in Europe, and it acquired Aseguradora Magallanes for US$ 204 million.
Colombia’s Grupo Sura, through its insurance affiliate Suramericana, purchased all the Latin American assets of the British insurer RSA for some US$ 620 million, thereby positioning itself as one of the leading insurance firms in the region and making itself a strong force in the markets of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Uruguay.
Lastly, in 2015 the British United Provident Association Ltd. (Bupa) took control of Bupa Chile, through the purchase of 17% of locally held shares and a subsequent tender offer, involving an investment of US$ 590 million.
As in other countries of the region that were hit by the collapse of commodity prices, the decline in FDI in Colombia was especially pronounced in the natural resources sector (see chapter II).
Several Chilean groups have become actively involved in Colombia’s retail trade: Cencosud, Falabella and Parque Arauco are investing to expand and upgrade their facilities in the country.
In the hotel sector, the Spanish group NH acquired 87% of Hoteles Royal for around US$ 96 million.
Confident of a recovery in international trade, the Danish firm APM Terminals, the port operator of the Maersk Group, is planning to invest some US$ 200 million in the port of Cartagena, after signing an agreement with the Compañía de Puertos Asociados, Compas S.A.
In the manufacturing sector, General Motors of the United States has announced its intention to invest some US$ 100 million in its Colombian plant in the next few years, while the Spanish firm Cementos Molins and the Colombian group Corona have agreed to the joint production of cement in Colombia, for which they have announced investments of US$ 370 million.
In recent years, Colombian firms have shown a real determination to expand their operations beyond their country’s borders.
Colombian investment abroad rose by 8% 52 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I in 2015, to US$ 4.218 billion.
Important outward investments include the purchase of the Chilean sanitation company Aguas de Antofagasta by Empresas Públicas de Medellín for US$ 967 million, and the acquisition by the Grupo Éxito (in which France-based Casino holds 54%) of 55% of GPA (Grupo Pão de Açúcar) in Brazil, and 100% of Libertad in Argentina (owned by Casino) for US$ 1.826 billion.
Yet another important investment was the purchase of the Latin American assets of the British firm RSA by Grupo Sura, for US$ 617 million, a transaction that, because it was only completed in 2016, is not included in the figures for 2015.
While this growth is impressive, it is tempered by the fact that the 2012 nationalization of 51% of YPF showed up in Argentina’s external accounts only in 2014, in which year it represented a divestment of around US$ 6 billion.12 Without the impact of that transaction, FDI inflows in 2015 would have been very similar to those for 2014.
There has recently been a rapid increase in the interest shown by some international companies in the exploration and exploitation of hydrocarbons in Argentina.
In fact, vast shale deposits of oil and natural gas have been discovered.
If the initial tests prove positive, the company could invest up to US$ 13.8 billion.
Trafigura Beheer, the Dutch trading company for metals and hydrocarbons, has announced an investment of US$ 350 million to build a port and a metals warehouse.
When it comes to sectors not related to natural resources, Spain’s Telefónica invested US$ 941 million in 2015 to upgrade its 3G and 4G services in the country.
The Spanish telecommunications company has announced its intention to invest an additional US$ 3.7 billion between 2016 and 2018.
The French automaker Renault, for its part, will invest around US$ 100 million in its plant in the city of Córdoba.
The component that saw the greatest retreat was intracompany loans, primarily because of the increase in amortization payments.
In Peru, as in other countries with significant extractive industries, the relative importance of the mining sector in inward FDI has shrunk.
Nevertheless, there was important movement in other sectors, and significant M&A activity.
The most important transaction was the purchase of the power generator Fénix Power by a consortium headed by the Chilean company Colbún, for US$ 786 million.
This was in fact one of the biggest cross-border M&A transactions recorded in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2015 (see table I.3).
At the beginning of 2016, the Mexican firm Arca Continental, Coca Cola’s second-largest bottling company in Latin America, completed its purchase of 48% of Corporación Lindley, with a transaction of US$ 760 million.
Finally, there was great activity involving changes of ownership among foreign firms engaged in smaller-scale mining operations.
In telecommunications, following the acquisition of Nextel in 2013, the Chilean firm Entel has invested around US$ 500 million to upgrade its network.
According to the Sociedad Hoteles del Perú (SHP), hotel investment in that country should amount to US$ 1.211 billion between 2015 and 2018 (involving 102 projects that would add some 7,676 rooms in 3-, 4- and 5-star hotels).
In recent years, the country has received heavy investments in the energy sector, and this has modified its energy mix considerably.
At the present time, 95% of power generating capacity comes from renewable sources, and there are several solar and wind power projects in the development stage.
In 2015 the 65 MW Artilleros wind farm was inaugurated, representing an investment of US$ 107 million by a joint venture between the Uruguayan state-owned electric utility Administración Nacional de Usinas y Trasmisiones Eléctricas (UTE) and Brazil’s Petrobras.
In parallel with the progress in renewable energy, the search for hydrocarbons is also underway in Uruguay.
Exxon Mobil acquired a 35% share of the offshore “concession 14” which was awarded to the French company Total.
In 2016, work started on the drilling of a well at the Uruguayan marine platform.
This well, which is expected to require an investment of some US$ 200 million, will be the deepest in the world.
After three years of exploration activity, the British oil company BP decided to abandon Uruguay in light of the collapse in world oil prices and the high risks involved in exploration.
A highlight for the manufacturing sector was the decision by United States-based Velcro Companies, the world’s largest fastener systems producer, to build a new plant in Uruguay.
This was Velcro’s biggest investment in recent years, and one of the largest private investments in Uruguay in 2015.
Another important development was the return of the Italian firm Parmalat, after its controlling company, France’s Lactalis, acquired the Mexican company Esmeralda, which has a plant in Mexico, another in Argentina, and two in Uruguay.
The complicated political and economic situation in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has had an adverse impact on inward FDI.
Figures for the fourth quarter are not yet available, but official data show that during the first three quarters of 2015 the country received US$ 1.383 billion, 153% more than in the first three quarters of 2014.
Within this framework, the Chinese firm Zhengzhou Yutong Bus Co. will invest US$ 417 million to build a bus assembly plant in Yaracuy, with the capacity to produce some 3,600 buses a year.
Other Chinese firms have shown interest in investing in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, including Sinotruck (in a plant that will produce heavy trucks) and Sany Group (with a construction machinery factory).
On the other hand, some foreign firms operating in the manufacturing sector are beginning to abandon the country.
Companies from other countries are still active in the petroleum sector, but international firms have written off the bulk of their manufacturing investments.
In fact, Ford Motor has segreagated its operations from its Venezuelan subsidiary.
With this move, it was seeking to prevent its accumulated debt (some US$ 800 million) from affecting the company’s financial balance, and this could well mean the definitive closure of operations in the country (Automotive News, 2015).
Ecuador recorded a historic high in inward FDI in 2015, with inflows rising by 37% to US$ 1.06 billion.
The oil sector remains the main destination for FDI, although its share of the total dropped to 32% in 2015, ahead of the manufacturing industry at 24%.
For its part, the World Bank’s arbitration tribunal, the International Center for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID), ordered Ecuador to pay slightly more than US$ 1 billion to Occidental Petroleum of the United States in compensation for the cancellation in 2006 of a contract to produce oil in the Amazon zone.
If this payment is made, it will mean a divestment in that amount.
The United States remained the leading source of FDI inflows to Ecuador in 2015, accounting for 18% of the total, followed closely by Peru and China with 16% and 9%, respectively.
Among the most important cross-border M&A transactions concluded in 2015 was the purchase of 64% of Unión Cementera Nacional (UCEM) by the Peruvian company Cementos Yura, part of the Grupo Gloria, for US$ 230 million.
The Colombian infrastructure management and development company Grupo Odinsa took control of the concessionaire for the Mariscal Sucre Airport in Quito (Corporación Quiport), through the purchase of the 46% holding of the Canadian concern Aecon Group, for US$ 232 million.
This purchase follows upon the acquisition of the sausage maker Juris by Sigma Alimentos in November 2014.
The hydrocarbons sector is still the most important for foreign capital, with intensive activity in natural gas exploration and exploitation.
Of note here are the announcement by the French oil company Total that it will invest some US$ 800 million between 2016 and 2018, and the coming start-up of joint production by Gazprom of the Russian Federation and Tecpetrol of Argentina at the Incahuesi field in July 2016.
In the first stage, the extraction of gas from the Incahuesi deposit is expected to reach 6.7 million m³ a day.
As well, the Spanish firm Repsol has announced that it will invest US$ 1.5 billion following the increase in production at the Margarita field.
British Gas Group (BG Group) has announced the investment of US$ 300 million by 2019 for geological exploration in various zones of the country, while Gazprom and Petrobras have also announced huge investments of more than US$ 2 billion for exploration in the coming years.
In the telecommunications sector, the Swedish company Millicom announced investments of US$ 130 million in its local operator, Tigo, primarily to expand the fibre-optic network and to service 100,000 new households.
Chinese companies have also shown interest in the country, and are estimated to have invested around US$ 3 billion17 in recent years.
A number of companies have undertaken exploration work in the country’s hydrocarbons sector.
They include the Franco-Russian Riviera SA, which announced its intention to invest an initial US$ 25 million to get two wells operating, and a further US$ 100 million in the near future.
In the telecommunications sector, the Swedish firm Millicom, through its trademark Tigo, has purchased several pay-TV operators.
These transactions have allowed it to expand its presence and the services it offers in the country.
In 2015 Intercement, and the Brazilian owner of Cimentos de Portugal (CIMPOR) sold 16% of Yguazú Cementos SA to the local concern Concret-mix, for US$ 35 million, as part of a corporate reorganization and sale of nonstrategic assets.
Even so, the firm retains a majority shareholding interest (51%) in Yguazú.
In the hotel sector, the United States chain Hilton has announced the construction of two new hotels in Paraguay, one in Asunción (US$ 30 million) and the other in Ciudad del Este (US$ 50 million).
Finally, Germany’s Grob Aerospace intends to establish a small aircraft assembly plant in Paraguay. 3.
Mexico: the region’s strongest investment growth FDI inflows to Mexico rose 18% in 2015, to US$ 30.285 billion, the second highest level for the last seven years after the US$ 45.855 in 2013.18 For the second year running, profit reinvestment declined, dropping to 30% of total FDI.
On the other hand, capital contributions and intracompany loans were up substantially.
Mexico accounted for a large portion of the cross-border mergers and acquisitions recorded in Latin America and the Caribbean (see table I.3).
In 2015, the United States again became the principal investor country, and was responsible for 52% of the total, up from 30% in 2014.
Next in the ranking, but well behind, came Spain (9%) and Japan (5%).
Canada retreated as a source of FDI, dropping from 12% of the total in 2014 to 4% in 2015, as a result of the stagnation in mining investment.
Brazil was the largest investor in Mexico from the Latin American and Caribbean region in 2015, with US$ 993 million.
The manufacturing sector was the leading destination of FDI inflows to Mexico, accounting for 50% of the total.
The largest segment within this is the automotive industry, responsible for 43% of manufacturing FDI.
In recent years, the world’s leading vehicle brands, especially those from the United States, Japan and the European Union, have announced many new investments.
These announcements have been materializing gradually over the years, and have sparked heavy inflows of FDI.
In 2015 this trend persisted, and the coming years will likely witness significant new FDI inflows in the automotive industry.
In 2015, the Korean automaker Hyundai announced US$ 800 million in investments to install two new plants.
Similarly, Japan’s Toyota announced an investment of US$ 1 billion to build a new plant in Guanajuato, where it will undertake assembly of the Toyota Corolla model.
Alternatively, comparing the preliminary figures for both 2014 and 2015 yields a jump of 26% in FDI inflows in 2105. 56 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I Other manufacturing industries showing notable activity have included the food and glass businesses.
The Danish company Lego announced its intention to expand production capacity in Mexico, for which it will invest some US$ 800 million.
In services, the telecommunications sector was a leader during 2015, thanks in particular to the ambitious acquisitions strategy of United States-based AT&T.
Until the recent reforms in the sector, the Mexican telecommunications market had maintained heavy restrictions on the entry of new international players, and on the convergence between different technological platforms (fixed telephony, mobile telephony, broadband and pay television).
This context has given rise to one of the leading players in the region’s telecommunications market: Telemex/América Móvil.
Recent regulatory changes have helped to overcome domestic market rigidities by encouraging competition and the offer of better and more modern services to users.
In 2014, AT&T sold its interest (around 8%) in América Móvil for US$ 5.566 billion, allowing it to finalize the purchase of the satellite TV provider DirecTV, a move that entailed a divestment of US$ 4.03 billion in Mexico.
These transactions reflect an expansion strategy on the part of AT&T, designed to meet heavy competition in the United States market.
This approach has not been restricted to the United States market, however, and the company has also sought opportunities abroad.
Thus, AT&T began to implement an ambitious strategy of acquisitions to reinforce its position in the Mexican market, not as a minority shareholder of the dominant provider but rather as the entity controlling fiercely independent operators.
In 2015, according to data from Bloomberg, AT&T consummated the purchase of Iusacell and Nextel for US$ 2.5 billion and US$ 1.875 billion respectively, and it also announced investments totalling US$ 3 billion to upgrade the services of both companies.
Finally, as with telecommunications, the energy reform launched by the Government of Mexico is opening new opportunities for private sector participation.
While this is not yet apparent in the official FDI figures, there have been many announcements recently in which international firms have declared their intention to invest in Mexico.
This is the case with the Spanish company Abengoa which, before its financial problems surfaced, had announced a number of projects, both traditional and in nonconventional renewable energies, totalling several billion dollars.
The Italian firm ENEL has also shown interest in investing in Mexico’s flourishing energy industry, and it announced construction of two wind farms of 100 MW and 129 MW, with investments of US$ 220 million and US$ 250 million, respectively.
Finally, the Spanish company Iberdrola announced construction of a 53 MW power plant, for which it will invest some US$ 84 million jointly with the chemicals firm Dynasol.
Outward direct investment by Mexican firms rose by 62%, to US$ 12.126 billion.
Mexico remains one of the principal investor countries of Latin America, and some of its firms are indeed world leaders in their industries.
According to data from Bloomberg, one of the largest transactions of 2015 was the acquisition of properties in the United States by a group of private Mexican investors, in the amount of US$ 650 million.
Thanks to its wide presence in Latin America and, more recently, in Europe, in a sector that is highly competitive and demands constant technological upgrading, América Móvil is perhaps the biggest direct investor outside Mexico.
In the food sector, a number of Mexican firms with an international presence continued to expand their operations.
Central America: a shift in the energy mix FDI flows in Central America were up by 6% in 2015, at US$ 11.808 billion.
With 43% of the total, Panama is still the most important destination of FDI in the subregion, followed by Costa Rica (26%), Honduras (10%) and Guatemala (10%) (see map I.2).
In the last year, renewable energies and the financial sector have stood out as the principal targets of inward FDI in the subregion.
In the end, the Citibank assets were sold in separate batches: Canada’s Scotiabank purchased the operations in Costa Rica and Panama, the Honduran group Ficohsa bought the assets in Honduras and Nicaragua, the Nicaraguan group América took over the operations in Guatemala, and the Honduran group Atlántida acquired the assets in El Salvador.
The fact that the assets of Citibank and AIG were sold primarily to Central American entities will help to further business integration in the subregion.
This figure constitutes a record high, positioning the country as the leading recipient in Central America, and the seventh in Latin America and the Caribbean.
During 2016, the work of widening of the Panama Canal will be completed and a number of firms involved in Canal-related activities have made major investments to expand their capacities.
Energy projects have been one of the most dynamic areas for foreign investment in Panama, as in other Central American countries.
During 2015, the same company pursued construction of a wind farm that will generate 215 MW, with an estimated investment of US$ 430 million.
The Canadian company SkyPower announced construction of a 500 MW solar energy generating plant, at a cost of US$ 1 billion, to which maybe added another US$ 50 million for installation of a research centre on solar energy and other environmental issues.
The country has benefited from a real estate development boom, focused essentially on the tourism industry and retirement communities, in which a few foreign investors have been key players.
In recent years, thanks to an aggressive strategy for attracting investments, Costa Rica has been able to influence the decisions of firms seeking locations.
In 2015, Germany’s Bosch announced an investment of US$ 30 million to establish a business services centre.
Like other countries of the subregion, Costa Rica has also received investment in renewable energies.
SunEdison of the United States invested US$ 350 million to acquire 100% of Globeleq Mesoamerica Energy (GME) from a consortium led by the British firm Actis, with renewable energy assets throughout the subregion.19 Lastly, the United States chain Wal-Mart announced a US$ 100 million investment to upgrade and expand its operations in the country.
Over the last two years, the energy sector was the main destination for FDI, accounting for 31% of total inflows, followed by manufacturing, with 16%.
The main source of these capital flows was the United States (29%), followed by Colombia.
An important development in the electricity sector was the purchase of Energuate, the country’s biggest power distributor, by the Israeli firm I.C.
Since this acquisition, Actis and Mesoamérica have expanded capacity from 24 MW in operation to 314 MW in operation and under construction. 20 Energuate embraces two power distribution companies that together supply 1.6 million customers, or around 60% of connected users in Guatemala.
This acquisition marks the third change in ownership of the power distributors, after the partial privatization of the Instituto Nacional de Electrificación (INDE) in 1999.
Lastly, two firms announced new investments: Germany’s Bayer, to improve and expand its local operations in the area of over-the-counter medicines and agricultural inputs (US$ 28 million), and Peru’s Ransa, for construction of a specialized logistics centre for receiving and fitting out imported passenger and commercial vehicles (US$ 60 million).
The biggest increases were in the financial sector, real estate and business services.
An expansion plan has been drawn up for renewable energy generation and distribution, aimed at increasing these energies’ share of the country’s power generation matrix to 80%.
In the framework of this plan, the Government of Honduras announced a special rate for the first 300 MW of solar energy generated before 31July 2015.
This programme proved very successful during 2015: 500 MW in new capacity was created (GTM, 2015), while it is expected that about 700 MW on new capacity will come on stream by 2017.
Among the many new projects is one headed by SunEdison of the United States, which had already acquired the Central American assets of Globeleq Mesoamerica Energy (GME) and had built an 82 MW generating plant for which it invested US$ 145 million.
In 2015, Honduras became the second most important market for solar energy in Latin America, behind Chile but ahead of Mexico.
In this way, and with the new investments in wind energy, the energy mix in Honduras has undergone some significant changes.
Since 2014, Nicaragua’s maquiladora (assembly plant) industry has felt the effects of the change in United States policy, which entailed removal of the tariff preference level (TPL) provisions.
It is estimated that some 3,000 jobs have been lost and textile exports have fallen by 5% as a result of this change.
To counter the effects of that measure, the Government of Nicaragua is in discussions with Canada and the Republic of Korea to move forward with trade negotiations.
If those efforts are successful, the Nicaraguan authorities estimate that the next few years could bring some US$ 160 million in new investment.23 Moreover, in March 2015 Japan’s Yazaki Group, a manufacturer of wire harnesses and auto parts, announced a substantial investment in expanding its operations, with the creation of 3,300 jobs.
The telecommunications sector saw the greatest activity in 2015, thanks in particular to the investments made by Movistar and América Móvil.
And in manufacturing, Mexico’s Sukarne inaugurated a new meat processing plant in which it invested US$ 115 million.
In 2014, work began on the biggest project in the country’s history, the Nicaragua Canal.
As of the date of publication of this paper, however, there were still many unknowns as to its continued viability (International Business Times, 2015).
Most of the new investments received by El Salvador are the result of small-scale projects.
The biggest acquisition was the US$ 100 million purchase of Grupo CYBSA, a packaging manufacturer, by the Irish company Smurfit Kappa, in order to expand its presence in Central America.
In recent years, the country’s mineral resources have attracted interest from international investors in metal mining; however, strong opposition was mounted amid environmental concerns, chiefly in relation to water resources, which led the government to halt mining operations in the country.
Some of the firms involved, such as Canada’s Pacific Rim Corporation, a subsidiary of OceanaGold, brought legal actions against El Salvador, whose outcomes were still unknown at the time of publication. 5.
The Caribbean: tourism maintains its share in FDI FDI in the Caribbean was down by 17%, to US$ 5.975 billion (see table I.7).24 In 2015, the subregion’s main recipient of FDI was the Dominican Republic, with 39% of the total.
Somewhat behind came Trinidad and Tobago (20%, but counting only the first three quarters) and Jamaica (13%).
The countries of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) received together 9% of FDI inflows to the subregion (see map I.3).
When it comes to FDI, the Caribbean economies can generally be divided into two groups: those dependent on tourism and those specialized in the exploitation of natural resources.
Experience suggests that very few countries are able to attract FDI simultaneously into tourism and natural resources, and sector diversification is rare.
However, strong activity in the telecommunications sector has modified this pattern in the recent past.
Lucia, and Trinidad and Tobago).25 In March of 2015, this acquisition was completed, after payment of some US$ 3.025 billion.
To fulfil the conditions imposed by the regulatory authorities, CWC undertook to sell 49% of Telecommunications Services of Trinidad and Tobago, a move that had not yet been finalized as of the date of publication of this paper.
A few months later, Liberty Global of the United States and the United Kingdom announced its intention to acquire CWC for some US$ 5.3 billion.26 These transactions are sure to have an impact on FDI statistics for the subregion, but it will probably be minor, as the operations involve changes of ownership among foreign companies.
However that may be, as a result of these operations the Caribbean will be left with only two significant telecommunications operators, Liberty Global and Digicel, a situation that could affect the level of competition in some markets of the subregion. 24 In the case of Trinidad and Tobago, fourth-quarter data are lacking for 2015.
Investment in 2015 was centred in tourism-related activities and in real estate development, which together accounted for 49% of the total.
For example, the United States-based cruise operator Carnival Corporation inaugurated a new terminal at Puerto Plata, for which it invested US$ 85 million.
The Amber Cove terminal will be the port of departure for the first vessel of the Fathom brand, which Carnival Corporation will launch in 2015.
The shipping company is planning to have 23 vessels of its different brands arrive at the new cruise terminal during the first year, carrying some 350,000 tourists.
The German group Lopesan has acquired around 20 ha in the tourism centre of Bávaro-Higüey (La Altagracia), for US$ 30 million, where it will build a hotel with more than 1,000 rooms.
The acquired site is located in the most desirable zone of Playa Bávaro, on the beachfront and next to the IFA Villas Bávaro hotel complex, which the German company already owns.
Other major sectors of activity including telecommunications (15%) and free zones (11%), while the importance of mining has evaporated: it dropped from 47% to 0.3% of FDI inflows between 2011 and 2015.
In telecommunications, the Mexican operator América Móvil announced its intention to invest around US$ 245 million in 2015, and a total of US$ 800 million over the next three years.
In the power sector, AES Corp. of the United States, which generates 40% of the country’s electricity, has a portfolio of projects for some US$ 125 million.
These include expansion of the Andrés terminal for the export of liquefied natural gas, and the construction of a gas pipeline that will allow the generation of 1,000 MW of energy: both projects are supposed to be ready in the second half of 2016.
Lastly, as proof of the problems facing international mining companies, the Swiss concern Glencore sold its participation in a nickel mine in the Dominican Republic to Americano Nickel Ltd. (ANL).
In fact, due to the low price of nickel and the high cost of energy, Glencore has cut back and at times suspended production.
In Trinidad and Tobago, information for the fourth quarter is not yet available.
In the first three quarters of 2015, the country received US$ 1.214 billion, up by 55% over the same period of the previous year.
Even so, inflows may not record any significant increase for the full year, given the collapse of oil prices: the hydrocarbons sector, which has contracted sharply around the world, accounts for close to 90% of FDI inflows (89% in 2015).
In fact, Royal Dutch Shell has announced that it will keep the BG operation running.
In a move that will help to compensate for the decline in the oil sector, in 2015 the Japanese group Mitsubishi launched construction of a methanol plant, a project that it had announced two years earlier.
The company has invested some US$ 990 million in that plant, which is to come on stream in early 2019 (Mitsubishi Corp., 2015).
In telecommunications, Jamaica-based Digicel is making major investments in its network infrastructure in order to upgrade its services in the country.
At the beginning of 2016, Digicel announced that it would invest some US$ 300 million in deploying “fiber to the home” (FTTH) infrastructure, in preparation for the launch of new pay TV and fixed broadband services.
Lastly, the Salvadoran retail group Unicorner has begun construction of a distribution centre that will involve an investment of around US$ 60 million.
In the first three quarters of 2015, the United States was the source of 60% of FDI inflows to Trinidad and Tobago.
Next, but well behind, came Canada, with 8% of the total. 27 This huge operation has coincided with the collapse of oil prices, sparked by the nonconventional oil boom in the United States and the decision of Saudi Arabia not to cut back production.
In that year, the tourism sector proved particularly attractive, accounting for the bulk of investment projects announced by foreign firms.
Among the most important developments was the announcement by the Mexican chain Karisma Hotels & Resorts that it would invest US$ 900 million to build nine hotels with a total of 4,000 rooms over the next 10 years.
The four-lane road, popularly known as the “Beijing Highway”, will cost US$ 600 million (Financial Juneteenth, 2016).
The same Chinese company has participated in another major project on the Caribbean island, the development of a transshipment port in Portland Bight, on Goats Island, where it will invest some US$ 1.5 billion.
This initiative, however, has aroused great resistance in the community, given the status of Goats Island as a protected zone, and this poses much uncertainty as to its future.
On another front, the French company CMA CGM, one of the world’s leading container carriers, signed a 30-year agreement with the Government of Jamaica to manage the container terminal at the Port of Kingston, for which it is committed to investing around US$ 600 million (Jamaica Observer, 2015a).
Lastly, a new free zone is to be constructed in Spanish Town, under the aegis of the Jamaican Logistics Hub Initiative, which seeks to create a logistics centre in Jamaica and take advantage of the island’s communications links by manufacturing products destined for regional markets.
This project will involve US$ 350 million in investments covering productive activities related to oil derivatives, vehicle assembly, food and tobacco, and pharmaceuticals (IIS, 2015).
The 2015 edition of this document examined the process of concentration in the beer market in Latin America and around the world (ECLAC, 2015a).
However, during the past year the Dutch firm Heineken, the world’s second-biggest brewer, completed acquisition of two companies that it held jointly with the British firm Diageo PLC, for US$ 781 million.
Thus, Heineken acquired 57.9% of the local firm Desnoes & Geddes (D&G), thereby achieving 73.3% ownership.
This transaction is part of the Dutch bottling company’s strategy for coping with a global market dominated by the major brands, and with declining consumption in some key markets including the United States.
This in fact turned into one of the largest cross-border M&A operations in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2015 (see table I.3).
First, with the partial decriminalization of marijuana, the Jamaican authorities are implementing a series of rules and regulations intended to regulate a flourishing pharmaceuticals industry based on cannabis.
In this context, the Canadian firm Timeless Herbal Care (THC) announced an investment of US$ 100 million to produce marijuana for medical purposes (Jamaica Observer, 2015b).
In line with other regional initiatives, WRB Enterprises of the United States announced an investment of US$ 60 million in a 20 MW photovoltaic plant with 98,000 panels that will be the biggest solar generator in the English-speaking Caribbean.
FDI inflows to the Bahamas declined by 76%, to US$ 385 million.29 As in other Caribbean countries, tourism is the most important industry for FDI entering the Bahamas.
Of particular interest here is the Baha Mar project, which was to involve investments of US$ 3.5 billion.
In addition to this megaproject, there are a number of initiatives in the tourism sector that entail significant investments.
At the end of 2015, the Italian firm Mediterranean Shipping Company (MCS), the second largest cruise operator in the world, undertook to build a cruise ship port, with an investment of US$ 100 million, at Sandy Cay (Tribune 242, 2015).
Some weeks later, the Government of the Bahamas awarded MCS a 100-year concession to transform a desert island into a high-end beach destination, for which it will invest around US$ 200 million (Daily Mail, 2015).
Despite all this activity, it must be noted that the soaring crime rate in the country could pose a potential risk when it comes to attracting new investments (Tribune 242, 2016).
The case of Baha Mar The Bahamas receives around 5 million visitors every year, including cruise ship passengers, making the island one of the prime tourism destinations of the Caribbean.
This has imprinted a marked pattern of specialization on the economy, in which the bulk of jobs depends directly or indirectly on the tourism industry.
At the same time, new tourism undertakings generate huge inflows of FDI.
At the present time, the biggest project in the Caribbean area is unfolding in the Bahamas: the Baha Mar resort, near Nassau, with 3,000 rooms and an estimated investment of US$ 3.5 billion.
The project was launched in 2010, and a year later the cornerstone was laid.
This undertaking would become the second mega-resort in the Bahamas, after Atlantis Resort, located a few kilometres away.
The Baha Mar is intended to breathe new life into tourism in the Bahamas and to broaden the country’s tourism options.
The Atlantis is geared to family tourism, while Baha Mar targets an adult clientele, with a large casino as its prime attraction.
In contrast to other projects, moreover, this undertaking is intended to draw visitors from Asia.
The project was conceived by local entrepreneurs, although it had the backing of the Government of China.
The company responsible for construction is China Construction of America (CCA), which used thousands of Chinese workers.
Most of the financing for the project was provided by the Export Import Bank of China, through a loan of US$ 2.45 billion.
From the balance of payments perspective, this project would not represent FDI since, although it has external financing and was built by a foreign company, the owner is a local firm.
This shows that some international financial flows do not represent FDI, a topic that is discussed in further detail in Chapter III.
Similarly, a foreign investor can finance itself locally and “create” FDI without any cross-border movement of funds.
During 2015, when the Baha Mar complex was practically completed, the project began to encounter severe problems.
In June, the firm responsible for the undertaking filed for protection under the Chapter 11 of the United States bankruptcy law in the District of Delaware.
The judge hearing the case dismissed the filing and the project was placed in the hands of a liquidator in Nassau.
The suspension of activities had an immediate impact on the country’s economy, with a significant jump in unemployment and a decline in economic growth.
The estimated value of the project was in fact equivalent to 40% of GDP.
Apparently, the project’s failure was sparked by disputes between CCA, the Export Import Bank of China, the local investors and the government.
However, it must be noted that the economic feasibility of the project was questionable, to say the least.
A few years previously, the Atlantis resort had been so burdened with debt that it was declared bankrupt, and this obliged the South African company Kerzner International Holdings to transfer ownership to the Canadian investment administrator Brookfield Asset Management.
Yet there are no potential investors on the horizon capable of assuming the challenges posed by the project.
In recent months, different options have appeared, prime among which are Kerzner International Holdings, referred to above, and China’s Fosun Group, which has operations in the Bahamas.
This is a very interesting project from the viewpoint of FDI statistics.
As noted at the outset, the project does not currently represent an inflow of FDI to the Bahamas.
However, if it were taken over by a foreign firm, it would become an FDI project.
If this alternative should come to pass, it could result in an extremely large inflow, even if the money were used to pay off the loans from the Export Import Bank of China.
In the end, the situation shows once again that large, short-term movements of FDI do not necessarily translate into new investments in productive capital.
In 2015, FDI flows into Suriname rose by 69%, to US$ 276 million.30 This outcome reflected the fact that the United States company Alcoa Inc. had disinvested heavily in 2014, under the impact of shrinking bauxite reserves and rising energy costs.
The process continued in 2015, when Alcoa sought to transfer its bauxite refining operations to a state-owned enterprise.
At the present time, the country’s main economic source of attraction is shifting to gold mining.
The United States mining concern Newmont is committed to investing US$ 1 billion to develop the Merian gold deposit, which is to come on stream at the end of 2016.
In the same vein, Australia’s Mariana Resources was promoting the Nassau Gold Project, located some 20 km from Merian, but it abandoned the undertaking at the beginning of 2016.
As noted earlier, the largest transactions in the Caribbean subregion took place in Barbados.
In addition, the Canadian electric company Emera Inc. acquired 19.3% of Emera (Caribbean) for around US$ 55 million, giving it 100% ownership.
As is the case in other Caribbean countries, Barbados is experiencing an investment boom in the tourism sector.
Investment of close to US$ 1 billion is expected in the next few years, adding some 2,300 rooms to the country’s hotel offerings.
The Jamaican company Sandals recently opened a new luxury resort, Sandals Barbados, in which it has invested around US$ 300 million.
In addition, Wyndham Hotels and Resorts announced construction of a 5-star hotel with 450 rooms, to open in 2018.
The mining sector remained the most important destination for these capital flows, accounting for around 30% of the total (compared to 28% in 2014).
In October 2015, the Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela notified the Canadian company Guyana Goldfields of possible legal action against its operations, located in a territory that has been the subject of a century-long dispute with neighbouring Guyana.
Guyana Goldfields has been working the Aurora mine since 1996 and, after investing US$ 277 million, it finally began to extract gold in 2015.
In that year gold production began at the Karouni project headed by Australia’s Troy Resources, following an investment of around US$ 100 million.
At the present time, Guyana produces no oil, but new discoveries could change this picture.
In 2015, an international consortium led by Exxon Mobil discovered an oil deposit of 700 million barrels on the Esequibo coast, valued at some US$ 40 billion.
This discovery has exacerbated the dispute with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, and has heightened the uncertainty prevailing in the country (PI you, 2016).
Haiti received US$ 104 million in FDI in 2015, 5% more than in the previous year.
FDI is targeted at two priority sectors: the maquiladora industry and tourism.
The first is a traditional destination, while the second has become important more recently.
In the maquiladora industry, the Korean clothes maker Hansae announced the opening of a new, export-oriented factory in the Sonapi industrial park, where it is eligible for the tariff benefits that Haiti enjoys in the United States.
As one of the world’s largest clothing manufacturers, Hansae employs some 60,000 workers in 11 countries, and its customers include Nike, Gap, H&M, Uniqlo, and Abercrombie & Fitch.
As well, several Chinese companies have shown interest in transferring a portion of their basic manufacturing activities to Haiti.
In the tourism sector, a number of important investments are coming to fruition.
In 2015, the first Marriott hotel was opened in Port-au-Prince, with 175 rooms, as the result of a joint initiative with the Clinton Foundation, the Jamaican company Digicel, and the Marriott chain, with an investment of US$ 45 million.
The government is actively encouraging investment in the tourism sector, especially in large-scale projects.
Prime examples are the undertakings at Ile-à-Vache and Côtes-de-Fer, although both have drawn criticism from neighbouring residents.
The SpanishGuatemalan group Santander Sugar has been particularly active recently, committing US$ 150 million to produce sugar for export.
At the same time it will use molasses to produce up to 16 MW of electricity annually, representing 20% of the country’s power generation.
The outsourcing of business processes is another activity that has expanded rapidly among domestic firms, although the government is hoping for a major foreign investment in this sector.
The United States actor Leonardo DiCaprio is sponsoring the construction of an ecological resort in Blackadore Caye, in which there are plans to invest some US$ 283 million.
Also of interest are the projects at Itz’ana (US$ 43 million) and Mahogany Bay (US$ 75 million).
Lastly, the Norwegian shipping company Norwegian Cruise Line has 67Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter I purchased 30 hectares of land in the south of the country to develop a US$ 50 million project that will open its doors in late 2016.
This methodological change has meant some amendments to the overall figures for previous years.
In 2015, the member countries of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) received a total of US$ 545 million, representing a slight reduction (of 1%) from the previous year.
As with the great majority of Caribbean countries, tourism is the most important activity for foreign investors.
Major projects include one headed by the Chinese company Yida Investment Group for construction of an enormous real estate complex with a number of luxury hotels, more than 1,000 residential units, golf courses and other facilities, for which around US$ 2 billion will be invested.
However, although it was announced in 2014, construction work had not yet started as of the date of publication of this document.
In a similar situation is an undertaking headed by Canadians of the Sunwing Travel Group to build a 500 room hotel in Deep Bay, with an investment of around US$ 400 million.
Slightly more advanced is the Pearns Point project, involving an investment of US$ 300 million, which finally saw shovels in the ground in 2015.
Lastly, a project with an estimated cost of US$ 200 million, headed by the United States actor Robert DeNiro on the island of Barbuda, is to begin construction in 2016, thanks to legal changes introduced by the government that should forestall a pending legal challenge (The Daily Observer, 2015).
Many projects in Antigua and Barbuda are financed under the “citizenship by investment” model that gained prominence some years ago.
However, it is also clear that several of these projects are drawing criticism from various segments of society, either because of their environmental impact or because of the costly tax incentives granted them by the government.
For this Caribbean island, the lack of an international airport that would connect it with the principal markets of North America and Europe still constitutes a great drawback.
For that reason, the authorities sponsored an international competition for the construction of a new airport, with a budget of around US$ 300 million.
It is hoped that this governmentsponsored investment will boost tourism arrivals and attract the interest of international investors.
Similar thinking underlies the construction of the Pink Sands Club, a luxury resort headed by English investors at an estimated cost of US$ 120 million.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines is the only member state of the OECS that does not have a “citizenship by investment” programme.
Saint Lucia received US$ 95 million in FDI in 2015, representing an increase of 2% over the previous year.
Like other Caribbean countries, Saint Lucia depends heavily on the tourism trade.
Work has also been progressing without any major setbacks on construction of the Harbour Club Hotel, led by Swiss investors.
In 2015, the government issued a surprise announcement offering citizenship by investment, a step that the island’s authorities had previously rejected.
However, Saint Lucia’s policy differs from that of other countries in the subregion, as it requires potential investors to demonstrate a certain degree of wealth before they are granted citizenship.
Although it recorded a drop in FDI in 2015, Saint Kitts and Nevis continues to receive a particularly high volume in relation to the size of its economy.
This outcome reflects 68 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I the success of the citizenship by investment programme.
Among the projects under development is one headed by the Hilton chain of the United States, which is building an Embassy Suites-brand hotel with 227 rooms at a cost of around US$ 140 million.
Kitts undertaking, with an estimated cost of US$ 150 million, are also moving forward.
In the tourism sector, the Egyptian entrepreneur Naguib Sawaris is building at least two new hotels.33 In 2015 work started on the renovation of the Silver Sands and the refurbishing of the old Hotel Riviera, for which some US$ 120 million will be invested.
At the beginning of 2016 the Jamaican chain Sandals announced a US$ 10 million investment in its LaSource Resort & Spa facilities.
In August of that year, tropical storm Erika wrecked havoc on the island, causing damage measured at around 90% of GDP (World Bank, 2015).
There must also be levels of transparency sufficient to reduce the asymmetries of information between investors in the different countries where these transactions take place.34 Both aspects presuppose the existence of regulatory frameworks that will spell out the responsibilities of the parties involved in M&A transactions.
Transactions associated with foreign direct investment, and cross-border mergers and acquisitions in particular, can influence corporate governance practices in the host countries.
Some authors suggest that FDI operations involving cross-border M&A have positive spillover effects for the sector in which the target firm operates, in terms of corporate governance, market valuation and productivity of rival firms (Albuquerque et al., 2013).
The evidence shows that these spillover effects are more pronounced when the acquiring firm is from a country with stronger shareholder protection.
At the same time, mergers and acquisitions can benefit from better corporate governance regimes.
The volume of M&A activity is relatively greater in those countries where there is stronger shareholder protection and better accounting standards (Rossi and Volpin, 2004).
In most countries, some standards and rules are mandatory and others are discretionary.
This means that firms, rather than account fully for their actions, need only report to the market on their governance practices (the principle of “comply or explain” enshrined in the corporate governance principles of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and in most national legislation).
Providing incomplete information will often lead to higher operating costs for firms.
At the present time, the normative frameworks for corporate governance are confined to securities market aspects, and this limits their observance to those firms that are publicly traded or listed on stock exchanges.
Moreover, every country has its peculiarities, and while most countries make it mandatory to have a board of directors, there are some countries that do not.
The Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, together with the Latin American Development Bank (CAE) and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), has designed a benchmark indicator that measures the level of corporate governance in corporate debt issuance.
It also includes two crosscutting categories that permeate action at all levels by the Board of Directors: transparency and equitable treatment of shareholders,38 and it covers as well some other general aspects of business affairs.
To obtain the value of corporate governance, each category is assigned a weighted value as a function of its importance.39 The sum of the values of the different categories is 10, the maximum score that can be earned. 35 For Salas (2002), efficiency means net wealth creation.
Shortcomings in terms of transparency and disclosure can contribute to unethical behaviour and loss of market integrity, at high cost to the firm and its shareholders, and to the economy as a whole.
As to the role of the institutions responsible for overseeing the performance of corporate governance (superintendencies and stock markets), there is a general effort on the part of regulatory entities in the seven countries to improve their standards of corporate governance.40 The countries that have the lowest indices are Brazil and Ecuador.
Furthermore, one third of the board of directors may be executives of the company, which may generate a potential conflict of interests.
The corporate governance rules in Ecuador are confined to banks and financial (essentially insurance) institutions.
In the absence of a strong code for nonfinancial companies, the regulatory authorities recommend that companies follow the principles of the Andean Code of Corporate Governance, although it is not compulsory, and there is moreover no mechanism for the authorities to monitor compliance.
Of all the countries considered, Peru showed the highest level of corporate governance.
In addition, use is made of information from the codes of good corporate governance practices issued by the supervisory entities, the general principle of which is “comply or explain”.
In recent years there have been some important changes in the legal frameworks: however, these have not been sufficient to broaden the coverage to the entire business spectrum.
Lastly, given the limited coverage of corporate governance rules, these should be coordinated with regulations, such as those governing competition, that are broader and where the scope of action goes beyond governance, allowing their application to be extended to a greater number of companies.
The aim: to attack higher investment in a slow-growth context In nominal terms, foreign direct investment inflows into Latin America and the Caribbean show clear signs of stagnation.
In 2015, for the fourth year running, the region recorded no significant increase in FDI inflows.
Overall, therefore, ECLAC estimates that FDI flows into the region could drop by as The productive specialization of an important segment of Latin American economies, together with the collapse of commodity prices, has had a substantial impact on FDI inflows.
Moreover, this complex scenario has been accentuated by the slowdown of economic growth in various countries of the region.
Foreign direct investment can constitute a driving force for development, which will have positive effects on the host economies.
Of particular interest is the function of FDI as a complement to domestic savings and a source of new capital contributions and of benefits in terms of transfers of technology and management systems for productive modernization.
However, the positive fallout from FDI does not occur automatically and, in some cases, there are some significant gaps between the expectations generated and the outcomes obtained.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, FDI in natural resources, exports and modern services has made a key contribution to underpinning the pattern of international integration of the countries of the region.
However, it has had only a moderate and not very extensive impact in terms of technological content, innovation and research and development (R&D).
Overall, these factors make up a system that can enhance or diminish the benefits of foreign investment in the host countries.
Consequently, the adoption of strategies that combine FDI attraction with policies that promote economic modernization and productive diversification would not only foster the establishment of transnational firms in sectors with greater possibilities for developing and strengthening capacities, but would also facilitate the integration of those companies into local economies and would promote economic growth with social inclusion and environmental sustainability.
When policies to attract foreign direct investment are coordinated and integrated with development policies, a country can enhance the conditions that make it attractive to foreign investors, on one hand, and it can also take maximum advantage of the potential benefits of FDI.
In this case, the country will define strategies and FDI will help to achieve them.
In the context of international competition to attract investments, then, a country can modify and adapt its offerings according to its needs.
It can also monitor, through a series of indicators, the impact of FDI, the progress of policies and their performance vis-à-vis the principal competitors.
Lastly, the policies adopted will be geared not only to attracting FDI but also to generating conditions for absorbing its benefits.
To this end, it is essential to boost the competitiveness of local firms, so that they can integrate themselves into the production and marketing networks of foreign companies.
Jensen (1983), “Separation of ownership and control”, Journal of Law and Economics, vol.
Volpin (2004), “Cross-country determinants of mergers and acquisitions”, Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 74, No. 2.
The sixth edition is a revision of the fifth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual (BPM5), which was first published in 1993.
The changes were the outcome of intensive collaboration between the different multilateral and national institutions, involving different aspects of balance-of-payments statistics.
There follows a description of the main changes affecting statistics on foreign direct investment.
The main change concerns the way data are presented, which has shifted from a directional presentation to an asset/liability basis.
Under BPM5, FDI statistics were constructed on the directional principle, according to which direct investment was shown as “direct investment abroad” or “direct investment in the reporting economy”.
The directional principle is a net construction, to which operations with affiliate companies and reverse investments (where a directly investing company acquires a capital share in its immediate direct or indirect investor) are added or subtracted.
That is, once the direction of influence or control is established, the value of the operations by the direct investor in respect of the receiving firm is subtracted from investments this latter firm makes in its parent (the direct investor) (see diagram I.A1.1).
Analytically speaking, the sixth edition of the IMF Balance of Payments Manual notes that data presented according to the directional principle helps to understand the motivation behind direct investment.
Here, transfers by local affiliates of non-resident firms to their parent companies are presented as an asset from the point of view of the reporting economy (and transfers in the opposite direction as a liability) (see diagram I.A1.2).
These differences in presentation can have major impacts on foreign direct investment statistics.
For Brazil in 2015, presentation by assets and liabilities gives a value of US$ 10.584 billion more than the figure obtained using the directional approach, for both investment abroad and foreign direct investment in the reporting economy.
In 2014, the difference between the two approaches was US$ 24 billion.
IMF has recommended the change in methodology to better harmonize the various components of the balance of payments and to make them more comparable with other macroeconomic variables.
However, from the perspective of this publication, the changes proposed do not appear to progress in that direction.
In fact, for analysis of FDI by sector and by origin, the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) recommends a directional presentation for constructing statistics.
Disruptive market changes This chapter looks at key aspects of the processes that have transformed global metal markets and examines their relationship with foreign investment in Latin American and Caribbean economies.
Considering that several of the region’s countries are major producers of metallic minerals, the study focuses on those that are of greatest significance for international exports, notably precious metals (such as gold and silver), base metals (such as bauxite, zinc, copper, tin, nickel and lead) and ferrous metals (chiefly iron ore).
Section A analyses the changes that have occurred in markets and the geographical distribution of activities, with special emphasis on China and the capacity of Latin America and the Caribbean to maintain its leading position.
Section B considers the role and strategies of the principal economic agents in the sector, namely transnational corporations.
Section C addresses the radical shifts in the metal mining sector in the past 15 years, and their consequences for foreign direct investment (FDI) in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Section D reflects on the changes of recent years and their impact on FDI in the region and, lastly, section E considers the challenges associated with the sector’s potential to make a greater contribution to capacity-building and production diversification in the region. 1.
China: the engine of demand The metal mining sector presents certain characteristics that are key to understanding its dynamics and its close relationship with FDI.
One the one hand, it is highly concentrated, both in terms of international demand and production; on the other, the specificities of the investment and production process mean that the vast majority of leading firms are transnational.
After a period of stagnation, international prices for the main products enjoyed a strong growth cycle between 2003 and 2011, but since then have suffered a sharp decline.
Understanding these dynamics requires some consideration of the fluctuations that have occurred in international demand, and of changes in the characteristics and strategies of transnational corporations.
These aspects are fundamental not only for explaining the transformations in the sector at the international level, but also for comprehending the consequences for FDI in Latin America and its outlook for the coming years.
International demand has seen strong shifts in the past 15 years, with China’s rise to prominence a key factor.
China’s exceptional growth and it industrialization strategy caused its consumption of iron ore and base metals to outstrip the increase in its domestic production.
This gap, which began to open up in the 1990s, widened further during the 2000s.
In 2005, China’s consumption of iron ore was three times its national output, while base metal consumption was twice the level of domestic production.
This situation led to a surge in mineral imports, especially from Latin American countries, which were experiencing the reverse trend; extraction of base and ferrous metals at around seven times the level of consumption (Rogich and Matos 2008).
The high volume of imports from China altered the structure of the international market: in 2000 China imported 70 million metric tons of iron ore, equivalent to 14.4% of global imports by volume and 14.3% by value.
By 2014, these figures had risen to 932 million metric tons, equivalent to 68.4% of the volume and 64.6% of the value of total global imports.
Countries that 90 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter II historically had carried greater weight therefore lost market share: these included Germany, the Republic of Korea and above all Japan, which until 2001 was the world’s largest importer of iron ore.
A similar pattern was observed for copper concentrate (albeit to a lesser extent, given that China’s imports rose from 12.6% of the total in 2000 to 40.1% in 2014), and bauxite and aluminium.
China’s imports of copper concentrate began to increase in 1995, and by 2000 the country had already overtaken most of the world’s top importers, such as Germany, India, the Republic of Korea and Spain.
China became the largest importer in 2009, overtaking Japan, whose market share has been in constant decline (see figure II.1).
Traditionally, Germany and Japan were the main exporters of basic iron and steel manufactures, but in 2004 China began to consolidate its position and by 2014 had assumed leadership of this export market, accounting for 13.6% of exports by value (see figure II.2).
A similar situation was observed in aluminium and aluminium manufactures, with China’s share of total exports rising from 5.7% in 2004 to 13.4% in 2014, overtaking Germany which had led the market since 1995.
China’s aluminium exports mainly went to other Asian countries (49.2% of the total value on average for the period 2011-2015), 27 countries of the European Union (14.3%), and the United States (12.7%).
This pattern was mirrored by exports of iron and steel manufactures; 44.4% of the average value of exports between 2011 and 2015 went to other Asian countries, 15.7% to the United States and 13.7% to the European Union (27 countries).
Changes in demand, together with China’s new position in the world economy, created a cycle of extremely high prices, especially for iron, during the 2000s.
By 2011, the price of iron had soared to 14 times its level during the 1980s, while that of copper had risen five-fold.
Gold prices quadrupled and aluminium prices doubled over the same period (see figure II.3).
As will be discussed below, this marked trend shift is chiefly due to slower growth in China and weak demand from developed countries, together with increased global production capacity for minerals and mineral products. 2.
The region remains a major player The shifting global scenario during the 2000s coincided with changes in international production, as rising prices fuelled a steady increase in metallic mineral production from 2003 onwards (see figure II.4).
Global iron ore production tripled, while other minerals posted smaller but still significant increases in output: bauxite by more than The global geography of production has also shifted.
Chinese iron production leapt by 570% between 2000 and 2014, and accounted for half of worldwide output by the end of that period (see table II.1).
In absolute terms (metric tons), sizeable increases also occurred in Australia (which boosted its share of the world market), Brazil and India (whose relative share declined).
Data is not provided for years in which production did not reach the minimum level necessary to be included in the list of the world’s largest producers.
These two countries retained their status as the world’s leading exporters, but while Australia’s share of the global market climbed from 27.8% in 2000 to 52.9% in 2014, Brazil’s share contracted from 33.1% to 22.7% in the same period (see figure II.5).
Meanwhile India, which was the third-largest exporter during the 2000s (accounting for 15% of global exports in 2005), saw its exports decline owing to a government ban on mining operations in several states during 2011 and 2012, due to legal and environmental concerns.
The copper market is less concentrated, with the four largest producers taking a 53.1% market share in 2014 (see table II.2).
Chile, China, the Democratic Republic of the Congo (where production recovered after 2010) and Peru were the main drivers of increased production.
Mined copper output in Australia and Canada expanded more slowly, and decreased in the United States.
In 2014, the main international supplier of copper concentrates and refined copper was Chile, which accounted for 33.5% of global concentrate exports and 29.9% of refined copper exports.
Peru’s copper concentrate exports leapt after 2003, whereas Indonesia, historically one of the largest exporters, has lost much of its market share in recent years (see figure II.6).
The value of global exports amounted to US$ 50.0 billion in 2014, of which Australia, Canada, Chile and Peru together accounted for 63.6%.
The drop in copper concentrate exports from Indonesia is partly due to the Mineral and Coal Mining Law of 2009, which stipulated that minerals extracted in the country must be processed and refined domestically before export.
Accordingly, a regulation prohibiting the export of concentrates was adopted in 2012; this was subsequently postponed and eventually partly implemented in 2014.
It is expected that the value of mineral exports will more than double by 2017 as a result of this policy (Sujatmiko, 2015), although an adjustment period is needed in which to make the required investments in smelting and refining.
Provided there is sufficient incentive, the loss of share in world copper concentrate trade due to the application of industrialization policies may actually be beneficial if the period of lower exports subsequently leads to growth of refined mineral exports, such as grade A copper cathodes, whose prices are known and listed on the world’s metal markets.
In 2014, the four main exporters (Australia, Chile, Japan and Zambia) together accounted for 50.2% of the market, with exports valued at US$ 64.0 billion.
Chile’s relative weight has declined as exports from the Democratic Republic of the Congo and Zambia have made steady inroads into this market.
Regulatory change in Indonesia also had an impact on the production and export of bauxite, the raw material from which alumina and subsequently aluminium are obtained.4 Global alumina and bauxite production almost doubled between 2000 and 2014, owing to booming production in Australia, Brazil and China.
Indonesia was one of the largest producers in 2013 (20% of the total), however the regulatory impact saw production levels plummet in 2014.
This market was highly concentrated, with 84% of global output originating in Australia, Brazil and China, three countries whose production rose substantially.
By contrast, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Jamaica, countries that in 2000 had held a strong market position, suffered a steep decline during the period to 2014 (see table II.3).
Export trends show that the international market has become less concentrated as Guinea’s share of exports has fallen, from 65.5% in 1995 to 26.4% in 2014, during a period in which that country’s export growth was surpassed by that of other countries (see figure II.7).
Exports from Australia and Brazil increased steadily during the period, so that Australia, Brazil, Guinea and India together accounted for 73.8% of the value of world exports in 2014.
While base and ferrous metals are extracted for mass use in construction, infrastructure, manufacturing and consumer goods, gold is used as an industrial input, in final goods, and also as a store of value alternative to currency.
Gold production has risen more slowly than that of other metals, driven by increased output in traditional gold-producing countries and the emergence of some new players —especially after 2007—, thus helping to reduce its geographical concentration.
In 2000, a group of 8 countries was responsible for 71.1% of global production, whereas 14 countries accounted for a similar percentage of output in 2014 (see table II.4).
China managed to double its market share during that period, consolidating its presence as the world’s leading producer followed by Australia, the Russian Federation, the United States and Canada.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, Peru was the world’s seventh-largest gold producer in 2014, while output increased in Mexico, Brazil and, to a lesser extent, Chile.
In international markets, gold tends to be traded directly as a metal, processed to varying degrees, in manufactured goods, and often alloyed with other metals, rather than as unprocessed ore.
Switzerland included the gold trade in its official statistics in 2012, emerging as the world’s main importer and exporter of this metal in 2014.
Besides Switzerland, the main importers of non-monetary gold were Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China, India, where gold is used primarily as jewellery or for personal reserves, and the United Kingdom.
These four countries accounted for 72.4% of international imports, overtaking countries that had formerly exhibited most demand, such as Italy, Japan and the United States (see figure II.8).
International supply was less intensely concentrated, with the three main exporters, Switzerland, Hong Kong SAR and the United Kingdom, responsible for 64.6% of the total.
These countries increased their share of gold exports in recent years, at the expense of countries such as Australia, Canada and the United States, which had dominated exports in the 1990s.
Latin American and Caribbean countries accounted for 7.8% of the total value of non-monetary gold exports in 2014, and were led by Peru (the world’s seventh-largest exporter in 2014, with 2.0% of the market) and Mexico (with 1.7% of total exports).
Brazil (0.8%), Argentina, Colombia and the Dominican Republic (each around 0.6%) enjoyed smaller shares of this export market.
In summary, Latin America has maintained a solid position in the new international production and trade scenario for the minerals in question, with marked increases in output and exports.
This has translated into a loss of market share for some countries: certainly Brazil in the case of iron production, Jamaica in alumina and bauxite, and to some extent, Chile in copper (although the country remains the world’s leading producer).6 B.
Competitive advantages: scale, markets and technology Mining is traditionally characterized by an uneven geographical distribution of production and consumption.
Some developing countries are among the main producers and net exporters, while developed countries are the major consumers and importers (UNCTAD 2007).
The growth of China and India and the development of the Republic of Korea have brought new actors into this system; however, since mining requires the exploitation of natural resources associated with a particular territory, the uneven pattern continues to prevail.
In that context, transnational corporations have played a key role in business development, investing in areas with natural resources and catering to demand via the international market.
The predominance of transnational corporations in this sector is explained by several factors, not least the need for large investments over lengthy time periods, it being estimated that on average 10 years are needed to identify and determine the feasibility of a greenfield mining project, and an additional 6 years before investors can expect returns (Behre Dolbear, 2015).
An additional factor is that mining is a high-risk activity (see diagram II.1).
In the industry, reserves refer to that portion of a territory’s mineral resources that is identified as feasible for exploitation under certain legal, economic and technical conditions; in other words, resources with known conditions of economic viability.
Exploration is either undertaken by transnational firms themselves, or performed by “junior companies”, which are listed firms that, although not conducting mining operations themselves, sell extraction rights to larger firms if finds are made.
The exploitation of these resources usually takes place in hard-to-reach geographical locations, under hazardous conditions for the personnel involved, and with profound environmental impacts both for natural resources and the communities residing in the affected areas.
Safety and respect for the environment are therefore core aspects of mining investment, and are among the most frequent sources of conflict in cases of planned expansion.
Only listed companies are included; accordingly Chile’s National Copper Corporation (CODELCO), which holds US$ 35.0 billion in assets, is not shown.
The market value of most mining firms plummeted after 2011, so the mining corporations shown in the table above were selected and classed by the value of their assets.
While most transnational mining corporations are headquartered in developed countries; metal mining firms from Brazil, China, India and Mexico all posted strong sales and built up considerable assets during the boom period.
Some of these firms have far-reaching geographical presence and diversified production, including metallic minerals, energy minerals and mineral fertilizers, while others carry out more specialized operations with a narrower geographical scope (see table II.6).
While most corporations are in private hands, State-owned enterprises have also played a significant role.
The need to secure raw materials for strategic purposes, and to appropriate natural resource rents, led to various forms of State intervention, from direct participation in business activities to more traditional instruments such as charges for subsoil use, royalties, corporate income tax, and others.
After the Second World War, and even in the 1990s, many developed countries such as Finland, France and Sweden invested in State-owned mining companies.
Mining activity was nationalized in several developing countries in the 1960s and 1970s, while governments took control of copper mines in Chile, Peru, Zaire (now the Democratic Republic of the Congo) and Zambia and promoted State ownership of bauxite mines in Guinea and Jamaica.
Governments also took over iron ore production in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil and India, and tin production in Indonesia and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (UNCTAD, 2007).
In Mexico, the Mexicanization of Mining Law was enacted, stipulating a mandatory minimum 51% national ownership of mining projects and strengthening direct ownership by the State (Wise and Del Pozo, 2001).
Since the 1990s, many of these nationalizations have been reversed amid low metal prices and shifts in the global political climate, with the prevailing trend being for less State involvement in the economy.
In 1997, Brazil’s privatization policy led to one of the world’s largest miners, Vale do Rio Doce, being sold to a consortium of 104 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter II Brazilian and foreign investors.
Nevertheless, the Government of Brazil retained control of the company though holdings known as golden shares, which give it considerable influence over decision-making.
It also holds a 5.3% stake in the company through the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES).
In Peru, all State-owned mining corporations were sold, mostly to foreign investors, as part of a privatization programme that commenced in 1991.
Before then, most mining in the country was done by publicly owned operators, with the exception of a single foreign private firm (Campodónico 1999).
Mexico’s State-owned enterprises were acquired by the same domestic groups that had been operating since 1960, and therefore no new actors entered the market (Wise and Del Pozo, 2001).
In Chile, the National Copper Corporation (CODELCO) remains a key actor, while State-owned enterprises remain in charge of iron ore production in India and Sweden (NDMC Limited and LKAB, respectively).
In China too, mining corporations are government owned (the five largest are listed on stock exchanges but the State retains control).
These companies have stepped up their international investments, chiefly because deposits located in China are of low grade, meaning that the country looks overseas to meet its demand for better quality natural resources (World Bank, 2011).
In summary, excluding China, the State share of global metallic mineral production stood at 10.6% in 2008, compared with 42.3% in 1984.8 Including China, where Stateowned firms are in the ascendancy, the figure rises, but at 23.8% is still smaller than in previous decades (World Bank, 2011).
Despite nationalizations in mineral-producing countries such as the Plurinational State of Bolivia during the 2000s, and the resurgence of debate over nationalization in countries such as South Africa (a proposal that was ultimately rejected), metal mining remains dominated by private corporations. 2.
The emergence of new actors The business structure of the metal mining sector changed somewhat during the recent growth cycle, with existing actors expanding and newcomers entering the market.
The companies that were operating at the beginning of the decade continued their activity and in 2015 held assets worth 66% of the total.
With the exception of Switzerland’s Glencore, most of the major corporations that have consolidated their presence since the mid-2000s are based in emerging economies, notably Brazil (Vale), China (Aluminum Corporation of China Limited), the Russian Federation (United Company Rusal) and India (Vedanta).
Rising prices in the early 2000s invigorated the market as the largest corporations sought to consolidate their leadership through mergers, acquiring companies that would allow them to diversify their product portfolio or improve their position in segments with existing operations.
Meanwhile, firms in developing countries consolidated their position in the international market through acquisitions.
The mergers and acquisitions market was at its most buoyant between 2006 and 2013, with about 600 transactions concluded each year (see figure II.9); this figure halved in 2014 and 2015. 8 Figures refer to the production of bauxite, copper, gold, iron ore, lead, manganese, nickel, tin and zinc.
A number of record-breaking transactions took place in the metal mining sector between 2000 and 2015.
The 10 largest mergers and acquisitions, representing 22% of the total value for the period, were nearly all concluded between 2006 and 2013 (see table II.7).
The most significant of these was Glencore’s purchase of Xstrata Ltd for US$ 43.4 billion: the largest transaction in the history of the metal mining sector.
According to analysts, the merger of these Swiss-based firms combined Glencore’s strengths in selling of energy products, metals and agricultural products with Xstrata’s coal, copper and zinc mining capacity.
With a financial structure based in the Australia and the United Kingdom, Rio Tinto specializes in the mining, exploration, extraction and processing of aluminium, copper, diamonds, energy minerals (coal and uranium), gold, base metals and iron ore.
The purchase of Alcan Inc. gives the firm a solid position in the aluminium market.
Other major transactions involved companies headquartered in Canada and the United States.
In 2007, Freeport-McMoRan Inc., a United States company whose main asset was a gold mine in Indonesia, acquired Phelps Dodge —an established United States mining firm that had been operating since the early twentieth century— to become one of the world’s largest copper producers.
Corporations from emerging countries also made some significant acquisitions of transnationals headquartered in developed countries.
In 2007, Brazil’s Vale acquired Inco of Canada, a specialized nickel miner with Canadian operations dating from the early twentieth century.
Together with the sale of Falconbridge, this transaction placed two of Canada’s biggest mining firms under foreign ownership.
This was the first major transnational operation involving a Chinese mining firm.
Most cross-border transactions in metal mining targeted businesses based in North America and Asia and the Pacific, two regions that between 2000 and 2015 accounted for 30% and 29%, respectively, of the value of mergers and acquisitions in the sector (see figure II.10).
Transactions targeting European companies accounted for 18.6% of the total, while the value of transactions targeting Latin American and Caribbean and African and Middle Eastern companies, respectively, amounted to 12.6% and 9.8% of the total.
While firms from developing countries improved their position, those of developed countries still dominate the sector.
Approximately 16% of mergers and acquisitions targeted companies based in Latin America and the Caribbean, with transactions between 2000 and 2015 amounting to US$ 78 billion.
Ninety-two per cent this total was distributed among target companies in eight countries, led by Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Peru (see figure II.11).
Transaction participants were more sparsely concentrated in terms of their origins, with firms in Canada, China, the United Kingdom and the United States all making significant contributions to the value of mergers and acquisitions.
Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States accounted for the bulk of transactions (74% of the total number); however, China concluded a large transaction that accounted for 9% of the total value of mergers and acquisitions in the region during the study period.
Besides investing in other Latin American and Caribbean countries, leading firms in Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Peru have sought to expand through mergers and acquisitions in other regions, particularly North America, where 6.75% of the value of mergers and acquisitions originated in Latin American corporations.
Another important operation took place in 2011, when Norsk Hydro purchased a number of bauxite extraction and alumina production assets from Vale for US$ 5.27 billion (see table II.8).
These investments suggest an effort to gain a strategic position in access to raw materials, since Brazil and Canada are the countries with the largest niobium reserves, with Brazil accounting for 90% of production in 2013, according to the United States Geological Survey.
Similarly, in 2011 the Republic of Korea acquired a stake in CBMM for US$ 650 million (although at less than 5% of that company’s share capital, it is not counted as FDI).
This wealth has traditionally attracted the attention of foreign capital in search of natural resources, and inward FDI in the region’s mining sector intensified throughout the recent commodity price boom.
Peru ranked sixth, having improved its standing of previous years, while Colombia occupied ninth and Brazil eleventh place, respectively.9 In the past 15 years, the natural resources sector has expanded its share of foreign investment inflows to Latin America and the Caribbean.
During this recent period, the region’s natural resource sectors attracted US$ 170.555 billion in FDI, with mining accounting for the vast majority of FDI in natural resources in several recipient countries (see In most countries with metallic mineral reserves, the mining sector’s percentage of total inward FDI has increased in recent years (see figure II.12).
This was the case in Chile, the Dominican Republic, Mexico, Nicaragua and Peru; albeit official information was unavailable for the latter country. 9 This ranking surveys 25 countries and expresses the opinions of 200 experts.
It is based on seven criteria: political system, economic system, currency stability, social licence issues, permitting, competitive taxation and corruption. 10 One of the main recipients of FDI in metal mining, Peru, does not publish official data disaggregated by sector.
In Brazil, in 2015 the central bank changed its data collection methodology to that used in the sixth edition of the Balance of Payments Manual, published by the International Monetary Fund.
The estimates included in this analysis use the previous methodology, which enables comparison with earlier years.
This information is an approximation, since investment may be cancelled or may differ from the amount given in the announcement.
According to this source, between 2003 and 2015, investment announcements in metal mining totalled US$ 445.7 billion and were mostly associated with projects in developing countries.
Investment announcements for Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia and the Pacific and Africa accounted for 84.6% of the total (33.8%, 29.7% and 21.1%, respectively).
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the bulk of investment was earmarked for the exploitation of precious metals (53.7%), and copper, nickel, lead and zinc (44.9%).
Asia-Pacific countries were leaders in aluminium and iron (41.4% and 37.0% of investment, respectively).
Within the Asian and Pacific region, Australia, India and Indonesia attracted most investment, while in Africa the largest investment announcements were those recorded in Algeria, the Democratic Republic of the Congo and South Africa. 11 The data do not allow for further disaggregation by metal.
Latin America and the Caribbean accounted for the largest share of investment in exploration between 2004 and 2014, attracting 27% of global spending in 2014.
Base metals were the top exploration target (42% of overall budgets), followed by gold (41%) (SNL Metals & Mining, 2015).
Australia and Canada, which had attracted the largest exploration budgets before the boom, held shares of 12% and 14% respectively, while 16% of worldwide budgets were allocated to Africa.
The privatizations undertaken by Latin America and the Caribbean in 1990s, together with the higher cost of mining in traditional countries such as Australia, Canada and the United States, helped the region consolidate its status as the most popular destination for investments in mineral exploration during the past decade (ECLAC, 2013b).
Between 2003 and 2015, some 510 metal mining investment projects were announced for Latin America and the Caribbean, worth an estimated US$ 150.54 billion and equivalent to 12.2% of total investment announcements for the region.
The average announcement was for US$ 300 million, although this figure was dwarfed by a number of mega-projects, for example a US$ 8.0 billion gold project in Chile in 2003, and a US$ 6.4 billion copper project in Panama in 2014.
There were 25 projects with announced capital investment in excess of US$ 1.0 billion, which together represented 40% of total investment during the study period.
Most projects announced in the region were associated with gold and silver mining (44.0% of announced investment), followed by projects for the extraction of copper, nickel, lead and zinc (37.3%).
Brazil, Chile and Peru were the countries with the most announcements and together accounted for 75.6% of total investment in the region (see table II.10).
In both Chile and Peru, metal mining accounted for approximately 40% of total investment announced in the country, a share that was smaller in Brazil and Mexico.
Gold and silver mining was the segment that attracted most widespread investment across the region, with projects announced for 19 countries.
Copper, nickel, lead and zinc mining projects were more concentrated, with Chile, Panama and Peru jointly accounting for 88.4% of announced investment.
Brazil attracted the bulk of investment in iron ore mining (69.0%), followed by Peru (27.2%).
The aluminium segment followed a similar pattern, with Brazil receiving 72.1% of total investment and Guyana and Jamaica also enjoying a significant share thanks to their sizeable bauxite deposits.
Half of announced investment in metal mining between 2003 and 2015 originated in Canadian firms (50.6%), which also accounted for 83.0% of total investment in gold and silver mining.
United Kingdom-based companies made up the next largest source, representing 52.2% of investment in iron ore mining and 21.3% of investment in copper, nickel, lead and zinc mining.
The United States was the main source of investment in aluminium and the second-largest investor in iron ore extraction.
While developed countries have led the way in mining investment, China has strengthened its presence as an investor since 2007, chiefly through participation in copper and iron mining projects in Peru, and bauxite mining and aluminium production projects in Guyana and Trinidad and Tobago.
Estimates by the Ministry of Energy and Mines of Peru indicated that in October 2015 some 34.0% of the country’s mining investment portfolio was in Chinese hands, while 17.0% was owned by United States companies and 14.8% by Canadian firms.12 Peruvian enterprises accounted for just 6.5%, a figure that demonstrates the predominance of foreign capital in Peru’s mining industry.
Copper projects accounted for the bulk of the portfolio (64.7%), followed by gold and iron operations (12.6% and 9.4%, respectively).
In Chile too, mining activity mostly targeted copper and, to a lesser extent, gold and silver.
Although the existence of two State-owned enterprises explains a higher share of domestic capital in the industry, foreign firms retained a substantial presence.
For example, 42.1% of copper production was in the hands of Chilean companies (with 32.9% belonging to State-owned enterprises), while the remaining producers were transnational firms based in Australia, Canada, Japan, Poland, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States.
Prices, profitability and investment are falling A sharp fall in prices has brought about remarkable reductions in the profits and the market values of mining firms.
This meant that the 40 leading firms in the mining sector barely topped the market value of Apple Inc., which was valued at US$ 725 billion in 2014.
There is a strong positive correlation between investments in exploration and price trends.
One of the first impacts of falling prices was that mining corporations cut their exploration budgets, which fell steadily after 2012 to US$ 9.2 billion in 2015 (SNL Metals & Mining, 2015).
Traditionally these firms raise capital by listing on the stock exchange, meaning that their access to capital hinges on the evolution of prices and market expectations. 12 This portfolio includes mining unit expansion projects, projects in an advanced exploration phase and projects with environmental impact studies approved or under evaluation.
In a sector in which the minimum required rates of return have topped 15%, in 2014 the average return on assets employed among the world’s 40 leading mining companies fell to 9% in 2014, a 10-year low (PwC, 2015).
The situation is no better for the companies operating in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The publication América Economía produces an annual list of the 500 largest companies in the region, ranked by sales the previous year.
Between 1998 and 2015, a total of 70 mining firms appeared in the ranking, 20 of which were included for more than 10 consecutive years (see annex II.A1).
Rising commodity prices boosted the value of sales and, consequently, the number of mining corporations included in the ranking.
During the 1990s, fewer than 20 firms were included in the list, but this figure stood at about 40 in the late 2000s, with companies from Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.
According to this information, private foreign firms dominated the market, except in Chile, where hegemony was shared with State-owned enterprises, and Mexico, where domestically owned companies had the highest turnover.
The América Economía rankings are indicative of trends in companies’ returns, which reflected the commodity price upcycle and downcycle, respectively (see figure II.14).
This rate is far below expectations for the mining sector, and is strongly influenced by the profitability of Brazil’s Vale, which in 2014 secured a return on assets of just 0.3%.
Falling profitability, both in the world and in Latin America, had repercussions for investment announcements in the metal mining sector.
Companies are adjusting to the downcycle Forecasts suggest that the mining sector faces a complex short- and medium-term scenario.
Much of the sector’s growth was based on meeting demand from the Chinese economy, whose growth over the past decade has coincided with intense infrastructure development.
China’s growth prospects and future development pattern are now uncertain, and therefore it is not known whether the country will trigger a resurgence in global demand for metals.
The current outlook of reduced infrastructure development is of deep concern for iron ore production, but there may be better news for other metals used in mass consumer goods such as copper and nickel (used in cars and computers, for example) (PwC 2015).
According to Deloitte (2015), most experts agree that a downcycle is in progress and are expecting demand from emerging countries and regions such as India, South-East Asia and even Africa, to eventually rebound to the point where it once again outstrips supply.
However, this is still some way off, and firms will continue to retrench until the revival takes effect.
In this context, the sector’s largest companies have reduced their exploration expenditure and capital investment.
According to their reports they expect to maintain this strategy until 2017, generally targeting cost reduction, productivity improvements and asset rationalization.
Moreover, many corporations took on high levels of debt during the boom period.
The subsequent price downcycle, compounded by the strength of the dollar, caused a deterioration of their financial position that also contributed to asset sales and the focus on strategic products.
To concentrate on its key assets of iron ore, copper and energy products, BHP Billiton committed to the divestment of non-strategic assets valued at US$ 7.0 billion between 2013 and 2015 (BHP Billiton, 2015).
In May 2015 the company also approved the demerger of South32 Ltd. in a transaction valued at US$ 4.4 billion, with the spin-off company retaining alumina, aluminium, coal, manganese, nickel, silver, lead and zinc assets in Australia, Colombia and South Africa.
Meanwhile, Rio Tinto sold various assets for US$ 2.5 billion in 2013 (Rio Tinto, 2015), while in 2014 it divested its 50.1% stake in Australia’s Clermont coal mine to a joint venture (in equal shares) of Sumitomo Corporation and Glencore for US$ 1.005 billion.
Switzerland’s Glencore also carried out a significant asset divestment in 2014, selling the Las Bambas copper deposit in Peru for US$ 7.005 billion.
Anglo American responded to the prospect of lower prices and a slow recovery in demand by concentrating on its strategic diamond, platinum and copper mines, specializing in minerals required at more advanced stages of economic development, rather than during the urbanization phase (Anglo American, 2015).
In 2015, the company divested assets worth US$ 2.1 billion and is following a strategy that aims to divest US$ 5.0 billion to US$ 6.0 billion by 2016.
In 2015, it divested US$ 3.0 billion in non-strategic assets, notably through the sale of 12 iron ore carrier ships to China for US$ 1.3 billion, as well as a 36.4% stake in Minerações Brasileiras Reunidas S.A. for US$ 1.089 billion.
Leading consultants suggest that mining firms must innovate to survive in the industry.
McKinsey & Company believes that the mining industry is at an inflection point in which the traditional form of production needs to be modified to enhance productivity.
This consulting firm advocates a new form of production based on the adoption of digital technologies, both in production and in the planning and analysis of information, which could unlock a new productive model that utilizes the available information in a more efficient way.
The first large-scale iron-ore mining project to incorporate an automated mineral transport system will enter operation in 2016 in Brazil, having been installed by a transnational specializing in automation and technological solutions.
This Vale project (known as Carajás S11D) required a US$ 14.4 billion investment, and includes the mine, a processing plant and logistics.
The 30-kilometre automated transport system is able to move the equivalent of 100 240-ton truckloads of mineral with a 70% saving on fuel, thus reducing costs and greenhouse gas emissions.
Other technological innovations, such as a 93% reduction in water use at the iron-ore treatment plant (a saving equivalent to the water consumption of a city of 400,000 inhabitants) and a modular plant design mean that the facility is at the cutting edge of iron ore production.
Lastly, during the study period some Latin American firms purchased operational mines in the region from foreign-owned companies, but this was not a widespread pattern.
In 2012, a joint venture between CODELCO of Chile (67.8%) and Mitsui of Japan (32.2%) acquired a 29.5% stake in the mining company Anglo American Sur for US$ 2.8 billion, while in 2015 Antofagasta plc, also Chilean-owned, purchased 50% of the Zaldívar copper mine from Barrick Gold for US$ 1.005 billion (see table II.11).
The region has fallen behind in value chains China was the central protagonist in the expansion of metal mining during the 2000s.
Ten years later China had nine firms in the top 40, overtaking Canada and the United Kingdom, which both had seven companies in the 2015 edition.
During the mining boom, Chinese companies stepped up mineral extraction and demanded more minerals on the international market, as well as investing in smelting and refining and thus moving up the mining/metallurgy value chain.
The first link in this chain is mining, which comprises the extraction of ore from deposits and its concentration.
The second step in adding value is ore processing to obtain the 119Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter II metal (or metal compounds), while the third link refers to the utilization of that metal to manufacture intermediate inputs or final goods.
In China, the development of the sector included at least the first two stages.
In the first stage of the copper value chain (from copper concentrate to refined or smelted copper), China’s production outstripped that of Latin American and Caribbean countries, although Chile remains the leading exporter of refined and smelted copper.
Data on the global market share of refined copper production indicates that China steadily increased its industrial copper processing capacity between 2005 and 2014 (see figure II.16).
In 2014, the region’s countries produced 43.6% of the world’s mined copper and less than 20% of its refined or smelted copper, whereas China produced 8.8% of mined copper and 34.8% and 25.8% of refined and smelted copper, respectively.
It may therefore be discerned that China is following an industrialization strategy in which minerals are imported at an early stage of production and subsequently processed and exported as base or finished metals, with the consequent addition of value in the local market.
This imbalance in the production of ore concentrate and refined copper may extend to the other minerals produced in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Mineral exports from the region increased after 2003, but this growth largely corresponded to minerals at early stages of the production process.
Refining and smelting capacity in Latin American and Caribbean countries did not keep pace with rising mineral production, which helped create a pattern of growth in exports of mined minerals rather than refined metals.
A similar trend was observed in Australia, which also tended to export minerals at the early stages of processing, rather than finished metals or manufactured metal products (ECLAC, 2013b).
This does not mean that metal production is currently absent from the region’s countries.
There are cases where it exists, but the present trend in copper refinery and smelter production may be of concern if China manages to satisfy its domestic 120 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter II consumption and increase its competitiveness in the international market.
In any case, the further processing of concentrates prior to export would deliver benefits both in sales and in the development of forward linkages, consequently expanding the production matrix.
Mining for production diversification The exploitation of natural resources for inclusive economic development entails huge challenges: from the essential requirement that the sector’s development is compatible with safeguarding the environment and the rights of peoples and communities, and the creation of production linkages and synergies with other sectors, to fiscal and monetary issues and infrastructure investment.
Considering the abundance of metallic mineral resources in the region and the impact of transnational strategies in territories, it is imperative to build governments’ capacities to leverage metal mining in support of structural change, so that the growth of this sector makes a strong contribution to enhancing technological innovation and capabilities.
Strong growth improved the availability of resources Foreign direct investment inflows to the metal mining sector surged during the favourable price cycle of the 2000s, boosting production and exports, which in turn helped deliver higher foreign exchange earnings and fiscal revenues.
Between 2001 and 2003, inflows averaged almost US$ 20 billion a year from metallic mineral and metal exports from Latin American and Caribbean countries.
In 2004, an uptrend commenced that eventually saw annual export revenues top US$ 100 billion after 2010.13 Exports from Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Peru, chiefly those of copper, iron and gold, accounted for 89.8% of the total between 2005 and 2014.
However, the impact of mining as a source of foreign exchange differed greatly between countries.
In Chile and Peru, mining accounted for 60% of income during the past 10 years (see table II.12) and made a substantial contribution to the trade surplus. 13 Based on data provided by TradeMap.
The region’s share of metallic mineral exports remained stable during the expansion phase, and its performance was broadly in line with the world’s other metallic mineral exporters until 2011, when falling prices hit the region harder and its share of global exports dropped to 18.8% on average for 2012-2014.
The high rents obtained by the mining sector had a positive impact on the fiscal revenues of the region’s countries, especially between 2005 and 2008, before the international financial crisis.14 Chile and Peru were the countries where fiscal revenues from mining made the greatest contribution to GDP and total fiscal revenues.
The State-owned enterprise CODELCO lent weight to the leap in fiscal revenues from mining in Chile, while revenues from private mining corporations in that country were equivalent to 10.6% of the cumulative total between 2005 and 2008, equalling the contribution of large mining firms in Peru.
Information for the non-financial public sector is taken into account in the cases of Argentina and Colombia. c Does not include the value of mining royalties that are not disaggregated from total royalties (which mostly originate in hydrocarbons production). d GMP-10: the ten largest private mining corporations.
In most countries, the contribution of mining to fiscal revenues was obtained through corporate income tax, which accounted for 70% to 90% of revenues from the sector, with a smaller share coming from royalties and other specific forms of payment for the right to exploit State-owned natural resources.
Colombia, Jamaica and the Plurinational State of Bolivia were exceptions in that royalties were the main instrument of revenue collection (Gómez Sabaini, Jiménez and Morán, 2015).
Many countries implemented reforms to ensure the sufficient appropriation of mining rents during the period.
One of the goals of these reforms was to make the system more progressive, seeking a greater appropriation of rents during periods of extraordinary prices.
In general terms, the State’s involvement in the sector increased, although the growth of fiscal revenues from mining was outpaced the growth of economic rents from mining as a whole, indicating a lack of progressivity in the region’s fiscal regimes (Gómez Sabaini, Jiménez and Morán, 2015).
Nevertheless, in Chile, Colombia and Peru the appropriation of mining rents was put at 30% to 35% for the period 2004-2009, a broadly similar percentage to that of Australia and other countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), although in other economies in the region, percentages stood at about 10% (Acquatella and others, 2013).
This shows the delicate balance between policies to attract investment to a highly capital-intensive sector, and States’ capacity to appropriate rents.
The territorial distribution of rents often creates political tension between different levels of government.
The regional overview is heterogeneous, with some countries presenting a high degree of distribution to subnational administrative levels, for example Peru (56.9% of fiscal revenues from mineral exploitation between 2010 and 2012), Colombia (51.5%) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (37.3%).
In Argentina and Brazil, the share allocated to subnational governments was 12.8% and 9.9%, respectively, while in Chile and Mexico the central government controlled 100% of these revenues (ECLAC, 2014).
In Colombia, the new General System of Royalties changed the situation by establishing a centralized regime in which the distribution of rents to departments and municipalities gradually declined (to 9.8% in 2015).
In Peru, revenue from mining activities is geographically concentrated, with 5 of the country’s 24 regions accounting for 60% of income.
This has caused some discussion about the need to improve the redistribution of the system; however, reforms have been impeded by certain municipalities’ high dependence on mining resources.
Since the fiscal management of rents generated from natural resource extraction is important for development, governments have promoted the creation of global multilateral forums to favour greater transparency in the management of these resources.
One example is the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI); a voluntary initiative that began to take shape in the United Kingdom in 2002, with the goal of promoting the transparency of resources generated by extractive industries in developing countries, and which was implemented through the review and publication of data on companies’ tax contributions and the resources received by States.
Peru was the first Latin American and Caribbean country to comply with the reporting requirements for EITI membership in 2012, followed by Guatemala in 2014.
As of March 2016, 31 countries had met the membership criteria and a further 20 were candidates (at some stage of the implementation process).
EITI is geared towards developing countries but has been little implemented in the most advanced economies.
Of these, Norway is the only member country (since 2011), while the United Kingdom and the United States have been candidates since 2014 and Germany since March 2016.
The tax regime is a decision variable for transnational firms, which presents countries with the challenge of balancing State appropriation of rents with the need to attract foreign investment, often essential given the scale of the investment required to operate in the sector.
As ECLAC (2014) proposes, coordination between countries on this issue is crucial to prevent detrimental tax competition for investment, which weakens the role of the State and its capacity to promote natural resource governance.
Conversely, from the macroeconomic perspective, the growth of FDI in mining and the high profitability of this activity may cause balance-of-payments difficulties in the current context of slowing FDI inflows to the sector.
The average return on assets of the largest mining corporations was about 20% between 2005 and 2011, compared with 6% for the 500 largest companies in Latin America.
Transnational firms’ profits are recorded as an outflow on the income side of the balance-of-payments current account, regardless of whether they are reinvested or repatriated to the parent company’s country of origin.
Profits that are reinvested in 124 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter II the domestic economy do not affect the balance of payments, since they are recorded as an outflow (debit) from the income account, and subsequently counted as an inflow (credit) in the financial account.
However, profits that are repatriated to the parent company generate a debit, with a consequent negative effect (ECLAC, 2013b).
On average, about 50% of profits generated by transnational corporations operating in the region are repatriated (ECLAC, 2013b).
In this context, the strong foreign capital flows to mining during the expansion phase and the sector’s high profitability created a scenario in which a large proportion of profits could be repatriated.
The squeeze on profits in the past two years may mitigate this effect, it being necessary to analyse each country to identify how rents from mining investment may affect the balance of payments position.
The outcomes of such an analysis will hinge on the presence of transnationals in mining, their profitability, and their tendency to repatriate or reinvest earnings. 2.
Few production linkages were created The expansion of metal mining in an economy has the potential to spur activity in other sectors and may therefore lend impetus to production diversification.
This diversification is achieved through production linkages of various kinds: backward linkages (through firms that supply inputs for metal mining), forward linkages (through the local processing of metallic minerals prior to export or their use as inputs in other industries), fiscal linkages and linkages produced by the expansion of demand that drives growth in the sector (Hirschman, 1977).
Traditionally, extractive industries have been characterized as having substantial capacity for income generation, but limited capacity for creating jobs and local linkages (UNCTAD, 2007).
Production processes in the sector are capital intensive and have high specialized technology requirements and low labour requirements, making difficult to develop backward linkages or to boost direct employment.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, direct employment creation in the metal mining sector is low compared with the sector’s impact on GDP and foreign-exchange earnings, notwithstanding that the labour force employed in mining grew more quickly in most countries during the expansion phase.
Chile has the highest proportion of direct employment in mining, at about 3% of the total workforce in 2014, almost double the figure posted in the early 2000s (see table II.14).
The country where mining had the second-largest impact on jobs was the Plurinational State of Bolivia, accounting for 2.4% of the workforce in 2014, while in Colombia and Peru the proportion was about 1%.
Quantitative analysis of linkages shows the mining is generally a sector with low spillovers in terms of demand for other economic activities.15 The multipliers for metal mining in Chile, Colombia and Mexico, and for non-ferrous metals in Brazil, were valued at less than 0.6 (backward linkages).
This means, for example, that each additional US$ 100 million in mining production creates a US$ 60 million increase in other economic activities in the country as a result of the direct and indirect demand generated by the mining sector.
By comparing these coefficients with those of manufacturing sectors, it may be observed that the technical coefficients associated with mining are not very high.
For example, non-ferrous metal basic industries in Chile and Mexico have output multipliers of 1.24 and 0.8, respectively, while in Chile the manufacture of wood products has a multiplier of 1.22 and in Brazil vehicle manufacturing has a multiplier of 1.18.
This reduced spillover capacity is not exclusive to the countries of the region; the multiplier for metal mining in Canada was estimated at 0.4 in 2011.
These estimates provide a macroeconomic indicator that reflects the interrelatedness of a given sector with other sectors of the economy, but does not provide any information on the technological intensity or the capabilities required by each activity.
Moreover, high production levels such as those observed in the region’s main mining countries may still deliver a substantial impact in absolute terms, despite modest multiplier values.
In Chile, the most influential sectors in backward linkages (in other words, the largest suppliers of the mining industry), are copper mining itself (16% of the multiplier), electricity (16%), architecture, engineering and scientific services (10%), legal, accounting and other business services (9%) and wholesale trade (7%), among others.
In Mexico, the backward multiplier of the metal mining sector is lower than in other countries (0.3), with impacts on own consumption (48% of the indicator), oil and coal (9%), electricity (6%) and others.
In Brazil, the multiplier for non-ferrous metal mining is quite high (1.2), with the sector relying on oil and coal (19%), transport and storage (14%), commerce (9%), machinery and equipment maintenance (6%) and machinery and equipment manufacturing (5%), among others.
From a quantitative viewpoint, the main effects of mining in the region are apparent in fiscal linkages and linkages related to resource availability, which matches the findings of studies carried out for other mining regions (Auty, 2005).
The greatest difficulties for developing backward linkages are presented by the characteristics of metal mining production processes.
Large-scale mining uses specialized equipment, produced with economies of scale and sold in global distribution networks.
In most of the region’s countries, mining firms imported machinery, chemical products and manufactured goods (rubber, iron and steel and metal products).
However, a qualitative overview of metal mining suppliers in the region revealed that some domestic suppliers have found niches in which to export to third markets, which according to Melitz (2003) suggests the higher productivity of these enterprises.
If the expansion of metal mining in the region is conducive to the growth of high-productivity domestic firms, then it would also be contributing to greater economic diversification and would be an example of how FDI can contribute to local business development. 15 See Schuschny (2005) for methodology and detailed concepts.
Chile is emerging as the Latin American country that has made most progress in the development of sophisticated mining suppliers and exporters, albeit these firms account for a small proportion of total exports.
In 2014, it was estimated that Chile had 5,000 suppliers of goods and services for the mining sector, with total sales of US$ 20 billion.
Around 330 of these firms managed to sell their products and services overseas, with exports valued at US$ 540 million in 2014.
However, these exports are highly concentrated, with just five firms responsible for 61% of total export value in 2014, and 87% of exporters reporting sales of under US$ 1 million (Fundación Chile, 2015).
This reality, while far from ideal given the scarcity of larger firms, offers a glimpse of the possibility that local mining suppliers can secure a foothold in the international market for technologically complex goods and services.
Services accounted for 33% of total expenditure on domestic inputs for the Chilean mining industry in 2012.16 The growth of the mining sector boosted demand for architecture, engineering and scientific services, and machinery and equipment repair and installation services.
The proportion of mining suppliers that made more than 40% of their sales to the mining sector rose from 50% to 73% between 2010 From the viewpoint of building local capabilities and innovation, the establishment of specific research centres for mining is a key element for the future development of the sector.
In Chile, research initiatives for mining innovation are being pursued that connect academic institutions with the private sector, creating an interesting opportunity for the generation of applied knowledge.
Led by a board of directors formed of academics and representatives of mining companies, AMTC carries out basic and applied research projects with government funding, as well as applied research projects financed by corporations.
Besides helping firms increase their productivity, this type of initiative may serve an important function in informing policy design, enabling the drafting of strategic guidelines for the growth of sector based on solid technical foundations.
Other Latin American and Caribbean countries have notable sectors or enterprises that supply the mining industry.
In Peru, about 110 companies in the metalworking, chemical and iron and steel sectors provide goods and services to mining, with total sales of US$ 3.3 billion in 2013, and exports worth US$ 750 million.
In Colombia, the growth of the mining sector benefited suppliers, especially those in the metalworking sector that produce basic components, whose sales and exports increased during the period (Perry and Palacios, 2013).
In the Plurinational State of Bolivia, most domestic suppliers of the mining industry are concentrated in non-tradable, low-technology goods and services, although in some cases domestic metallurgy and construction companies have carried out highly complex projects for the mining industry.
A degree of integration has been achieved between the dynamics of the mining market and local suppliers that have greater technological prowess; however, the development of these supply industries is still incipient and faces competition from major international exporters of mining services, technologies and equipment (for example, Australian suppliers).
In the current context, company strategies aim to reduce costs and minimize environmental impacts; technological progress offers solutions to these problems.
The energy and water requirements of mining mean that technological development 16 The main input was electricity.
See Correa (2016) for a more detailed analysis of intermediate consumption in mining subsectors. 127Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter II is fundamental for the growth of the sector, which needs cheaper sources of energy and water, along with greater sustainability.
Attracting FDI for the provision of solutions in these areas may create an opportunity for growth associated with mining activity that contributes to the creation of intangible capital.
In Chile, the mining industry increased the proportion of total energy consumption drawn from renewable sources (Correa, 2016); while the renewable energies sector received stronger foreign investment flows.
The continuation of this trend could be central to achieving a more sustainable mining sector.
Both in Chile and Peru, suppliers of more technologically complex products and services are based in the main cities and the externalities they have generated at the local level are weak, even in traditional mining areas such as Antofagasta and Calama, and have greater impact nationally (Phelps, Atienza and Arias, 2015).
In Peru, on average 3.6% of input purchases are transacted in the vicinity of the mine.
These acquisitions tend to be low-technology goods and services, food and beverages and textile, agro-industrial or handicraft products, and are generally intended to strengthen relations with the local population, while specialized suppliers are located in Lima and Arequipa.
The impact of employment on mining localities depends greatly on the context and the characteristics of the region in question.
When starting up a new project, consideration should be given to how the regional economy can meet the requirements of modern mining (Söderholm and Svahn, 2015). 3.
New industrial policies are needed for mining The benefits of foreign direct investment in the mining industry are far from being automatically accrued.
In its study on the use of fiscal resources from extractive industries, ECLAC concluded that the commodity price boom increased the availability of financial resources, whose potential for achieving structural change was not fully leveraged (ECLAC, 2014).
As mentioned previously, the inherent nature of the industry may limit spillovers into other sectors of production, added to the fact that major social and environmental impacts make regulation of these aspects an essential priority.
In this context, a policy space is emerging for countries to promote the accumulation of local capabilities linked to the development of a sustainable mining sector that drives diversification.
The benefits that an economy may obtain from integration into global value chains are related to its local capabilities (Cimoli, Dosi and Stiglitz, 2009).
Therefore, the benefits that can be obtained from exploiting natural resources at the local level are linked to these capabilities.
In recent decades, certain countries managed to attract investment to metal mining through a combination of active policy elements and passive market elements.
For example, in 2015 Brazil joined the Committee for Mineral Reserves International Reporting Standards (CRIRSCO), an initiative that also counts Chile as a member, and which seeks to offer greater investment guarantees.
Policies to attract investment in mining were accompanied by policies to regulate the sector, mainly in the area of property rights, taxation, environmental protection, community relations and respect for human rights.
In Peru, the reforms implemented in the 1990s focused on promoting investment in the sector by providing legal and tax stability and guarantees, while recent policies also emphasize social and environmental conflict resolution (CEPLAN, 2011; MEM, 2012).
In Colombia, the growth of the mining industry led to the sector’s inclusion as a driver of sustainable development in the National Development Plan 2014-2018, with emphasis on social and environmental responsibility.
The sector’s rapid expansion, the excessive awarding of mining rights and a surge in illegal exports all created to situations of conflict, leading the Government to take steps to regulate the industry’s growth; for that purpose it published the National Mining Management Plan, deciding not to explore for gold in páramo upland areas and to combat illegal production.
At the same time, a policy to regularize the situation of informal miners was launched in 2014.
Despite the persistence of conflicts the significant risks entailed by the expansion and operation of mines, the region has made some progress in regulating the sector.
One of the action lines explored by the region’s countries has been the development of suppliers for the mining sector.
In Brazil, the Brazilian Agency for Industrial Development (ABDI) developed a map of the mining goods and services supply chain with a view to proposing a supplier development programme (Prominer); an ongoing project established under the National Mining Plan 2030 (in turn part of the Brasil Maior Plan).
The strategies set forth in Mexico’s Mining Development Programme include promoting the development and consolidation of mining-sector suppliers through the Mining Promotion Trust (FIFOMI), an institution that has provided financing, training and technical assistance to producers and suppliers.
This supplier development programme was launched by the private corporation BHP Billiton in 2008, later attracting the participation of the State-owned enterprise CODELCO.
An agreement has since been signed by the Ministry of Mining and Fundación Chile to continue and expand the programme.18 The programme aims to develop knowledge-intensive suppliers, with technological solutions that may be transferred to other sectors and markets.
The mining corporations identify and prioritize problems whose solutions are not available on the market, and which have potential economic, environmental or community benefits.
Based on these requirements, they select firms with the potential to resolve problems, who then test their solutions within the corporations, thus creating capacity among local companies and resolving the miners’ operational problems.
Its goal is to promote innovation in different sectors of the Chilean economy. 129Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter II sector (100 suppliers were expected to participate by 2012; however, in 2014 there were only 87 participants; the current target is for 250 suppliers to join by 2020).
Just as in Chile an initiative that emerged in the private sector was later adopted by a State-owned enterprise and subsequently redefined as part of the national strategy, so too in Brazil the activity of Vale exerts strong influence on the sector.
In 2009, Vale launched a specific supplier development programme for its operations in Brazil (Inove), with financing tools, training and business meetings.
The programme is implemented in association with local credit entities, training providers and business associations.
In 2013, a proposal for a new regulatory regime for the mining sector was submitted to the National Congress of Brazil, and its adoption is presently under debate.
Among other strategic reforms, the proposal would establish local content requirements for the signing of new mining contracts, similar to the regulations in force for the country’s oil and gas sector.
The hydrocarbon regulation introduced in 1999 sets forth that concessions will favour companies with more local content and requires suppliers to certify the domestic origins of the goods and services provided.
Australia is another country that implements such policies, collectively known as Australian Industry Participation.
Although this framework does not establish compulsory quotas in terms of contracting, it requires that a study be carried out for all projects with capital expenditure of more than 500 million Australian dollars, recognizing and communicating the economic effects in terms of jobs, knowledge transfer, strategic partnerships and territorial development.
The aim is for local firms to have a genuine chance of competing for services contracts at all levels of the chain, while government business support agencies offer technical assistance to firms that wish to apply to be suppliers.
Technological development is crucial for mining activity, especially in the current context as corporations seek to enhance productivity, reduce costs and minimize environmental impacts.
The technology road map of Chile’s Alta Ley National Mining Programme makes a valuable attempt to identify and prioritize those areas in which new technologies would be useful in meeting the Programme’s targets, while CONICYT promotes the strengthening of research capacity in the mining industry.
In Mexico, FIFOMI grants funding for environmental conservation projects and the development of new technologies, while Brazil is planning to launch an innovation programme for mining (Inova Mineral) as part of the Inova incentive scheme, which operates with the support of the Studies and Projects Financing Entity (FINEP) and BNDES.
The programme targets the development of technologies for the exploitation of two groups of strategic minerals: those defined by the Government as “future carrying” minerals (cobalt, graphite, lithium, molybdenum, the platinum group, niobium, rare earths) and those on which the country depends (phosphate and potassium).
The technologies developed may also be used to minimize the environmental impact of extracting these minerals.
In general, large mining transnationals have worked according to a system whereby minerals are extracted worldwide but the bulk of concentrates are exported to smelting and refining plants in countries located close to demand markets and which have ready supply of cheap energy.
For that reason, smelting and refining has been concentrated in Europe, Japan and the United States.
The past decade has seen some changes in this system, with refineries and smelters opening in developing countries, most notably China, which then began to supply the international market.
In the copper market, Chile is pursuing a strategy to improve its position in refining and smelting.
There are currently seven plants in the country, five of which are Stateowned, which operate obsolete technology and have high running costs (Fundación Chile, 2016).
The technology road map therefore sets out three challenges for this subsector —increase efficiency, reduce the environmental impact and improve working conditions— and proposes specific research and development measures to meet them.
Projects include the nationalization and modernization of a tin metallurgical company and the reactivation of a lead and silver smelting complex that had been inactive for the past 30 years.
Furthermore, a project to exploit lithium in the Salar de Uyuni salt flat aims to create a whole value chain, from the extraction of the raw material (brine) and its processing to obtain basic compounds (lithium carbonate and potassium chloride), to the manufacture of intermediate goods (battery cathodes and electrolytes) and ultimately, lithium-ion batteries.
The State plans to invest about US$ 1.0 billion,21 and has signed agreements with foreign partners for the project’s implementation and for the training of professionals (Córdova, 2016).
In the past 15 years, global markets for the main metallic minerals have experienced profound changes, with huge swings in demand, prices and output.
This has generated significant flows of foreign direct investment, much of it to Latin American countries.
Global demand was invigorated above all by China’s growth and its industrialization strategy, driving major transformations in international markets.
These changes materialized in the form of a price boom between 2003 and 2011 and the reshaping of the mining sector’s worldwide production structure.
Latin America has maintained a strong position, at least in the stages of raw material extraction; however, new actors have emerged during this period, particularly in Africa, while China too has significantly expanded its extractive capacity.
Changes of a similar magnitude have occurred in the manufacture of metal products (steel, aluminium and smelted copper), a sector in which China has acquired absolute leadership, displacing the United States, Japan, Germany and the Russian Federation (among others) and posing a serious threat to the industry in Latin American countries.
This period, therefore, has been one of dramatic transformation in the geographical distribution of extractive activities and the stages of industrial processing of metallic minerals.
The leading production agents in these processes are transnational firms, comprising a corporate segment that has also undergone significant changes.
The jump in the number 21 The Economic and Social Development Plan 2016-2020 within the framework of Integrated Development for Living Well includes the lithium plant among the country’s strategic industrial production complexes.
Forward linkages from mining, through the use of mineral resources in smelting or more advanced stages of manufacturing, are becoming more significant in the region. 131Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter II of large corporations was particularly remarkable, with many new companies formed in developing countries, especially Brazil, China, India and the Russian Federation.
At the same time, there was a spate of mergers and acquisitions as enormous transactions were concluded by companies pursuing geographical and production diversification strategies.
In recent years, however, falling prices and profitability have translated into more defensive strategies, with firms tending to concentrate their spending on key assets at the expense of exploration expenditure and capital investment.
In this new context, companies have attached greater importance to cutting costs and minimizing environmental impacts.
Latin America and the Caribbean has been actively involved in these processes.
In several of the region’s countries, the boom in metallic mineral prices triggered strong investment flows, mainly from overseas, which in turn led to a significant expansion of exports and contributed to increased capital formation, sustained GDP growth, and greater availability of resources for the State.
This pattern was conducive to the funding of more extensive and better quality social programmes, and the realization of investment in infrastructure improvements.
Taken in conjunction with other factors, it may be said that this cycle of high prices contributed directly and indirectly to improving the well-being of the population.
Searching for better strategies so that mining can bolster development is a complex challenge, in which each country must balance an array of opposing interests.
For that reason, the design and implementation of industrial policies to promote diversification based on mining sector linkages requires an institutional space for coordination between the public and private sectors.
There is a need to identify those actions that could create the context for communities to participate in companies’ processes of value creation.
For companies, the acquisition of environmental and social licences should be internalized as an essential part of their operations, in addition to creating value in the communities where they operate by promoting the development of production capabilities.
Corporate social responsibility initiatives appear to be insufficient in that regard, since building these capabilities will require more focused measures.
This challenge is shared by more advanced economies that enjoy comparative advantages in natural resources.
Canada was able to diversify its production thanks to a long history of industrial policy intervention, a critical element for natural-resource-based economies since States that do not define their policy in relation to the exploitation of resources and the comparative advantage they wish to obtain, will have foreign governments define it for them (Ciuriak, 2014).
How to keep step with the expansion of mining activity through policies in support of the sector, securing the maximum possible benefit for inclusive and sustainable development, remains a major challenge for Latin American and Caribbean countries.
Auty, R.M. (2005), “Maximising the positive socio-economic impact of mineral extraction on regional development in transition economies: a review of the literature”, European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD).
The top 10 issues mining companies will face in the coming year, Canada.
Melitz, M. (2003), “The impact of trade on intra-industry reallocations and aggregate industry productivity”, Econometrica, No. 71.
Palacios (2013), “Emprendimiento alrededor del sector de la minería y el petróleo en Colombia”, Documentos CEDE, Bogota, Universidad de los Andes.
Arias (2015), “Encore for the Enclave: the changing nature of the industry enclave with illustrations from the mining industry in Chile”, Economic Geography, PwC (PricewaterhouseCoopers) (2015), Mine 2015.
Svahn (2015), “Mining, regional development and benefit-sharing in developed countries”, Resources Policy, No. 45.
Mining companies included in the ranking of the 500 largest companies in Latin America. a The sales figure provided for 2005 is from 2006. 135Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter III Foreign direct investment as a driver of intangible capital accumulation A.
Only one third of foreign direct investment creates new physical capital B.
Only one third of foreign direct investment creates new physical capital The positive effects of foreign direct investment (FDI) can foster development in the recipient economies; in particular, they can supplement national saving through new capital contributions and stimulate transfers of technology and improve management systems to enable productive modernization.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, FDI has played a crucial role in the pattern of production and international engagement, owing to its importance in the exploitation of natural resources, manufacturing activity, exports and modern services.
Its impact on technological progress and on research, development and innovation has been less, however; and its spillovers have had limited penetration in the economic structure.
The effects of FDI depend on each country’s production, technological and human resources capacities and knowledge, and also on the regulatory frameworks governing individual sectors, particularly services.
Strategies that combine the attraction of FDI with policies that promote productive modernization and diversification would encourage transnational enterprises to enter sectors with greater potential for technological development and capacity-building; and this would help them to integrate into local economies and fuel socially inclusive and environmentally sustainable economic growth.
This chapter explores two important factors in ensuring those positive effects are attained.
First, it quantifies the contribution made by FDI to gross fixed capital formation and demonstrates the importance of the intangible component of such capital flows for the development of host economies.
Foreign direct investment inflows to the region have been broadly stable relative to GDP —maintaining a level around 3%, with fluctuations of about 0.5 percentage points since 2000, despite the major increase recorded in absolute terms (see figure III.1).
This is divided into fixed capital generated by domestic agents and that created by foreign firms.
The M&A proportion of FDI varies widely, but it is always large and can account for as much as On the basis of data published by the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) and Bloomberg, cross-border mergers and acquisitions are estimated to account for at least 29% of the region’s FDI inflows.
This figure is in line with international lower-bound estimates for that variable.
The proportion differs sharply between countries: high in Peru but somewhat lower in Colombia and Mexico between 2000 and 2014.
There is also considerable variation from year to year, owing to the weight of certain individual operations.
Data for Latin America and the Caribbean between 1990 and 2014 show a reasonably strong correlation between the two variables.
However, this correlation could be spurious since both may be driven by the same underlying variables, such as GDP growth.
In theory, the financial flows that contribute to the formation of gross fixed capital could come from FDI or from other sources (such as domestic financial flows).
One estimate is that each additional dollar of FDI increases gross fixed capital formation by 34 cents.3 In other words, around one third of FDI flows actually contribute to fixed capital formation in the receiving economy.
By combining information on mergers and acquisitions with the results of the direct impact of FDI on gross fixed capital formation, it is possible to identify the destination of around two thirds of the total flow.
The first involves an increase in an economy’s capital stock; the second represents a way of financing that increase, which might be supplemented with resources from the domestic or international financial systems.
Although a positive relation between the two variables is hoped for, the relation is neither one-to-one nor constant over time. 2 There are no good data sources on mergers and acquisitions.
The most widely used is the cross-border mergers and acquisitions database of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD, 2015).
Between 1990 and 2014, FDI data are available for 646 out of 850 year-country values in Latin America and the Caribbean; and UNCTAD estimates mergers and acquisitions activities for only 375 of them.
While there are no estimations of mergers and acquisitions activities for eight economies (mostly from the Caribbean), only 338 cases have data for both variables. 3 This result is obtained by implementing Cronbach’s alpha for gross fixed capital formation using a measure of FDI.
Alternative estimations can be calculated by examining the slope of a scatter diagram of gross fixed capital formation and FDI, which gives 39 cents on the dollar, or by taking an average of these slopes across countries, which yields 35 cents on the dollar.
Cross-border mergers and acquisitions are estimated to account for at least 29% of the region’s FDI inflows. 139Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter III The first two can be considered negative secondary effects of FDI, whereas the third has no effect on the local economy.
Thus, FDI has three main destinations: (i) creation of fixed capital; (ii) mergers and acquisitions; and (iii) leakages or losses (see figure III.2).
The proportions vary widely, mainly owing to the dynamic of mergers and acquisitions; but the total rate of direct fixed capital creation through FDI remains broadly stable at around 1% of GDP.
A breakdown of gross fixed capital formation into non-FDI private investment, public investment and FDI shows that the capital created directly by FDI is a small proportion of the total.
Non-FDI private capital formation is the largest component, and public investment also plays a significant role (see figure III.3).4 Between 2009 and 2013, the region’s gross fixed capital formation averaged 21% of GDP per year, higher than in the European Union or the United States, and a similar rate to Africa.
The relationship between per capita GDP and the rate of fixed capital formation is not linear: both low- and high-income regions have low levels of gross fixed capital formation, albeit for different reasons.
Whereas in the poorest regions income is insufficient to attain high levels of investment, in the developed regions, there is less need for investment in physical capital, owing to the greater emphasis on creating intangible capital.
While not reflected in gross fixed capital formation, this second component is increasingly important, in forms such as investment in education or in technological research and development.
Middle-income regions have higher rates of gross fixed capital formation. 4 In Latin America and the Caribbean, gross fixed capital formation varies greatly from one country to another.
In 2014 for example, it ranged from 13% of GDP in Barbados to 30% in Saint Kitts and Nevis.
In Latin America and the Caribbean there is no relationship of that type: the highest rates of gross fixed capital formation correspond to the countries with the highest income levels.
Investment levels in the region are below those of the rest of the world in all categories considered in figure III.5, especially in lower-middle and upper-middle-income countries.
The Latin American and Caribbean region has one low-income country, six countries in the lower-middle income group, 17 in the upper-middle income group and 10 high-income countries.
For the region’s single low-income economy (Haiti), comparable data are not available.
Major shortage of intangible capital in the region The developed economies of North America and Europe have lower rates of fixed capital formation than those of Latin America and the Caribbean, but productivity levels that are several times higher.
The explanation for this can be found in the cumulative stock of physical capital per worker and in the accumulation of intangible capital.5 At higher levels of development, the ratio between intangible capital and tangible or physical capital increases as economies become more knowledge-based.
An initial measure of intangible capital is investment in education and capacitybuilding.
As the annual investment in this type of capital is hard to measure and it depreciates more slowly than physical capital, most research studies use a measure of the stock of education, frequently estimated by years of schooling among the 5 Apart from its non-physical nature, the definition of intangible capital is hotly debated.
This section focuses on human capital and innovation capital. 142 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter III active population.6 A second measure is innovation capital, defined as “the value of innovation-related assets that contribute to productivity growth in the economy” (McKinsey, 2013).
This type of capital has three components: physical capital, knowledge and human capital.
Following the McKinsey methodology,7 figure III.6 shows estimations of innovation capital for selected countries in Latin America and the Caribbean and in the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).8 The highest levels of innovation capital worldwide are in the United States, Sweden and the United Kingdom.
The key factor explaining the low stock of innovation capital in Latin America and the Caribbean is the very low rate of investment in R&D (see figure III.7).
Whereas in the OECD member States (excluding Chile and Mexico) that variable explains 39% of an innovation capital stock that is equivalent to 34.4% of GDP, in the region it contributes just 12% of an innovation capital that amounts to 15.2% of GDP.
The region is also lagging behind with respect to patents (0% compared with 1%) and intellectual property expenditure (6% versus 7%).
Some components, however, are greater in the region than in OECD countries: the contributions made by tertiary education (42% as against 25%), information and communications technology (ICT) infrastructure (27% versus 22%), and higher education abroad (7% compared with 1%).
The paucity of R&D initiatives in the region reflects the relative shortage of research universities, lack of government support and the heavy concentration of private enterprises in low-technology sectors.
Brazil, for example, is ranked third in public R&D expenditure on agriculture worldwide, accounting for 4% of the total, following China and India (13% and 7%, respectively).
As a result, between 1970 and 2009 productivity in that sector grew by 176% (ahead of China’s 136%) (Beintema and others, 2012). 6 According to this information, Guatemala has the lowest levels of schooling in the region, followed by Haiti and Honduras.
At the other extreme, Chile has the highest levels, ahead of Argentina and Panama.
Ireland has a disproportionate level of innovation capital owing to the way it is calculated, since the total is boosted by intellectual property expenses that reflect that country’s role in tax management schemes.
The same is true to a lesser extent for Luxembourg and the Netherlands.
The thin lines indicate the lower and upper bounds of the estimation for countries for which information is incomplete.
In developed economies, the production structure tends to be more intensive in intangible capital as they move towards more knowledge-intensive sectors.
The different path followed by countries in the region has generally led to low levels of productivity.
These low productivity levels are partly explained by the structural heterogeneity that manifests itself as very low productivity among the smaller firms.
In OECD countries, the smallest enterprises have productivity levels between 60% and 75% of those of large firms, whereas in Latin America and the Caribbean, the equivalent ratio is only 20% to 35%, and the situation is even worse among microenterprises (OECD/ECLAC/ CAF, 2014).
One explanation for the poor results achieved by small firms in the region is their lack of integration into national or global value chains.
Foreign direct investment for technology and international engagement Although FDI makes only a small contribution to gross fixed capital formation, transnational enterprises can play an important role in economic development by helping to transform economies through the creation of intangible capital.
Transnational firms can help overcome the technological barriers to entry into new markets, particularly in the case of proprietary technology.
For example, when the United States enterprise Intel invested in an assembly plant in Costa Rica, that country had no local ICT industry, and the company’s arrival radically transformed the local economy.
Although Intel announced a significant downsizing of its activities in the country in 2014, Costa Rica has kept its advanced ICT cluster.
Although low- and high-technology projects have remained stable, the share of medium-low technology projects has declined from 50% to 15% over the same period, whereas medium-high technology projects have expanded from 30% to 60%.
The reduced share of medium-low technology projects is explained by a slump in extractive projects. 10 There is no certainty that these project announcements will turn into real investments.
The weight of manufacturing dropped from a peak of 89% in 2005 to 33% in 2013, before recovering slightly to 39% in 2015.11 The most dynamic sectors were telecommunications, which doubled its share from 15% to 30%, and renewable energies, which grew from around 5% to 25%.
In 2015, renewable energy accounted for 33% of the value of all medium-high technology projects.
In that year, telecommunications represented 17% and the automotive industry just 6%.
These figures reveal a radical change in the composition of announced projects, which has been unfolding for some time.
This change in the technological intensity of newly announced projects could strengthen the transformative impact of FDI inflows: they could have an effect on the technological intensity of all economic activity, especially in smaller countries and those with less diversified production structures.
The importance of these projects increased in all the economies, except for Colombia.
That result was accentuated by the steep decline in mining projects, which are particularly important in that country. 11 Vehicle assembly plants account for between 15% and 20% of announced projects.
Mexico, followed by Brazil, is the main recipient of investments in high-technology projects, exceeding 10% of the total value in 2003-2015.
First, FDI is directed towards places with local capacities; and, second, the fact that high-technology FDI has gone to a country in the past helps to build capacities and attract more of the same.
In the case of R&D investments, although project announcements have waned considerably over the last few years, the global share of Latin America and the Caribbean has increased slightly from 3.4% in 2003-2005 to 4.4% between 2013 and 2015.
This is important because evidence from developed countries shows that transnationals invest proportionately less in R&D than domestic firms, because their subsidiaries can access advanced technologies through their parent companies, and they undertake activities that are more distant from R&D efforts (Un and Cuervo-Cazurra, 2008).
This manufacturing centre uses some of the most advanced technologies available in the market; and, to use them effectively, it created a large-scale training centre where both Audi employees and local suppliers receive training to enable them to work with this technology.
This means that it is not only the employees of the firm who benefit from the training, but also the suppliers, who are very numerous in this case.
In the case of the hotel sector in the Caribbean, the top executives tend to be recruited internationally and assigned there directly by the company.
Nonetheless, below that level, and in certain specialized posts, local workers have the opportunity to develop new management skills in a professional environment.
Local firms can imitate or copy some of the best practices of transnationals (Gorg and Greenaway, 2003).
Business process outsourcing (BPO) activities in Barbados are one example where foreign firms have helped to modernize the sector.
Similarly, the Government of Belize is seeking to move local firms from BPO to knowledge process outsourcing (KPO), by engaging a foreign firm.
Other than Mexico, the region’s countries have weak participation in global value chains, and the region displays little productive integration (ECLAC, 2015b).
The proportion of foreign value added contained in a country’s gross exports is a measure of its upstream participation, whereas the proportion of domestic value added incorporated in third-party exports represents a measure of downstream participation (Bohn and others, 2015).
This is explained by a less intensive use of imported inputs in Latin American exports, in other words fewer backward linkages.
Compared with the world’s best connected countries (United States, the Netherlands and Singapore), Latin American and Caribbean countries are lagging far behind.
Mexico is the highest ranked (twenty-first), with Brazil (forty-fourth) and Chile (forty-fifth) far behind (see figure III.11).
Attracting investment from transnationals integrated in global value chains can stimulate local suppliers into improving their capacities and joining those chains as autonomous agents.
A major debate is unfolding in the region on the relationship between FDI and participation in international trade (Zhang, 2001; Bengoa and Sánchez-Robles, 2003; Cuadros, Orts and Alguacil, 2004).
The conclusions suggest the existence of a strong two-way relation: integration increases FDI flows and these in turn increase trade possibilities.
For economies to be able to benefit from their membership of a value chain it is crucial to develop local capacities (Cimoli, Dosi and Stiglitz, 2009).
Those capacities mean being able to deliver a given level of quantity and quality, stemming from the economy’s sectoral specialization.
The lack of those capacities substantially reduces the chances of benefiting from integration.
If local firms are unable to meet the demands of transnationals, they will not be able to integrate fully into their chains and the benefits will be reduced. 149Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter III D.
Intangible capital accumulation through foreign direct investment The above provides a basis for relaunching the debate on how to measure and evaluate the benefits of FDI in the receiving country.
An initial approach focuses on issues associated with external financing, from a balance of payments standpoint, and macroeconomic variables such as gross fixed capital formation, exports and employment.
This view adopts an aggregate approach and tends to evaluate FDI inflows by size (“the bigger the better”).
An alternative or complementary view seeks to evaluate the microeconomic aspects of FDI, which stem from the operations of foreign firms in the host country.
In this case, the focus on FDI is replaced by a focus on the activities of transnational enterprises.
Here the key concern is their contribution to the local economy in areas such as the emergence of new activities that extend or deepen industrialization, access, transfer and assimilation of technologies, establishment and deepening of production linkages, human resources training and local business development.
All of these elements contribute directly to the formation of intangible capital in an economy.
Although there is consensus on the potential benefits of FDI, the difference between the two approaches is how these are actually obtained.
Under the first approach, the benefits arise in the form of spillovers from the foreign firms in the local economy, which occur automatically once a certain level of investment has been achieved.
The more modern view, shared by ECLAC,13 is that, although FDI is likely to have positive effects in host countries, they are by no means automatic.
It therefore needs to be shown —and not just assumed— that they are positive.
A direct implication is that FDI policy should focus less on attaining a critical mass of investments and more on ensuring that these are aligned with the country’s productive development objectives.
Proactive and integrated policies The different policy approaches that countries can adopt for attracting FDI are distinguished by the degree of government intervention and proactiveness and the degree of integration with other economic development policies.
The first consists of passive policies, which, despite not reflecting a lack of interest in FDI or being synonymous with low investment flows, imply an absence of specific attraction policies.
In general, the authorities consider that the comparative advantages or macroeconomic conditions are sufficient, and they see no need to intervene in the process.
At most, they confine themselves to defining a legal framework with administrative procedures that regulate FDI, without intervening in firms’ decisionmaking processes.
This strategy could suffice to attract investment by firms targeting a country’s intrinsic advantages, in other words, market potential or the opportunity to exploit natural resources.
This type of policy is not necessarily integrated with productive development policy, and its success is measured essentially by the magnitude of the investment flows.
In general these entail the creation of a specialized department or agency responsible for promoting the country and engaging with potential investors, with the possibility of establishing incentives.
It is also recognized that not all investments are the same, and governments seek those that contribute to national development.
In this stage, governments focus on investment projects to enhance efficiency in the production of export-oriented goods and services, so competition between countries is more intense.
When FDI attraction policies are coordinated and integrated with other development policies, the conditions that make a country attractive to investors are enhanced, and the benefits of FDI can be exploited to the full.
These integrated policies help the country to achieve its previously defined goals.
Countries that are most successful in attracting FDI and harnessing its benefits are those that have adopted more active and targeted policies (UNCTAD, 2004 and 2005).
Where the country’s policy objectives coincide with the interests of transnational firms, a virtuous circle can be generated to the benefit of both parties.
A maturity path can be traced for FDI policy which, as it becomes more proactive and integrated with other development policies, has a better chance of capturing and harnessing its benefits (see diagram III.1).
When FDI attraction policies are coordinated and integrated with other development policies, the conditions that make a country attractive to investors are enhanced, and the benefits of FDI can be exploited to the full. 151Foreign Direct Investment in Latin America and the Caribbean • 2016 Chapter III 2.
Horizontal policies: necessary but not sufficient Policymakers generally agree on the importance of having a pro-investment business climate, which helps not only to attract FDI but also to boost national investment.
The investment climate is a combination of the ease of doing business, efforts to attract investment and the costs and benefits associated with business activity.
In this connection, policies have often focused on reducing the tax burden for investors, which, although important, is not a decisive factor.
In relation to the business climate, many of the region’s countries have a low position in rankings such as the Doing Business Index published by the World Bank.
The highest rated countries are Mexico, Chile and Peru, of which only Mexico is in the world’s top 40, ranked at number 39.
Furthermore, the index shows that only a few countries have improved their relative position in recent years —Costa Rica, El Salvador, Jamaica and Mexico being among them (see figure III.12).
World Bank (2013) argues that a 1 percentage point improvement in the Doing Business Index is associated with an increase in FDI of between US$ 250 million and US$ 500 million, without establishing causality.
The degree to which investment promotion agencies can fulfil this function depends largely on national legislation and the financial and human resources available to them.
First, they need to be consolidated as a one-stop facility where investors can obtain all information and undertake the corresponding procedures.
Second, investment promotion agencies are more effective when they coordinate efforts to promote exports and investments.
Third, institutional autonomy and the political support they receive are crucial to their effectiveness.
Lastly, it is more efficient to work with international and local investors in areas where they face similar problems, such as developing and integrating into global value chains.
In countries where investment promotion policies are not transparent in terms of the incentives offered, increasing information on norms and practices will reduce subjectivity in granting the incentives, and thus strengthen their legitimacy. 3.
Selectivity and mechanisms for transferring benefits Proactiveness is important in two spheres, at different points in the investment process (see diagram III.2): to capture and transfer the potential benefits of FDI.
The first is the targeted promotion of projects at the evaluation stage for potential investors.
The second, in the implementation and operation phase of the investments, seeks to generate mechanisms that enable those investments to integrate more effectively in the local economy.
As investments are not all the same, attracting higher quality investments that are consistent with the country’s development goals would, in principle, generate greater benefits, as well as being an efficient way to use promotion resources.
They refer to the decision that a country or an investment promotion agency adopts to prioritize or prefer one type of investment over another, according to a specific criterion, to then adopt measures that make it possible to capture the corresponding projects.
Targeting, which can use different strategies (see diagram III.3), arises from the confluence of three factors: development policy goals, the country’s advantages and investors’ requirements.
Flows into the country were 30% higher than in 2007, when they had already reached record levels, thanks to investments in the natural resources sector, especially in mining and natural-resource-based manufacturing, such as steel.
The close ties of Mexico and the Caribbean Basin countries with the United States economy explain the drop in FDI flows to that subregion.
The recession in the United States slowed activity among the export platforms located in the subregion, which had been set up mainly to serve the United States market, and this stemmed the flow of export-oriented FDI.
At the same time, the downturn in local economic growth had a negative impact on domesticmarket-seeking FDI.
Mexico was the worst hit in this regard, and its FDI intake fell 20% with respect to 2007.
In contrast, FDI flows to the Caribbean climbed 42% thanks to the rise in FDI in the Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago, which offset the decline in the other countries in the area.
Ratios of FDI to GDP, which indicate the weight of FDI in national economies, were higher in the countries of the Caribbean and of the Eastern Caribbean Currency Union in particular in the last few years.
Much of the FDI received by these countries was in the tourism sector, which is analysed in chapter III.
The distribution of FDI by sector and by country of origin has not varied notably (see figure 2).
The main destination for FDI in the region as a whole is the services sector, basically telecommunications, financial services and public utilities.
In South America, FDI in natural resources, as a proportion of total FDI, continues to be greater than in manufacturing, while the opposite tends to be the case in Mexico and the Caribbean Basin countries.
By country of origin, the United States continues to be the region’s principal source of FDI, followed by Spain and then Canada.
The effect of the international crisis on the different types of FDI (which are classified into natural-resource-seeking, market-seeking and efficiency-seeking FDI according to the investment strategy pursued by transnational corporations) has varied.
Flows of natural-resource-seeking FDI remained strong thanks to high commodity prices and the fact that mining, metallurgy and hydrocarbon projects take years to come to fruition and investments in them tend to focus on the long term rather than on immediate circumstances.
As the international crisis deepened and spread, however, companies in the sector were forced to take measures to mitigate the effects of the turmoil.
These have largely consisted of production stoppages, reductions in the workforce, strategic partnerships to obtain financing and the revision of investment plans, among other steps.
After a period of major expansion, these firms are now revising and cautiously adjusting their investment plans and strategies.
The slowdown of the United States economy, the main destination of exports from Mexico and the Caribbean Basin, has plunged some of the largest manufacturing industries in the subregion, namely the automobile, electronics and textiles and apparel industries, into dire straits.
All of them laid off workers, temporarily stopped production or closed plants in 2008, which has deterred FDI.
The automobile industry is in the most critical situation and is undergoing the most radical restructuring process at the global level.
It remains to be seen how this will affect the region, however.
The international crisis may encourage companies to shift production to developing countries that can offer relatively lower costs, which could stimulate FDI, but this does not seem likely to happen in the short term.
Restructuring and reorganizing production takes time and is considerably difficult when credit is tight.
Market-seeking FDI remained buoyant thanks to its main driver, regional economic growth.
Latin America and the Caribbean posted its sixth consecutive year of economic growth in 2008 which, together with lower unemployment and better poverty indicators, increased the population’s disposable income and boosted domestic demand.
Market-seeking FDI became more buoyant in South America, driven by GDP growth of 5.5% in 2008.
Even the automakers continued to invest in the subregion: the developed countries’ markets may be highly saturated, but opportunities and unmet demand still exist in emerging economies, including Brazil.
Also, the huge battle between the two regional leaders in the telecommunications market (Telefónica and Telmex-América Móvil) is still raging, spurring not only technological development, but also FDI in the industry regionwide.
There was heavy investment in the banking and financial services sector in 2008, but some of the largest financial entities in the region will probably change hands or undergo restructuring given the difficult situation that Citigroup is facing and the emergence of the Brazilian banking giant Itaú-Unibanco.
The struggle for dominance of food distribution channels in the region is also ongoing.
Major investments were carried out in the retail sector, including Wal-Mart’s investment in the Chilean market as part of its strategy to increase its presence in South America.
The international financial crisis has, meanwhile, affected the region’s countries in different ways, gradually shutting down the engines of growth, and the increasing constraints on consumer credit could put off market-seeking FDI.
The region’s governments have taken various steps to prop up aggregate Outward foreign direct investment and the internationalization of the trans-Latins The upward trend in outward foreign direct investment (OFDI) by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean continued in 2008, with OFDI reaching US$ 34.561 billion, 42% above the level recorded in 2007 (see figure 3).
Brazil, the region’s leading foreign investor, spearheaded the increase, with investments of US$ 20.457 billion (61% of total OFDI), followed by Chile and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela with US$ 6.891 and US$ 2.757, respectively.
As the fall-out of the international crisis spreads across Latin America and the Caribbean, the economic conditions that generated the FDI boom of the last five years have begun to change.
Faced with meagre growth prospects, financing constraints and greater uncertainty, it is reasonable to expect that FDI flows to the region will decline in 2009.
The boom has nevertheless underscored the importance of continuing to build and strengthen the production capacity of the region’s national economies so as to maximize the benefits of not only inward, but also outward, FDI.
Pursuing such a strategy could place countries in a better position to withstand periods of economic turmoil such as the one affecting the region at present.
OFDI figures indicate outflows of direct investment by residents, minus sales of assets abroad by those investors.
A combination of factors was behind the region’s notable OFDI performance, including: • The largest investments in 2008 were generally the result of corporate decisions taken before September 2008, the point at which the crisis worsened.
The sectors in which trans-Latins are most active, in particular the natural-resource-based production sectors, performed favourably for the first two thirds of the year.
In fact, some companies’ investments have been driven by the need to diversify and increase their presence in markets that have better growth prospects. • Some investments, especially in the hydrocarbon and mining sectors, where projects have a long maturation period, have been made in anticipation of a recovery in the global economy.
Despite the good results, starting in the fourth quarter of 2008, many trans-Latins were forced to curb their operations and revise their investment plans.
Some enterprises were severely hampered by past international acquisitions —such as the Mexican firm Cemex’s purchase of Rinker of Australia and the acquisition by Argentine firm Tenaris, which is part of Techint, of Maverick of the United States— that, in addition to sharply increasing their debt levels, made them more sensitive to fluctuations in the United States market.
The behaviour of OFDI flows from the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in 2009 will depend largely on the evolution of the international economic and financial crisis and the extent to which it affects global demand for natural resources and the economic performance of the markets of Latin America and the other economies in which the trans-Latins operate.
Given the current situation, the international expansion of Latin American and Caribbean enterprises is expected to be less dynamic in 2009, although the crisis could create new opportunities for solid firms that have access to financing.
Foreign direct investment in offshore business services in Latin America and the Caribbean An increasingly broad range of services fall into the category of offshore business services (offshoring),2 including contact centres, business processes, information technology (IT) services, and knowledge-intensive, analytical services.
What they have in common is that their use of information and communication technologies (ICT) makes it possible to overcome barriers imposed by the distance between the demand and supply of labour.
Companies can therefore provide lower-cost services to their customers or provide a higher-quality service by drawing from a global pool of skilled workers.
By taking part in the offshore business services market, developing countries have benefited from the creation of jobs that are usually better remunerated than alternatives for similarly skilled persons, as well as from the skills-upgrading generated by on-the-job experiences and training and from exposure to global standards in management practice, ICT tools, and technology, among other factors.
Hence FDI in remote business services have great potential to boost the development of recipient countries.
Despite difficulties and discrepancies in quantification, estimates generally coincide in predicting high growth rates for the coming years (see figure 4).
A slowdown may occur in the short run due to the current international economic Offshoring refers to the provision of services from a location outside the country where the customer is located.
By using information and communication technologies (ICT), firms can overcome barriers imposed by the distance between the demand and supply of labour in some activities.
The scope of services offshored is broad and in constant expansion through innovative uses of information and communication technologies (ICT).
A related concept is outsourcing, in which one firm lends services to another, regardless of location.
Some, but not all, offshore business services are outsourced, since some can be provided in-house (which is known as captive offshoring). and financial crisis but, as has occurred elsewhere, the pressure to reduce costs because of the crisis may actually lead more firms to offshore.
There is great potential for growth, given that offshore services still represent only a fraction of the global business services market.
First, competition increased among outsourcing players in the traditional functions, such as contact centres, business process outsourcing (BPO) and IT services.
This drove profit margins down and increased the pressure to offshore to low-cost destinations.
Second, the upgrading of ICT and the body of accumulated experience have prompted firms to offshore a broader array of services, including higher-skilled and higher-value-added services that involve fewer standardized procedures and greater analysis and industry-specific knowledge.
Firms providing those services gain a comparative advantage from having a global presence, operating in different time zones (allowing for 24/7 services) and being able to draw upon a multilingual staff.
Global networks also help to offset the risks involved in concentrating key operations in a single location.
Although India dominates the offshore business services industry, investors in the sector have been turning their attention to Latin America and the Caribbean in the last few years.
United States clients looking to offshore traditional functions tend to prefer to work with service providers who are physically closer, a shorter journey time away and in the same time zone, among other benefits of what has been named “nearshoring”.
Firms running worldwide integrated operations in higher-value-added services have been using the Latin American and Caribbean region to complement other destinations.
The Latin American and Caribbean region still plays a relatively small role in the global offshore business services industry.
In 2007, it accounted for 3% of payments by United States companies to companies abroad (affiliated and unaffiliated) for computer and information services, compared to India’s 27%.
In total business and professional services (which include management consultancy, public relations, R&D, testing, advertising, construction, architecture, engineering, legal and equipment support services), the region’s share is about 7%.
Nonetheless, world rankings based on investor perception indicate that interest in Latin America and the Caribbean is growing.
The English-speaking Caribbean has hosted United States-oriented call centres and data-entry centres since the 1980s.
The industry has boomed since 2005, however, fuelled by the preference for nearby destinations and by the upgrading of the local telecommunications infrastructure.
Although the Caribbean can compete with Asia on a cost basis in some services, its main advantages lie in operations that require frequent interaction and those in which scale is non-critical.
Low staff attrition has also made the English-speaking Caribbean attractive for offshoring in segments that require a relatively high investment in human resources training, such as medical informatics.
For the economies of the English-speaking Caribbean, this industry is particularly important because it complements the fairly volatile and cyclical tourism industry.
Central American countries and the Dominican Republic have also benefited from nearshoring.
Although only a fraction of the population in these countries speaks English fluently, the number is significant in absolute terms, allowing for the establishment of larger centres than in most of the English-speaking Caribbean.
The bilingual contingent has grown in recent years through educational efforts and through the return of people who had previously worked or studied in the United States or grown up there.
Moreover, the growth of the Hispanic community in the United States and of the markets of Latin America and Spain has created demand for Spanish-speaking operators, to the benefit of these countries that stand at the intersection of North and South.
Governments have actively supported FDI generally and most have taken measures to promote the offshore service industry.
In fact, as the apparel industry started suffering from competition from China and other Asian countries, especially from 2001 onward, the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic took steps to diversify their economies and have targeted the offshore business services industry in particular.
The larger markets, Mexico and Brazil, host service centres in virtually every major segment of offshore business services.
Although they are relatively recent offshore destinations and export a relatively small share of those services, they represent a large share of the region’s total services exports.
Part of the attractiveness of both countries for offshore operations stems from their large local markets and solid industrial sector.
The strong presence of transnational corporations in multiple industries resulted in the establishment of in-house service centres for engineering and R&D, regional headquarters and shared service centres.
It also led to the presence of outsourcing vendors that cater to both global and local clients.
In addition, the existence of sizeable IT hardware manufacturing industries in both countries helped create a pool of engineers and other professionals employable in the IT services industry.
Other South American countries have focused on specific niches of offshoring, based on their comparative advantages.
Argentina has competed well both in segments where cost is the critical factor, such as call centres, and in higher-skilled industries, such as IT.
Chile has taken a cluster approach to the development of a global services industry, which today includes operations in shared service centres, software development and knowledge process outsourcing (KPO).
Uruguay has been stronger in the software product industry but has expanded in services, especially since Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) of India established its global delivery centre in 2005.
Colombia has a large business services industry which, like that of its larger neighbours, caters largely to the local market.
Given that the offshore business service industry is seen as crucial for attracting FDI, countries have taken specific steps to foster it, alongside horizontal business climate policies, country image promotion and other initiatives directed at attracting FDI generally.
The most common specific measures fall into two categories: tax-related instruments and free zones, and skills development.
In fact, one of the major bottlenecks for the expansion of the offshoring industry in Latin America and the Caribbean lies in the availability of skilled human resources.
Other initiatives include the establishment of technology parks and grants for pre-investment assessments and for setting-up costs.
As well as the public policy measures already being taken to help the industry realize its potential, other steps will be needed to overcome the region’s main limitations, including the size of the pool of workers with adequate technical and language skills.
Integrated hotel and real estate complexes: investments and business strategies Tourism grew strongly in the second half of the twentieth century and has become one of the most internationalized industries in the global economy.
Many different economic activities involving a wide range of agents, from transnational corporations to very small firms, interact in this industry, offering diverse services in different parts of the world.
Although Europe and North America continue to account for the bulk of tourist arrivals, other destinations have gained prominence, many of them in emerging economies, which has spread the potential benefits of tourism to practically every corner of the globe.
The Latin American and Caribbean region is the destination for just over 8% of international journeys, and this share has remained relatively stable for the last few decades (see figure 5).
Changes have been coming ever faster in the industry recently, in response to shifts in economic, cultural, political, technological and demographic patterns, and it is becoming increasingly segmented.
Accordingly, tourism companies have begun to outsource many of their activities, which has brought related firms —real estate and construction businesses, financial entities and so forth— into the sector.
As in other service industries, the leading firms have been able to hold on to their competitive edge by entering into different types of contractual arrangements —management, leasing and franchising— without having to make conventional capital investments in order to embark on new initiatives.
As a result, many global brands in the tourism industry have established an international presence without pouring large amounts of FDI into securing control of physical assets, such as real estate.
As tourists become better informed and more selective and demanding, many developing countries have made it a priority to capture FDI and attract global brands in order to gain a foothold in international tourism circuits.
Mounting competition and over-exploitation of the natural environment, however, forced the major tour operators to seek out new destinations to meet the expectations of an increasingly demanding clientele.
Thanks to their proximity to the United States, Mexico and the countries of the Caribbean Basin developed into increasingly attractive hubs for this type of vacation tourism and now account for almost 70% of all international arrivals in the Latin American and Caribbean region (see figure 6).
But volatile demand and the problems caused by issues of waste disposal, beach pollution and the provision and delivery of drinking water began to erode the competitive advantages that sustained the industry.
In these circumstances, the major tourism companies embarked on massive upgrades of their facilities in an effort to capture higher-income travellers.
The region also began to see new ventures on a much larger scale involving local and international real estate developers.
Spurred by the real estate boom in the industrialized countries and taking advantage of the lower prices prevailing in the Latin American economies, developers began to offer a high-quality product aimed at the flourishing vacation-homes market, both for occasional travellers and for those seeking a more permanent residence, such as retirees from Canada and the United States.
The combination of high-end hotels and real estate developments has enabled investors to increase their cash flow through home sales and to prorate the costs of building and maintaining shared leisure facilities, such as golf courses, among the owners of the residential units.
These mega-projects have been highly successful in Mexico and are beginning to spread to other countries, such as Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Panama and, more recently, the North-East of Brazil.
Construction companies, real estate developers and financial entities, many of them locally-owned, are the main drivers of these mega-projects, while the hotel chains contribute their business know-how and customer management experience, all vouched for by the prestige of their brand name.
This model seems to have stronger linkages with the local economy than the all-inclusive scheme, which tended strongly towards enclave-type operation.
Lastly, investors’ expectations may be severely dented by the repercussions of the global financial crisis and of fears over influenza A (H1N1).
In fact, not only have visitor numbers dropped, but the sales of several of these real estate developments have plummeted in the last few months, which has complicated the financial management of the mega-projects.
Conclusions and implications In a highly volatile climate, levels of FDI flows into the Latin American and Caribbean region reached a fresh high in 2008, drawn mainly by the sound performance of the region’s domestic economies and of the industries linked to natural-resource extraction and processing, especially in the first three quarters of the year.
As conditions have become increasingly challenging, many countries of the region have taken steps to diversify their FDI priority areas, in order to maintain and augment their presence in the international economy.
In particular, strenuous efforts are being made to develop offshore business services and the new integrated hotel and real estate complexes.
Offshoring may not attract huge volumes of FDI, but it does create a number of benefits in terms of jobs, training, technology transfer and assimilation and local business development.
Large-scale tourism projects have helped to create economic activities in little-developed areas and seem to be reshaping business models in overexploited locations.
They also provide an important source of employment for unskilled workers and have created interesting synergies between local and foreign businesses and investors.
The increase in FDI flows into the region in recent years has been advantageous.
Yet the potential benefits of this increase and of the greater presence of TNCs have not always been fully realized.
Resource-seeking FDI has contributed to higher exports and has generated employment and fiscal revenue.
TNCs in the natural-resource sector often continue to operate as enclaves in isolation from the domestic economy, however, with very limited local processing operations and risks in terms of pollution and environmental degradation.
Efficiency-seeking FDI in export sectors has helped to transform the industry in a number of economies, mainly in Mexico and some Caribbean Basin countries, by making their manufactures more internationally competitive.
It also helps to transfer knowledge and technology and so contributes to enhancing human resources.
This type of investment can risk being trapped in low-valueadded activities, which generate few production linkages and are based on static comparative advantages (low cost) rather than on dynamic advantages (innovation) in the host economy.
Scaling up the value chain of efficiencyseeking FDI remains a challenge for the region.
Domestic-market-seeking FDI has fostered new economic activities in host economies, increasing local content, developing production linkages and local business and improving the standard of services.
In the absence of sound institutions or in the presence of regulatory gaps, however, this type of FDI can lead to the crowding out of local companies or the production of goods and services that are uncompetitive on international markets.
The strong FDI flows into the region in the last five years show that the volume of such investment does not in itself guarantee the realization of all the potential benefits of the presence of TNCs.
OFDI flows from the countries of the region have also continued to increase.
As the trans-Latins have globalized, they have become more competitive, but this does not automatically feed through into industry-wide competitiveness or efficiency gains.
The potential benefits of knowledge- or technology-transfer may be diluted by constraints on absorptive capacity.
All this indicates the need to formulate and implement policies that can increase the absorptive capacity of the region’s economies.
So the key question is not only how much FDI is received, but what is achieved with it.
As part of the response to the current economic crisis, the production capacities of domestic economies must be built up and strengthened in order to maximize the benefits not only of FDI, but also of these economies’ investment abroad.
Taking full advantage of FDI flows and the presence of the TNCs making those investments may be one of the keys to increasing the share of technology- and knowledge-intensive sectors in the production structure.
The realization of that potential depends heavily on the action of a production development policy that is strongly centred on innovation and local capacity-building.
Introduction Foreign direct investment (FDI) levels in Latin America and the Caribbean reached US$ 128.301 billion in 2008, 13% above the record volume posted in 2007.
This was a notable result considering that the international financial and economic crisis triggered a 15% contraction of FDI flows worldwide.
FDI in the region did not escape the crisis unscathed, however: growth in FDI in 2008 was below the 52% rate witnessed the year before.
The resilience of FDI flows to the region is noteworthy, but the record high conceals marked differences at the subregional level.
Brazil, with a 30% increase in FDI inflows, became the main FDI recipient in Latin America and the Caribbean and accounted for most of the increase recorded by the region as a whole.
Meanwhile, FDI to Mexico and the countries of the Caribbean Basin fell 5% in comparison with 2007, to US$ 38.438 billion.
Mexico remained the main recipient in this subregion, but its FDI inflows dropped 20% in relation to 2007.
The increase in FDI to South America was fuelled by two factors: commodity prices, which remained high through most of the year and attracted natural-resourceseeking investment, and the solid economic growth of the subregion, which encouraged market-seeking investment.
In contrast, the recession in the United States had a direct negative impact on the economies of Mexico and the Caribbean Basin, because it removed the incentive for efficiency-seeking investors to set up export platforms in the subregion.
The close ties between these economies and the United States market led to a slowdown in economic growth in the subregion, which also resulted in market-seeking FDI being less buoyant.
This was largely on account of the major investment plans of trans-Latin corporations which, in many cases, were executed in 2008, and to the fact that these companies’ investments in the naturalresources sector are less sensitive to the current situation because they correspond to long-term projects.
The largest investor in Latin America and the Caribbean was Brazil, which accounted for almost 60% of the region’s total outward investments in 2008.
Given the magnitude and spread of the international financial and economic crisis, this chapter examines the main effects of that crisis on current and future FDI flows to Latin America and the Caribbean.
The analysis is based on balance-sheet data and information on the activities and strategies of the main transnational and regional corporations in Latin America and the Caribbean, the so-called trans-Latins.
The OFDI figures indicate outflows of direct investment by residents, minus disinvestments abroad by those investors.
The FDI figures do not include flows received by the main financial centres of the Caribbean.
The OFDI figures do not include flows originating in these financial centres.
An overview of investment flows worldwide The global boom in FDI, which started in 2003 and peaked in 2007, was brought to a halt by the international financial and economic crisis (see figure I.2).
In 2008, global FDI flows totalled US$ 1.7 trillion, a figure that, despite being 15% lower than in 2007, was still above the average for the previous five years.
What started out as a crisis in the United States real estate market in mid-2007 soon turned into an upheaval that shook the financial systems of most of the developed countries and exposed major cracks in the global financial market.
Increasing financial deregulation and a flurry of new instruments (such as mortgage-backed securities and collateralized debt obligations) encouraged a massive accumulation of financial assets supported by mounting levels of debt in the developed countries.
For consumers, this meant that financing could be obtained to buy consumer goods, but the drop in share and housing prices slashed the value of their assets, which curtailed their purchasing power and drastically altered expectations.
Companies reacted with measures to curb supply, which contributed to the slowdown in economic growth.
Meanwhile, rising levels of debt (particularly off-balance-sheet debt) in certain financial institutions pushed leverage ratios to extraordinary highs in some cases.
The deleveraging of these institutions widened the cracks that had appeared earlier in the financial system and tumbled several established financial institutions in the third quarter of 2008, which lead to the rapid evaporation of global liquidity.
The crisis which had started in the developed countries gradually spread to the developing ones, both through the real economy (the slowdown in exports, the fall in commodity prices, the decline in remittances) and the financial market (less access to financing and at higher costs).
And the crisis became a global one.1 This gradual deterioration of the economic situation completely altered the outlook for FDI in 2008.
The negative impact of the international crisis on FDI flows made itself felt in three ways: (1) Through the worsening of the prospects for economic growth, which is the single most determinant factor of FDI (Sauvant, 2008a).
The present situation with its bleak growth prospects (see table I.1) has lowered the incentives to step up production capacity, which has triggered a sharp contraction in FDI flows. (2) Through the more limited access to resources to finance investments.
The international crisis has limited access to financing in two ways: the contraction and increased cost of commercial credit is forcing companies to rely on their own resources to finance investments (Sauvant, 2008a); and the economic crisis is eroding corporate profits.
This combination of factors has placed constraints on companies’ capacity to finance new investments or mergers and acquisitions with their own funds (UNCTAD, 2009).
A more optimistic and a more pessimistic scenario are also taken into consideration. (3) By raising perceptions of risk and uncertainty.
Companies have taken various measures (restructuring, divestment, plant closures, pay roll reductions) to prepare themselves for the possible turmoil ahead.
For example, in the face of plummeting commodity prices and the turmoil in world markets, BHP Billiton (Australia) withdrew its bid for Rio Tinto (United Kingdom), and the mega-deal between the two companies is now on hold (Expansión, 2008).
Another example in the mining sector was the withdrawal of the bid made by Xstrata (Switzerland, United Kingdom) for Lonmin (United Kingdom) on the grounds that it was having difficulty obtaining credit to finance the transaction (Financial Post, 2008).
The world economic situation and its prospects led Samsung (Republic of Korea) to withdrew its US$ 5.9 billion takeover bid for SanDisk (United States), and Huawei (China) had to suspend the sale of its mobile devices unit after several possible buyers pulled out (New York Times, 2008).
Other examples and their impact on Latin America are described in the next section.
In comparison, FDI flows towards developing countries and transition economies increased 7% and 24%, respectively and reached a new record high.
This was achieved thanks to high commodity prices, the solid economic performance of some of developing economies and the inertia of certain large investment projects which were already under way and were not suspended.
Although developed countries are still the largest recipients of global FDI, their share fell from 69% in 2007 to 60% of world FDI flows in 2008, offset by the rise in the share of the developing and transition economies from 31% to 40% over the same period.
The share of Latin America and the Caribbean in global FDI increased from 7% in 2007 to 8% in 2008 (see table I.2).
Inward FDI in developing and transition economies increased, but the international crisis curbed their growth also, albeit to different degrees in different regions.
The extent of the slowdown depends on the economic vulnerability of each country or region and on how far the effects of the crisis have spread.
In every region except Africa, FDI growth rates were lower than in 2007.
Flows to Latin America and the Caribbean are analysed in greater detail in the next section.
In terms of FDI as a proportion of GDP, the regions with the highest indicators were South-Eastern Europe, the Commonwealth of Independent States and Africa.4 By the same measure, FDI in developing countries fell in relation to the previous year (see figure I.3). 27% in number and 40% in value with respect to the previous year.
National mergers and acquisitions (between companies in the same country), meanwhile, fell 24% in number and 36% in volume.5 This decline may signal the end of what could be considered the sixth wave of mergers and acquisitions (see box I.1).
Cross-border mergers and acquisitions also provide an indication of how the current situation is affecting FDI flows.
These transactions tend to follow the same pattern as total FDI flows and are one of the most common means that transnational corporations use to penetrate foreign markets.
The volume of mergers and acquisitions announced in 2008 was well below the volume recorded in 2007, mainly due to the growing limitations on financing (see figure I.4).
Announced cross-border transactions fell The objective of this indicator (FDI/GDP) is to normalize FDI figures according to the size of the economy.
It has several flaws, however: given that the GDP figures used are based on current prices, some factors, such as inflation or exchange rate fluctuations, can have a strong effect on the FDI/GDP ratio, which makes it difficult to compare one period or one region with another.
Bloomberg does not report on the value of all the transactions; the aggregated data therefore only correspond to transactions whose values are made public.
It should be noted that the financial crisis triggered a major drop in share prices and consequently in the value of companies’ assets.
This makes the same merger or acquisition worth less in monetary terms than before the crisis, which means that FDI in cross-border transactions also declines in value terms during the crisis.
Despite the world economic situation, several large transactions announced prior to the crisis did still go ahead in 2008.
A list of the cross-border transactions involving amounts above US$10 billion that were announced or concluded in 2008 is provided in table I.A-1 of the annex.
The value of all the transactions was not given; the aggregated data therefore corresponds only to transactions for which this information was available.
The first wave (1887-1904) led to the creation of the principal steel, telephone, oil and other giants of the manufacturing and transportation industries in the United States.
The main motivation of companies during this wave was to monopolize markets.
The second wave (1916-1929), which ended with the 1929 stock market crash and the Great Depression, saw further consolidation in the industries involved in the first wave, as well as mergers leading to greater market concentrations and between companies seeking greater diversification or vertical integration.
The third wave (the 1960s) involved diversification and the creation of conglomerates.
Companies such as IT&T, LTV and Litton were created during this period.
Those companies that diversified, however, never reaped the benefits of this process.
The fourth wave (the 1980s) was mainly characterized by hostile takeovers, junk bond financing and the increase in the volume and size of leveraged buyouts.
This wave ended with the leveraged buyout of RJR Nabisco, the collapse of the junk bond market and serious capital and credit portfolio problems in commercial banks.
Towards the end of the 1980s, European companies sought to prepare for the European Common Market through cross-border horizontal mergers.
During this period companies of unprecedented global size and scale were created.
The widespread belief that size was key to competing in global markets motivated mergers between such companies as Chrysler and Daimler-Benz, Exxon and Mobil, Boeing and McDonnell Douglas, as well as AOL and Time Warner.
At the beginning of the new millennium, however, the bursting of the dot-com bubble, the fall of Nasdaq, the tightening of banking standards on issuing credit and the fact that merger announcements were not well received by the stock markets put an end to the fifth wave of mergers and acquisitions.
The sixth wave (2003-2007) saw record numbers of cross-border mergers and acquisitions.
This wave was spurred by sustained global economic growth, pressure on transnational firms to improve their competitiveness through the acquisition of foreign companies, globalization, the availability of low-cost financing, the rise in commodity prices, increased hedge fund activity and notable growth of private equity funds.
In economic literature on the subject, particularly neoclassical works, waves of mergers and acquisitions are held to be the result of changes in the economic, technological or regulatory environment within an industry (Mitchell and Mulherin 1996) which induces the large-scale reassignment of assets.
These shocks alone, however, are not sufficient to produce a merger wave.
Capital must be available and there must be fewer restrictions on financing for changes to become a wave The current financial crisis, uncertainty and lack of liquidity have been negative factors which slowed the process of mergers and acquisitions both domestically and internationally in 2008.
This could signal the end of the wave that began only five years ago.
Their investments have accounted for between 80% and 90% of total outward FDI in the last two decades (see figure I.5).
The volume of outward FDI originating from developing and transition economies has continued to climb, however.
In the 1990s, this upward trend remained constant, driven by buoyant outward FDI flows from Asia.
E.08.II.D.23; estimates for 2008 based on projections of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC).
Although cross-border mergers and acquisitions have declined, an analysis of the 100 largest operations in 2008 shows that there was an increase in mergers undertaken by companies from developing countries and transition economies in industrialized countries.
Recent examples are the transactions carried out by Aluminium Corporation of China (Chinalco) and the Chinese mining firm China Minmetals.
In one operation involving joint ventures in aluminium, copper and iron ore and the purchase of convertible bonds, Chinalco invested US$ 19.5 billion in the mining company Rio Tinto, whose debts are estimated at around US$ 40 billion.
China Minmetals tendered a bid of US$ 17 billion for the Australian firm OZ minerals, which also has debt problems (The Economist, 2009b and 2009c).
Sovereign wealth funds are another significant source of financing originating from developing countries and they have a large potential to generate FDI.7 These funds have an estimated value of US$ 5 trillion in assets.
FDI as a stabilizing influence on capital flows in times of crisis FDI is still the most important source of financing for developing and transition economies and has proven to be the most resilient in the current context.
Although in absolute terms FDI has increased over time, in relative terms, it has lost ground to other capital flows, such as portfolio investment flows and commercial bank funding (see figure I.6).
The increase and diversification of capital inflows in developing countries has been unquestionably positive.
The world economic crisis, however, caused a sharp contraction in portfolio investment and private lending, which suddenly cut off capital flows to developing countries (see box I.2).
First it affected the transnational corporations of the developed world and then the companies of the developing and transition economies whose financial situation had been boosted by high commodity prices, at least those that export commodities.
Sovereign wealth funds are investment funds that are financed by the accumulation of international reserves that are managed separately from official reserves handled by the country’s monetary authorities.
They are directly or indirectly managed by Governments, which has aroused concern in several recipient countries, leading some to establish ceilings and much more demanding review procedures for investments.
FDI implies a long-term relationship that reflects a lasting interest in a company located in a different economy than that of the foreign investor.
In 2004, Lenovo acquired the computer division of IBM in an operation that aroused national security concerns in the United States based on fears that the deal would enable the company to transfer advanced technology to the Government of China.
When the United States Department of State wanted to purchase Lenovo computers, it could only acquire those that would be used in what are considered non-classified situations.
In 2006, DP World (United Arab Emirates) tried to buy six ports in the United States that were owned by P&O, and although the deal was initially approved by the Foreign Investment Committee, it was blocked for national security reasons during a second review by the United States Congress.
The worst hit were the developed countries, which saw their inward FDI flows fall by 25%.
Flows towards developing and transition economies, on the other hand, increased 7% and 24%, respectively.
FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean (including the financial centres) withstood the first onslaught of the economic crisis and actually rose 9%.
Despite this positive performance, FDI flows are expected to subside in 2009 in the developing and transition economies unless the world economy starts to show signs of recovery.
The following sections analyse the performance of Latin America and the Caribbean both as a recipient and as a source of foreign investment.
Although foreign direct investment (FDI) has been one of the most important sources of financing for developing countries, the composition of international capital flows has changed significantly in recent years.
The proportion of FDI in total private capital inflows declined over the decade to less than 50%, while flows from portfolio investment and private lenders increased their prominence as sources of financing.
With the unfolding of the world economic crisis, however, these latter flows, which are highly sensitive to changes in the global situation, contracted sharply.
FDI flows, by contrast, remained extremely steady and even increased in absolute terms.
FDI inflows and transnational corporations in Latin America and the Caribbean Trends and characteristics of FDI flows to Latin America and the Caribbean in 2008 Despite the international crisis, FDI flows to Latin America and the Caribbean continued to climb in 2008.
While the FDI received by South America rose 24% to US$ 89.862 billion, the FDI received in Mexico and the Caribbean Basin11 fell 5% to US$ 38.438 billion, basically as a result of the enormous drop in FDI flows to Mexico (see figure I.7).
The FDI figures indicate inflows of foreign direct investment, minus divestments (sales of assets) by foreign investors.
The economic recession in the United States produced a slowdown in the activity of the export platforms that were mainly set up in the countries of this subregion to supply the United States market, and this had a negative impact on efficiency-seeking FDI.
At the same time, the slowdown in the economies of the subregion itself deterred market-seeking investment.
Brazil accounts for the bulk of the rise in FDI in the region: FDI inflows in that country reached a new high of US$ 45.058 billion in 2008, 30% above the record posted in 2007.
Of that, about 50% was in the natural-resources sector and natural-resource-based manufacturing, 14 mainly mining.15 These sectors also account for 80% of the increase in FDI in the country.
Nevertheless, growth in this type of FDI was not as buoyant as in natural-resource-seeking FDI.
Other factors underpinning the continued rise in FDI in Brazil up to the end of 2008 despite the crisis are the large size of the domestic market, a lower dependence on exports than in other emerging economies and the lower exposure of the Brazilian banking system to the financial crisis (SOBEET, 2009).
FDI flows to Central America remained stable, increasing 7% to US$ 7.554 billion.
FDI in the country plummeted 48% with respect to the previous year to US$ 784 million.
This drop should be analysed in context, however; acquisitions in the banking sector in 2007 generated an unusually high level of FDI, and the volume received in 2008 represented the second largest amount ever observed in the country.
FDI shrank in most countries in the subregion, but this decline was offset by the increases recorded in the Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago.
This was largely on account of FDI in the trade and industry, telecommunications and mining sectors.
The mining sector in fact received the largest investment ever made in the country: US$ 3 billion dollars in the Barrick Gold project.
This offset waning investment in tourism and real estate development, which have been the main sources of FDI in the past few years (see chapter III).
In Trinidad and Tobago, FDI is estimated to have increased by 200% to about US$ 2.5 billion thanks to Royal Bank of Canada’s buy-out of RBTT Financial Holdings Limited in what has been one of the largest transactions in the region (see box I.A-7 in the annex).
In South America, the increase in FDI flows to Argentina, Chile and Colombia was strongly driven by the rise in natural-resource-seeking FDI, especially in the mining industry in Chile and Colombia.
In Chile, most of the growth in FDI can be attributed to mining investments, most notably, the purchase by the Japanese group Marubeni of a 30% stake in the La Esperanza mine owned by Antofagasta Minerals, for US$ 1.3 billion.
Investments in the natural-resources sector, especially in petroleum and mining activities, accounted for 54% of FDI in Colombia.
The countries that recorded the largest relative increase in FDI were the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador.
In the case of Ecuador, approximately 80% of the rise was generated by investments in the transportation, warehousing and communications sectors, mainly those made by América Móvil and Telefónica, which offset the decline in FDI in the natural-resources and public services sectors (electricity, water and gas).
At present some countries do not report FDI by sector, which limits the analysis of the effect of FDI on the productive sectors of the economy.
According to the data available, the economic crisis did not substantially alter the sectoral distribution pattern of FDI in 2008.
FDI in services still accounts for the largest proportion of FDI in the region, although over the last year, investments in natural resources have climbed just as investment in manufacturing has fallen (see figure I.8).
For more information on the sectoral distribution of FDI by country, see the tables in annex I.A-2.
Heavy worldwide demand for natural resources meant that large investments were made in the primary sector of the economies that are more manufacturing-oriented.
The Canadian company Baja Mining Corp. and a consortium of Asian firms, for example, invested in El Boleo, one of the largest mining projects in Mexico, and another Canadian company, Barrick Gold, spearheaded the largest investment ever in the history of the Dominican Republic.
Another way to examine the dynamics of foreign capital flows by sector is to analyse the composition of the sales of the 500 largest non-financial companies operating in the region.
Immediately prior to the crisis, transnational corporations accounted for 29% of sales, slightly above the 26% share recorded in 2006 (see figure I.9).
The market share of transnational corporations varies from sector to sector: they account for 13% of sales in the primary sector, 31% in services and 42% in manufacturing.
This represents an increase in all sectors since 2006: from 6% to 13% in the primary sector, 29% to 31% in services and 37% to 42% in manufacturing. large proportion of sales in manufacturing and services accounted for by transnationals, however, shows that these are the sectors that are most likely to receive FDI in the region.
For more information on the 60 largest nonfinancial transnational corporations in Latin America and the Caribbean, see table I.A-5 of the annex.
By country of origin, the United States continues to be the region’s largest source of FDI, followed by Spain, Canada, the Netherlands and Japan (see figure I.11).
The increase in FDI from Canada and Japan, driven by naturalresource-seeking investment, is especially noteworthy.
For more details on the geografic origin of FDI by country, see table I.A-3 in the annex.
Total sales by the largest transnational corporations in the region are distributed as follows: 52% in the manufacturing sector, 36% in services and only 12% in the primary sector (see figure I.10).
The low proportion of sales in the primary sector is the result of the predominance of State companies in the hydrocarbon industry.
Finally, as mentioned in the previous section, crossborder mergers and acquisitions constitute a indicator of FDI trends complementary to the information obtained from central bank data.
Cross-border transactions in the region increased almost hand in hand with FDI.
Despite slowing down at the global level, the pace of mergers and acquisitions did not slacken in the region.
In fact, the operations concluded up to November 2008 amounted to US$ 119 billion, more than the US$ 110 million recorded in the same period the previous year (Latin Finance, 2008).
For a list of the largest transactions carried out in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2008 see table I.A-7 of the annex.
Although the foreign direct investment (FDI) received by these countries is relatively low when compared with FDI to Mexico and the Caribbean Basin, it represents a larger proportion of GDP.
For 2000-2008 statistics are available on country of origin for only 42% of all investments received.
This information suggests that the United States is the largest investor (23%), followed by the United Kingdom (13%) and the Caribbean countries (5%).
In terms of sectoral composition, tourism is the main focus of FDI.
In the last three years, the sector has received more than 50% of all FDI entering ECCU.
In short, FDI in the region increased on account of the rise in flows to South America and to Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Colombia in particular.
The contrasting situations are explained by the patterns of FDI inflows in each subregion and the fact that the international crisis has affected the different types of FDI in different ways.
The next section examines the impact of the economic crisis on the different types of investment and on the strategies of some of the largest investors in the region.
The land sales category may include FDI in the tourism or real estate sectors.
Effects of the crisis on corporate strategy FDI flows are the result of the actions and strategies adopted by investors.
Therefore, in order to understand the dynamics of FDI in the present situation, it is essential to understand how the international crisis has affected the engines that drive each type of investment.
Only the first three types of FDI will be examined in this section as strategic-assetseeking FDI flows are minimal in the region.
Market-seeking FDI is highly important throughout the region and especially so in the countries with large domestic markets.
Natural-resource-seeking FDI still continues to account for the largest proportion of FDI in South America, while efficiency-seeking FDI has more weight in FDI flows to Mexico and the Caribbean Basin countries.
Each of these types of FDI has been affected in different ways by the crisis. (a) Foreign direct investment in natural resources Natural-resource-seeking FDI remained buoyant in the region despite the drop in commodity prices in the second half of 2008 (see figure I.13).
Mining projects take time to bear fruit and investments in the sector therefore tend to focus on the long term.
This makes naturalresource-seeking investment less sensitive to changes in circumstances than efficiency- or market-seeking FDI.
The effects of the international crisis and the fall in commodity prices are beginning to resonate in the sector, however, and some companies have already cut back production, laid off workers and postponed investment projects.
After a period of robust expansion, the firms operating in the natural resources sector are now cautiously revising their plans and adjusting their investment strategies (ECLAC, 2008a).
In the case of energy, the basket includes crude oil, petroleum derivatives, coal and natural gas, and in the case of minerals and metals, it includes steel, copper, iron, aluminium, silver, zinc, tin, nickel, lead and gold. (i) Mining Investment in mining in the region was still forthcoming in 2008, but mainly in South America.
As a result of the consolidation witnessed in the industry over the last few years, the large mining companies continued to pursue expansion strategies in 2008.
The goal has been to attain economies of scale and scope and to ensure availability of, and access to, the minerals that constitute the basis of their net worth (ECLAC, 2008a).
The relatively low volatility and high price of iron ore in comparison with other products (see figure I.14) spurred FDI especially in Brazil, which has large iron deposits.
In the first half of 2008, Rio Tinto (United Kingdom/ Australia)announced plans to expand for its La Corumba mine, and the United Kingdom firm Anglo-American purchased the Brazilian firm Iron X (of the MMX group) to broaden its iron ore operations in the country.
The price of iron ore was kept high by huge demand in the manufacturing industry during the economic boom that lasted through 2007 and into the beginning of 2008.
Iron and steel companies pursued vertical integration with the mining sector to ensure themselves a steady supply of the inputs they need.
The Argentine firm Technint, for example, announced plans to invest in the development of its iron and tin deposits in Mexico.
Arcelor Mittal (India/ Luxembourg) bought the assets of London Mining, an iron ore producer, in Brazil in 2008.
A consortium of companies from Japan and the Republic of Korea acquired a 40% stake in the mining arm of Compañía Siderúrgica Nacional (CSN) of Brazil (see table I.A-7 for details).19 Together with its balance-of-payments figures, these actions show that Brazil has become the epicentre of the global trends under way in the region’s industrial sector.
This is one of the large transactions underpinning the high level of FDI recorded in Brazil in the last quarter of 2008.
Since demand for basic products has fallen, however, and the financial crisis has hampered access to credit, transnational corporations have scaled back their investment plans, even in iron ore.
At the beginning of 2009, AngloAmerican announced a 50% cut in its expansion plans, which will almost undoubtedly affect its projects in Brazil and Chile.
Rio Tinto announced the postponement of its US$ 2 billion expansion plan for the La Corumba mine, which has brought associated logistics projects, such as the iron-ore port in Uruguay, to a halt.
Rio Tinto’s huge debts pose another obstacle to its expansion plans (Reuters, Meanwhile, the drop in copper prices has triggered vast changes in strategy in transnational corporations operating in this segment, at least in the short term, mainly in Chile, Mexico and Peru.
The impact in Chile has been huge: US$ 12 billion in projects have been postponed or suspended (La Tercera, 2009a).
One of the most significant cases was the postponement by Australian firm BHP Billiton of its US$ 6.7 billion expansion project at La Escondida, the largest private copper mine in Chile (Business Latin America, 2009).
Two other major projects will also be delayed: Inca Pacific of Canada has halted its copper mining operations at El Magistral in Peru, and Baja Mining has put its announced US$ 911 million investment in copper, cobalt, magnesium and zinc mining on hold in Mexico.
Even then, given the time it takes for mining projects to come to fruition, companies are proceeding with caution so as to still be able to react quickly to a rise in demand once the crisis is over.
Investment in the sector will therefore continue, but at a slower pace, and access to financing will become a vital factor and play a major role in corporate decisions in 2009.
Against a backdrop of falling prices, restricted financing, an economic slowdown and growing uncertainty, companies have halted or postponed new projects and expansions and found themselves forced to adjust their operations by cutting back operations or laying off workers.
This is largely due to the strong presence of local State-owned oil companies, especially in the countries with the largest reserves, which sometimes limits the participation of transnational corporations.21 Investment in the sector was buoyant worldwide in 2008, with exploration and production companies investing an estimated US$ 96.2 billion in the sector, 47% more than in 2007.
As in the mining sector, however, the financial crisis and the drastic plunge in oil prices (see figure I.13) forced firms to revise their budgets and drilling plans at the end of 2008 and beginning of 2009 (Global Markets Direct, 2008).
As Colombia is one of the most open countries in Latin America and the Caribbean as far as foreign investment in the energy sector is concerned, it is also the one to receive the highest proportion of FDI in the hydrocarbons sector: over US$ 3 billion in 2008, which represented 35% of total FDI in the country.
Although this transaction was between two foreign companies, it reflects the strategy adopted by CEPSA to move ahead with secondary production and ensure access to its basic input (América economía, 2008n).
The Swiss company Glencore meanwhile announced a gradual increase in its investments at its Cartagena refinery from US$ 600 million to US$ 3 billion (Proexport, 2008c).
Some of the trends observed in 2007 lasted into 2008, such as the sale of assets to channel investment into other exploration projects and the arrival of companies from emerging economies outside the region.
In Brazil, despite investment-conducive regulations, the predominance of Petrobras has been seen as an obstacle to the entry of transnational corporations in the hydrocarbons sector (ECLAC, 2008a). 22 The amount of the Anadarko-StatoilHydro operation was US$ 1.8 billion, while the transaction between ONGC and PDVSA came to US$ 480 million.
Petrobras and PDVSA, meanwhile continued their regional expansion, as analysed in part 2 of section D.
Transnational corporations remained interested in the region despite the fact that they play a smaller role than the State companies.
The nationalization processes and threats that transnationals have faced in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia have triggered major disputes.
On the regulatory front, one of the most notable changes was the reform of the energy sector in Mexico which aims to revitalize the State monopoly Petróleos de México (Pemex).
Foreign investors are still not allowed to participate in the exploitation of the deepwater reserves in the Gulf of Mexico or in the construction and administration of refineries, but they can now bid for exploration and drilling contracts as subcontractors in specific parts of Mexico (Time, 2008).
FDI continued to pour into the hydrocarbons sector in 2008, although the flows were far smaller than in mining.
The strong presence of State companies and legislative restrictions limit the participation of transnational corporations in the sector.
Even in Mexico, where reforms were introduced, the participation of foreign enterprises is restricted to a few activities.
As shown in part 2 of section D, the most active companies in the hydrocarbons sector are still Petrobras and PDVSA. (iii) Renewable energies High oil prices and growing environmental concerns have generated considerable interest in the renewable solar, wind, geothermic and biomass energies.
The Spanish company GreenFuel has announced plans to build a biodiesel plant in Argentina.
Eight countries together invested approximately US$ 480 million in the Peruvian ethanol industry.
Brazil has sparked the most interest thanks to its agroclimatic conditions and its leading position in the renewable energy sector, especially in the production of liquid biofuels.
The biofuels market is expected to grow faster in Brazil than elsewhere in the region thanks to Government policies.
The development of the biofuels market and the maximization of the opportunities it offers in and outside Brazil is one of the key strategies of the energy giant Petrobras (PETROBRAS, 2008).
Cosan, the largest sugar and ethanol producer in the country, acquired ExxonMobil’s service and distribution centres in Brazil for US$ 989 million with a view to ensuring a distribution channel for its ethanol production (Herald Tribune, 2008).
The Spanish firm Endesa also invested in 2007 in the construction of the El Canela wind farm in Chile, which is still expanding.
At the beginning of 2009, Mexico inaugurated the first phase of the largest wind farm project in Latin America, which is a joint venture being carried out by the Mexican firm Cemex and the Spanish firm Iberdrola, which invested about US$ 500 million in the project (OEM, 2009).
However, investment prospects in this sector may be severely affected by the sharp drop in the oil price.24 One The Economist Intelligence Unit projects the average oil price in 2009 to be US$ 35 per barrel, well below the levels recorded in 2008 (Business Latin America, 2009).
The prices of oil and other products, such as grains, edible oils and sugar, play a huge role in decision-making in biodiesel and bioethanol production.
However, rises (or falls) in the oil price can trigger rises (or falls) in the price of inputs and hence alter the costs of biofuel production (Razo and others, 2007). (b) Efficiency-seeking foreign direct investment The global crisis could have mixed effects on efficiency-seeking FDI.
On the one hand, this type of FDI could shrink in reaction to falling demand in the developed countries and this, together with a possible surplus installed capacity in the region’s export platforms, could further deter new ventures in this area.
On the other hand, the current situation could be viewed as an opportunity and encourage companies to relocate production activities to developing countries that offer relatively lower costs.
Although both scenarios are feasible, efficiency-seeking FDI has in fact contracted because the reorganization and restructuring of production requires time and is difficult to carry out during a credit crunch.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, Mexico and the countries of the Caribbean Basin have been the main destinations of efficiency-seeking investment.
Foreign companies generally set up assembly plants in the various countries of this subregion to manufacture exports, mainly for the United States market.
The main challenge for this technology is to compete with conventional energy sources.
The internalization of the environmental costs of conventional energy sources may make renewable energies more competitive, but improving cost-effectiveness remains a priority (OECD/IEA, 2007).
With the technology as it stands today, the low price of oil is eroding the competitiveness of renewable energies, as well as their investment prospects.
Investment in the sector in 2009 will therefore depend largely on Government support and incentives.
In short, despite the financial crisis, natural-resourceseeking FDI in the region did not lose momentum, but targeted fewer countries.
It has been driven mainly by investments in the mining sector, followed by the hydrocarbons sector.
Although some companies have been paring down their investment projects, natural-resourceseeking FDI has largely withstood the crisis thanks to commodity prices that remained high for most of the year and the fact that mining investments take several years to bear fruit.
Companies in the sector therefore look beyond the current situation in their investment planning and decision-making.
In Mexico, the automobile and electronics sectors continue to be the mainstays of a manufacturing industry that is dominated by foreign companies.
In 2007, exports from these two sectors reached US$ 41.9 billion and US$ 72 billion, respectively.26 Although there have been some changes in manufacturing industry in Central America, such as the increasing weight of the electronics sector, the textiles and apparel industry continues to be the most important (Padilla and others, 2008).
Offshore business services have been gaining ground in Mexico and the Caribbean Basin countries.
FDI in offshore services offers new opportunities not only in terms of job creation, but also in terms of transferring know-how and incorporating higher-value-added activities into the economy.
This subsection begins with a brief overview of investment in the Mexican automobile industry.
This industry was hit particularly hard by the problems afflicting the large United States automakers, which have worsened in the current financial crisis, and the United States authorities have been putting together a rescue plan that will have repercussions in the Mexican industrial sector.
The second part of the subsection presents a general analysis of the effects of the financial crisis on efficiency-seeking investment in Central America.
At the same time, heavy competition from Japanese automakers (Toyota, Nissan and Honda) has been eating into their market share (ECLAC, 2004).
At the beginning of 2009, both companies asked for more financial support from the Government at the same time as they announced mass lay-offs, plant closures and the suspension of production of certain In 2008, Chrysler sales fell by 30%, General Motors sales by 23% and Ford sales by 20%.
Although not as dramatically, the Japanese automakers’ sales also dropped: Toyota’s by 16% and Honda’s 28 In November 2008, in the face of a credit crunch in the financial system, General Motors, Ford and Chrysler requested US$ 34 billion in aid from the United States Congress.
In December that year, given the dire situation that the companies were in, the Government of the United States approved a US$ 17.4 billion aid package for the automobile industry.
The funds were taken from the US$ 700 billion of the stimulus package that had been approved in October, originally to bail out companies in the banking sector.
The funds were to be used first to prop up General Motors and Chrysler, which were teetering on the brink of bankruptcy, because Ford was in better financial shape.
In April 2009, the Government pumped more resources into the industry to avoid bankruptcies and to promote the restructuring of the companies in the worse straits.
Chapter II allows a company to reorganize its business operations so that it can eventually come out of bankruptcy and meet its financial obligations.
Some of these measures have also been taken at the international operations of United States companies.
In the face of plummeting demand (three out four vehicles produced in Mexico are exported to the United States), General Motors, Ford and Chrysler have dismissed workers en masse, put technical stoppages into effect and halted certain non-strategic assembly lines at their Mexican plants.
In the industry as a whole, some 10,000 people are estimated to have been affected by these lay-offs (Expansión, 2009).
In the midst of this turmoil, non-United States companies have been facing similar problems because their main export market is also the United States.
In addition to reducing its workforce, the German automaker Volkswagen held at least three technical and emergency stoppages in the first quarter of 2009, and in January, the company confirmed that 800 temporary workers would not be rehired at its Puebla plant (CNN Expansión, 2009a).
The Japanese firm Nissan, meanwhile, announced that it would close its main Mexican assembly plant in Aguascalientes for 26 days during the first quarter of 2009 and that if the recession in the United States continued, it might lay off 6,000 workers (CNN Expansión, 2009b).
For Volkswagen and Nissan, these measures could represent a 20% slash in production in Mexico in 2009 (El Universal, 2009).
Despite this, Mexican automobile production increased by 4% and sales by 3% in 2008.
This growth was mainly thanks to rising exports to Canada, Asia, Europe and the rest of Latin America, markets which have still not In February 2009, Chrysler requested a new loan of US$ 5 billion from the Government of the United States and announced the dismissal of 3,000 workers and the suspension of production of three of its models.
General Motors meanwhile announced that it would be asking for a further US$ 16.6 billion in addition to the US$ 13.4 billion the company had already received.
The General Motors restructuring plan includes the dismissal of 47,000 workers around the world, the closure of 14 plants in the United States and the reduction in the automobile brand names that it produces from eight to four (leaving it with Chevrolet, Buick, Cadillac and GMC).
According to the company’s estimates, with this plan, General Motors will be turning a profit again in two years’ time and will be able to pay off its debt to the Government by 2017 at the latest (BBC, 2009). been fully hit by the global crisis (see table I.4).
Installed capacity worldwide is expected to operate at only 68% in 2009, and Mexico’s production is projected to shrink by close to 12% (PricewaterhouseCoopers Automotive Institute, 2009; América economía, 2008g).
Despite the bleak prospects, some interesting announcements have been made that could give the industry a boost, specifically by shifting production to smaller and more fuel-efficient vehicles.
General Motors has led the way with an investment of almost US$ 1 billion in a new plant that will produce compact cars in San Luis Potosí (CNN Expansión, 2008c).
Meanwhile, Ford, the least affected of the three United States giants, announced a US$ 3 billion investment in the production of its Fiesta model for the North American market (CNN Expansión, 2008d).30 Geely Holding Group, the largest Chinese automaker, for its part, announced its interest in investing US$ 500 million in building a new plant in Mexico.
The original goal was to export vehicles to the United States, South America and, above all, Central America, where the company already has a large market presence (El Economista, 2008).
However, owing to the financial crisis, in March 2009, Geely decided to downsize the project in Mexico and to strengthen its global position, and expressed an interest in the luxury carmakers Volvo (a subsidiary of Ford) and Saab (a subsidiary of General Motors), which are struggling at the moment (El Periódico de México, 2009).
The restructuring under way in the industry means that some companies will probably be relocating their plants.
Ford will also be setting up a diesel engine production line at its plant in Chihuahua and building a transmission factory in Guanajuato, in a joint venture with the German firm Getrag.
This move was made with a view to improving the efficiency of its production and its logistics so as to be well positioned when the market recovers.
If the crisis continues or worsens, the most vulnerable transnational automakers might have to shut down production lines and plants, in both their home countries and those where they have set up international operations.
Mexico will be especially vulnerable in this case, as it will not receive any of the financial support being given to the parent companies and its main export market is already going through a major economic crisis that has caused vehicle sales to plummet.
The Japanese firm Sharp invested in the television segment in 2008: first it built an assembly plant for newgeneration televisions and then it set up local manufacturing facilities for the liquid crystal display (LCD) screens that are a key component in television receivers.
This will reduce the production time for television sets from nine to four weeks. screens to other assembly plants in the region (Bancomext, 2008).
Following closely on its heels is Samsung of the Republic of Korea, which announced the construction of a new LCD screen plant in Mexico (El Semanario, 2008).
The goal of these undertakings is to enhance the competitiveness of the Mexican television industry, shorten delivery times and increase Mexico’s technological capacity vis-à-vis China, its main competitor in this segment.
In other high-tech projects, the German company Q-Cells announced the investment of US$ 3.5 billion over the medium and long term in the installation of a plant that will produce thin-film crystalline solar cells for export to the United States market.
Q-Cells is not the only company in Mexico producing equipment for the renewable energy sector.
The Japanese firm Kyocera (solar cells) and the joint venture between the Japanese company Mitsubishi and the United States company TPI Composites, known as Vientek (blades for wind turbines) are also operating in the country.
Between 2000 and 2006, manufacturing exports represented over 60% of total exports and the United States was the main export destination (Padilla and others, 2008).
The subregion is thus highly vulnerable to any fluctuations in the United States economy, as the current financial crisis has shown.
In 2008, FDI in the subregion’s manufacturing industry did not grind to a halt, but it did slow down.
Two companies that did invest in Costa Rica, which has been a major FDI destination for investments in the electronics, medical and autoparts sectors, were the United States company St.
FDI in El Salvador and the Dominican Republic continued to be heavily concentrated in the textile and apparel industries.
There are some signs, however, that the crisis has begun to dampen efficiency-seeking FDI in the subregion.
Goods exports in Costa Rica in 2008 expanded only half as much as expected at the beginning of the year.
In the sectors using advanced manufacturing technology, including the automobile and electronics sectors, the number of visits from potential investors fell in the second half of 2008, and fewer companies invested during the course of the year than in 2007.
FDI flows also dropped in El Salvador and several clothing and apparel factories closed, such as the ones owned by Cupid Foundations (United States) and Lido (Republic of Korea).
On the other hand, the offshore business services sector has continued to grow steadily.
Three of the five largest FDI projects in El Salvador in 2008 were also in offshore business services (Americatel, Sykes and Citigroup).
In the Dominican Republic, 28% of the companies setting up operations in the free zones provide export and telemarketing services (see chapter II).
Efficiency-seeking FDI is likely to decline as the economic crisis deepens, especially in the advanced manufacturing sectors where projects require large amounts of investment capital.
In short, the international crisis might spur companies to relocate production to more cost-effective countries, which could increase efficiency-seeking FDI in the region.
During the first months of the financial crisis, however, FDI has mainly contracted because exports have been falling in response to the bleak growth projections for the developed countries, especially the United States.
This is reflected in both the strategies that companies have adopted and the official statistics of Mexico and the countries of the Caribbean Basin.
In 2008, the region’s sixth consecutive year of economic growth, the growth rate of Latin America and the Caribbean was 4.2%.
This, together with falling unemployment and better quality jobs, reduced poverty in the region and increased the population’s disposable income (ECLAC, 2008c).
These conditions also attracted foreign investors interested in the region’s potential as a market.
The situation began to change, however, as the effects of the global economic crisis spread throughout the region and started to shut down the engines of growth.
The impact has been uneven, however, and has affected different sectors at different times.33 Hence the varied growth rates recorded across the region: 5.5% in South America, 4.1% in Central America, 2.3% in the Caribbean and 1.3% in Mexico.
According to ECLAC estimates made in April 2009, the region is projected to post negative growth in 2009 (-0.3%).
Despite the bleak economic outlook, it should be borne in mind that the region’s growth has outpaced average world growth for the last few years and that, though negative, the growth projections for the region are better than those for the developed economies for 2009.
The main automobile manufacturing centres in South America, Argentina and Brazil have seen production levels rise in the last few years thanks to robust domestic demand (see figure I.16).
Despite the financial crisis, several companies pressed ahead with their expansion plans in 2008.
General Motors (United States) announced investments of between US$ 500 million and US$ 1 billion in the production of a new model, and Ford (United States) modernized its Sao Paulo plant to produce the latest version of the Ka model.
Honda (Japan), meanwhile, boosted the capacity of its plant in Sumaré, near Campinas, by 20%.
Growing demand in the emerging markets, especially the BRICs, has sustained the pace of activity in the automobile industry, and the large automakers have not shown any signs of wishing to delay their announced investments.
The crisis has begun to make itself felt in the South American market, however.
Brazil, which produces 75% of light vehicles in South America, saw its sales fall in the last quarter of 2008 and is expecting them to diminish to 2.5 million units in 2009, 20% fewer than in the previous year (PricewaterhouseCoopers Automotive Institute, 2009).
A survey conducted by the Union of the Automotive Vehicle Component Industry (Sindipeças) of Brazil on investment and prospects revealed that 48% of companies plan to keep their investments at the same level in 2009, 46% expect to reduce them, and only 6% plan to increase them.
Although no significant changes in investment plans were announced by automakers, the effects of shrinking demand have already begun to appear.
In Brazil, 12,000 workers at the factories of General Motors, Fiat, Scania and Volkswagen were forced to take vacations (La Nación, 2008), while falling demand resulted in a production stoppage at Iveco, the Argentine plant of the Fiat group.
The Governments of Argentina and Brazil have set up financing programmes to sustain demand and to avoid mass lay-offs in the industry (AFP, 2008; PricewaterhouseCoopers Automotive Institute, 2009).
Although the South American automobile industry is facing difficult times, it seems to be holding its investment position in readiness for a possible recovery in 2010.
The developed markets may be saturated, but opportunities and unsatisfied demand still abound in the emerging markets, including Brazil, which could turn out to be a lifesaver for some of the large automakers in the near future.
The purchase was in part a reaction to the competition posed by Santander after its acquisition of Brazilian bank Banco Real.
Itaú Unibanco now has a solid position in the national market and possibilities of competing and expanding in the regional one (Bloomberg, 2008).
This buy-out will probably increase the pressure on smaller banks in the region to negotiate their acquisition by larger ones as the global financial crisis is pushing up the costs of financing and the economic slowdown is harming their loan portfolios.
Of these, Citigroup has been the worst hit by the crisis, and authorities are considering splitting its operations into two business units: one for commercial banking and one for investment banking.
In 2009, the Government of the United States announced its intention to increase its stake in Citigroup.
The Spanish banks Santander and BBVA, which performed well in 2007, began to feel the effects of the crisis.
BBVA turned in good results up to the third quarter of 2008, but saw its profits wane as the economies of Mexico and the United States, its largest markets outside Spain, started to experience a slowdown.
Despite capital increases, BBVA does not have much room for lending because demand for credit has fallen in both Mexico and the United States.
Santander, which was affected by the Madoff scandal, has stated that it will continue to invest in markets with large potential, such as Brazil and the United The telecommunications market has shown tremendous resilience during the economic and financial crisis, and the number of service subscribers continues to grow steadily.
Two companies are vying for the leading position in the telecommunications sector: América Móvil/Telmex and Telefónica (ECLAC, 2008a).
The financial results of both companies reflect significant growth in sales and corporate profits, which has placed them in a strong position to withstand the economic crisis.36 The income levels of these companies allow them to advance their investment plans without having to rely on the complicated credit market.
América Móvil’s investments exceeded US$ 4 billion in 2008, and its level of investment is expected to be the same in 2009.
Telefónica has also continued to expand and has bought the remaining shares in its subsidiary in Chile for US$ 1.5 billion.
The company has projected that the sector in Latin America and the Caribbean will grow by 8% per year up to 2010 and is therefore continuing its investment plans.
One of the most notable strategic moves was the purchase of Brasil Telecom by Oi for US$ 2.306 billion.
With this transaction, Oi has become América Móvil’s and Telefónica’s new rival in the sector, and not just in Brazil: over the next few years, as it consolidates its position, this Brazilian company is expected to venture out and conquer other markets in Latin America (América economía, 2009a).
This new participant will increase the competition in the telecommunications market, which could push the large operators in the sector to invest so as not to lose their leading positions in the regional market. (iv) Retailing: the giant Wal-Mart makes its moves in the region The expansion and consolidation of supermarkets continued in 2008.
With this purchase, Wal-Mart has obtained another valuable foothold in the South American market for furthering its international expansion strategy (WalMart, 2009).
The Chilean market had up to now been one of the bastions of national supermarket chains and one which the large international companies had not been able to penetrate with great success (Calderón, 2006).
This move is probably being used to pave the way for Wal-Mart’s eventual expansion into Colombia and Peru.
Wal-Mart’s low-price policy will increase pressure on its Chilean competitors, which will have to come up with strategies to compete against the retail giant.
Wal-Mart also continued its expansion in Brazil, where it opened nine new stores in 2008 and is expected to invest US$ 984 million in 2009 to establish a strong position in one of the fastest-growing markets in the region (América economía, 2008m).
The Chilean firm Cencosud completed its acquisition of Supermercados Wong in Peru to expand and consolidate its presence in the region.
In 2009, the group is planning to reduce its short-term debt and scale back its investments (Cencosud, 2008), and is therefore not expected to pursue any major expansions.
The economic slowdown is definitely having an affect on the retail trade, but it is still not clear to what extent.
What is clear is that Wal-Mart will continue its aggressive strategy to penetrate the Latin American market.
In short, the slowdown of the economies of Latin America, together with increasingly limited access to consumer credit, could stem the inflow of market-seeking FDI.
In response to this situation, the Governments of the region have implemented a range of policies to prop up aggregate demand, which could counteract the effect of falling demand.37 These policies will probably be insufficient, however, to keep market-seeking FDI at the levels recorded in previous years.
Conclusions Despite the international crisis and the drop in foreign direct investment worldwide, FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean reached a new historic high in 2008 of over US$ 128 billion, 13% higher than in 2007.
FDI to South America increased notably thanks to the rise in natural-resource- and market-seeking investment, which was stimulated by commodity prices that remained high for most of 2008 and by the subregion’s economic growth.
Brazil was the main recipient of FDI in the region and accounted for most of the increase in FDI.
Investment flows to Mexico and the Caribbean Basin, on the other hand, declined as a result of the crisis in the main export market of these economies, the United States.
The recession in the United States stemmed the flow of efficiency-seeking FDI at the same time as the global economic and financial crisis slowed economic growth in the region itself, which had a negative impact on market-seeking FDI.
Mexico was the worst hit and suffered a 20% reduction in FDI with respect to 2007.
For an overview of the measures that the region’s governments have adopted in response to the crisis, see ECLAC (2009).
The economic conditions that sustained the FDI boom in Latin America and the Caribbean throughout 2008 have begun to change.
As the crisis worsens in the region, the engines that drive FDI have begun to stall one by one.
The prospects of less growth and access to financial resources, together with mounting uncertainty and perceptions of increased risk, will reduce FDI flows to the region in 2009.
In fact, given the trends and preliminary data for the main receiving countries, all evidence points to FDI in the region falling by between 35% and 45% in 2009.
This situation serves as a reminder of two things: FDI has considerable potential to generate structural change; and investment is not an end in itself, but a means to achieving economic growth.
What matters is not so much the quantity of the FDI received as the quality of that FDI and its potential to generate spillovers and linkages that enhance the production and technological capacity of the receiving economy.
Outward foreign direct investment and the trans-Latins Outward foreign direct investment (OFDI) flows In 2008, flows of OFDI from the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean continued to increase, rising to US$ 34.561 billion, up 42% from the previous year (see figure I.17).
The outward foreign direct investmen figures indicate outflows of direct investment by residents, minus disinvestments abroad by those investors.
This historically positive result probably reflects, at least in part, the completion of transactions that that already been negotiated and projects that had already been started before the economic and financial crisis really gained momentum.
Brazil is the region’s leading foreign investor, accounting for US$ 20.457 billion of OFDI (61% of the total), followed by Chile and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, with US$ 6.891 billion and US$ 2.757 billion, respectively (see figure I.18).
For Brazil, this represents a 190% increase over the previous year and is the second largest outflow in its history, after 2006.
Most of these investments were in natural resources, iron and steelworks, and food, under a relatively favourable price scenario and local economic conditions through the third quarter of the year.
In Chile, OFDI flows, as recorded in the balance of payments, increased 76% from the previous year.
Rep. of) In the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, whose OFDI in 2008 outstripped its incoming FDI, 96% of investment is attributable to the State oil company PDVSA.
In 2008, Mexico, which in recent years had been one of the two leading investor countries, saw its outward foreign investments contract.
Having been affected more quickly by the crisis, some Mexican transnationals were forced to revise their internationalization strategies and even shed international assets.
Others, such as Mexichem and Bimbo, however, have moved forward with their expansion plans (see section 2).
When OFDI is measured in relation to GDP, the largest outward investor in 2008 (among the countries for which information is available) was Chile, followed by Brazil, Colombia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In 2008, the main geographic destination of Brazilian outward investments was the United States (28%), whereas the financial centres of the Caribbean received 25% of Brazilian OFDI.
Some 12% of Brazilian outward investment went to Latin America, with the largest recipients being Argentina (4%), Chile (3%) and Uruguay (3%).39 By contrast, Chilean outward investment in South America amounted to 72% of its OFDI.
Whereas Argentina was previously the main destination of Chilean investments, in 2008 the largest volumes went to Brazil and Peru —two markets in which the fastest-growing Chilean trans-Latins are consolidating their positions.
Petrobras and PDVSA, the Latin American companies in the sector that have invested the most outside of their countries of origin, maintained and even expanded their internationalization programmes in 2008.
Petrobras’ international investments in 2008 totalled US$ 6.133 billion, 7% more than in 2007, and accounted for 12% of the company’s total investments.
Approximately 86% of international investment was used for exploration and production in Argentina and the Plurinational State of Bolivia.
In the secondary-processing sector, the company acquired ExxonMobil’s operations in Chile, the only South American country where it did not yet have operations.
This transaction was part of a trend that has seen some transnational enterprises withdraw from the Latin American fuel-distribution market, with a concomitant expansion of regional companies (ECLAC, 2008a).
Outside of Latin America, Petrobas increased its stake in Pasadena Refining System Inc., in Texas, United States, and signed an agreement to purchase ExxonMobil’s 87.5% stake in Nansei Sekiyu Kabushiki Kaisha, which owns a 100,000 barrel-per-day capacity refinery in Japan, in addition to logistical infrastructure that will allow Petrobras to commercialize its biofuels in Japan and other Asian markets.
One tenth of this amount will be used for investments outside of Brazil, mostly in exploration and production activities in Latin America, West Africa and the Gulf of Mexico.
In response to the crisis, the company is granting priority to projects that can generate results more quickly and has sought out strategic partners (which would later receive profits from the crude production).
Due to the long maturation period of exploration and production projects, many of the investments are being made now in anticipation of the eventual recovery of the world economy.
PDVSA also continued to benefit from high oil prices through September 2008 as its profits for the first three quarters of 2008 soared (Dow Jones, 2009).
It has restructured its international refining capacity by selling its Paulsboro Savanna refineries in the United States, investing in the Camilo Cienfuegos refinery in Cuba (in which it owns slightly more than half of the production assets) and announcing the construction of a refinery in Ecuador.
PDVSA, which in the United States controls Citgo, one of the 10 largest fuel distributors in that country, is evaluating new business opportunities in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, Europe and South America.
Petroandina announced investments of US$ 900 million for oil extraction activities and close to US$ 250 million for experimental drilling and studies.
For its part, YPFB signed a US$ 1 billion agreement with the Dutch-owned Petroholland for exploration and the construction of a gas pipeline.
Colombia’s State-owned Ecopetrol was behind one of the largest international investments by Latin American gas and oil companies in 2008.
The company acquired a stake in an exploration project in the Gulf of Mexico operated by the Norwegian firm Statoil-Hydro.
This operation comes in the wake of others undertaken by Ecopetrol in Brazil, Peru and the United States. (b) Mining and iron and steel Latin American mining companies’ investments abroad are also motivated by the long-term outlook for minerals and metals markets, especially in emerging economies.
Some investments in this sector are related to the trend analysed in the section on natural-resourceseeking FDI.
Latin America’s largest mining enterprise, Companhia Vale do Rio Doce, has moved forward with an ambitious investment plan in Brazil and abroad, in anticipation of an economic recovery around the globe.
In 2008, it made some acquisitions outside of Brazil, in line with a strategy intended to enhance its position in coal and copper extraction.
The company acquired a coal mine from Cementos Argos, of Colombia, and entered into a joint venture with TEAL Exploration and Mining, which has reserves in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, Namibia and Zambia.
Most of CVRD’s investments outside of Brazil in 2008 were not in acquisitions but in project development.
In times of uncertainty, focusing growth strategy on the development of mining assets that the company already controls allows the company to delay or accelerate projects according to the outlook for growth in demand.
In 2009, 30% of the US$ 14.2 billion investment budget will be used for projects outside of Brazil.
Some US$ 1.1 billion will be used for investments in Canada, US$ 831 million in Mozambique and US$ 515 million in Oman (see table I.5).
CVRD, like its competitors, has felt the effects of the crisis and has had to curb operations in response to the expected contraction in the world iron-ore market.
It has scaled back its operations in Brazil and Canada and laid off 1,300 employees worldwide.
The company also suspended a steel-foundry project with China’s Baosteel (Reuters, 2009a and 2008e).
The largest publicly announced acquisition by a trans-Latin in the mining sector in 2008 (outside of the company’s country of origin) was the purchase of Mineração Taboca’s tin division in Brazil by the Peruvian firm Minsur.
Minsur accounts for 12% of tin production worldwide, and until now all of its operations have been located in Peru.
This first international acquisition by the company increases its output capacity by approximately 20% and includes, among the main mining assets, a mine in the Amazon region and a foundry in São Paulo.
Other particularly noteworthy acquisitions in the mining sector include the acquisition by the Brazilian group Votorantim of US Zinc (United States) and Minera Atacocha (Peru).
In 2008, Votorantim started producing indium in Peru (used, inter alia, to manufacture liquid crystal displays), made new investments in iron and steelworks, acquired a majority stake in Argentine long steel producer AcerBrag and began to invest in a new steel plant in Colombia, in partnership with Acerías de Colombia (Acesco).
The steel market had a relatively positive performance in the first half of the year, as a large volume of investments was made.
In 2008, the company completed the acquisition of the United States-based Macsteel and established a strategic alliance with Corporación Centroamericana del Acero (with assets in Guatemala and Honduras) by acquiring a 30% stake in the company.
It also acquired 50.9% of Cleary Holdings, which has coke production units and reserves in Colombia.
The transaction is in line with the global trend in the steel industry towards vertical integration to ensure the availability of key raw materials amid heavy global demand for natural resources.
The company also increased its stake in the Spanish firm Sidenor, allowing it to consolidate its position in the world steel market.
In addition to these acquisitions, Gerdau announced important investments to expand the capacity of its subsidiaries in Argentina and Peru in line with its growth strategy in the Americas.
However, towards the end of the year, the company announced the postponement of its investment in Argentina and cutbacks in some operations both in and outside of Brazil (América economía, 2008h; Valor online, 2009).
For its part, the Argentine group Techint announced US$ 6.6 billion in investments in Mexico over five years in plant construction and expansion projects, as well as in developing tin- and iron-ore reserves (CNN Expansión, 2008a).
Ternium, the iron- and steel-making division of Techint, had —like its competitors— three strong quarters until customer demand plummeted, mainly in three sectors that were hit hard by the crisis: automobiles, construction and household appliances.
Its international operations were marked by the completion of the integration of the IMSA group which had begun in 2007.
Ternium’s purchase of IMSA and the simultaneous increase of its participation in the Mexican and United States high-value-added market left the company vulnerable to the performance of these two economies.
Another important event in Ternium’s international operations was the nationalization of Sidor in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Techint had headed the consortium that purchased 60% of Sidor in 1998.
Under the nationalization process, Ternium’s shareholding in the company comes under the control of the Stateowned Venezuelan company Corporación Venezolana de Guayana.
Tenaris, the Techint group’s steel-pipe maker, was also negatively affected by its acquisition of the United States company Maverick in 2007 because the number of new gas exploration and production projects (one of the key markets for Tenaris’ products) waned in the following two years.
Nevertheless, during most of 2008, demand for Tenaris’ products increased, among other reasons, thanks to the rise in imports by China.
One of the main OFDI transactions carried out by a Brazilian company in 2008, which substantially altered the country’s OFDI balance, involved Companhia Siderúrgica Nacional (CSN).
As noted above, CSN sold a stake in Namisa —the company that controlled its mining assets— to a group of Japanese firms.
The cement maker also announced a 10% downsizing of its workforce worldwide (América economía, 2008i).
In February 2009, it was expected that the economic stimulus package in the United States might help increase demand for Cemex’s products, but results were deemed unlikely to be seen before 2010 (CNN Expansión, 2009c and 2009d).
The cement division of the Votorantim group acquired Prairie, a concrete producer from the Great Lakes region of the United States, as well as a strategic stake in Cementos Bío Bío, a leading Chilean cement and concrete producer. (d) Petrochemicals The Mexican company Mexichem continued to expand its international presence in the petrochemicals sector.
Although Rinker was an Australian company, the concentration of many of its assets in the United States was one of Cemex’s main reasons for making the purchase.
Continuing with the internationalization process begun in 2006 with the purchase of a company in the United States, Mexichem acquired Dripsa (Argentina), Bidim (Brazil), Geosistemas (Peru), Colpozos (Colombia) and a majority stake in Plastubos (Brazil) in 2008, in addition to making other acquisitions in Mexico.
As this US$ 2.5 billion transaction took place in January 2009, it is not reflected in OFDI data for Mexico for 2008.
Bimbo also acquired a 75% interest in Brazilian bread-maker Nutrella Alimentos, making it the leading industrialized bread-maker in Brazil as well.
As was the case in 2007, important acquisitions took place in the meat-producing industry in 2008.
Sigma Alimentos, part of the ALFA group of Mexico, acquired Braedt, a leader in Peru’s coldcuts market, as well as Butterball’s Longmont brand, the largest turkey-products manufacturer in Latin America.
Moving forward with its strategy of diversifying and expanding its activities in various markets and in order to gain direct access to international markets, Brazil’s Marfrig bought Moy Park in Europe and acquired some beef jerky brands in the United States.
At the beginning of the year, Marfrig bought the beef jerky producer Mirab in Argentina.
When the United States imposed restrictions on meat imports from Brazil, the company transferred its processed meat beef jerky operations from Brazil to its Uruguayan subsidiary.
The Brazilian company JBS had embarked on an internationalization process in 2005, with the purchase of Swift Armour in Argentina.
In 2008, it expanded its geographic presence by acquiring a 50% interest in Inalca, of Italy, and in Tasman, of Australia.
Although the acquisition of Smithfield Beef was successfully concluded, the purchase of National Beef was challenged by the United States Department of Justice on the grounds that the transaction could lead to higher consumer prices and lower wholesale prices for cattle producers.
In addition to these new acquisitions, the company invested in the expansion of its plants and distribution centres in Angola, Australia, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Italy, the Russian Federation and the United States.
JBS’s presence in the leading beef-producing countries protects it from trade and health restrictions.
In the beverage market, the largest acquisition concluded in 2008 was in the Caribbean, where Angostura (Trinidad and Tobago), acquired a majority stake in Lascelles, a Jamaican liquor producer for US$ 920 million.
The acquisition is expected to be the first step for closer integration between the two companies, which will allow them to expand internationally.
Also in the beverages segment, Coca-Cola FEMSA, of Mexico, moved forward with its strategy, as a distributor of The Coca-Cola Company, of complementing its non-soft-drink line and acquired Brisa, a bottled-water company in Colombia.
In addition, it concluded the acquisition of Refrigerantes Minas Gerais in Brazil, giving it control of approximately one-third of the bottling and distribution system of The Coca-Cola Company in that country. (f) Retailing Chilean companies have played a prominent role in the retail trade in the region, the main target of Chilean OFDI.
In 2008, most Chilean investment in this sector was used to open new stores in Argentina, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico and Peru (CCS, 2009).
Even with the economic and financial crisis, Falabella posted sharply higher sales in 2008, even in the fourth quarter of the year, thanks to its international expansion.
In the last quarter of 2008 alone, it opened 14 stores in Peru and took over five Casa Estrella stores in Colombia.
Despite the economic downturn, Falabella plans to open 130 new stores, both in Chile and abroad, in the coming four years.
Another Chilean company, Cencosud, having gained a foothold in Brazil and Peru in 2007 (it completed its purchase of Supermercados Wong in Peru the following year), opened its first points of sale in Colombia in 2008.
Cencosud has also invested in Argentina, Brazil and Peru, which, taken together, accounted for 56% of its revenue in 2008, up from 37% in 2007.
In the near future, Cencosud expects to consolidate its presence in the markets where it currently operates.
The other notable investment in retailing in 2008 was the purchase by the Mexican firm Grupo Casa SABA of the Brazilian network of pharmacies Drogasmil.
This is the first international move by Grupo Casa SABA, which views Drogasmil as a starting point for future growth in Brazil. (g) Autoparts and bodies In an industry reeling from the crisis, Latin American autoparts manufacturers made modest investments in 2008.
The economic situation might reinforce the trend towards geographic diversification already being followed by companies such as Nemak, of the ALFA group, which, in the wake of the sizeable acquisitions it has made in recent years, now posts half of its sales in Europe and South America and is seeking to expand in Asia (CNN Expansión, 2008b).
The Brazilian manufacturer of bus bodies Marcopolo has focused its international growth strategy on developing markets, often through partnerships with companies in the target destinations.
It began to produce buses in India in a joint venture with Tata Motors in 2008.
Through a joint venture with the Russian firm Ruspromauto, Marcopolo began to manufacture buses to be used for urban transportation in the Russian Federation.
Conclusions and outlook for 2009 In 2008, the volume of OFDI from the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean reached US$ 34.561 billion, which represented a 42% increase with respect to 2007.
This was the result of a combination of factors: • Some of the largest investments in 2008 were brought about by inertia, as the result of corporate decisions taken prior to the worsening of the crisis in September.
Some of the sectors in which trans-Latins are most active, in particular naturalresource-based production sectors, performed favourably for the first two thirds of the year.
In fact, some companies’ investments have been driven by the need to diversify and increase their presence in markets that have better growth prospects; • Some investments, especially in the hydrocarbon and mining sectors, where projects have a long maturation period, have been made in anticipation of a recovery in the global economy.
Despite the good results posted in terms of investment in 2008, starting in the fourth quarter of the year many trans-Latins were forced to curb their operations and review their investment plans in response to declining global demand, uncertainty regarding the recovery in demand and the limited availability of credit.
Due to increasingly tight credit and the fall in regional and global demand, the international expansion of Latin American and Caribbean enterprises is expected to be less dynamic in 2009.43 Nevertheless, the internationalization of these companies is already under way and oriented towards the long term, and the crisis could create opportunities for those that can obtain financing.
In addition to the effects of the crisis, these two firms have seen their investments in the region affected by the nationalization of their operations in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
The first signs of deceleration in this process began to show in the first quarter of 2009.
For example, in Brazil, some US$ 400 million in divestments were recorded, in comparison with net divestments of nearly US$ 4.5 billion in the same period the year before (Central Bank of Brazil).
Concluding remarks Foreign direct investment reached a record high in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2008, despite the eruption of the global economic and financial crisis.
FDI flows into the region have in fact remained buoyant since 2003.
This boom cycle may have come to an end in 2008, however, owing to the worsening of the international crisis.
The increase in FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean in the last few years, for whatever motive, has undoubtedly brought benefits.
This increase has not, however, necessarily translated into countries taking better advantage of FDI, nor has the larger presence of transnational corporations in the region.
Natural-resource-seeking FDI has fuelled exports in that sector, raised the international competitiveness of naturalresource-based products, generated jobs in both urban and rural areas and increased fiscal income.
Transnational corporations operating in this sector still view their operations as enclaves, however.
They have no ties to the national economy, involve minimal local processing and furthermore may pose hazards in terms of pollution and environmental degradation.
In the mining sector, for example, foreign companies are less likely to have work done locally and tend to seek suppliers of inputs, services, machinery and equipment abroad.
This hampers the development of externalities and limits the possibilities of retaining the value added generated by mining activities (ECLAC, 2008b).
Costa Rica and Mexico, for example, have raised the international competitiveness of their manufacturing output, which is reflected in the increased volume and technological quality of their exports.
This type of FDI also contributes to the transfer of knowledge and technology, which helps upgrade the skills of the workforce.
It is associated with some difficulties, however, because efficiency-seeking FDI runs the risk of remaining trapped in low-value-added activities that generate few production linkages and tends to build only on static advantages (low costs) rather than on dynamic ones (innovation) in the recipient economy.
The region’s electronics industry, which is dominated by transnational corporations, is one example of this phenomenon.
FDI has transformed the electronics sector by boosting exports and transferring knowledge and technology, but it still targets mainly assembly, in other words low-value-added activities.
Moving up the value chain of efficiency-seeking FDI is still proving to be difficult in the region (ECLAC, 2008a, chapter II), but FDI in offshore business services (see chapter II) may be one way to achieve this upgrade.
Market-seeking FDI spawned new economic activities in the receiving economies, increased local content, promoted production linkages and connections with the local business community and improved services.
There is also a risk, however, that, in the absence of solid institutions or owing to regulatory loopholes, this type of FDI will displace local companies or encourage production of goods and services that are not internationally competitive.
Legal vacuums, passive attitudes among telecommunications and competition authorities, intense lobbying by the dominant operators and the absence of alternative service providers have, in some cases, resulted in the benefits of new technologies being slow to reach local consumers (ECLAC, 2008a, chapter III).
The large FDI flows that have poured into the region over the past five years show clearly that the arrival of FDI per se does not guarantee that all the possible benefits that the presence of transnational corporations implies will necessarily be reaped.
However, it is important to analyse the contribution that the companies of the region have made to the development of their economies of origin.
The globalization of the transLatins forces them to develop their own competitiveness.
However, the link between that competitiveness at the corporate level and improvements in competitiveness or efficiency at the industry level is by no means clear in developing economies.
In part, this is because it is difficult to quantify the effect.
But it is also because the benefits generated by knowledge and technology transfers may be undermined in developing countries by their limited ability to absorb them (Globerman and Shapiro, 2008).
This points to the need to develop the absorption capacity of the region’s economies.44 The question, then, is not how much FDI a country receives, but what it does and achieves with that FDI.
A sound reaction to the current crisis must include policies to build and strengthen national economies’ production capacity so as to maximize the benefits of not only FDI, but also the countries’ own investments abroad.
This could form part of a broader and more ingenious method for presenting a countercyclical response during economic slowdowns.
Absorption capacity is determined by, among other factors, the level of education of the population, labour training and the presence of solid institutions as well as adequate physical, scientific and technological infrastructure.
For a more detailed analysis of this topic, see Blomstrom and Kokko (2003) and Nunnenkamp (2004).
Data do not necessarily coincide with balance of payments. a Includes maquila from 2004 onward.
The operations reported here refer only to those for which the transaction value is known.
Introduction Previous issues of this report have stressed that the main challenge of Latin American and Caribbean countries in their investment promotion efforts is to attract high-quality FDI (defined as that which induces local economic, technological and social development) rather than merely large quantities of investment.
Although not among the industries generating the greatest dollar value of FDI, offshore business services have the potential to score well by the criteria that define high-quality FDI.
Offshoring refers to the provision of services from a location outside the country where the customer is located.
Through the use of information and communication technologies (ICT), companies can overcome the barriers imposed by the geographical distance between the demand and supply of labour in certain activities.
The scope of services offshored is broad and in constant expansion through innovative uses of ICT, as discussed further in this chapter.
A related concept is that of outsourcing, whereby a company provides services to another company, regardless of its location.
In fact, a number of companies have offshored in-house (or “captive”) service centers (see boxes II.1 and II.2).
By taking part in the offshore business services market, developing countries have benefited from the creation of jobs that are usually better remunerated than alternatives for similarly skilled persons, as well as from the skills-upgrading generated by on-the-job experiences and training, and from exposure to global standards in management practice, ICT tools, and technology, among other factors.
Classifications often distinguish IT services from IT-enabled services, which include the remaining categories of services in table 1 (contact centres, business processes and knowledge-intensive, analytical services).
Offshore services can be provided either in-house (also known as captive offshoring) or by a separate company (outsourcing to companies referred to as vendors) (see table 2).
This chapter addresses both as part of the same phenomenon, but when discussing corporate strategies, focuses on outsourcing vendors, for whom offshoring often lies at the core of their competitive strategies.
In-bound/out-bound calls or interaction with customers through other media such as Internet chats, fax and e-mail.
Main functions include telemarketing and customer support (also referred to as “voice BPO”).
Horizontal business processes or back-office services: purchases, logistics, marketing and sales (other than contact functions), human resources, and finances and accounting.
Vertical business processes: services specific to certain industries, such as claims and payments processing for financial institutions, insurance management for health care, network maintenance in telecommunications services and passenger flow management for airlines.
Knowledge-intensive, analytical functions/ Knowledge process outsourcing or offshoring (KPO) Intellectual property research, equity, financial and insurance research, data search, integration and management, analytics and data mining, research and information services in human resources, engineering and design, animation and simulation services, remote education and publishing, research and development (R&D) and vertical functions (services to medical, legal, biotech and pharmaceuticals industries).
Other industry-specific terms used throughout this text are as follows: • Nearshoring: offshoring to countries close to the client market to take advantage of a combination of low costs and geographic and time-zone proximity.
Second-generation offshoring: refers to services that are intensive in knowledge and analysis.
Integrated outsourcing companies: companies that base their business models on the integration of business processes and IT.
It is estimated that approximately 40% of all offshore business services are in-house operations (also referred to as the captive, or “make-vs.-buy” model), but this share varies among the different segments.
In-house offshoring is relatively higher in IT-enabled services (50%) than In IT services, outsourcing overtook inhouse offshoring in around 2005.
In its first stage, up until the beginning of the 1990s, IT service offshoring involved primarily United States and European companies establishing captive centres in India.
The Indian vendors developed throughout the 1990s and, starting in 2004-2005, expanded and surpassed captive IT centres.
When knowledge processes started being offshored at the end of the 1990s (pioneered by GE and McKinsey), they were undertaken inhouse partly because of the absence of KPO vendors.
These started emerging in 2000 when companies such as Evalueserve and Amba Research appeared on the scene.
Among the reasons for the growth in the share of outsourced services as opposed to in-house services is the increasing maturity and capacity of KPO vendors and the fact that captive centres are often only cost-worthy for very large companies, whereas the vendor model may be cost-effective for small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Certain knowledge processes that are key to companies’ businesses, however, are likely to remain in-house (Evalueserve, 2007).
In BPO, the trend is not as well defined, with some analysts pointing to continuing growth in captive centres and others arguing that more mature vendors and experienced clients will ensure high growth rates in outsourcing.
Currently it is estimated that in India, a major destination for offshore contact centre operations, 130,000 of the 280,000 contact centre operators are inhouse (Cybermedia, 2008).
Although there will always be captive functions, as vendors mature and as companies become familiar with outsourcing and are pressured to focus on their core functions, there may be a trend towards greater outsourcing or hybrid solutions.
One example is Teleperformance’s “Buy-Out’ programme, whereby a vendor manages a service centre staffed by the client at the client’s facilities (Interaction the Teleperformance Magazine, 2006).
Although captive offshoring has been a solution across industries, the largest centres are concentrated in the finance and technology industries.
In the KPO segment, captive centres are common in financial, automotive, pharmaceutical and publishing companies (Evalueserve, 2007).
Moreover, the offshore business services industry (henceforth also referred to as offshoring) is very dynamic.
Despite difficulties and discrepancies in quantification,1 The difficulty of quantifying the offshore services market has been extensively documented, and efforts to improve official data are on the agenda of several government and intergovernmental institutions (López, Ramos and Torre, 2008; Arora and others, 2006; GAO, 2004; Martínez, Padilla and Schatan, 2008).
Trade statistics generally do not allow for the separation of offshore corporate services from other tradable services; and FDI statistics, when available, do not distinguish services catering to the global market from those directed at local markets.
No other set of comparable official statistics adequately reflecting the situation of offshore corporate services exists for a significant number of countries.
One survey-based study estimates that in 2006, the market for offshore corporate services, defined similarly to the group of services considered in box II.1, was US$ 65 billion, of which approximately 35% referred to IT services and 65% to IT-enabled services.
The market was expected to grow to over US$ 280 billion by 2010, with higher growth expected in IT-enabled services (BCG, 2007) (see figure II.1).
There is still controversy over the impact of the global financial crisis on offshoring.
Whereas it is likely that in the short run there will be a slowdown, particularly in segments serving the hardest-hit industries, there may also be an increase in the number of companies resorting to offshoring as a cost-saving measure, as has been the case in previous periods of economic slowdown.
Also, the volume of certain types of transactions handled offshore and associated with crisis management solutions may rise.
Captive offshoring does involve FDI by definition because it involves a company establishing operations in a country other than its home country.
Outsourced offshoring may be done by a transnational corporation (TNC) outside its home country or by a local company.
In fact, local companies play an important part as offshore service providers in many countries, most notably in India.
Tata Consultancy Services (TCS), Infosys, and Wipro, which are today among the largest transnationals in the offshore business services market, started out providing offshore services from India the company’s country of origin.
TNCs have, however, been considered key players in the development of this industry.
First, because TNCs account for a large share of offshoring operations, both as investors and as clients.
Second, because, as in manufacturing, TNCs have been the motors behind the expansion of global value chains in services (OECD, 2008b).
Third, because partnerships and supplier relationships with TNCs can act as bridges between local companies, professionals and world markets, especially in higher-value added segments (López, Ramos and Torre, 2008).
In the past few years, TNCs have shown increasing interest in Latin America and the Caribbean as an offshore destination, and several investments have been made.
Nonetheless, challenges persist for the region to fully reap the benefits of offshoring.
To help understand those challenges, this chapter examines how the region is situated within the corporate strategies of major players.
Thus, section B examines key trends in this industry worldwide, section C identifies the main transnational players and describes the role attributed to Latin America and the Caribbean in the corporate strategies of selected companies, and section D discusses the challenges ahead.
Trends in the global offshore business services market Offshoring began expanding significantly in the mid1990s, motivated by enabling factors and push factors.
Examples of enabling factors include developments in software and telecommunications solutions, investment in infrastructure in the years leading up to the dot.com crisis, and the standardization of management practices.
Examples of the push factors for offshoring were the insufficient number of skilled professionals in the United States to face the Y2K crisis and competition and economic recessions that put pressure on corporate costs (Friedman, 2006; López, Ramos and Torre, 2008).
Offshoring was further encouraged by tighter restrictions on the mobility of workers (which had previously helped overcome labour shortages in IT), among other reasons, because of a cutback in H1B visas in the United States in 2003 (Lewin, Massini and Peeters, 2008).
Alongside these factors, it is likely that a significant share of growth in the offshoring industry can be attributed to the accumulation of experience, know-how and confidence in offshore solutions.
Buyers, vendors, and companies opting for in-house offshore centres gradually expanded the volume and nature of activities performed offshore.
The development of the outsourcing market in particular made it possible for smaller companies to benefit from offshoring —increasingly for innovation and product development— without incurring the information costs involved in doing so in-house (Lewin, 2008).
First, competition increased among outsourcing players in the traditional functions (contact centres, business process outsourcing, IT services).
Contact centre companies started performing BPO functions, while BPO players started providing IT services, and vice-versa.
In fact, the digitization of business processes somewhat blurred the distinction between IT services and BPO.
Even companies that originally focused on IT hardware manufacturing, such as IBM and Hewlett Packard (HP), entered the BPO and IT services market (ECLAC, 2008a).
Thus, the commoditization of the outsourcing market has led to greater demand for offshoring.
Second, there has been an upgrading of the offshore industry as companies have offshored higher-skilled and higher-value-added services that involve fewer standardized procedures and greater analysis and industry-specific knowledge.
These second-generation offshoring services include innovation, R&D and other science and engineering functions.
This trend also includes the offshoring of knowledge processes (KPO), in other words, services based on knowledge and the analysis of specific fields, such as financial markets, legal issues and intellectual property research.
There are several reasons for the growth in the offshoring of these higher-end services.
On the demand side, clients have gained enough confidence to consider offshoring and outsourcing activities previously viewed as core functions.
In fact, it is in the higher-value-added services that clients reap the greatest cost savings, while providers make the highest profits (ORN/Booz&Co., 2007).
On the supply side, outsourcing vendors have upgraded their service mix to compensate for shrinking profit margins in the traditional segments.
Through their accumulated experience with offshoring, they have been able to place these second-generation services in their offshore bases.
At the same time, countries hosting offshore service centres have matured in terms of providing adequate human resources, infrastructure and business environments, thus enabling the offshoring of these functions.
In sum, offshoring has grown in traditional segments, and new services have been added to the list of commonly offshored services.
As offshoring has matured and diversified, investors have acquired a better understanding of its benefits and costs and of the comparative advantages of different regions.
Against this background, two types of opportunities arise for Latin America and the Caribbean.
The onset of the information age has also been referred to as a “third industrial revolution” (Blinder, 2006).
In parallel, even companies that opted to avoid outsourcing —for all or certain functions— felt pressured to set up captive offshore centres to maintain competitiveness in regard to their competitors in their core businesses (Robinson and Kalakota, 2004).
Competing on cost: nearshoring and the value of proximity In the traditional offshore functions, cost is still the major determinant factor.
Few countries are able to compete, based on cost, and particularly labour costs, with India, which is still by far the main location for offshore operations and concentrated, in 2007, approximately 84% of the world IT services market and 46% of the IT-enabled services market (BCG, 2007).
The views on the extent and symptoms of this saturation are not unanimous.
Whereas some mention wage inflation, others point to falling quality, high attrition (or turnover) rates (which makes activities that involve technology transfer especially difficult) and inflexibility in tending to clients’ needs.
It is unclear to what extent increasing wages or other symptoms of possible saturation in India and other traditional markets are effectively leading to relocation towards other countries.
India in particular is still cost competitive and has unequalled advantages in terms of skills, know-how and the confidence of service providers and their customers.
Moreover, public and private actions are being put into place in India to expand supply and thus overcome any effects of saturation.
These efforts include innovative training systems with private-sector involvement and the expansion of the industries from the already consolidated hub cities (Bangalore, the National Capital Region —Delhi and the surrounding urban area—, Mumbai, Pune, Chennai, Hyderabad and Kolkata) to secondand third-tier cities (Ahmedabad, Nagpur and Japur, among others) (Gereffi and Fernández-Stark, 2008).
In the contact centre and BPO markets, as more companies compete, the importance of service quality is greater, and more value is placed on differentiating aspects of service.
Beyond language proficiency, customers (or companies offshoring their own operations) require accents that are more palatable to the customer, as well as cultural sensitivity.
In BPO, IT services and KPO, many services require more frequent interaction or are more sensitive to time zone proximity.
Latin America and the Caribbean is an increasingly important nearshore destination for United States customers.
These estimates do not necessarily reflect offshore operations because business services can also be provided to local customers.
Nonetheless, in these two countries, the bulk of business services are notoriously offshore operations.
Softtek, a Mexican IT and BPO company (see section C.2), has marketed the advantages of Latin America and the Caribbean (and its home country in particular) in these aspects under the concept of “Total Cost of Engagement” (see below), stressing that the approach to the cost of offshoring should go beyond the arbitrage of the cost of labour and facilities.
The term nearshoring is used in this document to signify a subset of, rather than an alternative to, offshoring.
Competing by way of global networks The second source of opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean is the trend to explore complementarity between destinations in global networks of service centres, as opposed to the traditional concept of offshoring from high-cost country to low-cost country based on simple labour cost arbitrage.
In both traditional and second-generation offshoring, companies are creating global integrated service networks with knowledge centres situated in several parts of the world.
Networks of complementary service centres are being developed as companies try to benefit from diversity.8 Companies have established bases in different time zones to provide 24-hour work cycles (“follow the sun” models).
Moreover, by resorting to newer offshoring destinations, companies have avoided the problem of high attrition rates in more saturated markets.
In addition to the costs involved in training a constant flow of workers, high attrition rates limit the possibility of offshoring functions that require the transfer of certain types of technology or knowledge.
In sum, as the offshoring industry has become larger, more sophisticated and more diverse, location decisions have become more complex, and factors not associated with labour and installation costs have increased their weight in companies’ decisions on where to locate.
This has created opportunities for emerging offshore destinations, including Latin America and the Caribbean.
These stem, paradoxically, on the one hand from attributes associated with proximity, similarity, and familiarity (valuing homogeneity), and on the other hand, from attributes associated with diversity that offer complementarity of talents, approaches, time zones and other assets between different locations within integrated global networks of service centres (valuing heterogeneity).
In terms of the framework traditionally used for analysing corporate strategies in this report series (see ECLAC, 2005 and subsequent issues), when the main factor determining the establishment of an offshore service centre is cost, entry strategies of offshoring TNCs are essentially efficiency-seeking.
However, as the industry has matured, other (non-cost) factors, such as the availability of specific skills, have become increasingly important in offshoring decisions.
Thus, especially for higher-value-added segments, entry strategies will often involve the pursuit of strategic assets or a hybrid approach that values a combination of strategic assets and relatively low costs.10 Moreover, companies have seen potential in the promising emerging markets.
Therefore, many companies have invested in large emerging markets under a combination of efficiency- and/or strategic-asset-seeking strategies and market-seeking strategies.
By combining local market operations with export-oriented (offshore) ones, they have been able to dilute the fixed costs associated with these operations or, in some cases, test the business environment, human resources and other conditions of that location by working with local clients first.
These trends are visible in the strategies pursued by TNCs in offshoring centres in Latin America and the Caribbean, which are discussed in the next section.
Companies have adopted business models based on networks of service centres that are located in the client’s home country (onshore), in nearshore locations and in further offshore locations.
One example illustrates the importance of diversifying offshore operations: the energy blackout on the East Coast of North America in 2003 happened outside Asian business hours, and companies with offshore centres in Latin America were able to react and run emergency procedures more rapidly (América economía, 2008o).
Kledia and Mukherjee (2008) approach offshoring from a theoretical framework that builds on the eclectic paradigm.
Latin America and the Caribbean in the corporate strategies of the main offshore players Overview of offshore services in Latin America and the Caribbean Latin America and the Caribbean’s role in the global offshore business services industry is relatively small.
In 2007, the region accounted for 3% of payments by United States companies to companies abroad (affiliated and unaffiliated) for computer and information services, compared to India’s 27%.
In total business and professional services (which include management consultancy, public relations, R&D, testing, advertising, construction, architecture, engineering, legal and equipment support services), the region’s share is about 7% (BEA, 2008).
Nonetheless, there are signs that interest in the region among investors is growing.
Kearney’s Global Services Location Index (see table II.1) shows the countries that are seen as most attractive for future investments.
Although Asian countries still head the list, Latin American and Caribbean countries have risen in the ranking over time.
Moreover, in the 2008 State of the Outsourcing Industry report (Black Book of Outsourcing, 2008), Brazil and Chile were ranked as second and third alternatives to India (after the United States) given than 87.2% and 84.2% of interviewed companies, respectively, indicated that they would “definitely consider” these countries for their offshoring projects.
Based on current and past experience, South America was recommended by 77.4% of respondents and Mexico by 56.3%.
The report states that “Latin America, above all regions, is expected to leverage its competitive advantages in high-growth areas of offshoring and possibly move ahead as the most attractive labor arbitrage alternative”.
The region has several hubs where, for historical reasons, multiple language skills are available, making it “poised to serve a more diverse array of global markets [than India] with multilingual skills” (Shankardass, 2007).
This situation has been shaped not only by the heritage of immigration from Europe and elsewhere, but also more recently by the emigration and subsequent return (sometimes years or decades later) of people and families for economic, political and educational reasons.
However, the countries in the region, and even areas within those countries, present a great degree of diversity in their comparative advantages in attracting FDI in offshore business services.
Some countries compete as low-cost destinations with the Asian destinations, especially for the lower-end activities.
Others compete based on the availability of skills combined with easier interaction with clients due to the nearshore factors mentioned above.
The following paragraphs provide brief overviews of the industry in (i) the English-speaking Caribbean; (ii) Central America and the Dominican Republic; (iii) the large markets: Mexico and Brazil; and (iv) the main South American destinations, apart from Brazil.
Further information on the industry in selected countries is available in the annex to this chapter.
High growth rates have been registered in a combination of data entry and transcription services, call and contact centres and certain BPO functions.
For Caribbean economies, this industry is particularly important inasmuch as it complements the very cyclical tourism industry (see chapter III).
Two factors have contributed to recent growth in offshore business services in the Caribbean, apart from the general expansion of offshoring worldwide.
The English-speaking Caribbean States have promoted the advantages they offer in terms of geographical and cultural proximity to the United States, competitive costs and low attrition rates.
Their main advantage vis-à-vis their Latin American neighbours, which also benefit from these nearshore factors, is that English is either a first language or the official and primary language of instruction.12 Secondly, the liberalization of telecommunications markets in several Caribbean States from 2001 on has led to lower costs and better service, factors that are crucial in this industry.
However, this process has evolved unevenly, and challenges remain in ensuring effective competition, especially in the fixed-line segment and in international connections.
Most members of CARICOM are still connected to other regions by a single cable that is controlled by a single operator (Browne, 2007).
Although Jamaica has been overtaken by the Dominican Republic as the largest offshore business services player in the Caribbean (Zagada Institute, 2008), within the English-speaking Caribbean States, it tops the list, with an estimated 10,000 agents.
Jamaica is the only English-speaking Caribbean State to host large service centres (of more than 1,000 agents) of the top TNCs in this industry, such as ACS, West and Alliance One (acquired by the Teleperformance Group in 2007).
Barbados, meanwhile, has the highest number of offshoring jobs in the Caribbean in terms of population size.
The presence of offshore banks has contributed to the country’s emergence as a destination for offshore services.
In the other island States, relatively small centres specializing in specific functions coexist with a small number of medium-sized centres employing between 100 and 300 people.
In Guyana, where offshoring operations took off in 2002, 1,400 people are now employed in offshore business services, 830 of them in foreign companies (GoInvest, 2008).
In the same way that the English-speaking Caribbean has a linguistic advantage catering to Anglo-Saxon markets, Suriname has started to provide offshore contact centre services to the Netherlands.
Likewise, Haitian residents of the Dominican Republic have been employed in centres providing French-language services, although for now these are relatively small operations.
A study was commissioned in 2008 by the Sogebank Foundation and Kata on the feasibility of a BPO centre in Haiti. (b) Central America and the Dominican Republic13 Central American countries and the Dominican Republic have also benefited from the increasing importance of nearshoring.
Although only a fraction of the population in these countries speaks English fluently, in absolute terms, the number of English-speaking agents with technical skills that can be employed in a number of different areas and functions is significant, allowing for the establishment of larger centres than in most of the English-speaking Caribbean.
The bilingual contingent has grown in recent years through educational efforts and through the return of people who had previously worked or been raised in the United States.
Moreover, the growth of the Hispanic community in the United States and of the markets of Latin America and Spain has created demand for Spanish-speaking operators, to the benefit of these countries.
Governments have actively supported FDI generally and most have taken measures to promote FDI in the offshore service industry in particular.
In fact, as the apparel industry started suffering from competition from China and other Asian countries especially from 2001 onward, the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic have been making efforts to diversify their economies and have targeted the offshore business services industry in particular (ECLAC, 2008a; 2008b).
Costa Rica is the most mature market in Central America for offshore business services, having gradually scaled up to higher-value-added activities and ensured steady growth in the jobs in offshore services, which today number approximately 23,500 (see box II.3).
Panama also has a large contingent of workers in this industry, which is more concentrated, however, in contact centres and simple BPO functions.
The Dominican Republic has one of the fastest growing contact-centre and BPO industries.
In El Salvador and Guatemala, 6,800 and 6,500 people, respectively, are employed in offshore service centres.
In terms of population size, the industry is more significant for El Salvador.
Both countries have active policies targeting primarily BPO, and, secondarily, shared services in the case of El Salvador and IT services in the case of Guatemala.
Although their role as offshore destinations is relatively recent and although the share of services that are exported is relatively small, in 2007 these two countries accounted for 67% of cross-border sales of computer and information services to United States companies from Latin America and the Caribbean (BEA, 2008).
Part of the attractiveness of both countries for offshore operations stems from their large local markets and industries.
The strong presence of transnational corporations in multiple industries led to the establishment of in-house service centres (including engineering and other R&D functions), regional headquarters and shared service centres.
It also led to the presence of outsourcing vendors that cater both to global clients and local ones.
Through these investments geared initially towards local markets, companies acquired infrastructure, knowledge and experience in the local business environments.
As IT developments made offshoring technically and economically feasible, some took advantage of their bases in these countries and started catering simultaneously to the local market and to offshore customers (or their own corporate headquarters and global networks).
In parallel to this general trend involving multiindustry clients and outsourcing vendors, the existence of sizeable IT hardware manufacturing industries in both Mexico and Brazil had a particularly important effect.
First, it helped create a pool of engineers and other professionals employable in the IT services industry.
Second, both countries hosted the main original equipment manufacturers in electronics (such as IBM or HP), and when these companies shifted their core activities from manufacturing to services, they took advantage of their decades-long experience and infrastructure in both to set up service centres there (ECLAC, 2008a).
Based on company interviews and survey response of ApexBrasil, in addition to cited documents.
Of the 23,500 offshore business service jobs in Costa Rica, 58% are in contact centres.
Labour costs in Costa Rica are now considered high relative to other countries in Central America, especially for the lower-skilled functions where cost is the crucial competitive factor.
This suggests that other factors compensate for higher labour costs in Costa Rica, even in the contact centre market.
Within this segment and in BPO functions, Costa Rica has invested in developing its capacities as a multilingual hub.
The establishment of the Intel plant in 1998 generated significant spillover benefits for the country, including a demonstration of the importance of targeting and of the value of the signalling effect of the establishment of a major transnational corporation.
Much like what had happened to Intel and the development of the electronics cluster (the limitations of which are discussed in OMGI, 2006), the establishment of the Global Business Services Unit of Procter & Gamble (P&G) in 1999 paved the way for several other operations in global business service centres.
Directly related to the P&G operations, HP and IBM set up operations providing different sets of services to the company.
Intel itself expanded into services in Costa Rica with its Latin America Engineering Services (LAES) group and a financial services group in 2004, followed by procurement and technical assistance.
After 2000, Costa Rica started receiving greater volumes of investment in shared-service and back-office centres.
On the back of its consolidated contact centre and BPO industry, Costa Rica started targeting offshore operations for highervalue-added services in 2004.
At the same time, companies that were already in the country, such as P&G, started carrying out more complex operations.
Costa Rica’s gradual upgrading within the offshore services industry has been made possible by a combination of educational efforts to generate a skilled workforce in different technical areas, cluster effects arising from the presence of other offshore service companies and the electronics industry, and active targeting.
Brazil benefits from being a member of the BRIC group (Brazil, Russian Federation, India and China) inasmuch as many companies, like IBM, have favoured these large, high-growth markets in their expansion strategies.
Most of the offshore operations undertaken from Brazil are combined with operations for the local market, with exports typically accounting for only a fraction of revenues from the Brazilian operations.
The country has been less successful at attracting new operations by companies looking specifically for low-cost offshore sites, chiefly because of relatively high costs (aggravated over certain periods by currency appreciation) and small numbers of skilled professionals who are fluent in English.
That the main motivation for investment in many of the existing service centres is not offshoring should not obscure the fact that the exports that are carried out are significant in the region.
IBM alone exported approximately US$ 300 million in services from Brazil in 2007.
One of the factors that have contributed to R&D in IT industries is the Informatics Act, which provides tax incentives to original equipment manufacturers and contract manufacturers provided that, among other conditions, they invest in R&D centres in Brazil.
Some of these R&D facilities have become global centres of excellence in specific products or areas and now export solutions to headquarters.
This instrument has been relevant for companies that stand at the interface between hardware and services, such as IBM, HP and Motorola.
Incentives for R&D have been strengthened through more recent initiatives, as set out in table II.A-1 in the annex to this chapter (see ECLAC, 2008a).
Mexico has greater nearshore advantages (for the United States market) than its South American neighbours and capacity for larger operations than the countries of Central America and the Caribbean.
Mexico has the second largest call centre industry in the region and dominates the market for customer service to the Hispanic community in the United States (A.T.
Also, under NAFTA, trade in services with the United States is easier than for other countries as certain security and data transfer issues are easier to manage, and visas do not constitute a barrier for the flow of IT professionals (Karamouzis and others, 2007).
Mexico too has a substantial number of global R&D facilities within companies that also hold manufacturing facilities in the country.
Thus the two largest countries in the region are especially well positioned to attract offshoring investments due to a combination of a history in manufacturing, large markets and, especially in the case of Mexico, proximity to the United States.
All three cities have large urban populations and a sufficient density of companies to make them an attractive destination for IT-based service companies.
These cities also have good educational infrastructures, and recognized institutions have partnered up with companies to develop their programmes.
In Monterrey and Guadalajara, however, the relationship between the offshore business service industry and the cities’ manufacturing past is clearer.
In both cases, the export-oriented maquila industry —especially in electronics and autoparts— led to the incorporation of the use of IT in local industry and generated R&D capacity.
The development models used in manufacturing were different, however, and this has shaped the development of the service industry in each city.
Guadalajara (Jalisco State) provides a larger volume of services through a smaller number of larger firms, including transnational corporations such as HP and IBM.
Reflecting its role as an electronics cluster based on the maquila model, the region has specialized in niche services such as semiconductor design, embedded software and multimedia products.
The large maquila plants of IBM have been converted to IT service centres, and several former maquiladora employees have set up small IT firms.
Monterrey (Nuevo León State), meanwhile, has benefited from a dynamic business environment that has nurtured a larger number of local firms.
The existence of strong local manufacturing firms contributed to the creation of IT services firms such as Softtek and Neoris.
The former was set up by former employees of the Alfa group, whereas Neoris originated as a spinoff of the IT operations of Cemex.
The presence of the Monterrey Institute of Advanced Technological Studies (ITESM) has also played a key role in supplying qualified engineers and fostering entrepreneurship.
The latter has also developed a computer programming industry (Mullan and others, 2008).
As the industry expands, destinations that are relatively new to this industry are becoming increasingly attractive.
For now, four countries, apart from Brazil, concentrate the bulk of these operations: Argentina, Chile, Colombia and Uruguay.
Argentina started attracting investments in offshore business services in the 1990s and has competed well both in segments where cost is the critical factor, such as call centres, and in higher-skilled industries, such as IT.
With the devaluation of the peso in 2002 the country became particularly attractive in terms of cost, which added to the advantages of a highly educated workforce (the country has the region’s highest rate of annual enrolment for tertiary education) of significant size.
In call centres, Argentina has started taking up a larger share of the Hispanic customer services market in the United States.
It is estimated that 60,000 people are employed in contact centres in Argentina and that 40% of service revenues are for offshore services.
An increasing range of BPO services (finance and accounting, translations, collections and others) are also being undertaken in the country (A.T.
Several investments in software development were made following the institution of tax breaks for software operations in 2004.
Although Buenos Aires concentrates the bulk of offshore business service activities, the most dynamic cluster is in the province of Córdoba (see box II.5).
The establishment of Motorola in Córdoba in 2000 marked a major landmark in the history of offshore services in Argentina.
Following in Motorola’s footsteps, Intel established a research centre, and EDS set up a global service delivery centre in the city (Clarín, 2005; Business Week, 2006).
From representing a few hundred jobs in 1999, the industry now employs approximately 30,000 people in the IT cluster there, including 20,000 in contact centre functions and approximately 9,000 in IT (1,500 of which are in TNCs).
The challenges now facing Córdoba, Argentina, are illustrative of the challenges many countries in the region face in maximizing the potential local benefits of offshoring by TNCs.
Córdoba’s automotive industry is known to have developed around a small number of TNCs that made it possible for hundreds of local providers to emerge.
In the IT industry, however, although policy has been successful at attracting major TNCs, the challenge remains to integrate local providers (there are approximately 100 software development companies in the area) into the supplier networks of the TNCs.
This is in part due to the software production model prevailing among TNCs.
In the past the incentive scheme adopted in Córdoba, which included grants for each person hired, was adequate for attaining the initial goal of bringing world class companies to the area.
Now, making the leap towards integrating local companies into the world market, either through the networks of TNCs or independently, may require more and direct support to be given to local companies.
Financing, as well as training, not only in technological capacity but also in management and marketing skills, should be key components of policy directed at small and mediumsized providers and individuals.
Such support would also help the province become less dependent on incentives and subsidies for its attractiveness as a location for FDI in offshore business services.
The expansion of the skills base, highlighted above, is also essential to the development of the local IT sector and other offshore service players as it can help avoid the crowding out of local companies that compete for labour with the TNCs.
TNCs have an important role to play as a channel between local firms and world markets. (San Pedro, 2008).
Based on company interviews and survey responses from the Chilean Production Development Corporation (CORFO) and the Export Promotion Agency of Colombia (PROEXPORT), in addition to cited documents.
Chile and Uruguay have also both targeted highervalue-added services where the scale of operations is less relevant than for contact centres and simple BPO functions.
Chile has taken a cluster approach to the development of a global services industry, which today includes operations in shared service centres, software development and KPO (see box II.6).
Uruguay has been stronger in the software product industry but has expanded in services, especially since 2005, when TCS established its global delivery centre that today employs over 800 people (see below).
IBM is also in the process of establishing a BPO centre for a Spanish client in the banking sector that will initially employ 200 people.
The exports component of Uruguay’s offshoring industry is higher than that of its neighbours, although largely concentrated within Latin America (CUTI, 2007, González, 2008).
As mentioned above, Costa Rica won the bid, but the experience was positive for Chile in two ways.
First, it gave the country a sense of its potential as a destination for investment in high-tech industries; and secondly, it highlighted the need for an active and strategically-oriented investment promotion policy for these industries.
Since then, Chile has gone through a process to assess its advantages, shortcomings and opportunities and has identified key, high-potential, segments, on which to focus its promotion efforts.
The relatively small size of Chile’s population limits its attractiveness for services requiring high-volume, low-cost, operations.
The country does host a number of call centres with export operations.
It is estimated that approximately 20-25% of call centre operators in companies such as Teleperformance, Konecta, Atento and Transcom cater to the export market, particularly Spain, while companies such as Air France and Delta have their regional contact centres in Chile.
Nonetheless, in its policy efforts, rather than high-volume operations, Chile has targeted segments where higher value added can be reaped through lower-volume operations.
In 2000, the country began implementing measures to develop the global services industry.
In efforts to diversify Chile’s economy away from natural resources and towards high-growth industries intensive in technology, human capital and innovation, the country selected global services as one among a group of five target clusters.
Exploring first-comer advantages within the region, policies were developed through a collaborative institutional framework involving public and private entities and academia.
This framework included the National Innovation Council and the Council of Ministers on Innovation, and a strategic council that includes government entities, local entrepreneurial associations, executives of major TNCs established in the country and representatives of universities and technical training institutes.
These policies targeted activities such as software development, IT and KPO services, as well as niche services geared at specific industries, such as finance and innovation activities in natural resource industries (mining and biotechnology, for example).
Financial incentives were established, investments were made in human resources development and infrastructure (including the building of facilities), and immigration procedures were streamlined.
A set of incentives is now in place for FDI in high-tech industries in particular.
These include grants for pre-investment studies and setting-up costs, investment support services, training, investment in fixed assets and real-estate leases.
CORFO provides office space at subsidized rates for a set period at its facilities in Curauma, close to Valparaíso.
In 2007, Chile exported over US$ 400 million in services (well in excess of the target established in 2000), through 50 service centres.
Most of these exports refer to engineering services rather than to contact centre or BPO functions.
Global business services were the first non-natural-resourcebased industry to generate a similar volume of exports.
There are currently 12,000 people employed in the global services industry, of which two thirds are specialized technical staff and one third are professionals holding university degrees.
The country has managed to attract leading firms that have had a strong signalling effect on the industry (see table II.A-1).
Policy efforts have also been directed at the development of the local industry within the global services cluster.
Some of the main challenges that remain are to generate sufficient numbers of English-proficient, skilled professionals to meet the demands of companies interested in investing in Chile without compromising the operations of those already established or local firms.
The first signs of saturation have appeared, as newly established companies have had to draw heavily from other companies in the global services cluster to staff their service centres.
Measures in course include specific programmes to improve English skills among IT professionals and at the secondary-school level, the revision of university engineering curricula to adapt them to the needs of an industry characterized by a high rate of technological change, and the strengthening of professional institutes.
It has promoted its advantages as a nearshore destination that can offer a large contingent of professionals in IT industries, flexible labour legislation and low costs.
Although some companies run in-house offshore centres, this section focuses on the experiences in the region of some of the major outsourcing players, for whom offshoring is a core element of competitive strategies (see box II.7).
Contracts with customers often involve a package of bundled services (and sometimes hardware).
The players in the contact centre services market can be more easily set apart from the others, although many companies also provide certain BPO services.
The market is highly fragmented, with the top four players accounting for less than 12% of the outsourced contact centre market.
There has been a significant merging of BPO and IT services as companies initially specializing in one have expanded into the other, and companies originating in the manufacturing industry, such as IBM and HP, have shifted into services.
Software development is an important component of the activities of several of these firms.
The majority of these companies, which will henceforth be referred to as “integrated outsourcing companies”, are either from the United States or, increasingly, from India.
Finally, KPO services are provided either by companies that specialize in KPO or as part of the package of services offered by integrated outsourcing companies.
Although there is a trend towards greater outsourcing of knowledge processing functions, there are certain services which will tend to remain under captive operations.
Offshoring in software has taken place in two other groups of software firms: software operations in non-software firms (Agilent Technologies, Citicorp); and software-intensive high-tech startups (Hellosoft, Netscaler and Ketera) (Aggarwal and others, 2006).
In regard to the offshore operations of major outsourcing companies in Latin America and the Caribbean, section a focuses on the contact centre companies Teleperformance and Digitex.
Section b looks at companies —referred to as “integrated outsourcing companies”— that provide combinations of BPO and IT services.
Whereas some also span the lower-skill contact centre functions (ACS), others have included KPO in their portfolios (TCS, IBM).
Sections c and d discuss the regional experiences of two individual companies: Evalueserve, which specializes in KPO, and Softtek, a Mexican BPO/IT player.
They also represent a significant share of offshoring of business functions in the other countries in the region (see table II.A-1).
All the main cross-industry contact centre companies have operations in Latin America and the Caribbean, and most are present in multiple destinations (see table II.3).
In the smaller countries, particularly in the Englishspeaking Caribbean and in Central America, investments have been mainly export-oriented.
The principal advantages of these countries are low costs (when the cost savings associated with geographical and time-zone proximity are considered), and the availability of people who are fluent in English and Spanish, the languages spoken most commonly in the major market, the United States.
Central America and the Caribbean offer comparable costs to India and the Philippines at the more basic level of contact centres and data entry.
Another asset is that operators from these countries usually have neutral accents, an asset that is increasingly valued by customers.
On a smaller scale, multilingual services have also started to be provided from the region.
In the larger countries of South America and in Mexico, companies have entered with a combination of export-oriented and market-seeking strategies, diluting the fixed costs of an offshore operation by catering to large volumes of local customers.
In many cases, the offshore component of operations is small, but still amounts to a significant number of employees and substantial revenues when considered in absolute terms.
For example, approximately 20% of Mexican contact services are exported, which, assuming even revenues per employee, represents the output of 72,000 workers, roughly equivalent to the number of people employed in this industry in all of the Caribbean and Central America put together (IMT, 2008).
For the purpose of this analysis, the strategies of two companies are considered: Teleperformance and Digitex.
Teleperformance is one of the largest contact centre companies in the world and one with the most extensive footprint in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Unlike some of its competitors, which have chosen to expand into BPO and IT services, Teleperformance has focused on contact centres as its core business and made only small incursions into other segments.
Digitex, on the other hand, is not among the largest companies in the industry, but is an interesting example of a company that specializes in Spanish-speaking services, a market in regard to which Latin America is uniquely positioned.
Teleperformance Established in 1978, Teleperformance is based in France and has 83,000 employees in 46 countries.
It provides services in 66 languages and dialects through a combination of onshore and offshore facilities.
Offshore centres are situated in 15 countries, seven of which are in Latin America and the Caribbean.
These include dedicated offshore facilities (such as those in the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Jamaica and some of its centres in Mexico) and others that combine offshore functions and local operations (in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and the remaining Mexican operations) (see table II.4).
Teleperformance’s internationalization strategy began with the penetration of Europe in the 1980s, followed by the United States in the early 1990s.
Its incursions into developing countries, including in Latin America and the Caribbean, began in the second half of the 1990s.
The company’s offshore operations in the region consist of two main systems, one that revolves around its base in Mexico, and the other that revolves around its base in Argentina.
It soon started providing a combination of local market services and bilingual services to the United States.
These service centres, which employed over 1,600 people at the time of the acquisition, fit into Teleperformance’s strategy of combining onshore and offshore services to its United States clients.
In addition to the Spanish and bilingual services it already provided, in 2006 Teleperformance started providing English-only services from its centres in Chihuahua.
Its Mexican operations were further expanded in 2007 through the acquisition of Hispanic Teleservices Corporation, which has over 1,800 employees and facilities in Monterrey and Guadalajara.
The El Salvador centre, established in 2004, is a lower-cost complement to the Mexican Spanish-language operations for the United States market and also provides services to Mexican banks and financial institutions.
Teleperformance’s employees in Mexico and El Salvador who cater to the United States market together number approximately 10,000.
Along with the operations based out of the United States, this means that Teleperformance has over 26,000 employees catering to the English-speaking and bilingual markets in the United States.
The company’s first centre in Argentina was set up in 1998 and now has 3,500 employees and offers services in five different languages.
Teleperformance also owns Software del Plata, which provides technical support, help desk, IT outsourcing and consulting services to the local and Latin American markets.
The Chilean operation was established in 2006 as an expansion of the Argentinean programme.
Teleperformance’s operations in the Caribbean also cater to offshore customers but with more focused objectives.
The Jamaican operation was acquired through Teleperformance’s purchase of United States company AllianceOne, in 2007, and specializes in accounts receivable management (debt collection).
The Brazilian operations were set up at the same time as the Argentinean ones, in 1998, and successively expanded, but with a greater focus on the local market.
Teleperformance is the third largest contact centre company in the country, with 20,000 employees working in 13 service centres.
The Brazilian centres export their services, essentially to the United States, but unlike the Mexican and Argentinean hubs, they do not cater to the Hispanic market.
Also unlike in the two Asian countries, the regional market plays an important part in Teleperformance’s strategy in Latin American and the Caribbean.
The company’s growing interest in the region is evident in the substantial investments made after 2002, and especially after 2007.
Digitex Digitex is not among the largest players in the industry, but it is one of the leaders in Spanish-language services and as such has a significant share of its operations in Latin America.
The company employs 8,500 people worldwide, with just over 4,000 employees in Latin America and the rest in Spain.
The company provides contact centre services, BPO, and IT services (software factory)16 and specializes in catering to companies in the telecommunications, banking, finance and utilities sectors.
Digitex was founded in 1988, in Spain, and initially focused on the Spanish market.
In 1999, it established a Chilean subsidiary, its first international operation, with the specific mission of providing support for the Y2K procedures.
A year later, the company set up a subsidiary in Argentina to target the local market there.
The company’s second wave of internationalization was undertaken after an experience with the remote provision of services through second-tier cities within Spain.
From its hub in Madrid, starting in 2001, Digitex began a “national offshoring strategy”, opening a centre in León, followed by La Carolina in 2003, Aranda de Duero in 2004, and later other destinations.
The concept behind this national expansion strategy was to operate out of multiple platforms situated in provinces with higherthan-average unemployment rates and few professional opportunities for local residents.
While for these areas the presence of Digitex service centres was welcome and generated significant social and economic benefits, for the company it has meant relatively lower costs, an eager workforce and low attrition rates.
Based on the success of this national expansion and on specific requests from clients to explore Latin America’s potential as an offshore destination, a second international expansion phase started in 2005.
Rather than the specific missions that had characterized the initial international moves in the late 1990s, this time the concept was to explore, in parallel, the Latin American market (including transnational and particularly Spanish clients situated in the region) and the Hispanic market in the United States.
Digitex entered a joint venture with Altra Inversiones, a Colombian venture capital firm, supported, among others, by the Santo Domingo Group, with the purpose of expanding within Latin America.
While Digitex contributed its know-how in establishing and developing customer service platforms and its relationship with the Spanish multinationals, Altra contributed its knowledge of, and experience in, the regional business environment.
The initial growth strategy was based on the acquisition of local companies and alliances with leading companies providing local services.
Company headquarters were set up in Mexico, and a joint venture was established with a United States company to penetrate the Hispanic market in that country.
The term “software factory” refers to the assembly of software components and the development of software applications according to client specifications.
The base there has 650 positions covered by 1,000 employees and caters to the United States and Spanish market in addition to performing regional inbound and outbound contact centre services (including technical support, help desks, customer service, order response, financial services, information services, collections, payment reminders, up-selling and cross-selling) and BPO functions.
In terms of the service mix, the strategy followed by the company has been to first provide the simpler functions initially and, if successful, gradually evolve towards a second generation of services that would include, for instance, software factory services.
Although the focus is still on Spanish-language services, the English-language market is increasingly being catered to.
The base in El Salvador has 250 positions, which provides customer services and BPO essentially to local clients and provides redundancy or back-up capacity in cases where operations are unexpectedly interrupted or capacity is insufficient to meet demand for the Guatemala base.
In Nicaragua and Panama, the company provides services to major locally-established clients.
In the Andean countries, Digitex has been operating in Colombia since 2005 and in Peru since 2006.
Following the Spanish offshoring strategy pursued earlier in the decade, in the Andean region, the strategy has been to move towards medium-sized cities to find motivated human resources at low costs and with low attrition rates.
The requirements for these second-tier destinations are the presence of universities, a significant number of qualified human resources and adequate telecommunications and transportation logistics.
Although the centre of operations in Colombia is in Bogota, the largest operation is in Manizales, where the company has 1,200 positions to provide both local services and offshore services to Spain.
The centre the company recently inaugurated in Ibagué, a city of approximately 500,000 inhabitants, has 1,000 positions.
In Peru, which is a relatively unexplored territory as far as offshore business services are concerned, the first operations were set up in Lima in 2006, but from the outset, there have been plans to expand into smaller urban centres such as Trujillo and Tacna (Peru.com, 2008).
As in the case of ACS, Digitex’s decision to expand into offshore services in Latin America and the Caribbean was influenced by requests from clients.
The experience of these two companies reflects characteristics that apply to contact centre companies in the region in general.
These companies have used the region as a nearshore base for Spanish- and Englishspeaking customers, catering mostly to the United States market (including its promising Hispanic component), but also to Latin American markets and to Europe.
Asia remains difficult to compete with in segments that rely more heavily on labour costs.
However, as companies start offering more targeted services that require more frequent interaction with clients situated in the United States or direct contact with customers, Latin America and the Caribbean has unique advantages.
Latin America is a natural choice for Spanish companies whose main market is Spanish-speaking.
In their strategies for the region, operations are almost exclusively export oriented in the smaller countries of the Caribbean and Central America, but in the larger countries, they provide a combination of local-market and export services.
This is part of the reason why in Latin America and the Caribbean, the offshore centres of the integrated outsourcing companies, unlike the contact centre companies, are located mostly in the larger markets (see table II.5).
Many of the United States companies have decades’ long histories in the region, especially in the largest markets, owing to their links with the manufacturing industry.
IBM manufactured IT hardware in Argentina, Mexico and Brazil before it shifted its core activities from hardware to services.
EDS, in turn, was owned between 1985 and 1996 by General Motors, which also has plants in these three countries and was subsequently an outsourcing provider to the company.
TCS is the company with the longest history in the region, having made its first investments in the 1990s.
However, the major export-oriented investments of TCS were only undertaken in 2005.
The following paragraphs describe the strategies of ACS, EDS - an HP company, IBM and TCS in using Latin America as an offshore destination.
Affiliated Computer Services (ACS) is a United States company with US$ 6.2 billion in annual revenues and almost 70,000 employees.
The business strategy of ACS focuses on serving vertical markets where it has subject matter expertise in a wide range of services, including data entry and transcription, contact centre, BPO and IT services.
It stands out among the other companies in this section in that it has made greater use of Latin America and the Caribbean as a low-cost, nearshore base for its United States customers in lower-value-added BPO services, including data entry and transcription and contact centre services.
Hence its larger footprint in Central America and the Caribbean than the other companies listed in table II.5.
However, the company’s service mix has recently started to diversify and move towards highervalue-added services.
The company’s regional strategies are shifting away from pure efficiency-seeking ventures towards a hybrid efficiency-, market- and strategic-asset-seeking approach, especially in South America.
In fact, its first operations outside the United States were in Mexico —initially Monterrey, then Hermosillo— followed by Guatemala, all in the mid-1990s.
The purpose of these initial investments was to explore the nearshore advantages of Mexico and Central America, a novel concept at the time.
At first, the services provided included transaction processing or data entry services.
Over the years, however, changes in the make-up of the company’s global offshore workforce affected the company’s Latin American operations.
First, as competition increased, ACS started searching for lower-cost markets, particularly for its lower-skill functions.
The company therefore invested in Asia, especially India and the Philippines, and even scaled back its operations in Latin America up until the mid2000s.
In the second movement, ACS adopted a different approach towards the region.
In addition to lower costs, the company saw potential in the region’s nearshore advantages, especially for higher-value-added services (within the contact centre category and in BPO and software development).
This motivated new investments in Guatemala and Mexico and later in the Caribbean.
This second movement, which was strongly influenced by the express interest of clients, did not mean transferring jobs back from Asia, but exploring new opportunities in nearshore capabilities.
In South America, the Brazilian operations were inaugurated in 2004 and geared at transnational corporations operating in Brazil.
The company owned a network of service centres in Chile, Colombia, and Peru and employed 6,000 people, roughly 10% of the workforce at ACS prior to the acquisition.
The purpose of the acquisition was twofold: to explore regional growth in South America and to expand capacity to cater to offshore clients.
Multivoice’s assets will enable ACS to strengthen its services to Europe and its bilingual (English and Spanish) services to the United States (ACS, 2008).
Since 2004, ACS has therefore renewed its interest in the region and begun to tap nearshore advantages in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, and, in South America, to explore a combination of regional market growth and the availability of skills to cater to the European and United States markets.
EDS, an HP Company Like other original equipment manufacturers in the IT hardware manufacturing industry, HP has increased the services component of its business in the last few years.
Its acquisition of Electronic Data Systems (EDS) in 2008 for US$ 13.9 billion reflects that strategy and is expected to more than double the services revenue of HP.
Since the buy-out, EDS has been rebranded as “EDS, an HP Company”.
HP itself is an important offshore player, not only in providing services to global clients but in offshoring its own back-office operations.
Initially established to service Procter & Gamble (see Martínez, Padilla and Schatan, 2008), HP Costa Rica now provides services to other global customers and has its own in-house back-office and global customer service operations in the country, where it employs 6,500 people.
HP also has offshore operations in Mexico, Panama and Brazil (on the Mexican operation, see Mullan and others, 2008).
Whereas the service operations of HP have historically been anchored to technology and the client relationships the company had developed initially through its hardware business, EDS has always been a services company.
EDS was one of the first firms to provide outsourced business and IT services and was founded in 1962 by Ross Perot and acquired in 1985 by General Motors to carry out its information management functions.
The company’s first incursions into Latin America were in Mexico during that year, precisely to service the General Motors operation in that country.
In 1996, EDS became an independent company again, focusing on its role as a BPO and IT service outsourcing vendor.
The company started exploring low-cost offshore options later than its more aggressive competitors.
A major step was taken in 2004, when it acquired the Indian company MPhasis.
In Latin America, the first attempts at offshoring were in IT applications, maintaining and developing software in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, for customers in the United States.
In 2006, the company decided to strengthen its offshore component, and Latin America, alongside Eastern Europe and China, were considered as alternatives to India.
Among other reasons, this was influenced by customers, who started requesting more familiar accents or wished to diversify the location of their service providers to cover political or natural contingencies.
Moreover, the Indian market started presenting attrition problems that in turn generated high costs, particularly in training.
That year, a decision was made to make a major offshore-oriented investment in Latin America.
Up until then, EDS locations in Latin America had been strongly determined by the location of the plants of its former owner, General Motors.
This had led to excessive fragmentation of service centres for a company that was now an outsourcing company catering to multiple clients and set within an industry that was exploring IT to take maximum advantage of scale economies.
The concept of global service delivery centres was instituted, which meant identifying sites where it would be possible to concentrate between 1,500 and 5,000 professionals in countries that provided competitive offshore cost conditions.
Like other companies, EDS favoured sites outside capital cities that nonetheless offered abundant human resources through proximity to academic centres and the availability of campus-type areas.
Three types of services were to be provided: IT infrastructure, applications development/ software maintenance and BPO (including call centre, procurement and back-office functions).
Several alternatives were considered in Brazil, where EDS already had important operations, but currency appreciation made costs too high.
So the company decided to integrate the existing Brazilian operations in a campus outside the city of São Paulo.
This operation was set up to provide mainly local services but also has approximately 200 employees dedicated to offshore operations, as well as others filling in offshore demand when necessary.
The offshore services provided by EDS in Brazil involve specific applications for which qualified professionals are scarce in Argentina, the location that was eventually selected for the global delivery service centre.
The Argentine city of Córdoba was chosen because it offered a combination of cost advantages and qualified personnel, met the company’s requirements in terms of adequate infrastructure and was a second-tier city.
In fact, Argentina had become particularly attractive as a destination for offshore business services since the devaluation of the peso in 2002, which added to the advantages of a highly-educated and numerous workforce (the country has the region’s highest rate of annual enrolment in tertiary education) and government incentives.
In Córdoba, the company found adequate office space in an industrial park, close to the airport, with world class technology and connectivity, as well as strong support from the provincial government.
The Córdoba government was actively promoting investment in this industry with tax rebates and a direct subsidy per employee.
Offshore operations were also undertaken from the company’s offices in Buenos Aires.
Thus, when EDS decided to strengthen the offshore component of its operations, Latin America was considered because it offered nearshore advantages (including ease of communication with clients in the United States) and lower saturation (and lower attrition rates) than India, could complement the company’s India-centred offshore operations and would help diversify the location of its operations.
At the time of the acquisition by HP, EDS had 2,300 employees in Argentina, 2,000 in Mexico, and over 8,000 in Brazil and smaller centres in Chile and Colombia.
Offices dedicated to relationships with single clients were present in other countries.
IBM first entered the services market in the 1990s when it started facing strong competition in the hardware industry.
Two key steps in that direction were the acquisition of PricewaterhouseCoopers’ global business consulting and technology services unit, PwC Consulting, in 2002, and the divestment of the PC manufacturing division to Lenovo in 2004 (EIU, 2006).
Like HP, and unlike Accenture and EDS (prior to its acquisition by HP), IBM provides both services and systems (the hardware infrastructure related to those services).
IBM is the largest company in its category worldwide and in Latin America and the Caribbean (see chapter I).
It has had manufacturing facilities in Brazil and Mexico for over 80 years.
As the company shifted into services, it established service centres in countries in which it had previously manufactured and in those with relatively strong export-oriented IT industries.
Comprehensive IT services integrated with business knowledge, working with clients to reduce costs and improve productivity through the outsourcing of processes and operations Company’s global scale, standardization, automation Business transformation outsourcing.
A range of offerings from standardized processing platforms and BPO through transformational offerings that delivers improved business results to clients through the strategic change and/or operation of the client’s business processes, applications and infrastructure Integrated technology services.
Services offerings that help clients access, manage and support their technology infrastructures through a combination of skilled resources, software and the knowledge IBM has of business processes Maintenance.
Support services from product maintenance through solution support to maintain and improve the availability of clients’ IT infrastructure Global Business Professional services and application outsourcing Consulting and systems integration.
Possibility of leveraging industry and business process expertise In Brazil and Mexico, IBM took advantage of its infrastructure, its professionals and a base of local clients to ensure minimum efficient scale in its operations.
In Brazil, between 2004 and 2006, the company spent US$ 70 million in the development of the Hortolândia hub, in the State of São Paulo, where it had manufactured IT hardware since the 1970s.
The centre now hosts over 7,000 employees, 80% of which are dedicated to export services to over 60 global customers in seven different languages.
Service exports by IBM in Brazil have grown continuously since the beginning of operations (see figure II.3) (Valor econômico, 2008).
In Mexico, IBM started converting manufacturing facilities to services centres in the late 1990s.
In 2005, the IBM centre in Guadalajara became one of the first in Mexico to obtain CMMI certification,17 and by 2006, IBM had 1,200 program developers working there.
Today, IBM Global Services accounts for 50% of IBM revenues in Mexico, and its computer programs account for another 25% (Mullan and others, 2008).
In 2008, IBM established a new centre of excellence in Guadalajara, Mexico, to provide innovation services for the retail market.
Based on a process improvement model, Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) certification is granted by the Software Engineering Institute (SEI), operated by Carnegie Mellon University, based on two main criteria: product or system quality and the maturity of the organization in software development.
In Argentina, the company’s global delivery centres started expanding significantly in 2004: the number of employees performing offshore functions rose from 70 in 2004 to approximately 2,600 by the third quarter of 2008.
In October 2008, the company announced the creation of three new global delivery centres, entailing investments of US$ 60 million over 10 years, to provide more than 20 countries with server, database, network and storage monitoring and support services.
IBM has an in-house operation in Costa Rica, as well as a centre dedicated to P&G, and is in the process of establishing an offshore BPO operation in Uruguay to cater to a specific client.
In short, the operations of IBM in Latin America have followed two main patterns.
One draws on the link between large local markets and industries and competitiveness as a global delivery centre.
In Mexico and Brazil, IBM had strong portfolios of local clients and local subsidiaries of transnational clients, which gave it a safe base to build on for its expansion into global offshore services.
The combination of offshore and local market operations allows service centres to operate at a minimum efficient scale, which compensates for higher costs than in the main Asian locations.
Moreover, through its own IT manufacturing business, IBM had accumulated knowledge on local business environments and owned infrastructure that it converted to service provision (ECLAC, 2008a).
Finally, the existence of an IT manufacturing industry countrywide, in the case of Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, helped create a pool of engineers and other professionals employable in the IT services industry.
The other pattern refers to the company’s smaller investments that have actively targeted technology-intensive services sectors in the region, including those in Costa Rica and Uruguay.
Founded in 1968 within the Tata Group in India, TCS started out developing software for other companies.
Initially, it sold the hours of engineers and maintenance and support personnel.
In time, this model evolved into providing solutions, which enabled the company to provide outsourcing services for an increasing range of IT and technology functions that were no longer core activities for its clients.
TCS first ventured into Latin America when its clients started expanding in the region.
It was the first of the Indian offshore business service companies to establish operations in Latin America, entering Brazil in the 1990s.
Later it established operations in Chile, Argentina and Uruguay in 2002 and 2003 and made another major acquisition in Chile in 2005.
Its global service centre in Uruguay was established in 2005 in Zonamerica, a free trade zone technology park.
This was the first centre in South America to obtain CMMI Level 5 certification (the highest standard under the CMMI model).
The region had an important role to play in the the company’s global delivery network model, which consists of a worldwide network of linked service centres using common standard processes and drawing from complementary capabilities worldwide.
Under this model, India is the major offshore destination; operations in China and Brazil are mostly for local clients, but there are prospects for gradually developing their offshore capacity; and Mexico, Uruguay and Chile function as nearshore sites for the United States market (as Hungary and Morocco do for the European market).
In fact, there is a marked distinction between the operations in Uruguay and to a certain extent Mexico, and those in the rest of the region.
The presence of TCS has had a significant impact on the local employment rate in this industry.
Mexico is becoming another strong export base for TCS because of its proximity to the United States and the large number of skilled professionals it has who are proficient in English.
A global delivery centre was set up in 2007 with 500 employees and there are plans for expansion.
With the exception of these two countries, however, the export-oriented operations in the region have not grown as fast as initially predicted, and roughly 80% of services provided in the regional centres are for local markets.
High costs compared to its home-country operations and difficulties in hiring sufficient numbers of skilled professionals have been among the main hurdles TCS has encountered in its efforts to expand the services it exports from the region.
In sum, the higher the skill-intensity of the services being offshored, the greater the role that professionals with engineering or other specialized skills play as key assets in investment decisions.
As companies like ACS move towards higher-value-added functions, they start investing in countries that do not necessarily offer the lowest labour costs, but concentrate significant volumes of skilled professionals and, in some cases, have large markets that can help dilute the costs of the offshore component of operations.
In fact, the operations of companies that have traditionally operated in higher-value-added segments (for example, EDS - an HP company, IBM and TCS) have therefore been concentrated in the larger countries in the region and in those with higher tertiary education enrolment rates.
The integrated outsourcing companies are strongly concentrated in Mexico and Brazil, where they combine market- and efficiency-seeking strategies, although they have also invested in Argentina, Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay.
Evalueserve is one of few dedicated KPO companies with service centres in the region.
Founded in 2000 in India, it provides market and business research, investment research, intellectual property and legal process services, marketing and sales support, knowledge management solutions and industry-specific expertise.
It has a sales network spread out over several countries, but service operations are concentrated in India, with three additional research locations: China (since 2005), Chile (since 2006) and Romania (since 2008).
Although Evalueserve’s business model is based on the offshoring concept and the provision of high-quality services at competitive costs, what has led it to invest in offshore sites outside of India is not cost but the need to complement its Indian operations with other, strategic assets, such as time zone complementarity and different types of skills.
The decision to invest in Chile was first and foremost a decision to invest in Latin America.
Having a service centre in the region was important for three main reasons.
First, many Evalueserve clients, especially investment banks in the United States, needed same-time-zone services.
Secondly, by combining operations in Latin America, India and China (having already planned the Eastern European location), the company could form a 24/5 delivery cycle without implementing night shifts.
This is critical for projects where a product’s “time to market” can determine success or failure.
Thirdly, Evalueserve had taken a decision to strengthen its presence in, and knowledge of, emerging markets.
Asia was covered by the Indian and Chinese locations, Romania would cover Eastern Europe, and a location in Latin America would be critical for conducting research on Latin American markets and catering to local clients.
The parameters considered were the availability of people, cost and the overall business environment.
In terms of human resources, despite the existence of good universities, Chile was limited by the size of its skills base in comparison with other destinations in the region.
Evalueserve saw, however, that it would be possible to complement local talent with foreign talent, as the country’s immigration policy and procedures were perceived as straightforward and simple.
This ability to draw from a global talent pool has been a major asset for the company’s operations in Chile.
Roughly a third of Evalueserve’s 150 employees in Chile today are foreigners.
However, this was compensated by government incentives, including grants for training and the provision of office space, and by low administrative and opportunity costs due to swift regulatory procedures.
Rather than Santiago, the company established itself in the facilities of the Chilean Production Development Corporation (CORFO) located close to the city of Valparaíso, which has the characteristics of other second-tier cities (a strong university community and lower costs and attrition rates) and where the company is rated as one of the best employment options for highvalue professional services.
Evalueserve’s Chilean centre, which accounts for 10% of the company’s global sales and 6% of its employees, caters to clients based either in North America or Europe and to regional offices of TNCs.
The centre provides mainly business and investment research services, and the service mix is gradually expanding to cover other types of services currently provided only out of India.
The first major clients for the Chilean centre were North American investment banks that valued time zone proximity.
Other clients include consulting firms and Fortune 500 companies from the United States and Europe.
In addition to global clients, the company has started to look at the regional market, which currently represents only a small fraction of the Chilean subsidiary’s portfolio.
Second-generation offshoring is still scarce in the region, although R&D operations within established companies and a small number of investments in KPO functions have been made.
As the skills intensity of services increases, the availability of skilled professionals and other strategic assets, rather than cost alone, becomes increasingly relevant in investment decisions.
In the experience of Evalueserve, the decision to invest in Latin America in these functions was not cost-based; the aim was to complement operations in India.
Several have undertaken internationalization processes of their own to exploit complementary assets within the region and in other regions.18 Softtek was the first Latin American company to make the Black Book of Outsourcing rankings.
Like others, Softtek has evolved into a transnational corporation in its own right.
The companies from the region that make the global rankings are concentrated in the largest countries.
However, smaller companies from smaller countries have also taken advantage of the opportunities of offshoring both through bases in their home countries and through investments in other countries.
There have, for example, been significant flows of intra-Caribbean investments in this industry.
Through these investments these companies have explored the common Caribbean nearshore advantages while at the same time diversifying locations to minimize risk and expanding beyond what would be possible within their home countries.
In the same way that the Indian companies in this industry were “born offshore”, Softtek was born “nearshore”, a term it coined in 1997.
Created in 1983 by employees of Alfa Group, it is the largest Mexican IT company and has 6,000 employees.
A large share of its sales comes from exports, which differentiates it from some of the larger Brazilian companies in this industry.
Softtek’s main operations are in Monterrey and Mexico City, but the company has expanded internationally and set up global delivery centres in Brazil, Spain and China.
The company has been known for its strong investments in training and certification and for its association with technological research and educational institutions, particularly the Technological Institute of Monterrey.
Softtek had concentrated on the Mexican market until the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) came into force and the company started exploiting its nearshore advantages for United States clients.
The company’s trajectory as an international provider can be defined in two different stages.
It closed this period with the acquisition of the 1000-engineer Mexico-based IT operations of GE and became the main nearshore IT solution provider for GE.
The second stage —the global nearshore model— started in 2004 with the inauguration of centres in Brazil and Spain.
Essentially, the strategy involved opening locations outside the “nearshore comfort zones” that would offer the company access to different skill sets and scale.
Also under that framework, in 2007 the company acquired IT United, a China-based provider of software development and outsourcing services, where it currently has 400 employees.
The network of eight global service delivery centres allows the company to provide “follow-the-sun” solutions for application-related services, IT infrastructure and BPO services, complementing its nearshore base while offering clients an alternative to India.
Softtek has strongly marketed its advantages as a nearshore base and has started exploring the complementarities between service centres located in different countries within the region and between regions.
These advantages largely coincide with those of Mexico, and a parallel can be drawn between the company’s strategy of combining nearshore with other offshore capabilities and a potential strategy for Mexico and other Latin American and Caribbean countries to find complementarities with other countries and leverage their domestic advantages in providing global services.
The companies described here are diverse in terms of the service mix they provide, their origin, their size and the extent of their experience in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Some are relatively new to the region and are still starting to understand it and to track future pathways to explore its potential.
Each experience has been unique, but certain general characteristics of the role of Latin America and the Caribbean in the offshoring industry emerge from the cases considered.
There has unquestionably been growing interest in the region as an offshore base.
As the global offshore service industry grows, opportunities are being generated all over the world based on cost, nearshore advantages or other strategic assets that complement global service networks.
Companies in the more traditional contact-centre and BPO functions have looked at Central America and the Caribbean as attractive destinations based on the nearshore advantages resulting from their geographical and cultural proximity to the United States and on the availability of both Spanish- and English-language skills.
Investment promotion policies have been important in attracting foreign investors to this industry.
While some companies have favoured more consolidated markets in the region, others have valued less explored markets that offer lower costs and lower attrition rates, including countries that are only starting to enter this industry and regions within the larger countries.
These same firms have invested in the larger countries in the region with a mix of market- and efficiency-seeking investments.
Several countries in Latin America, including Mexico and Argentina, have benefited from the increasing importance of the Hispanic market in the United States, through the operations of companies such as Teleperformance and Digitex.
The large integrated outsourcing companies have also taken different approaches, investing in predominantly export-oriented activities in the smaller countries that have substantial specialized skills bases and active policies to promote the offshore services industry (Chile, Costa Rica and Uruguay) and in the large markets of Brazil and Mexico, where they take advantage of local markets and consolidated structures.
Argentina seems to lie at the interface of these two models, sharing some of the characteristics of the larger markets and some of the features of the smaller but higher-tech markets at competitive costs.
The region has accumulated success stories in all segments of the offshore services industry, and the record of new investments and jobs created in the past few years is significant.
However, there seems to be a gap between the interest of companies in using the region as an offshore base and the actual rate of growth of service exports.
While there is no accurate way to measure foregone investments entirely, this gap is suggested by the trajectories of companies that established operations to cater to a combination of local and export markets but effectively export very little.
Latin America and the Caribbean is not yet benefiting from the industry to its full potential.
Section D addresses policy challenges that need to be overcome to expand investments in offshoring in the region.
Policy: reasons to promote offshoring and policies in place Much of the literature on offshoring has originated in the concern for the loss of jobs in developed countries.
The flip side of that concern —over which there is debate (McKinsey Global Institute, 2005)— is the fact that jobs have been created in developing countries.
Through offshoring, information and communication technologies have begun to create a more efficient geographical distribution of jobs according to labour supply, without the social costs of immigration, and for tasks that go beyond the menial and provide higher rates of remuneration than other segments for similarly skilled personnel.
The number of jobs created by this industry is significant, especially for the smaller countries (see table II.8).
Beyond the number of jobs, however, the characteristics of employment in this industry, as reported by companies and governments interviewed for this study, are particularly attractive from a social development perspective (see box II.8).
Secondly, the development of linkages between local companies and TNCs in offshore business services may be a key element for positioning them in global markets.
Smaller players in this industry face important barriers to entry into the global marketplace in the form of branding, recognition, and reputation.
By working through the networks of established TNCs, as providers or partners, local firms can tap into global services markets where brand and reputation enjoyed by the largest firms would otherwise represent significant barriers to entry.
Jobs in this industry are relatively well remunerated, even in the leastvalue-added segments.
In many countries, a call centre position is a career position, and call centre companies are considered good employers, as evidenced by low attrition rates.
The offshoring industry, and particularly the contact centre segment, has provided jobs to segments of the population that often exhibit high unemployment rates: inexperienced young professionals, students, women (who often compose more than half the headcount in contact centre operations), mid- to late-career professionals.
The same reasons that make offshoring services to another country possible also make it possible to relocate outside of large urban centres, to areas where employment opportunities are fewer.
In these areas, offshore business service jobs are highly valued, and from the point of view of companies, among other advantages, labour costs and attrition rates are low.
These characteristics have motivated investments in second-tier cities worldwide as the main service centres start showing signs of saturation and as peripheral areas develop infrastructure and capabilities.
Areas with strong concentrations of universities and other research and educational institutions have been particularly successful in this trend.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, there are several examples of clusters that are being either consolidated or starting to be developed outside capital cities: Córdoba in Argentina, a group of smaller cities on the outskirts of São Paulo city in Brazil, Valparaíso in Chile, Manizales in Colombia, and Santiago de los Caballeros in the Dominican Republic.
Offshoring jobs have reduced brain drain and aided the reabsorption of former émigrés, who have acted not only as employees but also as entrepreneurs, contributing skills, technology, entrepreneurship and capital and helping to put their home countries on the map for offshore business services.
At all levels, companies have offered continuous training and developed skills, at least some of which are transferable to other companies and industries.
The existence of skilled professionals in the local labour pool, who have been trained by the world’s largest transnational corporations in stateof-the-art technology and business practices, has been an asset for local companies.
Exposure to technology, business practices and corporate cultures adopted worldwide have also spilled over into local companies and the labour pool generally.
By catering to foreign customers in types of services not available on the local market (certain financial products, for instance), groups of professionals have been able to create those markets locally to the benefit of local companies and consumers.
This industry has created economic demand for education, stimulating governments to take measures to improve educational systems and practices at all levels: primary, secondary, technical and university.
Public-private initiatives have been undertaken and have potential to produce positive changes and make sure local educational capacity is up to date with global standards.
It is estimated that in the Dominican Republic, four indirect jobs are created for every direct job in the offshore business services industry.
Income received by employees has spurred local markets for consumer goods and services, and investments made by the companies themselves have created markets for other goods and services, such as hardware and software products, office furniture and construction.
Thirdly, investment in offshoring may lead to greater, more diversified, and higher-value-added exports in an activity that involves little material throughput and therefore has relatively little environmental impact.
Offshore services development has been one of the key priorities of countries trying to diversify away from the lowvalue-added manufacturing activities that are increasingly threatened by competition from China (ECLAC, 2008a, 2008b).
Finally, having an export-oriented industry has helped make investments in telecommunications and other infrastructure financially feasible.
This combination of characteristics makes the offshoring industry, if adequately harnessed, a possible magnet for high-quality FDI.
Most countries in the region have implemented strategies to foster the offshore services industry generally, and most consider FDI a critical aspect.
Alongside horizontal business environment policies, country image promotion and other initiatives directed at attracting FDI, countries have implemented specific measures for the offshore business service industry.
The most common fall under two categories: • Tax-related instruments and free zone status: the forms and specific tax-related instruments used vary widely and include the waiver of duties on equipment and components and the waiver of export taxes, income taxes and VAT.
In most countries in the region, services can benefit from free zone regimes.
In many cases single-entity free zone status has been granted, whereby companies accede to free zone benefits regardless of their location.
Besides strengthening English language programmes in public primary- and secondary-school systems and universities, countries have implemented supplementary English-language programmes and have provided scholarships for English lessons or on-the-job learning.
Chile has implemented a specific programme for English development among IT professionals and has used a creative mix of instruments to expand the base of English speakers generally, from immersion programmes This applies to the Spanish- and Portuguese-speaking countries.
In the English-speaking Caribbean, initiatives are being implemented to increase the number of bilingual (usually English- and Spanishspeaking) professionals. directed at secondary-school students to volunteer programmes for young English teachers.
Chile and Nicaragua have also implemented programmes to make their English-speakers known, through testing and inclusion in a roster that is made available to companies interested in hiring.
Chile, furthermore, has implemented an innovative programme for volunteers from abroad to help overcome the scarcity of English teachers.
These reforms have included strengthened mathematics programmes and greater access to IT.
The interaction between companies and universities has yielded interesting results on both parts, but, in some countries, companies report that university curricula are still excessively detached from the demands of the job market and particularly of this industry.
In some countries, the government provides grants for companies to undertake on-the-job training.
Some countries have begun to include other languages in their programmes in addition to English.
This is a natural limitation for smaller countries, but the bottleneck in Latin America and the Caribbean has not been in population size so much as in the size of the educated population, in small and large countries alike.
The paradox is explained by shortcomings in access to education and the poor quality of educational systems in the region.
Even among trained professionals, only a fraction is employable for the offshoring industry (see table below).
India has similar shortcomings, but a wider base from which to draw.
Companies interviewed for this report consider that the main limitations of Latin America and the Caribbean in terms of human resources are the following: Outside the English-speaking Caribbean, English-language skills were identified by many companies as more of a bottleneck than technical skills.
One major challenge is to break through from knowledge of the English language to functional proficiency, fluency and familiarity with commercial and technical English.
Skills acquired in primary and secondary education, such as mathematical reasoning, critical analysis, reading and listening comprehension and written and verbal fluidity all affect the performance of professionals, whether they deal with customers or work in software development, but they are especially important if a country is to upgrade its services industry to the higher-value-added segments.
Lags in these skills are corroborated by different studies (Dutta, Lopez-Claros The development of technical skills and science and engineering capacity are a moving target.
Aspects specifically mentioned by companies interviewed for this report as areas of opportunity for improvement include strengthening of post-secondary technical training, greater involvement of the private sector in the design of technical university curricula, particularly in engineering degree courses, and the promotion of higher rates of certification in software processes.
Engagement of public and private actors in these efforts, not only through financing but through hands-on involvement, is crucial (EIU, 2008).
Another factor that can affect the scale of the available talent pool for prospective investors is the flexibility of labour mobility policies.
Interviewed companies have expressed that more flexible immigration policies may enhance the attractiveness of the region as a competitive FDI destination in this industry.
The comparison of the labour pools of even the largest markets in the region, Mexico and Brazil, to those of India and China suggests that the integration of labour markets within the region would contribute to the region’s attractiveness as an offshore service destination (see figure below).
The limitation in the size of the labour pool is a problem not only in attracting new companies.
With a growing industry and a stagnant workforce or one that grows at insufficient rates, as investor interest rises, companies are forced to draw on each other’s employees, increasing attrition rates and costs and undermining the competitiveness of the industry.
Moreover, a limited skills base prevents companies from upgrading their service mixes in each country and thus restricts the potential role of transnational corporations in country strategies for technological upgrading through services.
These professionals hold university degrees in mathematics, physics or statistics and are employed in market research, software R&D and some back-office functions. b Generalists: positions that do not require any specific training but require a university degree.
Employees hold university degrees in other categories than those of the analysts as defined here.
They are employed in sales and marketing, administrative functions and customer service positions.
In both cases, and in addition to the cross-industry FDI attraction and after-care policies, these initiatives aim at the development of industry clusters that at a critical threshold will be sustainable without government support.
Regulatory reform of the telecommunications industry and IT infrastructure improvement programmes are advancing.
These do not necessarily target the offshore services industry specifically, but will benefit this industry to a greater extent than those that do not have IT at their core.
These measures all point to overcoming the major bottlenecks pointed out by companies (limited human resources and cost competitiveness).
However, challenges remain to fully tap the region’s potential as a host for new investments and to maximize the benefits of the industry for local development.
Despite the policies in place, if the industry is to fulfil its potential, stronger policy action will be required to overcome the region’s main bottlenecks, including the availability of human resources with adequate technical and language skills.
Five main groups of policy actions have been stressed as necessary by both local and foreign companies and by industry specialists and governments that are already engaged in promoting this industry in their respective countries.
Within all these measures, there is room for intra-regional cooperation. (i) Expand and improve the skills base.
Stronger primary and secondary education, including improved mathematical, logical and reading-comprehension skills, as well as early English-language education in non Englishlanguage speaking countries, together with increased interaction between the public and private sectors and academia in the design and deployment of technical and university curricula will help develop each country’s workforce.
Making labour mobility policies more flexible within the region could also increase the attractiveness of the region as a whole for service offshoring as it would enable countries to host higher-volume operations than the size of their respective workforces would otherwise allow.
Finally, countries with significantly large diasporas may benefit from programmes that encourage return through jobs in the offshore business services industry or as entrepreneurs.
The diaspora aspect, which, albeit with very different characteristics, was very important in India, is being considered by a number of Caribbean and Central American countries and by companies.
As part of the efforts to round up human resources for these centres, IBM implemented a specific programme under the slogan “Volvé a casa” (come back home) directed at attracting Argentine IT professionals currently working abroad.
Specific strategies to attract residents abroad to this industry have been taken by Guyana. (ii) Make strategic choices.
With Latin America and the Caribbean on the map of potential investment destinations, countries must find and develop their unique assets and explore ways in which they can be more successfully inserted into the regional and global markets and service delivery structures of transnational corporations.
Many countries are already doing so: Chile’s focus on higher-end functions such as KPO has been mentioned (see box II.6).
Antigua and Barbuda has concentrated on medical informatics, which does not require large scale operations but does require language proficiency to ensure accuracy and needs low attrition rates because of high training costs.
Moreover, medical informatics is a segment that is likely to grow due to the ageing population in developed countries and offers the possibility of upgrading from simple transcription services to higher-value-added services.
Uruguay, like Chile, is limited in its potential to host high-volume operations and has therefore focused its policy efforts on the higher-value-added IT industry and KPO.
Large countries like Brazil and Mexico, while hosting companies in all segments of the industry, have identified the need for specific policies to promote the development of higher-value-added sectors, particularly in IT services and have relied on both TNCs and strong local companies to develop these industries (see table II.A-1).
There may be a case for specialization by subnational entities (states and municipalities) within those countries. (iii) Act collectively to promote the region.
Countries in the region should consider exploring complementarities with each other, both through flexibility in the movement of labour and through common regional marketing strategies, at the same time as they develop and actively promote their unique advantages.
Competition among countries in the offshore business service industry is rife, and Latin American and Caribbean countries face established giants such as India, as well as a multitude of emerging destinations in Eastern Europe, Asia and Africa.
The decision by a company on where to set up a service centre can be motivated by its own desire to tap into the advantages of a particular destination or a request from a particular client.
In both cases, the first location decision is usually whether to choose Latin America and the Caribbean or another region.
Knowledge of the market and of the main investors allows for a more targeted approach.
Despite its many potential benefits, the concrete spillovers of FDI in the offshore business services industry on local economies depend on the local entrepreneurial fabric.
When TNCs find adequate local partners with which to integrate upstream, the beneficial impacts of FDI on local economies and development are magnified in the form of revenue, employment and the spillover of skills and technology.
Inversely, when local providers are not up to date in terms of technological and other skills and capabilities, foreign providers will fill the gap, which will grant the country the benefits of additional FDI but not of the linkages that would ideally be formed with local business and that characterize high-quality FDI.
Second, despite its potential benefits for development, this industry’s relatively low sunk costs also make it particularly footloose.
The withdrawal of a company may signify sizeable social and economic damages.
Minimizing the risk of withdrawal requires the creation of linkages between transnational corporations and local service providers, so that the company’s roots in the country go beyond fragile cost arbitration Third, for TNCs to fulfill the role of agents of productive upgrading, they need a solid base of providers at all levels.
In addition to its intrinsic value —yielding greater revenues and stronger technological and skills spillovers— upgrading within the offshore business services industry contributes to minimizing the risk of withdrawal.
The higher the complexity of the service functions being performed, the less likely it will be that the operation depends on costs alone, and hence the less vulnerable it will be to the appearance of alternative destinations.
Policy initiatives may be necessary to provide incentives and ensure local capabilities for established companies to provide broader service mixes and to attract other companies in higher-valueadded segments.
Local companies benefit from the same upgrading of the human resources base and from country and regional marketing as TNCs do.
Access to financing may be a critical factor in enabling the development of local firms. (v) Promote the development of competitive and reliable telecommunications infrastructure.
Although significant advances have been made in telecommunications infrastructure in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past decade, many countries in the region still suffer from infrastructure that is insufficient to meet the offshore business services industry’s requirements of reliability, quality, and low cost.
Countries stand to benefit from improvements in telecommunications infrastructure providing that, among other action, they ensure competition under an adequate regulatory framework.
If these challenges are adequately addressed, the offshore business services industry may present significant opportunities for the countries of the Latin American and Caribbean region to advance towards a number of policy goals, including employment and sectoral diversification.
The current global economic and financial crisis provides an opportunity for the region to position itself competitively in an industry that stands to gain from the search, by companies, for greater efficiency in their business processes and analytical functions.
Conclusions By overcoming geographical barriers, ICT have generated employment and business opportunities worldwide and in developing countries in particular.
In the past few years, there has been greater recognition of the potential of Latin America and the Caribbean as an offshore destination, and new factors have arisen that have generated stronger motivation on the part of many companies to invest in the region.
This has materialized in new investments from the largest to the smallest countries, not only in capital cities, but also in smaller towns previously not on the map for major transnational corporations.
By linking workers in the region to the global labour market, investments in offshore services have generated new sources of income, jobs and exports that are a welcome addition in economies that are heavily based on natural resources or on lowvalue-added manufacturing.
A large share of investments —and of jobs created by those investments— has been in relatively low-skilled contact centre services in which countries compete essentially based on cost or a combination of cost and nearshore advantages.
In these lower-value-added functions, offshoring has generated significant social benefits, as described in box II.8.
In addition to this, however, the expansion of offshoring in higher-skilled, higher-value-added functions opens opportunities for the region to receive strategic-asset-seeking investments, of which there have historically been very few.
When FDI is attracted not by low cost but by technological capacity and skilled human resources, it may be a significant source of technology transfer and thus provide a channel through which to tap into global technological developments.
In other words, in a virtuous circle, with the development of human resources, there are greater incentives for transnational companies to transfer more knowledge-intensive export service functions to the region.
Local professionals, in turn, develop greater capacity to absorb the knowledge that is transferred, and this strengthens the capacity of local economies to develop human capital, in itself one of the key aspects of development.
Transnational corporations have made sizeable investments in offshoring operations in the region, and many governments have implemented specific policies directed at this industry.
The Software Promotion Law (No. 25,922) created a specific tax regime for software development companies. 400 companies have applied to be included in the regime.
These include grants for pre-investment studies and setting-up costs, investment support services, training, investment in fixed assets, and real-estate leases.
Strengthening of institutions involved in educational policy Strengthening of technical institutions such as the TechnicalProfessional Training Institute (INFOTEP) and the Technological Institute of the Americas (ITLA) Joint ventures between government entities and universities to strengthen training in skills applicable to high-growth industries such as IT Government sponsored training in English as a second language.
Development of the Tamana InTech Park Tax incentives through the Information and Communication Technology Services Investment Incentives Act, issued in 2007 Improvements have been made by providers in infrastructure for telecommunications, with a next generation network to be completed Initiatives to increase industrial space New legislation on small businesses and on electronic transactions Efforts to Improve access to tertiary education.
The Skills for Inclusive Growth project of the Organisation of the Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) seeks to improve vocational and technical skills Income tax holiday, duty free concessions, no restrictions on repatriating profits and dividends Telecommunications liberalization starting in 2000 Saint Lucia has drafted and will soon enact legislation to support e-commerce, data security, electronic transactions, etc.
Introduction Tourism has grown strongly in recent decades and has become an important activity for increasing numbers of developed and developing countries alike.
Many different branches of the economy, involving firms of varying sizes and complexity, interact in the tourism industry, which gives it huge potential to contribute to national development.
It is also a difficult industry to categorize, however, which makes it complicated to quantify its importance and impact.
Recently, changes have been coming ever faster in the industry, responding to shifts in economic, cultural, political, technological and demographic patterns, and the sector is becoming increasingly segmented.
As in other service industries, the leading firms have been able to hold on to their competitive edge by entering into different types of contractual arrangements —management, leasing and franchising— without having to make conventional capital investments to embark on new initiatives.
Global brands are gaining a growing presence, particularly in the hotels sector, thus concealing the real magnitude of foreign direct investment (FDI) and the importance of transnational corporations (TNCs) in tourism.
The tourist industry’s extreme geographical dispersion makes it an increasingly globalized activity, which offers potential clients (tourists) growing numbers of options.
As tourists become ever better informed, selective and demanding, many countries —especially developing nations— have made it a priority to capture FDI and attract global brands to gain a foothold in international tourism circuits.
Major changes have occurred in tourism products, especially those associated with coastal locations (the type commonly known as “sun, sea and sand” tourism), as a result of the fragmentation of the value chain, the entry of new agents, the heightened value placed on leisure, broader access to cross-border travel and the overdevelopment of some traditional destinations, among other factors.
There has been a proliferation of large, integrated resorts offering hotel infrastructure, real estate complexes and multiple entertainment facilities such as golf courses and marinas.
In the latter months of 2008, the hitherto favourable conditions for tourism initiatives began to change rapidly as a result of the international financial crisis.
This chapter offers a general overview of the tourism industry and the main agents operating in it, focusing on activities in the hotel and real estate segment in tropical destinations.
It then analyses the situation and the development of the industry in Latin America and the Caribbean and discusses the role of FDI and TNCs, bearing in mind the complexity of business relations involved in the establishment of self-contained hotel and real estate complexes.
Overview of the tourism industry A complex economic activity with interesting potential for development Tourism is a complex industry.1 It encompasses multiple activities ranging from accommodation, transport and entertainment to construction, agriculture and telecommunications, forming a complex value chain (see diagram III.1).
This makes it difficult to make headway in characterizing the sector, which would help to better identify its economic significance in the framework of national statistics.2 Tourism —especially for leisure, entertainment or vacation— depends, as few other economic activities do, on a specific setting, such as a natural environment or a location of great cultural interest.
Yet the industry is not confined to a few places in the world —as the manufacture of automobiles is, for example— but encompasses many countries regardless of location and size.
Its strong geographical dispersion, in fact, makes the value chain truly global.
Tourism has thus benefited from globalization and has become one of the most internationalized sectors of the world economy.
However, a corollary of this internationalized demand is the decentralization of supply, which is necessarily associated with the specific location of providers of tourist services, which are still mainly local firms (OECD, 2008d, p. 12).
The sector encompasses a broad range of economic agents from TNCs to very small firms, which can participate in the industry on different scales and at different levels, offering a wide array of tourism services around the world.
Those features give tourism great potential to contribute to countries’ economic development.
According to the World Tourism Organization (UNWTO), tourism is understood to mean all those activities carried out by people who travel to and stay in places outside their usual environment for not more than one consecutive year for leisure, entertainment, vacation, visits to family or friends, business and other purposes.
International tourism or travel refers to arrivals in a foreign destination by residents who stay at least one night and do not engage in earning activities in the place visited (UNWTO/SEGIB, 2008, p. 4).
A number of international organizations have attemped to advance in this direction.
In the early 1990s, the World Tourism Organization drew up a set of definitions that enabled international comparison of tourism activities, and this was standardized by the United Nations in 1994.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), both established that same year, helped to organize trade in tourism services.
In 2001, UNWTO proposed a new Standard International Classification of Tourism Activities (SICTA), which was approved by the United Nations, and developed a standard methodology for measuring the economic value of tourism in national accounts by means of the Tourism Satellite Account (TSA).
The World Tourism Organization definitions of tourism became United Nations standards after the countries agreed upon a more limited definition of tourism within GATS, excluding transport and other activities that depend heavily on tourism, such as automobile rentals (Bentley, 2005).
Some 130 countries, more than for any other sector, have now made GATS commitments under the category “Tourism and Travel Related Services” (OECD, 2008d, p. 56).
The recent revolution in information and communications technologies (ICTs) has helped to make the tourism industry more productive and competitive and has made tourist services, such as plane and hotel room reservations, more accessible to potential travellers.
Internet has radically changed the international tourism industry by shortening the distance between providers of tourist services and their clients.3 All this has helped to provide responses to travellers’ increasingly complex demands by offering options that go beyond packaged solutions.
The growing prosperity of the Western economies enabled their inhabitants to devote greater resources to entertainment and leisure and this, combined with the introduction of paid vacation time, gave rise to mass tourism (UNCTAD, 2007, p. 9).
Accompanying this trend was powerful development of transport services, which helped to shorten distances and reduced the time and expense associated with travel.
Recently, the tourism industry has been growing one and a half times faster than any other sector (Harrison, 2004).
Today tourism is considered the world’s largest industry and one of its fastest growing (OECD, 2008d, p. 57).
In 2008, tourism represented almost 10% of world GDP and its long-term growth trend appeared to be stable (WTTC, 2008c, p. 6).4 Indeed, despite the occurrence of political and economic conflicts, epidemics and natural disasters in different parts of the globe, the sector has shown a notable ability to expand and resilience to adverse conditions.
A number of these economies are also among the world’s fastest growing, giving the emerging middle classes the wherewithal to push up demand for both local and international tourism services (Bardham and others, 2008, pp. 28-29).
This is particularly interesting, given that the great majority of international tourists still come from a few industrialized countries in Europe, North America and Asia.
Today, over 55% of international tourist arrivals originate in Europe, with France, Italy, the United Kingdom and Germany being the main origin markets (UNWTO, 2008e, p. 63).
It has been estimated that only about 10% of total tourist movements are international (UNCTAD, 2007, p 14).
Nevertheless, cross-border travel is on the increase and continental and intercontinental markets are growing fast, while domestic tourism markets in the developed nations are beginning to stagnate (OECD, 2008d, p. 12).
In this context, most international travel is short-distance and takes place within the same region.
In fact, interregional arrivals represent a little over 10% of inbound tourism in Europe There are two main dimensions to this shift.
First, all categories of firms, large and small, from anywhere in the value chain, can now communicate directly with their end customers.
Second, whereas consumers used to be outside the value chain, they are now at the heart of it.
Just as suppliers can reach consumers directly, so clients have direct access to the supply side.
Unlike in other industries, the customer can chose different routes towards the final product.
Hence, the consumer is the one who wields strong control over the value chain (OECD, 2008d, p. 34).
Growth in the tourism industry, and hence in international travel, has been interrupted only three times since the end of the Second World War.
Once in 1982, as a result of the second oil crisis; once in 2001, as a consequence of the attacks of 11 September in the United States; and again two years later, owing to the combined effect of the war in Iraq and avian influenza in Asia.
The industry may now face another downturn as a result of the global financial crisis.
Today, over 70 countries, many of them developing nations, each welcome over 1 million international visitors per year. and just over 20% on the American continent and in Asia (UNWTO, 2008e, p. 70).6 The largest flow of interregional tourists is between Europe and the American continent.
In particular, high prices in the real estate market in the United States have acted as strong drivers of such development in Mexico and some Central American and Caribbean countries.
For many countries, tourism is important because it is labour intensive and thus a major source of employment for semi-skilled workers in rural areas.8 Globally, tourism accounts for one of every 12 jobs (8.4% of world employment), Almost two thirds of visitors to the United States are from Canada, Mexico and the rest of the Latin American and Caribbean region.
Meanwhile, over 70% of visitors to Japan come from other parts of Asia and the Pacific (Bardham and others, 2008, After the Second World War, between 1946 and 1964, a number of countries, such as Australia, Canada, the United Kingdom and United States experienced an unusual surge in the number of liveborn children.
This phenomenon came to be known as the “baby boom” and those born during that period as “baby boomers”.
In the United States, baby boomers represent almost 20% of the population and they will significantly swell the ranks of retirees in the coming decades.
In Europe those aged 65 years and over will account for 25% of the population in 2015 and many of these people will be looking for places to live, with choices being driven in particular by the existence of warm climates, sun and sea, golf courses and retail centres.
This may be of particular interest to developing countries that have benefited from the commodities boom but have not been able to increase job creation significantly. which makes it the largest single employer in the world International tourism also has a strong impact on trade in services and inflows of foreign exchange.
The expenditures of foreign visitors in tourism destinations, even on buying a soft drink or a haircut, are classified as exports and have multiplier effects that can influence the host country’s level of development.
Tourism is a major export category for many developed and developing countries alike.
It is the main export of almost a third of developing countries and is among the main exports for over 80% (PPT, 2004, p. 2).
The industry has also become a main source of foreign exchange for almost all the less developed countries, particularly for a number of small island economies (UNCTAD, 2007, p. 4).
For example, services account for the bulk of exports in most Caribbean countries and territories and two thirds of those services are tourism-related (ECLAC, 2008d, p. 120).
In 2007, inflows of foreign exchange from tourism stood at US$ 856 billion, close to a third of the total value of global services trade (UNWTO, 2008b).
Tourism thus has great potential to act as a redistributive mechanism by transferring wealth between rich and poor countries.
The liberalization of trade in services and, more specifically, the agreements on free access and equal treatment for cross-border provision of tourism services signed in the framework of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) have been crucial in this regard (Ramón Rodríguez, 2002c, p. 32).
The gradual opening of air transport services and the implementation of open skies policies and measures to stimulate competition have helped to lower prices and create the conditions for the start-up of charter companies and low-cost airlines, all of which has aided the international development of the tourism industry.
For example, in hotel services, backward linkages result from the demand for inputs from other industries, including a wide array of agricultural products, meat and dairy products, beverages and multiple manufactures, as well as a large number of services, such as construction, telecommunications, power and water and sewerage.
When they are locally generated, these products and services can have a powerful impact on the host country’s value added (Gollub, Hosier and Woo, 2003, p. 29).
For all these reasons, most countries view tourism as a source of economic growth.10 Given the high standards required by potential visitors, however, there are a number of obstacles to the development of the industry.
Local attractions can be catalysts for the development of a tourism industry, but to realize their full economic potential they need investment in infrastructure (transport, telecommunications, electric power and sewerage systems), appropriate support services and human resource training.
Only then can countries attract tourists, whose spending will help to increase local employment and income (OECD, 2008d, p. 20).
It is therefore natural that many developing countries lacking capital, know-how, technology and access to international networks of tourism marketing see FDI as a means of compensating for those disadvantages.
Indeed, tourism is one of the main activities into which developing countries now seek to attract FDI.
The resolution of infrastructure and access issues is not enough to cover all the challenges involved in the tourism industry, however.
The development of the industry today is based on the growing sophistication of related services and mounting global competition among the different destinations sought have to do with legal differences between countries and price factors (from the exchange rate to energy costs).
Security issues, which are becoming increasingly important, especially after the events of 11 September 2001, can also add to the uncertainty faced by tourism and real estate activities (Bardham and others 2008, p. 49).
It is crucial to ensure that the positive impact of the industry does not threaten the sustainability of the local economy, the environment, social traditions or cultural resources.
Tourism can have negative impacts on the local communities it most directly affects, through the degradation of traditional values, cultural heritage and the environment, or the emergence of illicit activities and unforeseen migratory movements (UNCTAD, 2007, p. 9).
In some cases, even the physical landscape has changed and the massive inflow of tourists has put a strain on the resources that formed the location’s comparative advantage in the first place.
Moreover, the current global financial crisis has shown how vulnerable tourism destinations are to international conditions.
For some small countries with few resources and capabilities, tourism has become the main development strategy.
On the one hand, potential tourists have an increasing number of destinations and an ever broader range of products and services to chose from.
On the other, destinations have had to offer more than the comparative advantages associated with location (geographical distance between the supply of tourist services and the demand for them), accessibility and price and provide more sophisticated and exclusive services in order to stand up to the fierce competition.
This problem is particularly difficult for sun, sea and sand tourism, which is a very important segment for many of the Latin American and Caribbean economies.
There has been an increasing tendency towards the formation of large corporate groupings on the supply side of the tourism industry (OECD, 2008d, p. 16).
In most of the origin markets, the industry is dominated by large corporations, as a result of the consolidation and concentration of the leading firms in the different segments of the industry, particularly airlines, tour operators and hotel chains (UNWTO, 2002, p. 2).
In destination countries, there has been a proliferation of SMEs devoted to looking after visitors during their stay, especially firms providing accommodation and catering services.
Generally speaking, the size of these firms is no impediment to high standards and commercial excellence.
Although they are very different in nature, these two groups are not disconnected from each other, but interact in the tourism industry’s value chain (see diagram III.1).
The TNCs have tapped the potential of local tourism destinations by means of standardized products and global strategies.
This has enabled them to benefit from economies of scale, develop new markets, reduce costs and offer attractive services at highly competitive prices.
SMEs have more flexibility to tailor and personalize their services to the needs of the individual visitor.
With ever more exacting markets of origin, these abilities represent a major comparative advantage, since many customers do not want standardized products and prefer to adapt their vacation to their own needs and tastes.
A large number of firms that have historically been associated with the industry have outsourced many of their activities and firms in peripheral areas (such as construction and banking) are moving into tourism-related sectors.
In fact, the ownership of tourist services is becoming increasingly fragmented, which is creating the flexibility for different agents to enter the industry.
In the last few years, the main chains have gradually abandoned their vertical integration strategies and begun to focus on core management services, often moving away from the real estate aspects of the operation (Bardham and others, 2008, p. 29).
In general, the large hotel groups have their own brands and their growth strategy revolves around signing management, leasing and franchise agreements.
In fact, very few of the world’s largest chains own a majority share in the buildings where their hotels operate.
On the contrary, the hotel groups supply the brand and management services, while the ownership of the property is a totally separate operation led by different firms.
In the last few decades, franchises have figured strongly in the growth strategies of services firms, and hotels have been no exception to this (Contractor and Kundu, 1998).
In this regard, branding strategies are becoming increasingly important.12 In fact, the pursuit of segmented branding strategies as a means to target different groups of consumers has become one of the main comparative advantages of the large global chains, particularly when the differentiation between destinations begins to blur (Ramón Rodríguez, 2002c, p. 40).
The consolidation of the hotels market through mergers and acquisitions has also led to the concentration of the main industry brands in the hands of a small number of owners, who manage them without consumers being aware of the changes (UNWTO, 2002, p. 55).
Hotel rooms operating under the brand names of the 10 leading international hotel chains represent almost 20% of global supply today (Bardham, Begley, Kroll and George, 2008, p. 33).
In this context, certain intangible assets, such as knowledge of customer’s needs, access to booking systems, brands and forms of business organization, have become the key competitive advantages underpinning the growth strategies of the largest hotel chains, particularly the United States ones (Johnson and Vanetti, 2005, p. 1,094).
Branding is a marketing term which refers to the process of building up a brand name through strategic management of the full array of assets linked to the name or symbol (icon) that identifies it.
With hotel management moving out of the real estate business, other economic agents of various kinds have begun to gain importance.
Among these are real estate investment trusts (REITs),13 many of which have acquired hotel properties.
This has occurred particularly in the United States, where hotel chains operate in the mass market through franchises and the actual property assets are owned by a fairly broad range of investors, including REITs.
Amid the capital market effervescence and volatility of the 2000s, REITs have had a mixed reception.
On the one hand, their stock market performance has been rather inconclusive yet, on the other, they have been considered very safe instruments Internationalization of the tourism industry (a) Mechanisms of international expansion: the decline of foreign direct investment Tourism companies have invested abroad for decades, and much more so in the last few years.
This has been driven by the search for economies of scale, productive and geographical diversification and lower costs, or by the need to defend or strengthen a domestic-economy during periods of instability (UNWTO, 2002, p. 27).
Also during this period, as a result of a number of mergers and acquisitions, a small number of investment funds came to own multiple hotel properties within diversified portfolios of brands.
The blurring of borders in the tourism industry (particularly in the hotel segment) and the real estate business has helped to make viable larger projects that can build up the capacities of the agents involved.
This occurs with hotel and real estate complexes that combine hotel infrastructure, real estate developments and a range of entertainment and leisure facilities, such as golf courses, marinas, horse-riding clubs and so on.
Where such large complexes have developed, they have involved different types of local and foreign enterprises, ranging from hotel chains to real estate firms, construction companies, financial institutions and investment funds.
The profound changes that have occurred within the sector make it particularly difficult to analyse business patterns, because of the complex ownership structure underlying the major tourism projects and the interaction of the different firms that make up the value chain.
What is even more challenging is to look at this behaviour at a global level and to identify the ways in which the various agents are putting their international expansion strategies into practice.
Real estate investment trusts (REITs) first arose in the United States in the 1960s.
They were designed to provide a structure similar to that of mutual funds for share investment, but in this case for investment in real estate.
In general, REITs are corporations that trade on the stock market and are obliged to distribute up to 90% of their profits as dividends.
They invest in different types of real estate or immovable and related assets, such as shopping malls, office buildings, hotels and mortgages.
In the last five years, however, the supply of REITs in the United States has decreased.
One possible reason for this is the tight restrictions on leverage (capped at 60%) and equity reinvestment, since the required payouts prevent REITs from applying the capital-intensive management strategies that are generally needed in the hotel industry to remain competitive (Bardham and others, 2008, p. 36). position against new competitors (Ramón Rodríguez, 2002c, p. 31).
In the second half of the 1990s, foreign investment by tour companies increased mainly through mergers and acquisitions (UNWTO, 2002, p. 2).
The business has not only become increasingly internationalized, but has done so in ways that are constantly changing.
A tour company whose strategic asset is a global booking system might broaden its international presence by creating a network of franchises, for example.
Management contracts separate ownership of the tourism assets from their management, and this helps to fragment the value chain. absorptive capacity of local markets and availability of local resources.15 In general, transnational corporations combine these mechanisms in order to match their interests to the conditions in the recipient country (Endo, 2006, p. 602).
In the last few years, tourism firms, especially hotel companies, have opted principally for mechanisms that do not involve trading equity.
This has made it possible to set up management, leasing and franchise agreements without the need to own a stake in real estate outside a company’s home country. • These mechanisms help to manage the relatively high equity-to-debt ratio typical in the hotel industry by separating management risk from investment risk.
In the hotel sector, these modalities substantially reduce the onerous burden of capital investment in land, buildings and equipment.
This dynamic has also been driven by the entry into the tourism industry of firms from other sectors —construction companies, financial entities and real estate firms— as financial partners attracted by its profitability (Ramón Rodríguez, 2002c, p. 34). • Generally speaking, contracts in the tourism business can be sufficiently detailed to cover the key aspects of an operation.
In the hotel industry, for example, contracts can specify particular elements associated with a brand, as well as the design, style and layout of a hotel, the size and equipment of rooms, and the details of additional facilities such as swimming pools or car parks, gymnasiums, golf courses and marinas.
They therefore preferred local ownership or the formation of joint ventures with foreign investors.
FDI in the tourism industry has one very particular trait: control can be separated from ownership of real estate assets.
The industry therefore has unique features in comparison with manufacturing, since firms can reap the benefits of internationalization without having to invest directly in physical assets like land, buildings and other facilities (Dunning and McQueen, 1993, p. 268).
This occurs in the case of different hotels around the world that operate under the name of international chains: only a small fraction of the plant belongs to the TNC that owns the brand.
In fact, a local investor, with or without experience in the hotel sector, can buy land and build a hotel complex for a foreign company to manage.
There is no clear mapping of the extent of FDI in tourism, even though it is one of the world’s largest industries.
Little is known about the full economic dynamics of tourism and there are large gaps in understanding of its patterns and effects (UNCTAD, 2007, p. 7).
To make matters worse, there is a shortage of statistical information and even less is known about the tourism industry’s impacts in the form of linkages and spillovers.17 The statistical problems fall into two main categories.
The first is the wide range of activities that tourism covers (transportation, hotels and restaurants, tour operators, travel agents, financial services, among others), which makes it almost impossible to compile standardized FDI statistics in tourism at the international level (Endo, 2006, p. 600).
In reality, international statistics on FDI in tourism do not generally exist and such statistics as are available are incomplete or not comparable.
The second is that, since TNCs prefer non-equity mechanisms for international expansion, the official statistics do not record their international ventures as FDI, which leads to underestimation of foreign investment and tourism-related activities in recipient economies.
TNCs can actually acquire a high degree of control or influence over local firms through non-equity mechanisms, and this aspect should be taken into account when analysing FDI in the industry.
Despite these difficulties, there are a number of stylized facts that may help to define the basic trends in tourism-related FDI and TNCs.
There have been efforts to create a common analytical framework, such as the development of Tourism Satellite Accounts, for measuring the impact of tourism-related activities in different countries.
However, these efforts are unlikely to solve the problems of generating and comparing FDI data in the industry. • In many countries, tourism is the largest industry, yet one of the least globalized.
Rather counterintuitively, FDI in tourism is quite small, especially compared with that in other economic activities.
Little FDI is seen in other major activities, such as those relating to tour operators, booking systems and airline companies.19 • FDI in tourism has gone mainly to developed countries.
In fact, almost 90% of hotel TNCs are located in developed countries, with only a very small proportion of their operations in emerging economies (UNCTAD, 2007, p. 14). • Nevertheless, tourism-related FDI in developing countries is on the rise.
Recently, the emerging economies have been capturing close to 90% of FDI in the industry (OECD, 2008c, p.13).
These findings are particularly interesting because they help to dispel the myth that FDI in tourism is a widespread phenomenon that is making the industry highly globalized.
This perception has been spread by the broad presence of international hotel brand names in practically every country in the world.
The reality, however, is that tourism-related TNCs are not as global as those in other industries (Endo, 2006, p. 601).
These activities represent a tiny fraction of both countries’ total outward FDI stock, however: just 2.7% in the United Kingdom and 1.2% in the United States (UNCTAD, 2007, p. 19). 19 Although these activities have a large impact, they rarely involve FDI or the physical presence of a TNC.
Instead, in most cases, the tourism industry is dominated by local investors, including SMEs.
Nevertheless, FDI in tourism may be relatively low, but this does not means that tourism-related TNCs are unimportant.
Almost 80% of the global mass tourism market is handled in some way by transnational firms (Schulte, 2003, p. 22).
And the related FDI inflows may be crucial for many developing countries, regardless of the absolute volume of those resources.
In short, in tourism-related activities, since it appears to be relatively easy to protect competitive advantages through contracts, non-equity mechanisms are more prominent in TNC activities than conventional capital investments.
The relatively small amounts of FDI in tourism do not mean, however, that those flows are not important.
In fact, FDI could have a major impact on recipient economies, particularly in small countries.
It must also be borne in mind that the information available probably understates quite significantly the true extent of TNC activities in the tourism industry.
This FDI is especially important since TNCs could help the recipient countries to integrate into international tourism networks, increase the flow of foreign visitors and generate income from tourism-related activities. (b) Hotel strategies: the heart of the value chain The analysis of the tourism industry’s internationalization will focus on the performance of the hotel chains.
There are two main reasons for this: their importance in the industry’s value chain and the fact that they represent the segment in which TNCs have the greatest presence.
In the last few decades the hotel industry has seen strong international expansion and rapid concentration, largely resulting from the dominance of the United States chains (see table III.2).
Hotel companies in the United States were in fact the first to engage in major activities outside their home market, strongly underpinned by the development of commercial air travel connecting the world’s major capital cities (UNCTC, 1982, p. 8).
Later, technological progress in booking centres, liberalization of air transport, mounting capital market pressure —through REITs income— on the industry to increase profits, and a domestic market with great growth potential, helped to consolidate the global leadership of the United States chains.
The success of the United States firms’ strategy was based on broad recognition of the brand name, first locally then internationally, as they managed to attract customers and secure their loyalty (Ramón Rodríguez, 2007c, p. 39).
In developing countries, especially in Latin America and the Caribbean, they took a similar route, focusing on the corporate segment in major cities then diversifying gradually into the vacation business.
Overall, the leading hotel chains have gained a major international presence (see figure III.3).
In fact, these firms represent little more than a fifth of the global hotel offer.
In other words, the industry remains quite fragmented and small independent hotels continue to account for a very considerable part of it (Endo, 2006, p. 603).
At the same time as urban hotel services were developing, mass tourism was springing up thanks to the advent of charter flights and the establishment of regular medium- and long-haul air routes to sun, sea and sand destinations in the Mediterranean and, later, in the Caribbean, as well as the lower cost of air travel.
At first, this new segment was of little interest to the international hotel chains and this gave emerging tour operators the opportunity, jointly with local investors who were relatively inexperienced in the hotel business, to compete successfully to provide accommodation services in holiday destinations.
The industry developed quickly, using standardization and economies of scale to structure sun, sea and sand tourism services into low-cost packages and, ultimately, to develop the all-inclusive model (Lillo, Ramón and Sevilla, 2007, p. 49).
This is the background to the emergence of the world’s best known vacation chain, the French company Club Méditerranée, or Club Med (see box III.1).
Initially, high entry barriers meant that the holiday segment was much more fragmented than that of urban business hotels, with a great number of small and medium-sized hotel operators.
But as new destinations emerged and markets opened up, especially in Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean, the picture began to change.
The holiday segment underwent a rapid process of consolidation and concentration, spearheaded by hotel companies from countries that were already leaders in sun, sea and sand tourism, such as Spain.
This concentration was then intensified by these companies’ active international expansion strategies, particularly in Mexico and the Caribbean (see box III.2).
Sol Meliá, which currently occupies fifteenth place in the ranking of the largest chains (see table III.2), has become the world’s largest holiday hotel group (Álvarez, Cardoza and Díaz, 2005, p. 107).
In the 1950s, two French entrepreneurs introduced the vacation club concept on the island of Corsica, and they later replicated it in the Balearic Islands of Spain and in Greece.
From the beginning, the company introduced major innovations, such as original bar-consumption payment methods.
In 1968, Club Med opened its first resort on the island of Guadeloupe, which allowed it to attract customers from the United States.
By the late 1990s, Club Med faced increasingly stiff competition from other hotel chains that had replicated and refined its original model.
In response, and in an attempt to expand its presence in the vacation-package market, it acquired France’s fourth largest tour operator, Jet Tours.
In 2004, France’s largest hotel chain, Accor, acquired a 29% stake in Club Med, becoming its largest shareholder, in an effort to generate synergies between the two companies.
However, this plan was unsuccessful and two years later Accor sold much of its interest in Club Med.
Accor currently has a 6% stake, through which it is party to a shareholders’ agreement with Caisse de Dépôts et de Gestion du Maroc and Air France-KLM, which have a 10% and a 2% stake, respectively (Club Med, 2008, p. 13).
During this period, Club Med attempted to reposition itself in the highest market segment, with an all-inclusive arrangement in the highend, guest-friendly and multicultural sector.
To this end, it made important divestitures, particularly in Europe, in order to improve its financial position and Club Med sold Jet Tours to Thomas Cook for 70 million euros.
In addition, the company embarked on a process to upgrade its existing resorts and, in late 2008, announced that it would invest some US$ 530 million to remodel its facilities throughout the world.
Club Med currently has 80 resorts in close to 40 countries in Europe, Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, as well as the United States, all operated under the same brand (ClubMed, 2008, p. 21).
The company’s growth has been based primarily on direct investments, since it has financial control of most of its properties (34% of which it owns, while it leases 57%, with the remaining 9% operated under management contracts).
In late 2008, after investing more than US$ 65 million, Club Med reopened its complex in Punta Cana, the Dominican Republic, which had been known as one of the world’s leading family tourist resorts since it first opened in 1982.
This initially involved a small group of companies that focused on the vacation segment and relied primarily on the foreign direct investment (FDI) model to gain access to new markets.
Starting in the mid-1990s, the favourable economic situation and competitive position of these groundbreaking companies prompted other hotel chains to follow suit.
The range of products continued to revolve mainly around vacation packages, preferably through management contracts.
Especially important was the “all-inclusive” concept, promoted mainly by the leading international tour operators, which clearly preferred Latin American destinations.
Since 2000, following the example of other Spanish companies with a strong presence in Latin America, the hotel companies ventured into investments in Europe and the United States, mainly through the acquisition of local chains of city hotels, allowing them to further diversify and reduce dependence on the vacation segment.
Spanish chains have expanded internationally mainly to increase their bargaining power with tour operators.
Indeed, one of the hallmarks of mass sun, sea and sand tourism is the solid partnerships hotel chains have formed with tour operators.
As the internationalization process moved forward, these hotels began to diversify their services geographically, enabling them to strengthen their position vis-à-vis tour operators and reduce their reliance on the performance of a given destination.
In addition, hotel chains began to expand their existing facilities and to build new, large-scale complexes, with a variety of hotels targeting different market segments.
Shortly afterwards, some of the main domestic sun, sea and sand tour operators also embarked on active international expansion plans.
The company’s or investor’s country of origin strongly influences where and how foreign investment in tourism occurs (Bardham and others, 2008, p. 8).
In Latin America and the Caribbean there has been a strong geographical specialization.
After consolidating their position in those markets, these companies then set their sights on other destinations, which has blurred the strong original specialization.
The extent to which investors use a particular modality also depends on the origin of the hotel chain.
In emerging markets, the United States brands have shown greater profitability than domestic providers (Bardham and others, 2008, p. 9).
When they first started to expand abroad, European chains preferred to have an equity stake in their foreign subsidiaries, especially in developed countries (Dunning and McQueen, 1993, p. 256).
The hotel TNC has less influence in cases where a local investor with experience in the sector holds a franchise.
Holiday hotel chains typically use franchising arrangements less than the chains that target urban and business segments (see table III.3).
The Spanish holiday chains have found it more difficult to use franchises, since they have been unable to position such solid brands as the urban chains have.
As well, due to the volume of activities —basically entertainment- and leisure-related— in holiday complexes, parent companies have found quality control more problematic there than in business-oriented hotels (Ramón Rodríguez, 2002c, p. 40).
In the light of these considerations, the growing presence of “global hotel brands” could be rather misleading, especially as regards the magnitude and significance of FDI in the industry.
It is estimated, in fact, that only 20% of hotel TNCs have an equity stake in their subsidiary hotels abroad, of which approximately half are joint ventures (UNCTAD, 2007, p. 35).
Nevertheless, the capital contribution and popularity of the large hotel chains act as economic leverage for other investors, guarantee projects a certain degree of viability and arouse interest in related activities that can help to enhance the tourism product (UNWTO, 2002, p. 83).
The entry of those firms helps to create the conditions for new business opportunities for smaller firms, which can expand by integrating some kind of related product into their activities. operated under management contracts and 12% were operatorowned.
In Europe, the distribution is more even: 42% are franchised, 33% owner-operated and 25% run under management contracts.
Ramón Rodríguez, “Principales determinantes de la internacionalización hotelera española”, document presented at the round table on impacts of the internationalization of the Spanish hotel companies on the competitiveness of local destinations, held during the eleventh International Tourism Forum, Benidorm, 13 and 14 March 2007.
In the 1990s, this model went into crisis, as traditional sun, sea and sand destinations reached maturity and overdevelopment and excessively price-driven strategies led to infrastructure deterioration and environmental degradation.
In addition, the liberalization of air transport brought down airfares and facilitated access to new, more distant locations.
Sun, sea and sand markets came to be seen as unviable in the long term, particularly among the European destinations in the Mediterranean (Knowles and Curtis, 1999).
The tourism market has thus become increasingly segmented as firms have attempted to satisfy the diverse needs and interests of consumers.
With demand growing more sophisticated and income levels rising, less standardized vacation options are becoming more common, as firms seek to cater to different segments for whom environmental and safety considerations are of mounting importance.
The reasons for this include domestic market saturation, the sharp increase in property prices and the subprime mortgage crisis in the United States and the need to diversify risk (Bardham and Kroll, 2007, p. 11). up and integrated hotel and real estate complexes are becoming a more and more common alternative.
This sort of hotel and real estate venture is especially attractive for real estate developers and investors.
First of all, such projects diversify income sources by combining inflows from property management (hotels) and from real estate sales (vacation homes).
This formula is also a good way to lower the capital investment and recoup it more quickly.
Association with a prestigious luxury hotel brand also adds a premium to the selling price of the residential property.
Second, the project master planners have a great deal of flexibility for structuring the business.
They can create joint ventures or offer land parcels, usually known as mega-plots, to other developers or investors.
Third, a well-designed master plan with high-quality basic infrastructure allows the project to be rolled out in stages, bringing in new investors or increasing the capacity of the facilities as and when the demand arises.
Lastly, increasing government support —particularly in Latin America and the Caribbean— for these mega-projects confers high levels of legal certainty and statutory benefits, especially for investors, real estate developments and individual buyers.
Integrated hotel and real estate developments are also one of the more explicit manifestations of today’s segmented tourism industry, in which tourists and buyers have major benefits.
First, such developments offer environments with levels of security and privacy that individual residential complexes cannot readily match.
Second, they offer a broad array of leisure and entertainment facilities within a particular area, including beach activities, water sports, golf courses26 and marinas, as well as health and wellness services.
Third, these developments supply quality infrastructure such as drainage systems, water treatment plants, access roads and underground cabling, that gives property owners a degree of independence from local utility providers.
In short real estate or residential tourism can have massive potential for the host economy, since it can drive such activities as construction, agro-industry and manufacturing, as well as tourism-related services.
Latin America and the Caribbean: phased development The tourism industry is configured in many different ways in Latin America and the Caribbean, especially in sun, sea and sand destinations.
On the one hand, Mexico has built up a robust tourism industry based on its proximity to the United States and a rich array of geographical and cultural alternatives.
With strong government support, early on Mexico became the region’s main destination for foreign visitors and investors and produced powerful homegrown groups (see figure III.5).
On the other hand, the natural landscapes of many Caribbean countries and territories have become a magnet for international tourism.
The larger islands hosted a multitude of all-inclusive-type developments aimed at mass tourism, while the smaller islands became more exclusive destinations.
Lastly, Central America and Brazil have recently swelled the Latin American tourism offer with new initiatives in coastal areas, focused on high-income visitors.
All these destinations have different types of hotel offer, from small hotels and inns to exclusive luxury hotels, passing through various sorts of all-inclusive models.
Recently, though, a new and growing phenomenon has been attracting much of the investment effort of the different agents involved in one way or another in tourism: projects that combine hotel infrastructure, real estate developments and related leisure facilities, such as golf courses.
In this segment, the hotel chains have combined local and external sources to mobilize great volumes of financial resources.
Seeking to move away from mass tourism and ease pressure on the natural environment, developers have opted for low urban density and low environmental impact projects, aiming at a high-end, developed-country market, basically in the United States and Canada and, to a lesser extent, Europe.
A number of the internationally prestigious hotel chains have been attracted to the region by these developments, and all-inclusive chains have set about upgrading their facilities and incorporating some of the services that more demanding potential visitors may require (see table III.4).
There are some 60 million affiliated golfers in the world, of whom 32 million are in the United States.
Over 40% of United States players travel more the nine times per year to play, normally in spring and autumn, in other words outside the traditional high season.
The following pages will look at how these new hotel and real estate complexes have been formed.
In view of information the constraints that arise from the complexity of the different combinations of economic agents involved and the coexistence of different models within countries and across the region, the analysis will focus on the hubs where this phenomenon is unfolding.
Mexico: a new destination for high-income baby boomers Mexico is one of the world’s 10 main tourism destinations and the largest market in Latin America and the Caribbean, with over 21 million international visitors in 2007 (UNWTO, 2008c) (see figure III.5).
The hotel offer of the major tourism centres has more than doubled in the 2008 (see figure III.6).
In the last decade, however, the Mexican tourism industry has shown some signs of losing competitiveness, slipping down the table of the world’s top tourism destinations.
The loss of momentum in the Mexican tourism industry has been caused by multiple factors, including its heavy dependence on the United States market and the impact on that market of the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 and the recent economic downturn.
Other important factors are the frequency of hurricanes in the Caribbean region and certain indications of overdevelopment in some of the main Mexican tourism centres, which could be discouraging potential visitors and turning them to other destinations in the Caribbean and Asia.
Tourism has been one of the key drivers of Mexico’s domestic economy in recent years.
Today the industry generates almost 8% of GDP and 5% of employment, as well as being the country’s third largest source of foreign exchange after oil and remittances from Mexicans residing abroad.
In 2007, Mexico received US$ 12.9 billion dollars in tourism-related income, which places it seventeenth in the world in this indicator (UNWTO, 2008c).
Tourism has also helped to even out the balance of payments situation in the wake of the voluminous negative balances produced by manufacturing.
For all these reasons, the federal government continues to promote tourism energetically, in an effort to make up for the loss of market share of the last few years.27 In this regard, the National Development Plan 2007-2012 is aimed at broadening and diversifying the sun, sea and sand tourism product by upgrading existing resorts and developing new ones.
First are its master-planned resorts, which were developed by different federal and local government bodies to stimulate local and regional development.
In the 1970s, the National Trust Fund for Tourism Development (FONATUR) began to spearhead large-scale tourism projects in little-developed areas of Mexico in order to capture a share of the growing international mass tourism market.28 The first of these initiatives was developed in Cancun, followed by others at Huatulco, Ixtapa, Loreto and Los Cabos (see map III.I).
Lastly, Mexico’s tourism offer includes other beach locations such as Costalegre, Ensenada and The National Tourism Board was created in the early 1960s, and the Secretariat of Tourism and the National Trust Fund for Tourism Development (FONATUR), the executive arm for planned tourism developments, in the mid-1970s.
The Mexican Council for the Promotion of Tourism was established in 1999. 28 In the last 30 years, the main mission of FONATUR has been to provide the basic infrastructure and contribute to the legal certainty that are crucial for the success of tourism schemes, as well as sourcing financial resources for the private investors who have developed them.
Since it was created, FONATUR has invested over US$ 2.2 billion, which has leveraged private investment of over US$ 15 billion.
The government has committed US$ 450 million in public investment to this project, which is expected to leverage some US$ 6.6 billion in private investment.
Also part of Mexico’s tourism offer are some of its major cities, such as Mexico City, Guadalajara and Monterrey, as well as some border and interior towns, which possess a rich and varied cultural heritage.
Combined, the surrounding markets have a larger hotel offer than Cancun, which is evidence of the success of the policy implemented by FONATUR.
In fact, government support has served as a catalyst for private investment.
In the last few years, Mexico’s offer of tourism-related real estate has seen major growth and diversification.
To the traditional vacation hotels, many of which operate as all-inclusive schemes, have been added integrated multipurpose hotel and real estate mega-projects, which may include luxury hotels, condominiums, timeshare complexes, vacation homes, marinas, golf courses, wellness centres, haute cuisine restaurants and shopping centres.
Recently, much of the investment in tourism-related real estate in sun, sea and sand destinations has gone to this type of development.
Today, the main sun, sea and sand resorts possess a hotel offer of 143,000 rooms, of which the largest numbers are located in the master-planned resort of Cancun and the traditional destinations of Acapulco (16,434), Puerto Vallarta (10,598), Veracruz (8,866) and Mazatlan (8,568) (see figure III.6).
There is a clear difference among resorts as regards domestic and international visitors.
United States tourists form the majority, although a greater diversity is beginning to be seen on the Caribbean coast, with larger numbers of European and Latin American tourists.
The differences between domestic and international tourism are driven by geographical proximity, access to infrastructure (airports and roads), the larger supply of hotel facilities and price.
Master-planned resorts Other beach resorts Interior and border cities Traditional beach resorts Major cities basis of information from the Secretariat of Tourism of Mexico (SECTUR).
The attraction of natural landscapes, climate and culture, lower land prices and cost of living, the geographical proximity to the western, southern and central parts of the United States, good infrastructure and services provision and greater guarantees for foreign buyers30 have positioned Mexico very well.
In addition, baby boomers, mainly from the United States, are acting as key drivers of demand for these high-end tourism destinations.31 Apprehension over Legislation on real estate and foreign investment protection has undergone major reform.
Foreigners are now allowed to buy real estate within particular areas ­ a strip within 50 kilometres of the beach and another 100 kilometres from the borders— through a trust set up by a Mexican bank.
Under the Foreign Investment Act of 1994, such trusts have a life of 50 years and can be renewed at any point upon request.
The legislation also allows the sale, transfer or lease of the property at any time.
Mortgage loans are available for foreign buyers, as is property title insurance issued by United States firms. 31 The first of the 80 million baby boomers in the United States turned 62 in 2008.
Many of them will be making plans for their retirement, including moving to another area, buying a second home or simply travelling more often.
In fact, according to the United States real estate company Del Webb Corporation, over 50% of baby boomers are planning to move when they retire. long-distance travel following the events of 11 September 2001 has also contributed to this trend (NotiTur, 2007a, p. 16).
Baby boomers who, until a few years ago, would tend to have bought homes in Florida or California, have been pushed by the overpopulation and steady rise in real estate prices in those States to seek other alternatives, and Mexico is an obvious choice.
Over a million United States citizens are estimated to have acquired a second home in Mexico, either through a timeshare scheme or by buying it outright (El Economista, 1 October 2007).
In 2008, for the second year running, Mexico was ranked the best retirement location in the world for United States citizens (International Living Magazine, 31 August 2008).
As a result, multiple large-scale projects are changing the landscape of Mexico’s coasts (see table III.5).
The interest of investors in the industry is shifting from mass tourism developments to real estate ventures for a high-end market, in other words, a type of tourism adapted to the needs of the traveller.
In this context and given the sheer scale of these undertakings, new actors have begun to displace the international hotel chains from the lead role they played in the past, particularly in terms of financial commitment.
Real estate and construction companies, various sorts of financial entities and institutional and individual investors are becoming the main links in these mega-projects, of which a good example is the Mayakoba development in Riviera Maya (see box III.3).
In order to facilitate this process, the Mexican authorities created an instrument called Infrastructure and Real Estate Trusts (known by the Spanish acronym FIBRAS).
These instruments are inspired by the REITs in the United States market and are designed to capture venture capital to fund large-scale real estate projects in tourist areas.32 The ownership of many of these large developments is thus quite spread out, which makes it difficult to identify individual investors.
The FIBRAS scheme raises funds through the issue of real estate participation certificates on the Mexican stock exchange.
These hotels operate under the all-inclusive model and charge an average nightly rate of US$ 100 per person.
But 40 kilometres south of Cancun airport, one of the most interesting projects of Mexico’s new, segmented and differentiated tourism has sprung up: Mayakoba.
This project arose almost unplanned in the wake of the merger of the Spanish construction companies Obrascón, Huarte and Lain to form the company now known as OHL.
After nearly a decade of sitting idle, a 600-ha, difficult-to-develop land parcel, including two kilometres along the beach, originally owned by Huarte, became a lynchpin of the merged company’s internationalization and diversification strategy.
In addition, its peculiar trait —its mangroves— which in principle made it difficult to turn to commercial use, became one of its main distinguishing features.
The starting point was the opportunity arising from the buying power of baby boomers, in combination with their propensity to acquire second homes, and United States investors’ preference for real estate assets at the top-end segment.
To conserve the beach environment, most of the infrastructure was placed behind the mangroves and the sand dunes, 500 metres from the shore —an innovative design for the Mexican coast.
In addition to the sun, sea and sand product, it was essential to include a broad variety of alternative activities, most notably golf and health and wellness facilities.
With these features and the support of a plan to market to clients directly —independently from tour operators— it was hoped to generate annual average hotel rates of over US$ 300 per day.
OHL sought hotel operators positioned in the high-end segment to bring the project to fruition.
The management of the six hotels has been assigned to two chains from the United States (Rosewood and Viceroy), two from Canada (Fairmont and its subsidiary Raffles) and one from Singapore (Banyan Tree), with one still left to assign.
By the end of 2008, Rosewood’s and Fairmont’s facilities were operating, while Banyan Tree, Viceroy and Raffles are expected to open their doors between 2009 and 2011.
In addition, the construction of the El Camaleon 18-hole golf course was completed, and the Professional Golfers’ Association (PGA) has held a yearly tournament there since 2007.
The result is a resort surrounded by green areas and canals, with the hotel facilities extending inland and hidden by water and lush vegetation.
Once construction has been completed, OHL will keep somewhat less than 50% of the equity in the establishments and will leave the management to specialized partners.
Although hotel activity is the core of the business, the venture envisions major real estate developments.
Each hotel complex built by OHL will have dozens of vacation homes that will be put up for sale.
In the environs of the Rosewood, Fairmont and Viceroy hotels, 40, 50 and 60 homes have been built, respectively, whose prices will be well over US$ 1 million (Cinco Días, 5 The total investment is expected to exceed US$ 1.6 billion, of which nearly half has now been made.
In principle, a sixth hotel is planned, possibly to be run by the Canadian chain Four Seasons.
Much emphasis will also be placed on developing commercial areas, and more top-end vacation homes might be contemplated, in addition to the construction of two new golf courses.
Hence, Mayakoba has positioned itself as one of the top hotel and real estate developments in Mexico.
In addition, tourists in this category are typically strongly loyal to a destination and spend high average amounts during their stays.
Unquestionably, jointly owned property development is now one of the main drivers of tourism-related real estate in Mexico (NotiTur, 2007b, p. 21).
Moreover, as well as hotels and vacation homes, other formulas are helping to broaden the tourism and real estate offer.
The timeshare concept has been popular in the United States market for some 30 years.
It has evolved to include fractional ownership, condohotels and private residence clubs.33 In Mexico, such projects are found mainly on the Pacific coast, particularly in Los Cabos, Puerto Vallarta, In the fractional ownership model, a group of investors acquire a property jointly, with each obtaining the contractual option of using the property during pre-established periods.
In the condohotel model, investors buy hotel rooms either to use themselves or to entrust to a specialized administration to generate an income, or both.
Private residence clubs are boutique fractional ownership schemes for high-end segments, usually located within or adjacent to luxury hotels.
Acapulco continues to be a market with major potential for domestic tourism, with easy road access from the main interior cities.
International luxury hotel chains have also realized the potential of this type of venture.
For example, the Canadian chain Fairmont has given its name to a private residential club in Acapulco, and the United States firm Ritz Carlton, a subsidiary of Marriott, has done likewise in Los Cabos.
This new mechanism of alliances between luxury hotel brands and real estate development has proven particularly successful, since it gives greater credibility to projects and factors in quality hotel services, which usually results in higher sale prices and a quicker turnover of properties.
In fact, for investors and real estate developers, this formula is a good way to reduce the capital investment and recoup it within a shorter period.
With all these new ventures, private investment in the Mexican tourism sector has grown steadily in the 2000s, and coastal destinations have become increasingly prominent (see figure III.8).
The bulk of this new investment has gone into developing large integrated hotel and real estate projects and building and remodelling hotels (SECTUR, 2006, p. 4).
Private sector activity in the hotel and real estate segment has been complemented with voluminous investment in transport infrastructure (airports, cruise-ship docking areas, and roads), telecommunications, utilities and tourist facilities (golf courses, marinas and theme parks).
The geopolitical divisions where the main beach destinations are located —both master-planned resorts and traditional locations— account for the bulk of private investment in tourism.
Cancun, the most successful master-planned resort and the main catalyst for this type of investment, is situated in the State of Quintana Roo.
In addition, recent efforts to diversify the tourism offer towards higher-income segments with low-density integrated hotel and real estate developments have shifted the focus of private investment towards states such as Nayarit and Baja California Sur (see figure III.9).
Although the foreign investment component has become more significant, domestic investment continues to drive local tourism.
This merely confirms the existence of a trait that is typical of the tourism industry, particularly the hotel business, in which infrastructure and real estate are financed by local private capital and services are provided under international brand names through management, leasing or franchise agreements.
Foreign investment Local investment basis of information from the Secretariat of Tourism of Mexico (SECTUR).
Foreign investment in Mexico’s tourism industry comes almost entirely from the United States and Spain.
In the last two years (for which period disaggregated information is available), Spain contributed 64% of the foreign investment in the Mexican tourism business, while the United States generated 30%.
There is virtually no foreign capital in the traditional resorts such as Acapulco and Puerto Vallarta, as investments there are made by Mexican businesses.
Foreign investors are much more active in the resorts aimed at international tourism, in Baja California, Quintana Roo and, recently, Nayarit.
Spanish investors’ initial strong preference for Caribbean destinations thus seems to have shifted, as they seek greater diversification on the Pacific coast, hence their interest in Nayarit (see box III.4).
Since then the federal government (through the Mexican Council for the Promotion of Tourism), the Nayarit state government and private investors have embarked on numerous ventures to develop this new sun, sea and sand tourist destination on Mexico’s Pacific coast.
The federal government has also pledged over US$ 455 million though the National Trust Fund for Tourism Development (FONATUR) to create and maintain infrastructure to support the development of tourism in the region (Boletín informativo SECTUR No. 5, 19 January 2007).
In mid-2006, spurred by the positive outlook for the region, FONATUR launched the Nayarit master-planned resort.
Recently completed real estate and hotel complexes are expected to position Nayarit as one of Mexico’s leading destinations for tourism investments, most of which will be aimed at attracting visitor with high purchasing power, especially from the United States.
In late 2008, more than 90% of visitors and real estate buyers were United States citizens.
Nayarit currently has more than 12,000 hotel rooms, two thirds of which are in the four-star to super luxury range (Notitur, 2008, AprilJune).
These efforts have been supported by state authorities to avoid the rapid overdevelopment that ocurred in other Mexican tourism centres.
The first large-scale development began in the late 1990s, when the Mexican group Dine undertook an ambitious real estate and hotel project in Punta Mita, 45 km west of Puerto Vallarta.
Two luxury hotels were built on a 600-ha plot, one run by the Canadian chain Four Seasons (173 rooms) and the other, the recently opened Saint Regis, run by the United States chain Starwood,a with 120 rooms, 350 vacation homes and two golf courses certified by Jack Nicklaus.
More than US$ 500 million is now being invested to build 1,000 new residences, each valued at more than US$ 1 million.
Nearby, the Spanish hotel chain RIU recently inaugurated a 445-room all-inclusive luxury hotel.
Another major initiative in the region is Punta Raza, a project that was tendered to C&C Capital, a Mexican consortium involved in high-end residential and tourism development.
At Punta Raza, it is planned to build eight four- and fivestar hotels, 1,800 vacation homes, a golf course and a marina on a 293-ha plot, with an investment of more than US$ 270 million.
In the first phase, a 100-room luxury hotel, under the Capella brand, 120 homes, a spa and an 18-hole golf course will be built on a two-km stretch of beachfront.
The first envisions the construction of two luxury hotels, a golf course and 600 residences on a 300-ha plot.
From a medium- and long-term perspective, the progress in the Nayarit master-planned resort merits special mention.
Under this project, an 865-ha property, divided into three areas —Litibú, El Capomo and El Peñita— is to be developed in phases.
The first, Litibú, located 2 km north of Punta Mita, is expected to have a hotel offer of 4,000 rooms, 910 vacation homes, a marina and a golf course, with an investment of some US$ 1.1 billion dollars (Notitur, April-June 2008 and Inmobiliare Magazine, 27 March 2008).
The hotel plots for the first stage of the master-planned resort were sold quickly.
Prominent among the purchasers were the Spanish companies Iberostar and Fadesa, which acquired 200 ha for US$ 80 million.
In early 2008, Fadesa announced that it would invest US$ 350 million to build two luxury hotels, 320 residences and a golf course.
However, Fadesa’s recent bankruptcy could complicate the realization of this portion of the project.
These investments have made the State of Nayarit one of the leading recipients of private tourism investment in Mexico.
Indeed, by 2008, the State was bested in this regard only by Quintana Roo, which has been the preferred location of investors in recent years.
The Mexican real estate market slowed in late 2008, owing mainly to greater fiduciary caution and tighter lending practices in the United States.
The current financial market crisis and its effects on investors’ resources and consumer confidence will probably have a short-term impact on many developments (see table III.6).
Unless the global financial crisis deepens or the effects of the influenza that broke out in March 2009 worsen, however, the outlook for the medium and long terms still seems promising.
In summary, Mexico built up an extensive tourism infrastructure with strong government support, which helped the country to become the largest international tourism destination in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Now seeking to leave behind the stigma of mass tourism and its undesired effects, the preference is for large-scale projects targeting high-income segments, with emphasis on residential tourism.
The Caribbean: moving towards niche tourism Tourism has grown steadily in the Caribbean subregion in the last two decades (see figure III.5).
In terms of numbers, the main destinations for international visitors are the Dominican Republic, Cuba, Jamaica and the Bahamas (see figure III.12).
Tourism is now a significant industry for the great majority of the Caribbean islands, especially some of the smaller countries and territories (see figure III.13).
In fact, the foreign visitors received by some small islands with fewer than 100,000 inhabitants multiply their population several times over.
Although the tourism industry is bigger in absolute terms in the larger and more diversified economies, in relative terms it is more significant on the smaller islands. of Latin American countries are more significant origin markets.
Among other reasons, this pattern reflects active marketing campaigns, greater cultural and language affinity, rich economic and political relations with former colonies, explicit conflicts with the United States (for example, the embargo against Cuba) and the strong presence of European firms —mainly hotel chains closely associated with tour operators— in these countries’ tourism industries.
This is particularly true in the English-speaking countries and territories (see figure III.14).
The subregion has adapted very quickly to the new trends in international tourism.
The first all-inclusive hotels appeared in the 1980s in response to the demand from leisure travellers, and the system prospered notably in Jamaica (Issa and Jayawardena, 2003, p. 168).
In the 1990s, the industry shifted rapidly away from mass tourism towards a more discerning type.
A change in strategy became apparent in most of the Caribbean destinations, with promotion and marketing efforts focusing on new vacation options that went beyond the classic sun, sea and sand variety, aiming at specific niches in the tourism market.
A broad array of hotel establishments began to target different types of holiday-makers, such as couples, singles or families, generally operating under the all-inclusive scheme.34 The Jamaican firms SuperClubs and Sandals have been extremely important in spearheading the changes that have occurred in the industry (see box III.5).
The range of vacation clubs and timeshare complexes also began to increase.
This decade, there has been a boom in the market for second homes, either in integrated hotel and real estate developments or in new coastal urbanizations designed specifically for foreigners.
Among the larger countries, such as Cuba, Jamaica and the Dominican Republic, the all-inclusive hotel offer began to expand rapidly.
Despite an incipient trend towards specialization in niche markets, much of this offer was oriented towards standardized mass tourism, in which tour operators played a major role.
In general, these were beach resorts, where price was the crucial factor.
Better quality and more extensive infrastructure, active national promotion policies and cluster economies resulting from the en masse arrival of international hotel chains all helped to reduce costs.
In the Dominican Republic, in the wake of the success of pioneering initiatives such as Casa de Campo,36 close to La Romana, new sun, sea and sand developments proliferated all along the coast, including Punta Cana and Puerto Plata.
Between 1990 and 2007, hotel capacity and international visitor arrivals tripled and income from tourism increased more than fourfold (see figures III.12 and III.15).
In Cuba, following the loss of the country’s main trading partners —the former Soviet Union and the countries of Eastern Europe— the government banked strongly on the development of tourism on the island, especially in the resort of Varadero.
Between 1990 and 2007, the hotel offer in Cuba more than tripled, international tourist arrivals multiplied almost sevenfold and tourism income increased by a factor of more than eight (see figures III.12 and III.15).
The diversification of origin markets was a key driver of the success of the tourism industry in Cuba and the Dominican Republic (see figure III.14).
Despite the distance involved, Europe has become the largest single market of origin for both islands.
Canada has become especially important for Cuba, owing to the travel ban applied to United States citizens.
Gradually, all-inclusive hotels become increasingly significant, coming to represent 47% and 58% of hotel capacity in Cuba and the Dominican Republic, respectively Some destinations specialized in the wedding and honeymoon market, reducing or simplifying procedures for conducting marriage ceremonies, and several hotels built wedding reception rooms and special accommodation for honeymooners.
A number of resorts offering all-inclusive services exclusively for couples have been very successful in the United States market, where the Jamacian firms SuperClub and Sandals have been very active.
Other successful niches are those linked with golf, water sports, diving and family vacations.
Some destinations have promoted cultural events such as the carnivals in Aruba, Dominica, Jamaica and Martinique, and the jazz festivals in Aruba, Barbados, the Dominican Republic, Saint Lucia and Trinidad and Tobago Many all-inclusive resorts were built on wetlands, swamps and mangroves, taking advantage of the cheapness of this type of land.
In fact, Club Med was the first hotel chain to introduce this concept in warm beach destinations (Issa and Jayawardena, The idea of all-inclusive service arose as a way to cope with the difficult situation faced by the tourist industry in the Caribbean as a result of the oil crisis in the early 1970s.
Rather than to increase the hotel supply, the need was to offer a different type of vacation.
The first all-inclusive packages in the Caribbean were introduced in Jamaica, based on the concept developed by Club Med and the cruise industry.
The scheme offered tourists a combination of prized ingredients: including security, entertainment and, above all, vacations with no complications or surprises, since everything was paid for.
The young-singles image of the all-inclusive concept continued until 1978, when a complex for couples opened in Ocho Rios.
The success of these resorts was quickly reflected in industry trends, and many companies copied the various concepts (Issa and Jayawardena, 2003, p.168).
Subsequently, to differentiate itself from other all-inclusive companies, especially in the more economical and mass-tourism segments, SuperClubs introduced the “super-inclusive” system.
At about the same time, Gordon Stewart bought a small property in near-ruin in Montego Bay, which he transformed into the first all-inclusive hotel of the Jamaican hotel chain Sandals (Hawkes and Kwortnik, 2006, p. 370).
This chain specialized in the couples market, offering vacation services, weddings and honeymoons, under the “luxury included” system which offered super luxury features at all of its facilities.
In the mid-2000s, SuperClubs and Sandals dominated the Jamaican market, controlling 40% of rooms under hotel-chain management (PWC, 2005, p. 6).
Trailing far behind were other international operators such the Marriott of the United States and RIU of Spain.
SuperClubs also began operations in Brazil, where it had particularly strong success in the promising north-east region, and in the buoyant tourism sector of Panama, where it will open a new hotel in 2009.
In Brazil, SuperClubs was involved in developing the Costa do Sauípe complex, where it has a hotel and manages the establishments of the United States chain Honesta.
In 2007, it inaugurated a second all-inclusive resort on the island of Santa Luzia, off Aracajú.
In late 2008, SuperClub acquired a controlling interest in the Costa do Sauípe resort.
In response to strong competition, SuperClubs recently began an intensive effort to upgrade its facilities and reposition its Breezes brand.
Once this has been achieved, the company plans to have 14 Breezes hotels with similar features in seven countries.
The Jamaican hotel chains are thus the leading operators of a model that has become widely established and popular in the Caribbean.
Cuba thoroughly overhauled its tourism industry by creating the first enterprises in the sector (the chains Gran Caribe, Horizontes and Isla Azul, and the corporations Cubanacan and Gaviota) and a Ministry of Tourism, and establishing development hubs that could benefit from the hotel and airport infrastructure and ancillary services.
It also encourages pensioners and retirees who are interested in setting up residence in the country, with tax exemptions of up to 100% (Law No. 171 of 2007).
In 1992 a reform to the Constitution, among other things, recognized mixed enterprises as a form of ownership.
Under the Foreign Investment Act of 1995, known as Law No. 77, foreign investments can take the form of mixed enterprises, international economic partnership agreements or fully foreign-owned firms.
In 2004, Agreement 5290 established procedures for cooperative production contracts (goods and services) and hotel management FDI in tourism represented almost 20% of total FDI income in the Dominican Republic between 1993 and 2008.
The sum of this investment and the resources poured into real estate make up a third of all inflows (see figure III.16).
In Cuba, over a third of the more than 300 firms with foreign capital are involved in tourism-related activities, mainly in the area of hotel management (MINVEC, 2008).39 Spanish hotel chains have been the most active investors in the tourism industry in both countries (see figure III.17 and box II.2).
In 2007 Law No. 171 was passed establishing special incentives for those receiving pensions or incomes from abroad, in order to stimulate the real estate sector. 39 Hotel management contracts are signed for an initial period of five to seven years.
The parties may extend them as many times as they wish, taking the opportunity upon each renovation to update the conditions and operating modules that govern them.
These partnerships are formed on the principle that the mixed enterprise does not own the land it occupies, but receives the right to its use, which represents the capital contribution of the local entity (Hostelmarket, No. 86, October 2006).
The main Spanish vacation chains have a presence on the Spanish-speaking coasts of the Caribbean and have specialized strongly in the all-inclusive segment.
Today, the 14 international chains operating in Cuba —mostly Spanish and led by Sol Meliá— manage more than half the country’s hotel capacity under contract (Buen viaje, 1 September 2008).42 There are more international chains in the Dominican Republic, but the Spanish ones, headed by Barceló and RIU (see box III.4) are still very important.
The Spanish chains currently manage almost 70,000 hotel rooms in the Caribbean, or over half the available offer.
In the Dominican Republic, they encompass some 70% of the market (HostelTur, January 2009).
Although the international chains initially competed for market share on a price basis, that strategy was quickly exhausted.
As the competition stiffened, new investments were needed to improve the quality and diversity of services offered in the all-inclusive schemes, and this was difficult given their narrow profit margin.
Accordingly, most of the chains began to migrate towards higher standards of service, that is, to four- and five-star hotels.
The idea was to retain the all-inclusive scheme but aim it at a market segment with greater purchasing power that would be less sensitive to market fluctuations.
High-end hotel chains, which had hitherto preferred to locate in the smaller, English-speaking Caribbean islands, also began to become involved in more projects.
Cubacan thus began to venture into new hotel establishments, managed under the Sol Meliá brand. 42 In 2005, Spanish companies managed 40% of Cuban hotel capacity: almost half the rooms in Varadero and one in four in Havana.
Sol Meliá now operates 21 hotels in Cuba, which represents 20% of all hotel capacity and 50% of the units administered by Spanish chains. actively defend or even increase their presence in the luxury segment.
There are 65 new projects under way in the Caribbean subregion at present, of which 28 are at the construction stage.
Ten of these are located in the Dominican Republic, the largest number in a single country (Freitag, 2008).43 Against this backdrop, as well as the upgrading of many hotel establishments, new, more sophisticated projects began to spring up, incorporating luxury hotel infrastructure, real estate, golf courses and other commercial and leisure facilities.
This new concept, known as real estate tourism, caters to the regular traveller who begins to feel attached to a particular destination and consider the possibility of investing in it long-term.
The companies’ aim is to move away from low-cost tourism and all-inclusive hotels, capture new high-income customers and contain some of the unwanted effects of mass tourism.
A number of large-scale developments are under way in the Dominican Republic at present, including Roko Ki, Cap Cana and some new projects in established resorts, such as Casa de Campo (Los Altos real estate development) and Punta Cana Resort & Club (Los Corales project) (see box III.6).
The project envisions some 5,000 vacation homes, seven luxury hotels, five golf courses (including three designed by Jack Nicklaus, the first of which was inaugurated in November 2006), and a marina for 1,000 boats, in addition to shopping and leisure areas.
This undertaking has been headed by the Abrisa group, which is one of the largest in the Dominican Republic and also has a share in administering six airports, which handle 65% of the country’s air traffic.
Agreements to develop the project were signed with various international companies and a number of real estate schemes have been announced; these will gradually materialize in several stages over about 15 years.
In 2005, the Spanish chain Altabella Hotels began building two luxury hotels in Cap Cana, with an investment of close to US$ 300 million (Expansión, 21 May 2007).
In mid-2007, the Hotel Sanctuary Cap Cana Golf & Spa was inaugurated, followed a few months later by Golden Bear Lodge, a complex of condominiums that will operate as a boutique hotel.
In early 2007, the United States magnate Donald Trump joined the megaproject, to develop a large real estate complex with a luxury hotel, a golf course and vacation residences named “Trump at Cap Cana,” the value of which is expected to reach 1.52 billion euros (Cinco días, 20 February 2007).
The first stage of this initiative, Solares del Farallón Trump at Cap Cana, was very successful, with US$ 350 million in properties and over 95% of the land sold in the first four hours.
In late 2007, the United States-based hotel chain Marriott, through its Ritz-Carlton brand, joined the project with the aim of a building a luxury hotel (The Ritz-Carlton Cap Cana) and a real estate complex with 194 private residences, named “Residences at The Ritz-Carlton Cap Cana”.
This will take an investment of close to US$ 1 billion (Clave digital, 9 November 2007).
In addition, several independent real estate projects have been undertaken, most notably the Cap Cana Luxury Retreats with apartments facing the marina, and Green Village.
By mid-2008, Cap Cana had sold more than US$ 1.24 billion in real estate products and invested more than US$ 1 billion in the Dominican Republic.
The project managers have had difficulties in maintaining the pace of construction and delivery of the urbanized plots, condominiums and vacation residences, which has significantly reduced cash flow.
Liquidity problems greatly complicated payment and borrowing capacity, and this was further exacerbated by the real estate and financial crisis in the United States.
Even though the mega-project managers were able to avoid imminent bankruptcy by reaching an agreement with their main creditors (Clave digital, 9 December 2008), in the current situation, the future does not look straightforward for this ambitious business initiative.
The countries and territories with the largest numbers of projects are the Dominican Republic (10), Turks and Caicos Islands (7), the Bahamas (7) and Saint Lucia (5), and the most active hotel chains are Marriott, through its brand Ritz-Carlton (4), Radisson Hotels & Resorts (3), Starwoods Hotels & Resorts, with its brands Westin (3) and St.
Regis (3), Four Seasons (3), Choice Hotels, through the brand Comfort Inn (3), and Mandarin Oriental (3) In 2007, sales of over US$ 1.5 billion were made in the main real estate tourism complexes developed in the Dominican Republic (Gestión y competitividad, No. 2, May 2008).
At the end of 2008, some 4,000 vacation homes and apartments had been built and about 2,000 were in construction, mostly in the tourist areas of Samará, Punta Cana-Playa Bávaro, La Romana, Puerto Plata, Jarabacoa and Constanza (Listin Diario, 19 December 2008).
As in Mexico, some of these projects are being carried out by local groups financed from abroad, but foreign investors also have a strong presence (financial entities, real estate and construction companies and hotel chains, among others).
This has helped to diversify the sources of investment and Spanish firms have been joined by others from Canada, the United States and other countries (CEI-DR, 2008a, p. 5).
These projects target external markets, mainly in the United States and Europe.
The appreciation of the euro has made the Dominican Republic very attractive for the European market despite the distance involved.
Between 2004 and 2008, almost US$ 2 billion in FDI flowed into the real estate sector of the Dominican Republic (see figure III.16).
This prosperity has coincided with the international real estate boom, but is also occurring in a context in which the all-inclusive model is showing signs of exhaustion.
However, the current international financial crisis could complicate the financing of projects under way (see box III.6) and undermine the purchasing power of potential United States and European customers and their willingness to engage in leisure travel.
In fact, in the last few weeks of 2008, real estate prices fell sharply in the main Caribbean vacation hubs, in some cases by as much as 40%.
The sector may face difficulties in the short term as a result of slumping demand for real estate and hotel services in the Caribbean but, depending on the duration and depth of the international crisis, the medium- and long-term outlook should start to brighten and give the industry fresh momentum.
In summary, attractive natural settings, combined with the proximity of the United States and Canadian markets, have made most of the countries and territories of the Caribbean into highly attractive and sought-after holiday destinations.
The subregion first built up a platform for mass tourism with a range of all-inclusive formulas tailored to the needs of different segments of demand (couples, singles and families).
The larger countries improved access infrastructure (airports) and accommodation and entertainment services, which contributed to standardizing the tourism offer and heightening competition based largely on price.
The tourism offer in the smaller island territories tended to be more segmented and environmentally lower-impact, targeting high-income visitors.
When the all-inclusive model began to show signs of depletion as a result of tight profit margins, over-exploitation of the environment, changes in travellers’ preferences and the deterioration of hotel facilities, companies began to take steps to capture more volatile segments of demand.
First, the major hotel chains embarked on massive upgrading of their facilities.
Second, multiple emerging projects began to combine luxury hotel infrastructure with real estate developments, along with additional facilities such as golf courses and marinas.
The renewed tourism offer thus aimed to capture both sporadic visitors and higherincome residents.
The global real estate and financial crisis has reduced international arrivals, caused serious difficulties for a number of projects under way and forced the postponement of new ventures, freezing the second homes markets in much of the Caribbean.
At this early stage in the development of the sector, FDI is playing a larger role than in did in other countries.
Unlike the pattern in Mexico and in several Caribbean countries and territories, however, the Central American countries have yet to come consolidated as destinations.
Political stability and sound economic performance have driven local tourism demand and enabled the development of tourism industries orientated towards long-distance visitors (UNWTO, 2007a, p. 47).
The entry into force of the Dominican Republic - Central America United States Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR) could facilitate the operation of foreign tourism companies, especially hotels, which use large volumes of imported inputs.
In this context, international tourism arrivals have seen substantial and sustained growth, from 4.1 million visitors in 2000 to 7.5 million in 2007.
Tourism has become a major source of income for Central American countries, especially Costa Rica, Guatemala and Panama (UNWTO, 2008c), the countries where the sector has grown the fastest, along with El Salvador.
Income from international tourism more than doubled between 2000 and 2007, which has helped to offset the downturn in the maquila industry and the difficulties faced by the agricultural sector (see figure III.19).
In Costa Rica, tourism has become the second-largest generator of foreign exchange and one of the main poles of attraction for FDI (Román, 2007b).
In Costa Rica, tourists from Canada and the United States represent almost 50% of all international arrivals, while intrasubregional visitors are the most frequent in the rest of Central America, except in Panama, where tourists from South America represent a large proportion.
Given the natural endowments of the subregion, much of the tourism industry consists of traditional sun, sea and sand resorts and related services.
Other major attractions are the subregion’s natural environment (ecotourism) and archeological and cultural heritage.
Seeking to build on these innate advantages, the governments of the region are treating tourism as a pillar of national development and have created institutions and legal instruments to support and promote the industry, making tourism activities a priority for FDI.
In most of the Central American countries, the tourism industry has developed rapidly and not necessarily sequentially.44 In a short period of time, destinations that had emerged spontaneously under the management of small local companies gave way to more established resorts as international chains set up in business.
As Subregional The traditional development cycle of a tourism destination starts when it is discovered as a place of interest, but still lacks the infrastructure and ancillary support services for visitors.
Later, a range of more sophisticated services, especially hotel services, are offered to stimulate the arrival of tourists.
The location is considered to have reached maturity with the arrival of international hotel chains.
Large real estate developments, especially on the coast, begin to appear at a later stage, for seasonal leisure use and as second homes for overseas retirees.
These large real estate complexes usually include golf courses and marinas (Román, 2008, p. 7). occurred in Mexico, in a few Central American beach destinations all-inclusive hotel resorts sprang up with few links to the local community (Román, 2008, p. 5).
Shortly afterwards, real estate developments aimed at middle- and high-income buyers, particularly from abroad, began to gather momentum, along with the infrastructure and services needed to facilitate the arrival and stay of temporary residents.
The early advent of residential tourism represents a certain overlap in the traditional stages of tourism development in Central America.
The main sun, sea and sand hotel and real estate schemes are found in a few locations in Costa Rica and Panama.
Costa Rica in particular has managed to position itself internationally as a “country brand” associated with democracy, peace, security, environmental conservation and sustainable management of natural resources which, at least initially, appears to have enhanced the natural attributes of its coastal areas.
Panama has been able to benefit from the traditional influence of the United States—thanks to the Panama Canal and the use of the dollar as domestic currency— to attract foreign visitors and residents.
The Costa Rican province of Guanacaste on the northern Pacific coast has become one of the country’s main sun, sea and sand tourism centres.
Since then, a number of hotel and real estate complexes, run mainly by foreign investors, have started up and are at different stages of development.
Foreign investment in real estate, especially from the United States, has been driven basically by the flow of foreign tourists looking for vacation locations or interested in investing in a second home in the main coastal areas of the Pacific (BCCR, 2008, p. 16).
The Monte del Barco complex will include a hotel run by the United States chain Global Hyatt Corporation, 600 homes and condominiums, a golf course and a marina, with an investment of some US$ 1 billion (El Financiero, 14 September 2008).
The Hacienda Pinilla project will have a Marriott hotel, a spa and a convention centre.
Rancho Manzanillo includes a hotel belonging to the Chinese chain Mandarin Oriental, a residential complex and a golf course.
Lastly, a group of United States investors The Costa Rican authorities made over land for use, built access roads and took electric power to the start of the peninsula.
A number of local and foreign groups of investors did the rest. announced the investment of about US$ 800 million in a hotel and real estate mega-project due to start up in Punta Cacique in 2010.
This venture will offer vacation homes, a golf course and other facilities (La Nación, 4 August 2007).
The project has been postponed as a result of the real estate crisis in the United States, however (Business Information Systems, 1 September 2008).
The Spanish chain RIU is to open a hotel complex in 2009.
Other projects correspond to a number of major luxury hotel chains, such as Marriott’s Rosewood and Ritz-Carlton brands (United States), which have expressed an interest in establishing a presence on Costa Rica’s beaches.
There are also projects for exclusively residential schemes aimed at retirees from the United States, and many marinas.
However, this increasing tourism and real estate activity in the coastal areas is occurring in a context of limited public capacity for oversight and planning, and identification and mitigation of environmental impacts.
In some tourism areas, water quality is apparently being affected by increasing population density combined with lack of sewerage systems and waste water treatment facilities.
There have also been major difficulties in ensuring a sufficient supply of water (Román, 2007c).
In addition, 10 more golf courses are planned for Guanacaste in the next 20 years, which will demand large stretches of land (between 50 and 100 ha) and a huge amount of water to maintain them.
A number of tourism ventures have been undertaken in Panama, along both coasts and on some of the islands.
There are a number of mega-projects on the beaches of the Pacific coast, known as the “Panamanian Riviera”, where hotel chains are setting up and golf courses and luxury condominiums are being built.
The first hotel resorts were built on the Pacific coast, where many high-income Panamanian families have their beach houses.
Two of the largest are the Colombianowned hotels Coronado and Royal Decameron, both with golf courses and many other facilities.
Real estate developments built by foreign firms have proliferated in the vicinities of these hotels and all along the coast, and have been very popular among foreign buyers.
One is the Tucán Country Club & Resort which is being built adjacent to the Panama Canal zone and will have over 500 residences, a golf course and a boutique hotel.
At the other end of the country, the coastal area of Bocas del Toro has become a favourite among retirees from the United States, particularly the Red Frog residential complex.
The real estate segment has thus become the main driver of tourism investment in Panama.
Lastly, the most ambitious tourism development is being built on Viveros island in Las Perlas archipelago.
This includes several hotels, golf courses designed by Jack Nic­ laus, k luxury homes, condominiums, a marina and an airport, with an investment totalling over US$ 500 million (El Periódico, 14 November 2006).
Development here began with the construction of hotels and real estate projects have gathered momentum more recently.
A number of United States investors have built hotel and residential complexes oriented towards water sports, such as the Ma­ an Prin­ ess Beach Re­ ort and the y c s Pa­ rot Tree Plan­a­ion.
Within a few months, the Honduran r t t hotel offer could be expanded with Los Micos Beach & Resort Center, which is now under construction on the Bay of Tela on the Caribbean coast.
Los Micos is the country’s largest hotel and real estate project and will include two luxury hotels, one of which may be run by the United States chain Hilton, over 430 vacation homes and a golf course.
Likewise, local and foreign investors are looking into the almost unexplored advantages of the beaches of El Salvador.
The problems in the banking system severely constrained lending to retirees and travellers who would normally have financed their second homes by mortgaging their homes in the United States.
In summary, before even becoming consolidated as mass tourism destinations, the Central American countries were able to attract the interest of —mainly foreign— investors in developing coastal tourism hubs for high-income overseas visitors and residents.
Costa Rica and Panama have taken the lead with a number of largescale projects that combine hotel infrastructure, vacation homes and other facilities, especially golf courses.
In fact, it may be that the strong increase in real estate investment in El Salvador has to do with the sale of some of the large local banks to international entities (Román, 2008, p. 9).
Brazil: looking to improve access for tourists from the main markets of origin Although Brazil is the leading recipient of international visitors in South America, its capacity to draw in tourists is clearly under-utilized.
As well as being Latin America’s largest economy, the country is privileged in terms of natural and cultural diversity, several thousands of kilometres of coastline and a climate well-suited to year-round sun, sea and sand tourism.
Yet Brazil receives only a little over five million international tourists per year (see figure III.5).
During the second half of the twentieth century, the Brazilian authorities focused their attention on industrial development, leaving the tourism industry practically in the hands of private enterprise.
Rio de Janeiro, with its famous beaches, was the main destination, while the rest of the country remained isolated from domestic, regional and international tourist routes and most efforts to improve and expand hotel services were concentrated in large cities.
The main factors contributing to this equation were infrequent international flights to the area, high-cost domestic flights, distance from the principal sources of tourists (United States and Europe), insufficient support infrastructure, limited marketing of Brazil as a tourist destination and bureaucratic barriers that complicated the arrival of tourists (Neto, 2000).
As a result, despite its size and tremendous potential, Brazil has had only a marginal position in the global tourism industry.
Although the first large resorts were built in the 1970s, among them Club Med on the island of Itaparica across from Salvador de Bahia (see box III.1), the trend really took hold in the 1980s.
In 1989 a new Club Med was opened near Rio de Janeiro, along with several other locally run resorts.
Due, in particular, to the success of the Hotel Transamérica Ilha de Comandatuba in Bahia,48 great expectations surrounded such initiatives at that time in Brazil, particularly in the North-East, which had all the conditions necessary to replicate the success achieved in the Caribbean (Silveira da Rosa and Mendes Tavares, 2002, p. 98).
In time, with regained stability and significant government investment in infrastructure, institutional investors and international hotel chains took a fresh interest in large-scale tourism projects, particularly in the North-East.
Odebrecht had obtained financial support from the Banco do Brazil Pension Fund (PREVI) (Latin America’s largest pension fund), which invested nearly US$ 840 million in the project (Exame, 12 September 2008).
The project ran into accessibility issues, however, and failed to make a profit.
At the end of 2008, these difficulties led PREVI to withdraw from the project and sell its share to a consortium led by SuperClubs for close to US$ 112 million (Gazeta mercantil, 15 September 2008).
In the early 2000s, the difficulties faced by the large Brazilian hotel resorts in attracting foreign visitors and generating profits were due to circumstantial factors such as the terrorist attacks in the United States and the economic crisis in Argentina.
Nevertheless, what hampered these initiatives’ performance was the distance from tourists’ countries of origin and, fundamentally, poor access to sun, sea and sand destinations like those in the North-East (Silveira da Rosa and Mendes Tavares, 2002, p. 100).
Lastly, Brazil’s size and federal structure also conspired against the industry’s development.
In fact, the incentive wars between States to capture largescale projects may have made it difficult to generate cluster economies.
Government authorities and major private entities began taking measures to improve this state of affairs, Since the early 1980s, Odebrecht had been looking at the possibility of building a tourist hub on the land it owned 80 km from Salvador de Bahia.
They launched international marketing campaigns, plans to expand and upgrade infrastructure and systems of financial and fiscal incentives for investment in tourism and hotels.
Moreover, the beaches of Brazil’s North-East, which are free from seasonality issues, began to attract greater attention after destinations like Thailand, the Caribbean and the southern United States suffered large-scale natural disasters such as hurricanes and tsunamis (Exame, 2007).
The North-East region is thus at the heart of the recent transformation in the Brazilian tourist industry.
First, local currency appreciation has severely impacted demand for these large resorts, as Brazil has become more expensive than other similar destinations.
Lastly, a surge in supply in recent years has created stiffer competition, pushing down prices and seriously eroding the profitability of many of these ventures (HVS and Newmark Knight Frank, 2008, p. 6).
In the light of these developments, and building on past experience, the planners of new projects increasingly incorporated real estate components in order to reduce risk and gain quicker returns on their investment.
Today, some 50 real estate developments of varying sizes are being built in Brazil’s North-East, with the active engagement of local and foreign companies.
Tourism and real estate investments in vacation-home condominiums and resorts in the area now border US$ 5 billion (América economía, 21 January 2009, p. 32).
As a result of this boom, nearly 50,000 homes for foreigners could be built in the next eight years, with an investment of roughly 7.5 billion euros (Revista Hotéis, 14 May 2008).
Today, foreign investors, led by Spanish and Portuguese firms, are investing close to US$ 2.5 billion in the Brazilian real estate market (Revista Pronews, No. 102, August 2008).
Portuguese firms have committed some US$ 1.2 billion to new tourism developments in Brazil, particularly in the North-East, and Spanish firms plan to invest nearly The entry of Portuguese investors reflects cultural, linguistic and, in particular, geographical proximity between the two countries.
In fact, a flight from Lisbon to Natal, in Rio Grande do Norte, takes less than six hours.
There are currently more than 2,500 direct flights per year between Portugal and North-East Brazil, with no need to connect through Rio de Janeiro or Sao Paulo (Exame, 2007).
This has made Portugal the third largest origin market for Brazilian tourism, after Argentina and the United States, and one of the largest foreign investors in the country (ECLAC, 2007b, p. 165).
Ceará is home to the largest Portuguese investment not only in Brazil, but in all of Latin America.
Near Fortaleza, a consortium led by Banco Privado Portugues (BPP) plans to invest US$ 500 million in the construction of Aquiraz Golf & Beach Villas, a complex which will include eight hotels, 600 vacation homes and 640 apartments, as well as a golf course and other services.
It is the boldest project to be carried out in the North-East since the construction of Costa do Sauípe.
Similarly, Vila Galé Group is building Cumbuco Golf Resort, with an all-inclusive hotel and, later, a golf course and a 900-apartment condominium complex (Revista Hotéis, 14 October 2008), and the Reta Atlântico group built three hotels and 184 homes in Reserva Imbassaí.
These mega-projects have made Portuguese investors pioneers in Brazil as regards the new trends in large hotel and real estate ventures, such as those seen in Mexico and the Caribbean Basin.
Their target markets, however, are different: the schemes in Mexico and the Caribbean Basin cater to United States baby boomers, whereas the Portuguese-built resorts are aimed at Europeans and the high-end domestic market.
Spanish investors have largely stayed true to their traditional model of all-inclusive resorts, but are slowly incorporating the real estate segment into their investments in Brazil.
The Spanish chain Iberostar recently opened a five-star hotel and golf course in Praia do Forte, near Salvador de Bahia, to which it will add a 208-residence condominium complex with hotel services and infrastructure.
Trusam Group is building a hotel complex at Praia do Forte Norte, with three hotels and a residential and commercial area, and Sol Meliá is also planning a resort complex.
This combined formula of hotel and real estate ventures is present in most of the projects recently announced by local and foreign investors.
Although the North-East remains the centre of this phenomenon, projects with similar features are beginning to be seen in other regions too: the Jamaican chain SuperClubs in Búzios, near Rio de Janeiro and the Costão do Santinho Resort in Florianópolis, Santa Catarina.
Foreign tourist arrivals are expected to slump by at least 20%, which will strike a blow to the fledgling hotel industry in the country’s North-East.
The industry will attempt to compensate by attracting Brazilian and Argentine tourists, who tend to spend less but could be more likely to return (América economía, 21 January 2009, p. 33).
In summary, despite its enormous innate potential, Brazil has not been able to lock fully into international tourist circuits because of its distance from markets of origin, access infrastructure constraints and higher relative costs.
Recently, however, the North-East has attracted the interest of investors and potential visitors, creating a significant tourism and real estate boom.
Unlike some similar destinations, Brazil has been quite successful in diversifying its markets of origin for tourism.
Thanks to hefty investments in airport infrastructure and increased flight frequency, Brazil has come onto the radar of the European market.
As in the rest of the region, however, real estate and tourism have been severely hit by the international financial crisis in recent months.
Uncertainty in the real estate market has caused multiple delays and postponements in the Pontal do Camaragibe complex in the State of Alagoas.
This project includes the construction of three hotels (two managed by the Thai chain Six Senses Resorts & Spa and one by local group Invest Tur, which is spearheading the initiative) along with 165 vacation homes, with an investment of US$ 193 million (América economía, 21 January 2009, p. 33).
Conclusions Competition in the sun, sea and sand tourism industry in Latin America and the Caribbean has intensified and the price-driven, all-inclusive offer is showing clear signs of exhaustion.
Over-exploitation of the natural environment has eroded the comparative advantages that sustain the activity, bringing a range of related problems, including issues of waste disposal and beach pollution, difficulties with drinking water supply and rising crime.
Demand has been volatile and sensitive to external shocks (such as the terrorist attacks of 11 September 2001 and the recession in the United States) and this, combined with the low profit margins of mass tourism, has hurt the companies involved.
In response to this situation, the major companies have embarked on massive upgrades of their facilities in order to capture higher-income segments of demand.
As well as generating larger profit margins, this is opening up access to a less volatile and more predictable market.
There are also new ventures on a much larger scale involving local and international real estate developers.
Spurred by the real estate boom in the industrialized countries, developers are seeking to offer a high-quality product for the second- and retirement-homes market, taking advantage of the lower prices prevailing in the developing economies.
These mega-projects have been highly successful in Mexico and are beginning to spread to other countries, such as the Bahamas, Costa Rica and the Dominican Republic.
In fact, the proliferation of huge hotel and real estate projects could reduce the importance of the all-inclusive model, which has a very limited impact on local economies.
Unlike the boom in mass tourism, during which the hotel chains played a large role in real estate investment, other agents are driving the major hotel and real estate projects being built today.
Generally speaking, the investors are construction companies, real estate developers and financial entities, while the hotel chains contribute their business know-how and customer management experience, all vouched for by the prestige of their brand names.
As a result, it is difficult to quantify and measure the presence of foreign capital in such developments, and even more difficult to delineate the corporate strategies of the firms involved.
Finally, investors’ expectations may be severely dented by the repercussions of the global economic and financial crisis.
In fact, sales of several of these real estate developments have plummeted in the last few months, which has complicated the financial management of these mega-projects.
AFP (2008), “Argentina aporta 9000 millones de dólares para cesar despidos en sector automotriz”, 6 December.
CCS (Santiago Chamber of Commerce) (2009), “Inversión chilena en el exterior durante 2008 registra primera baja en 3 años”, Informe económico CCS, 9 February.
Clarín (2005), “La Argentina busca un lugar en las grandes ligas del software”, 30 October.
Kundu (1998), “Franchising versus company-run operations: modal choice in the global hotel sector”, Journal of International Marketing, vol. 6, No. 2.
CORFO (Production Development Corporation) (2008), “Respuestas a la encuesta de CEPAL sobre los servicios empresariales extraterritoriales en Chile”, Santiago, Chile.
Kundu (1995), “The internationalization of the hotel industry: some new findings from a field study”, Management International Review, vol. 35, No. 2, April.
El Mercurio (2008), “Energía y minería copan los 10 proyecto más grandes del próximo año: parque eólico Talinay”, 14 December.
El Mundo (2008), “BNP Paribas se hace con el negocio de banca y seguros de Fortis por 15.000 millones”, 6 October.
El Tiempo (2008), “Mexichem desiste de compra de Prodesal, tras analizar actuales condiciones del mercado mundial”, 27 October.
GAO (General Accountability Office of United States) (2004), “International trade: current government data provide limited insight into offshoring of services”, Report to Congressional Requesters (GAO-04-932), September.
Global Markets Direct (2008), “Impact of the financial crisis on oil & gas exploration and production investment”, December.
GoInvest (2008), “Respuestas a la encuesta de CEPAL sobre los servicios empresariales extraterritoriales en Guyana”.
International Business Times (2008a), “Acuerdo ItaúUnibanco dispararía fusiones en América Latina”, 4 November. (2008b), “Mexicano Slim invertirá 4000 millones de dólares en telefonía en 2009”, 9 December.
Chapter I looks at the ways in which the difficult international economic environment in 2010-2011 has resulted in emerging and developing regions (the South) increasing their share in world trade and economic variables.
The recent economic recovery has developed a starkly two-speed pattern: while the South recovered rapidly from the crisis and its economies have burgeoned, the industrialized countries (the North) remain mired in difficulties.
The dynamics of trade for the main groupings of products and countries shows that world trade, driven mainly by China and the rest of emerging Asia, has underpinned recovery from the crisis.
The fiscal situation in the European Union, Japan and the United States is heavily compromised, which is sapping the strength from their tentative economic recovery.
Fiscal and public debt challenges threaten to plunge these economies into a lost decade of low growth and high unemployment.
Conversely, the emerging economies have registered steady growth since the crisis, albeit with some signs of a slowdown by mid-2011.
Nevertheless, the international scenario, with its strong contrasts, holds a number of risks and limits political space for achieving substantive agreements on the governance of globalization.
First, a new commodity price boom has been under way since early 2009, despite a partial reversal in mid-2011.
Second, global trade restrictions have increased slightly since late 2010 and could worsen, given the persistence of major risk factors and the blockage in the Doha Round of trade talks.
Third, the number of regional and bilateral trade agreements being concluded in different parts of the world continues to increase rapidly.
Chapter I concludes by briefly describing how the financial crisis hastened two processes which had begun 20 years earlier: the convergence of per capita income between developing and industrialized countries, and the increasing weight of the South in the global economy.
In connection with the second of these processes, evidence is presented on the South’s growing participation in world aggregates for production, consumption, trade and investment.
Chapter II looks at the main trends, especially in the past decade, in trade and investment between Latin America and the Caribbean and its three main partners outside the region: the United States, the European Union and the Asia-Pacific region.
Trade and investment flows are examined overall and by sector and product.
Strategic aspects of the linkages with each partner are reviewed, including trade negotiations and economic cooperation initiatives.
Section B then briefly discusses the main variables of the region’s trade ties with the United States, the European Union and Asia-Pacific.
Sections C, D and E examine in more depth the links with each of these partners.
Chapter III discusses some of the main challenges that the transformations occurring in the global economy pose to economic integration efforts in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Section B summarizes the changes that will have the most impact on the region’s future position in the global economy, and section C briefly reviews the region’s main assets vis-à-vis the challenges it faces.
This section also summarizes the main arguments in favour of strengthening integration in order to improve the region’s international position.
Section E puts forth a number of policy orientations with that in mind.
Early in the year, instability in North Africa combined with other factors to push up fuel prices.
Then, in March, the tragedy of the earthquake, tsunami and nuclear disaster in Japan damaged global production chains.
Although the impacts of these factors eased in the second semester, concern mounted over the threat of default in Greece, Ireland and Portugal and the repercussions of such an event for larger European economies.
In late July, the difficulties in securing congressional approval on the United States public debt ceiling added to the volatility prevailing in financial markets.
The downgrading of the United States’ sovereign debt rating for the first time ever and lacklustre economic growth rates in the euro area and the United States added to the uncertainty.
Following the agreement by the United States Congress on the country’s public debt ceiling and the approval by European authorities and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) of a second support package for Greece, the major stock exchanges have been highly volatile and have seen falls reminiscent of past financial crises.
Economic stagnation in the euro area, including in its largest economies, France and Germany, is another cause of volatility.
International commodity prices are beginning to reflect this uncertainty and volatility and have declined sharply in a short time span, although they remain above their long-term trend, particularly in the case of metals and minerals.
Leading composite indicators show that slower growth in the industrialized countries is starting to act as a drag on the main emerging economies.
Data for mid-2011 suggest that the slowdown in the industrialized countries is affecting China and, particularly, Brazil and India.
If these trends continue, exports to Europe and the United States should be expected to slow in 2012 and export growth will be compromised in economies whose exports depend heavily on those markets.
As growth slows in the emerging economies and the industrialized economies show increasing weakness, international commodity prices are likely to fall, affecting the trade and current account balances of net commodity exporters.
The industrialized economies will experience slack growth for the next few years.
The outlook in these economies is for several years of growth below potential, high unemployment rates and latent financial threats amid considerable instability and jittery financial markets.
The inability of political leaders to find credible and sustainable solutions to fiscal deficits and high sovereign debt adds another element of uncertainty.
The fiscal adjustments needed in Europe and the United States are highly complex and will need a long process of consolidation, which will prove difficult to achieve without broad political support over several administrations.
This scenario limits the political space for agreement on the governance of globalization.
Economic turbulence and high unemployment in the industrialized economies may prompt a resurgence of protectionist forces and reduce the margin for new initiatives for responding to the challenges of globalization.
The Doha Round of trade talks, for example, has failed to achieve even the minimal agreements which could conclude the Round after 10 years of unsuccessful negotiations.
The early announcements by the Group of Twenty (G-20) on reform of the international financial system appear to have disappeared from its agenda.
Successive summits on climate change have not been able to tackle the issues with the required speed.
Furthermore, the increasing weight of emerging economies in the main variables of the global economy seems to have inspired apprehension and defensiveness on the part of the industrialized economies.
The engines of the global economy will depend increasingly on growth in the emerging economies and on South-South trade and investment.
As emerging economies achieve high and stable growth rates and their population growth slows, their per capita income will rise and move towards convergence with the industrialized economies, particularly for the middle class in these countries.
The announcements of the United States Federal Reserve concerning the possibility of a third package of quantitative easing and a near-zero interest rate for the next two years will heighten dollar liquidity in financial markets, amid continuing weakness in the industrialized economies.
This may accentuate the diverging monetary cycles between industrialized and emerging economies, generating additional upward pressure on emerging-economy currencies.
In the absence of an effective mechanism for currency coordination among the main economies, some emerging economies will find it difficult to avoid taking trade measures to defend their markets from competitive advantages arising from inefficiencies in the international monetary system.
Given the great uncertainty augured for 2012, the main recommendation for Latin American and Caribbean economies is macroeconomic prudence.
Financial volatility is affecting economies with deep financial and stock markets in the region and the slowdown in Europe and the United States will limit export growth and depress commodity prices.
Fresh quantitative easing in the United States could worsen currency appreciation in those countries already grappling with large capital inflows.
In these circumstances, Latin American and Caribbean economies should strengthen macroeconomic management, pursue sustainable fiscal and external accounts, reinforce macroprudential measures, and steer their policy decisions by the long-term behaviour of main economic variables.
Prudent macroeconomic management must be complemented with more strenuous efforts to further regional cooperation.
Deeper commitment to integration and regional cooperation, with extra support for intraregional trade, the consolidation of macroeconomic and social achievements made thus far and progress in forming an enlarged regional market, could help to cushion the impacts should international conditions take another turn for the worse.
There is room for more initiatives on trade facilitation and greater cooperation on infrastructure, transport, logistics, custom rules, innovation and technology.
Initiatives of this sort would not only open opportunities for exports by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) with a stronger manufacturing content, but also make the region a more attractive partner for trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) (see section C).
Crisis and convergence on the international front Three years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the global economy has been unable to shake off the legacy of the financial crisis as risk and uncertainty still exact heavy tolls.
In the euro area, the sovereign debt crisis and unwieldy fiscal deficits continue to jeopardize the euro, even after the approval of a second rescue package for the Greek economy.
In the United States, the budget cuts following congressional approval of the increase of the sovereign debt ceiling could tip the economy into another recession.
Private investment remains slack and unemployment high, preventing private consumption from rebounding as strongly as had been expected.
Japan is still working through the fallout from the disaster of March 2011 and its impact on the electric power supply, which is hampering the fragile recovery under way in its economy.
Early in 2011, the projected annual growth rate was 3.5%, but revised data for the first two quarters show that the average annualized rate was under 1%, with 0.4% in the first quarter and 1.0% in the second.
These GDP data revisions also indicated that the 2009 recession was deeper and longer than had initially been estimated.1 In the wake of the agreement to raise the sovereign debt ceiling in the United States, serious concerns have arisen over the weakness of the economy.
The United States has entered a phase of self-imposed fiscal austerity and is in Bureau of Economic Analysis, “Gross domestic product: second quarter 2011 (Advance estimate)”, National Income and Product Accounts, No.
BEA 11-38, July 2011. the process of phasing out the stimulus programmes, while the real economy and private consumption are showing few signs of picking up.
The end of the stimulus programmes could shave 1.5 percentage points off the growth rate for 2012 and it is difficult to see how this gap could be made up, given that the crisis and the predominant views in Congress have drastically reduced the manoeuvring room for fiscal policy.
It appears that economic policy continues to be misdirected towards reducing the fiscal deficit rather than boosting employment and growth.2 Nevertheless, the United States is in a less fragile situation than Europe.
United States Treasury bills continue to be a safe haven in the context of the crisis in industrialized economies, as illustrated by the fact that even the highly unusual downgrading of United States sovereign debt did not prevent a further drop in the medium-term yields of these papers.
Banks in the United States are not as compromised as those in Europe, having improved their solvency indicators and risk exposure.
Businesses in the United States have made large profits and have built up cash reserves by postponing investment decisions.
By contrast, the Greek and Portuguese economies are still mired in recession while accumulating debt at rates which make repayment well nigh impossible.
Many European banks are highly exposed to the economies in crisis, and the slowness of the European institutions in responding to the situation adds further uncertainty.
Moreover, the euro area economies showed flat growth in the second quarter of 2011 and the outlook appears grim.
Neither the perception that Greece is liable to default nor the threat of contagion spreading to larger European economies has dissipated after the second support package for the Greek economy.
Two weeks after the package was approved, Spain’s and Italy’s risk premiums soared close to the levels which had prompted bailouts for Ireland, Greece and Portugal.3 Worse still, the measures’ ineffectiveness is exacerbated by their slowness, inasmuch as they still have to be approved by a number of European parliaments, which is unlikely to happen before October.
It seems unlikely that Europe can overcome the current crisis without strengthening its mechanisms of regional solidarity and cooperation.
The key discussion is whether the way out of the crisis is through more or less integration.
If the current policies remain unchanged, the euro could well enter a P.
Sooner rather than later, the recovery of growth will be contingent on massive debt purchases by the European Central Bank or the issue of European debt to replace national liabilities, together with credible commitments to fiscal consolidation.
The European and United States economies will bear the legacy of hefty public debt left by the crisis for many years to come.
The crisis produced a deterioration in these economies’ fiscal accounts worse than any seen before.
According to projections, even if fiscal policy is gradually tightened, the debt-to-GDP ratio could rise to 126% by 2020.4 Without tougher fiscal measures, this ratio could rise as high as 150% (134% in the case of the United States).
Fiscal and public debt challenges threaten the industrialized economies with the possibility of a “lost decade”.
Given the magnitude of the challenges, the adoption of technically sound measures will need to be underpinned by firm political consensus allowing the adoption of painful decisions which will take several years to implement.
Political leaders are on the horns of a double dilemma: they are caught, first, between mediumterm needs and day-to-day electoral pressures and, second between the overall impacts of their decisions and their effects on the next election.
The amounts needed for fiscal consolidation and public debt reduction are so large as to cast serious doubt over any recovery in growth in the next three years or more.
Given also the fiscal pressures that financing future pensions for an ageing population will exert on the industrialized economies, it is no exaggeration to suggest that the industrialized economies could be entering a lost decade.
After regaining pre-crisis levels of GDP and trade, the main emerging economies began to show signs of a slowdown around mid-2011.
Several of these economies were growing above their potential in 2011, running the risk of overheating.
The recovery in this group of economies began in China then spread to India, Indonesia and the rest of the Asia-Pacific region, and from there to the rest of the emerging economies.
High growth rates in emerging Asia are rooted in stronger domestic demand and a dynamic trade performance.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the monetary and fiscal stimulus measures that supported the post-crisis recovery gave way to an upturn in private consumption and investment, together with an increase in exports.
Export growth has also been boosted by favourable terms of trade, particularly for mineral products.
As a result, for the last few years emerging and developing countries have accounted for around three quarters of global economic growth (see table 1).
Deutsche Bank , “Global economic perspectives: A scenario analysis of public debt by 2020”, July 2011.
The rise of China and the rest of the South is associated with the geographical fragmentation of global production and the spread of global value chains.
Global value chains are a key feature of today’s organization of international trade, in which the exchange of finished goods among nations is gradually losing ground to trade in intermediate goods, along with increased specialization in tasks or phases of production.
The distribution of value added within value chains reveals their inherent governance structure, in which control is often exerted by one or a few firms, both in terms of suppliers (upstream) and sellers (downstream).
Even though value chains have developed mainly in China and the rest of East Asia, they are spreading to other geographical regions.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the increasing importance of trans-Latins reflects this trend.
International trade contributed much to recovery following the economic and financial crisis of 2008 and 2009.
International trade and open markets prevented the crisis from worsening and swiftly transmitted the recovery in final demand.
The significant contribution of international trade to GDP growth is explained in part by several effects that temporarily increased the trade elasticity of output.
Also, the international trading system was able to contain the protectionist outbursts prompted by the worst international crisis in 80 years.
The agreements brokered by G-20 from 2008 onwards also help to ensure this outcome.
South-South trade, led by China and the rest of emerging Asia, is the main engine of world trade growth.
Exports from developing and emerging countries grew 17% by volume in 2010, compared to 13% for the industrialized economies and a global average of 15%.
Within this group, China showed the highest rate of trade recovery, since its exports jumped by 28% in volume terms in an impressive reversal of the 10% drop registered in 2009 and almost doubling the rate of global trade growth for that year.
Imports by developing and emerging countries grew 18% by volume in 2010, compared to 11% for the industrialized economies.
As a result, the developing and emerging economies had regained pre-crisis import and export values by late 2010.
These groups of countries accounted for almost 60% of the growth in global export values between 2005 and 2008 and in 2010, and represented a smaller share of the drop in world trade in 2009.
The industrialized countries are thus benefiting from dynamic external demand from developing and emerging economies while their own domestic demand remains weak.
The value of goods exports from the Latin American and Caribbean region is projected to rise 27% in 2011.
Prices will contribute most —18 percentage points— of this rise, whereas volumes will contribute 9 percentage points (see table 2 and figure 1).
The 2011 projection is based on an assumption of second-semester growth in external demand for the region’s products similar to that seen in the first semester, and on stable commodity prices for the remainder of the year.
The value of imports by Latin America and the Caribbean is projected to rise 22% overall, but more sharply in the case of fuels (46%).
Slower growth in imports than in exports may result in a regional trade surplus of around US$ 80 billion at year-end, in particular with the United States and, to a lesser extent, with the European Union.
The region overall will widen its trade deficit with China and the rest of Asia, but with a differentiated subregional pattern since South America will register a surplus and the rest of the region, a deficit.
Commodity prices have been booming since early 2009, benefiting net commodity exporters.
These prices began to rise more sharply in the second half of 2010 and came to exceed pre-crises levels for many products.
By contrast, prices for manufactured goods have increased only slightly in the past few years.
The commodity price boom is driven chiefly by demand factors, both real demand from emerging economies and speculation in a context of low financial returns in industrialized economies.
In the case of agricultural products, higher prices in 2010 were also attributable to poor climate conditions in producer countries.
The commodity price boom was interrupted in mid-2011, as uncertainty mounted amid the sovereign debt problems of Europe and the United States and the stagnation of their economies.
Sharp volatility on main stock exchanges and the dollar’s loss in value against gold, the Swiss franc and the yen also contributed to the commodity price drop.
It is too soon to draw firm conclusions about the trajectory of commodity prices, but their volatility is evident.
The effect of higher commodity prices is highly positive for most South American countries but negative for most countries in Central America and the Caribbean.
The largest benefits accrue to South America, particularly Paraguay and Uruguay in the case of food and beverages, Chile, Peru and Plurinational State of Bolivia in the case of metals and minerals; and Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador and, here again, Plurinational State of Bolivia in the case of energy products.
In contrast, higher commodity prices hurt terms of trade for most Central American and Caribbean countries.
The Caribbean countries are even more vulnerable than those of Central America, because they run a trade deficit in food and beverages, metals and minerals, and energy products, whereas the trade deficit of the Central American countries is concentrated in this last category (see figure 2).
Disequilibria between the current accounts of the major economies and those of their trading partners are growing again, largely as a result of real-exchange-rate trends.
In the United States, the dollar has been depreciating more or less steadily since late 2001.
China’s real effective exchange rate has been appreciating since 2006, but not quickly enough to rebalance its current account.
After almost 10 years of negotiations, the Doha Round of the World Trade Organization (WTO) has reached a critical point.
For most of this time the greatest disagreements have concerned agriculture, but recently differences have centred on the liberalization of trade in manufactures in the main emerging economies (particularly Brazil, China and India).
It will be difficult to complete the Round in 2012, as several large member countries (including France, India and the United States) are due to hold elections that year.
Growth rates can diverge only so far between emerging and industrialized countries.
Until now, emerging countries have withstood the impacts of the 2008-2009 crisis better then the industrialized countries, recovered more swiftly and maintained higher growth rates —bearing out to some extent the theory of decoupling between the two groups of economies.
However, the stock market turmoil during the first half of August 2011 has already hurt commodity prices and if the economic slowdown persists in Europe and the United States, exports to these economies will inevitably suffer.
In other words, even a slackening in economic growth in the industrialized countries will cloud the growth outlook of emerging markets.
An even more pessimistic scenario in the rich economies would have larger consequences, in all likelihood forcing governments to implement new stimulus programmes to safeguard employment and economic growth as in 2009.
This, of course, would depend on these countries having the policy space for such measures.
For all these reasons, macroeconomic prudence and a close watching brief on the international economic situation head the economic policy agenda of emerging economies.
The consequences of the subprime mortgage crisis —the largest and deepest since the Great Depression— are still being felt four years after it broke out, yet the drive for reforms has dissipated.
The declarations made by G-20 leaders at their Washington Summit on Financial Markets and the World Economy, held in Washington D.C. on 14-15 November 2008, called for major reforms to the international financial system and regulatory practices.
As stimulus packages and the containment of protectionist measures diminished the likelihood of a global depression, however, the appetite for reforms and international cooperation also waned.
Recent meetings of G-20 have been dominated by national interests, not a collective effort to reform the system and policies that allowed the crisis to happen.
More global cooperation is needed to avoid a new international economic crisis.
In the economic sphere, agreements must be reached in the short term on the regulations governing sovereign debt, on the functioning of sovereign debt rating agencies, on measures to resolve the European crisis, and on mechanisms that could dampen the volatility of commodity prices.
Key issues for the medium term include financial early warning mechanisms, the need to resolve excessive current account disequilibria to avoid emerging economies having to bear the brunt of adjustment through currency appreciations disconnected from productivity gains and, lastly, regulations requiring banks to hold provisions proportional to the risk of their operations.
Emerging markets need to have a stronger voice within global cooperation efforts.
All the matters discussed here impinge increasingly upon the growth prospects of emerging economies although they refer to forces that have taken shape basically in the industrialized world.
It is therefore only logical that the emerging economies, which underpin most of global economic growth today, should have something to say about the origins and trajectories of these disequilibria and their effect on the globalization process.
A fresh round of quantitative easing in the United States and the repurchase by the European Central Bank of European countries’ bonds would give rise to abundant international liquidity, which could worsen the current difficulties for emerging economies.
To avoid these potential growth constraints, emerging economies should improve their coordination within G-20, with well thought-out diagnosis and proposals.
The three Latin American members of G-20 should also seek closer coordination with the rest of Latin America and the Caribbean, inasmuch as their voice in G-20 would undoubtedly be strengthened if they represented concerted regional views on the aforementioned international issues.
The recent global financial and economic crisis and the different growth paths followed by emerging and industrialized economies thereafter has accelerated convergence in per capita income both the two groupings.
Steady expansion in emerging economies, led by China, compared with flat growth in industrialized countries, has brought forward productive, technological and industrial convergence between the two.
Thus, in mid-crisis, emerging economies improved their position in the world economy.
Increasing trade links between developing countries helped these economies to decouple to some extent from the adverse cycle in which the most developed OCED economies were caught up.
The Latin American and Caribbean region managed to reduce its per capita income gap relative to the industrialized countries during the boom in world growth between 2003 and 2008 and in the two years post-crisis.
In contrast to the two previous decades, from 2004 to 2010 the region’s income gap with respect to the advanced economies narrowed.
Stagnation in the advanced economies in 2010 and 2011 and rapid, steady growth in most emerging economies have hastened the reduction of global per capita income gaps.
Since the recent crisis, the emerging countries have gained a larger share in the main variables of the world economy.
Projections indicate that by 2016, emerging economies will account for three quarters of total growth in world GDP.
China is the single largest driver of growth both among the emerging countries and globally.
Regarding the participation of the South in world consumption, the Asia-Pacific region is likely to represent two thirds of the world’s middle class by 2030.
China’s middle class is already the world’s second largest in absolute terms, after the United States.
Rapid expansion of the middle class in China and India could compensate for some of the stagnation expected in middle class growth in the United States and Europe.
Trade has grown much faster for the emerging economies than the industrialized countries in the past few decades.
South-South trade has been particularly dynamic: having accounted for only 6% of world trade in 1985, growth in this trade gathered pace during the past decade, taking its share in world trade from 14% to 24%.
During that time, South-North trade expanded from 12% to 21% and the share of North-North trade dropped significantly (see figure 3).
The crisis reduced exports from the South in 2009 but does not seem to have affected long-term trends.
If South-South trade continues to increase more rapidly than other trade combinations, its share in global trade will exceed that of North-North trade by about 2018.
The rapid growth in South-South trade mostly reflects increased trade between Asian developing countries, with China as the centerpiece.
Almost 85% of South-South trade is among Asian emerging economies or between these and other regions in the South.
The South has gained more ground as a recipient of global FDI than it has as an originator of this type of investment.
Between 1970 and 2007, the South’s share in global FDI inflows rose from a fourth to a third.
The financial crisis may have further increased the weight of emerging countries in FDI inflows by some way: in 2010 the South represented over half of world FDI inflows for the first time.
Developing and transition countries are gaining share of global outflows of FDI, as well, of which they represented 22% in 2010.
The economies of the United States, Japan and the European Union are stagnant and are facing severe fiscal difficulties and have virtually depleted their monetary policy space.
The emerging countries could find their good prospects tarnished if the industrialized countries fail to resolve these difficulties.
Economies which have a major trade link with the United States —including Mexico and the Central American and Caribbean countries— could find their exports to that market slackening if growth there continues to slow during the second semester of 2011 and into 2012.
Industries with significant exports to the European Union may also be affected unless they redirect trade towards more dynamic markets.
The world economy still faces major risks that could lead to an increase in protectionist measures.
These risks include the persistence of global disequilibria between countries running deficits and those running surpluses; high levels of unemployment in the industrialized economies; the deep-reaching fiscal consolidation process under way in Europe, particularly in Greece, Ireland, Portugal and Spain; and food price volatility.
The large capital flows entering emerging economies may fuel pressures to increase protection, as the local currency appreciation they induce benefits imports relative to locally produced goods and services.
Relations between the Latin American and Caribbean region and its main non-regional trading partners Asia has become a much more important trading partner for Latin America and the Caribbean over the past decade, while the United States has lost share in the region’s trade and the portion going to the European Union has stood still.
The United States is still the region’s largest trading partner, but its share has declined significantly.
Exports to the region’s second largest trading partner, the European Union, rose slightly during the past decade, while imports from the bloc remained constant (see table 3).
The surge in trade between the Latin American and Caribbean region and Asia-Pacific largely reflects the dynamic trade relationship with China.
In the first half of the last decade, China displaced Japan as the region’s largest trade partner in Asia-Pacific.
Trade with China exceeded US$ 100 billion for the first time in 2007 and reached US$ 187 billion in 2010, and accounts for half the region’s total trade with the Asia-Pacific region.
China’s significance as a destination market varies from one country to another within Latin America and the Caribbean, however.
India, despite its rapid growth in the past two decades, represents only 6.4% of the region’s total exports and 3.4% of imports to Asia-Pacific, ranking below the Republic of Korea as a trading partner for Latin America and the Caribbean.
Asia-Pacific is a more significant trading partner for imports into the region than for its exports, which has led to a growing trade deficit for the region, particularly for Mexico and Central America.
In 2005-2010, the Latin American and Caribbean region was the fastest-growing trading partner for China and the second fastest for Japan.
China’s exports to and imports from Latin America and the Caribbean expanded nearly twice as fast as its total exports and imports in that period.
As a result, the region’s share in China’s trade gradually rose from a very low base to nearly 6% in 2010 for both exports and imports.
During the same period, Japan’s exports to Latin America and the Caribbean outgrew those to any other destination market and its imports from the region were surpassed only by those from the Community of Independent States (CIS).
During the past two decades, the United States’ trade with the region has increased more rapidly than with its other partners, with the notable exception of China.
In 2010, Latin America and the Caribbean became the largest buyer of United States goods exports, accounting for 23% of the total.
That year, 19% of total United States goods imports were sourced from the region, which positioned it similarly to China in the United States import ranking.
Bilateral trade between Latin America and the Caribbean and the United States is concentrated in few countries, with Mexico representing more than two thirds of the region’s exports to and half of its imports from that market.
The Andean countries are the region’s second largest supplier of exports to the United States market and, together with the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR), represent a quarter of the value exported to that country from the region in 2010.
In the case of imports into the region, the order is reversed: MERCOSUR is the second largest importer from the United States, followed by the Andean countries.
Contrasting with the region’s importance as a trading partner for the United States, China, and Japan, it represents only a fraction of the European Union’s international trade.
The share of the Latin American and Caribbean region in the total trade of the European Union has hovered at around 3% for the past three decades.
Although the European Union remains the region’s second largest trading partner, it could lose this position to China towards 2015.
Latin American and Caribbean trade with the European Union is concentrated in a few countries, with MERCOSUR representing almost half of the total.
The five MERCOSUR countries and Mexico together represent 61% of the region’s total exports to the European Union and 69% of its total imports from that bloc.
The Latin American and Caribbean region’s intraregional exports and those to the United States show a larger proportion of manufactures not based on natural resources than those to Asia-Pacific and the European Union.
Notably, however, exports to the United States in this category chiefly reflect the large proportion of Mexico’s manufacturing exports in the region’s total exports to the United States.
At the other extreme, primary products and natural-resource-based manufactures account for almost 90% of the region’s exports to Asia-Pacific (see figure 4).
Although during the past decade the Latin American and Caribbean region has considerably increased the range of products it exports to all destination markets, no market outside the region comes close to matching the intraregional market in terms of the number of exported products.
By 2010, the intraregional market was receiving the largest range of export products, followed by the United States, the European Union and —at a considerable distance— the Asian markets.
On average, in 2008 and 2009, the number of products exported within the region itself exceeded those exported to China by a factor of 10, and those exported to the rest of Asia by a factor of 4.
This confirms the growing importance of the intraregional market as a destination for manufacturing exports and as a vehicle for the development of regional value chains.
The current priorities of United States trade policy do not include a strategic vision for Latin America and the Caribbean.
The region is barely mentioned in the trade policy agenda the President of the United States presented to Congress in March 2011, and then only in reference to the administration of existing agreements, the President’s intention to seek congressional approval for the agreements negotiated with Colombia and Panama, and his interest in expanding and diversifying economic relations with Brazil.
There have been no significant developments in terms of trade talks between the United States and Latin America and the Caribbean since 2007.
The sole exception came in 2010 with negotiations to broaden the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership (also known as the TransPacific Partnership, or TPP).
Chile and Peru participate in this initiative, but its main focus is clearly the Asia-Pacific region.
This is in contrast to the dynamic negotiating activity between many Latin American and Caribbean countries and European and Asian partners.
In this context, ECLAC has proposed a new hemispheric alliance between the United States and Latin American and Caribbean region to tackle common challenges and seek closer integration with the global economy.
Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union have sought to inject renewed vigour into their relations in recent years.
In a context of low growth and great uncertainly in the European Union, the region has become an increasingly attractive market for European exporters and investors.
Accordingly, the European Union concluded negotiations in 2010 for an association agreement with Central American countries (including Panama) and a trade agreement with Colombia and Peru.
Also in 2010, negotiations were resumed on an association agreement between the European Union and MERCOSUR.
Including the agreements already in place with Chile, Mexico and the Caribbean Forum of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (CARIFORUM), by 2012 or 2013 the European Union could have preferential agreements with 30 countries in the region.
This points to the need to promote cumulation of origin between all these agreements, along the lines of the European Union’s practice regarding its agreements with the Mediterranean countries.
This would boost the integration of production and the development of regional and interregional value chains.
In addition to free trade, the association agreements negotiated between the European Union and the region include the pillars of cooperation and of political dialogue.
As such, these agreements are fundamental for promoting a virtuous relationship between political consensus-building, economic and trade development, and social cohesion, and they represent a more comprehensive view of development than agreements confined solely to trade.
Another important difference between the agreements the region has negotiated with the European Union and those negotiated with other partners is that the first include as explicit goals negotiations between regions and the achievement of substantial advances in integration in all the Latin American and Caribbean subregional groupings.
In the first decade of the 2000s, the share of the region —including financial centres— in FDI flows from the European Union exceeded that of Asia, as the European Union became the main source of FDI in the region.
In the wake of the many economic reforms implemented since the 1990s, FDI flows into the region expanded strongly, especially from firms in European countries, which took advantage of privatization in banking, telecommunications and other services.
FDI from the United States also increased, but at a slower pace.
This produced a shift in the composition by origin of cumulative flows and the European Union became the largest source of FDI in the last decade, with 43% of total flows.
Great potential exists for cooperation between the region and the European Union in such areas as green technology and corporate social responsibility.
The European Union is a global leader in environmental protection, in efforts to combat climate change and in corporate social responsibility, all of which contribute to broader and more inclusive development.
The European Union contributed between 30% and 38% of all patents issued globally between 2004 and 2006 in environmental technology categories.
European Union institutions have been promoting systematic inclusion of the concept of corporate social responsibility in corporate strategies for over a decade.
From this perspective, strengthening corporate ties between the region and Europe should advance the goals of achieving growth with greater equality and developing a less carbon-intensive competitive advantage, which should steer public policies in Latin America and the Caribbean in the next few years.
In the past few years integration in Asia-Pacific has evolved from a de facto situation towards a more formal structure.
The Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has positioned itself at the heart of this de jure integration process through various trade liberalization initiatives with other Asian countries.
As a result of the many trade agreements existing in the AsiaPacific region, nearly half of all intra-Asian trade is now covered by some form of preferential tariff treatment.
At the same time and for many reasons (particularly efforts to secure better market access), Australia, China, Japan, India, Republic of Korea and Singapore, among others in the Asia-Pacific region, have signed free trade agreements and established strategic partnerships with Latin America.
The ongoing removal of barriers to trade among Asian countries could divert trade at the expense of Latin America and the Caribbean.
China, India, Japan and the Republic of Korea, among other Asian economies, maintain high tariffs on key sectors for Latin American and Caribbean exporters, including agriculture, textiles, clothing, and some machinery sectors.
The lowering or elimination of these tariffs in the context of treaties between ASEAN members and the four counties mentioned above, as well a new agreement in the form of ASEAN+3, therefore favours ASEAN countries at the expense of Latin America and the Caribbean.
The resulting trade diversion could be significant unless the region actively pursues policies to secure bilateral or subregional trade agreements that would even out market access conditions in the main Asian markets.
The most active countries in the region in this regard have been Chile and Peru, the two for which the Asia-Pacific region represents the greatest share of total exports.
Costa Rica has recently followed suit and has signed free trade agreements with China and Singapore.
These initiatives reflect efforts by the Latin American countries to structure their relations with Asia-Pacific over a longer horizon, but do not yet amount to any sort of shared strategic framework.
In the case of China, an issue that must be carefully addressed is the sensitivities triggered by its industrial exports.
Concerns in this regard have emerged in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, as a result of loss of market share within the region and the threat of displacement in third markets.
Here, a coordinated, medium-term approach may be needed between Chinese and Latin American producers with a view to find building on complementarities and cooperation opportunities.
Otherwise trade conflicts are likely to grow and prompt new accusations of dumping behaviour and fresh non-tariff barriers.
Although processed mineral products still represent 80% of its total imports from Latin America and the Caribbean, Asia is starting to import new products from the region.
Though some of these products belong to the category of primary products, they are not commodities inasmuch as they can, to an extent, be differentiated by quality.
As long as household incomes continue to rise in Asia, and its consumption patterns gradually approach those of the West, Asian demand for these products could expand significantly in the near future, presenting growing opportunities for Latin America and the Caribbean.
In addition, the competition that the region faces in the Asia-Pacific markets, including the competition from Asian economies themselves, could open opportunities for interesting commercial, productive, and technological alliances.
These could include joint investment and strategic alliances in commercial and technological areas that would enable better response to Asian and Chinese demand, with benefits for both regions.
Given that Asia-Pacific is the most dynamic region of the world economy, the Latin American and Caribbean countries must redouble their efforts to forge a new trans-Pacific relationship.
China, specifically, is emerging from the global crisis with a strengthened productive, technological and financial base, and with tighter ties to the Asia-Pacific economies.
Recent estimates suggest that by 2016 China’s GDP, measured in terms of purchasing power parity, will surpass that of the United States, making China the world’s largest economy.
Accordingly, and given ongoing uncertainty over the economic future of Europe and the United States, Latin America and the Caribbean should strive to identify and seize the opportunities offered by greater integration with the Asia-Pacific countries.
These efforts will be more fruitful if the region adopts a coordinated approach, such that trade and investment initiatives may benefit from existing synergies, economies of scale and combined political will, thereby opening the door to more ambitious goals.
Economic and trade conditions are highly favourable for pursuing a new relationship between the two regions.
The good outlook for growth in both regions represents a unique opportunity to cement the foundation of a new phase in their trade and investment relations.
Securing a better position in the global economy: challenges for the region The profound transformations taking place in the world economy present the region with the challenge of rethinking its international position and its global alliances.
The weak recovery and great uncertainty prevailing in the United States and Europe, which will probably persist for some years, are contributing to the growing share of the developing economies in the different economic variables.
At the same time, production, trade and investment are increasingly structured around regional and global value chains.
Faced with these changes, the Latin American and Caribbean region has sought closer links with other emerging regions, particularly Asia.
In the coming decades, the quality of the region’s international economic position will be strongly determined by its links with other developing economies.
The main channel for these linkages today is trade between the region and other developing countries (South-South trade).
Another, increasingly important channel is investment, both the attraction of FDI and other capital from Asia and investments made by companies from the region —in particular the large internationalized corporations known as “Trans-Latins”— in Asia and other developing regions.
Moreover, ample space exists to develop alliances between firms from the region and those in other emerging regions through a variety of production modalities (including franchising, licensing, manufacturing contracts and services subcontracting) which are playing growing roles in the context of global value chains.
The Latin American and Caribbean region has important assets for conquering a higher-quality role in the international economy.
First, the region has absorbed important macroeconomic policy lessons, the benefits of which were made clear by the recent global financial crisis.
The region’s production, employment and social indicators were not left unscathed by the impacts of the crisis but they held up better than during previous episodes of smaller magnitude.
Second, improvements in the region’s social indicators and the expansion of its middle class in recent years have upped the strategic value of the Latin American and Caribbean market.
This larger consumer market makes the region more attractive as a trade and investment partner.
Latin America and the Caribbean is a major agricultural producer, particularly in soybean (accounting for almost half of the world’s production), beef (of which it produces almost a third) and dairy (almost a quarter).
A similar situation prevails in the mining sector: Latin America and the Caribbean generates over 45% of the world’s copper production and over 20% of molybdenum, zinc and tin.
Latin America and the Caribbean also boasts the largest fresh water reserves —a third of the world’s total.
Lastly, a third of the world’s potential crop land lies in the region.
These factors are all strategic advantages, since the world’s population is projected to grow to 9 billion by 2050, with the resulting nutritional needs.
Despite its assets, the region has been unable to significantly increase its share in world exports of goods and services in the past three decades.
Between 1980 and 2010, the share of Latin America and the Caribbean in world merchandise exports rose only marginally, from 5.1% to 5.7%.
To a large extent, this flat growth was determined by the slackening of Mexico’s exports, while the rest of the region increased its share.
Over the same period, the region’s share in world services exports fell from 4.5% to 3.4% (see figure 5), with an especially weak performance in the “Other commercial services” category —the fastest-growing at the global level in the past decade and the most closely linked to knowledgeintensive activities.
In short, against a backdrop of a growing participation by developing economies in world exports, the region’s performance has resembled more of a stagnation.
Although there are important differences between the export orientations of each subregion, they share the problems of insufficient value added and inadequate incorporation of knowledge and technology.
The South American countries have become increasingly specialized in the export of natural resources, in both primary and processed forms.
This pattern has been reinforced by strong demand from Asia, particularly China.
The Central American countries and Mexico have specialized in manufacturing industries intensive in assembly activities, and the Caribbean countries in certain services niches.
The common denominator among these three patterns is specialization based on static comparative advantages such as abundant unskilled labour and natural resources, and the lack of value added and knowledge embodied in both final products and productive processes.
The emergence of global value chains and the growing importance of innovation in world production and trade make it imperative for the region to take new steps in terms of its international participation.
The market opening and trade liberalization processes that have taken place since the 1980s have provided a necessary yet insufficient condition for sustained economic growth through trade expansion.
On the one hand, a strategic vision must articulate policies dealing with export promotion and diversification, innovation and technology dissemination, attraction of FDI and skills development.
On the other, public-private alliances must be promoted to support both the setting of objectives on a mutually agreed basis and concerted work to accomplish them.
This would enable the region to emulate —with the necessary adaptations to different national situations— the experiences of several countries in Europe, Asia and Oceania that have positioned themselves successfully in the world economy.
In the new international setting, the region must take advantage of its growing links with other developing regions and enhance its competitiveness by strengthening regional integration.
Here, the concept of open regionalism put forward by ECLAC almost two decades ago is still relevant.6 Open regionalism is aimed at developing regional strengths to better meet global challenges.
It complements integration into the main world markets with the stimulus provided by intraregional trade and, in so doing, it favours intra-industry trade, export diversification and a stronger presence of SMEs in export flows.
The larger scale provided by an integrated regional market would not only boost intraregional trade but would also help to attract FDI and pave the way for the creation and expansion of more trans-Latin firms.
Moreover, the regional framework would provide enabling conditions for still incipient regional production chains and would help to spread and leverage innovation processes.
Equity in the region would also benefit from greater internationalization of SMEs and the creation of employment in activities that embed more value added and knowledge than those that produce most of the region’s exports to extrarregional markets today.
To these traditional arguments in favour of integration is added the fact that in today’s globalized economy competitiveness increasingly incorporates regional elements.
Regional or subregional coordination is essential to achieve objectives such as an adequate transport, energy and telecommunications infrastructure, since coordinated action among governments yields better results than isolated national efforts.
These objectives are crucial to boosting the countries’ international competitiveness, particularly given the needs in terms of infrastructure, logistics, customs facilities, and so forth stemming from trade with “mega markets” such as the United States, the European Union and (increasingly) Asia.
Compared to other regions, intraregional trade in Latin America continues to be limited in relation to its total exports, and is intensive in final goods.
Over the past two decades, intraregional exports have never exceeded 20% of the total exports by Latin America and the Caribbean, a much lower figure than the 46% for East Asia and the Pacific.
Intraregional trade in Latin America and the Caribbean has a strong manufacturing component, but continues to be dominated by finished goods.
By contrast, the steep rise in Asia’s intraregional trade has been closely linked to the growing geographical fragmentation of production in value chains, and has therefore been characterized by strong growth in trade in parts and components in the sectors of machinery, transport equipment and electronics.
United Nations publication, Sales The small proportion of intraregional trade in total Latin American and Caribbean exports is partly a result of the natural-resource-oriented export pattern of many of its economies, but it also has to do with the lack of an integrated economic space.
In particular, nontariff barriers persist which, often being opaque and rather discretionally applied, can dampen trade even more than tariffs.
The development of value chains in the region is limited not only by remaining obstacles to trade in goods and limitations on cumulation of origin, but also by the uneven treatment of regulatory issues, such investment, services, competition policy and technical standards.
The experiences of East Asia and Central and Eastern Europe seem to bear out the idea that value chains require a certain minimum level of regulatory harmonization among participating countries in order to function.
Taking better advantage of the considerable potential offered by the regional market will require action on at least six fronts.
First, there is room for greater convergence among the different components of the region’s economic integration architecture.
Given the size of the economies concerned, the main missing link to complete the network of preferential trade relationships within the region is between Mexico and MERCOSUR.
Within this context, the negotiations on a strategic integration agreement between Brazil and Mexico which were announced in late 2010 could infuse momentum into the entire Latin American economic integration process.
Nevertheless, at the time of writing the negotiations had yet to start.
Other initiatives are also under way to advance convergence between countries and integration schemes.
Progress is being made, for example, in talks between Mexico and the Central American countries on merging the existing three free trade agreements between them into a single accord.
Another noteworthy development is the creation, in April 2011, of the Pacific Alliance, which is intended to establish a deep integration area between Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.
South American countries should re-engage with the economic and trade convergence agenda, as is already happening in Mesoamerica.
A very useful first step would be to allow cumulation of origin among the countries of the region.
With the exception of the three economic complementarity agreements between MERCOSUR and the Andean countries, most agreements negotiated in the framework of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) do not include cumulation of origin.
This reduces the potential for developing regional and subregional value chains and hence for achieving greater productive integration.
A second step would be to preserve as much as possible of the tariff and other commitments between the members of the Andean Community and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, with whom Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia have already concluded bilateral agreements to that effect.
Second, the region needs to invest heavily in trade facilitation, as it lags behind the world leaders in terms of the costs associated with foreign trade.
This is partly a result of the region’s large infrastructure deficit, which will take large investments over several years to close (see the next point).
Nevertheless, significant efficiency gains can be reaped over shorter time frames and at a lower cost by rationalizing customs and other procedures that affect merchandise trade at national borders.
Although such reforms are primarily the domain of individual governments, coordination of national efforts at the regional or subregional level can create useful synergies, as evidenced by subregional cooperation experiences in trade facilitation in Central America.
Third, it is necessary to enhance regional and subregional cooperation to reduce the infrastructure gap in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Infrastructure in the region falls short of the average for South-East Asia in all of the countries, and short of the broader world average in most of them, which stymies efforts to improve their integration into the world economy.
This lag is exemplified by the region’s ports, most of which underperform in relation to more efficient ports in Asia (see figure 6).
ECLAC has estimated that the region would need to devote an annual investment of around 5.2% of GDP to infrastructure between 2006 and 2020 simply to meet the needs arising from its projected economic growth.7 Regional and subregional cooperation can create synergies between national efforts in this area.
Cross-border development conduits, including bi-oceanic corridors, help to reduce the transport time and costs associated with foreign trade, both within and outside the region.
They also contribute to more harmonious territorial development between countries and between regions within countries.
The region could gain greater benefits from Aid for Trade to overcome its shortcomings in physical infrastructure and trade facilitation.
The Latin American and Caribbean region receives a relatively small share (9% in 2009) of total Aid-for-Trade flows.
This is partly because most of the countries in the region are classified in ECLAC, “The economic infrastructure gap in Latin America and the Caribbean”, FAL Bulletin, No. 293, Santiago, Chile, 2011. the middle-income category.
Nevertheless, Latin America and the Caribbean could still secure a larger share of such flows if the countries were to define priorities and identify and present relevant projects that could unlock fresh resources.
In this context, priority should be given to attracting grants for projects such as IIRSA and the Mesoamerica Project, which involve several countries and have a clear trade facilitation component.
Fourth, social factors —and their complementarity with the economic and trade agenda— must be afforded greater prominence in regional cooperation efforts.
Great inequality both within and between countries is unfortunately a hallmark of Latin American and Caribbean.
This is manifested in large disparities in indicators such as per capita GDP and social spending (see table 4).
The integration modalities promoted must therefore contribute to reducing these stark asymmetries of development, as a necessary condition for the sustainability and legitimacy of the broader integration process.
All integration schemes should adopt systems of asymmetric benefits in favour of relatively less developed economies.
This principle has long been expounded in the proposals of ECLAC regarding open regionalism.
In particular, structural funds aimed primarily at those economies must be strengthened, building on the positive experience of the Structural Convergence Fund (FOCEM) of MERCOSUR and similar initiatives in other subregional schemes.
It is also important to make the markets of the larger integration partners more open to exports from the relatively less developed members and to redouble efforts to integrate firms from these countries into subregional value chains.
The Latin American and Caribbean region lags significantly in the area of international competitiveness, as shown consistently in international indices.
For example, only two countries in the region (Chile and Barbados) rank among the top 50 in the Global Competitive Index (GCI), which is compiled annually by the World Economic Forum.
The Global Innovation Index (GII) 2011, which is prepared by the French business school INSEAD together with other institutions, including the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), captures data on 125 countries to reflect a broad view of innovation.
Of the 20 Latin American countries included in GII, only Chile, Costa Rica and Brazil rank in the top 50 (at positions 30, 45 and 47, respectively).
Given the limited individual capacity of many countries in the region to substantially boost their investment in research and development (R&D), it is imperative to pool national efforts and adopt a concerted approach.
This could be accomplished, for example, by integrating national technological centres into multinational research efforts on common topics, thereby creating synergies and a regional critical mass of human and financial resources.
At the national level, this approach also requires: (i) greater coordination among the different public agencies working on competitiveness issues; and (ii) the formation of public-private partnerships to share information and define objectives of common interest.
These general guidelines can lead to concrete actions such as the creation of a regional cooperation fund for innovation, which would finance programmes or actions defined jointly by the countries in the region.
Sixth, the link with Asia-Pacific could be tapped to deepen regional integration.
During 2011, the Chinese authorities have repeatedly expressed a willingness to cooperate in promoting the diversification of Latin American and Caribbean exports to that country.
Another key challenge for regional integration is the facilitation of investments from China and the rest of Asia through a single regional window.
Such investments, especially if they were made in infrastructure, energy, transport and logistics, would not only help to strengthen trade links with Asia-Pacific, but would also create positive externalities for the region’s internal integration process.
The region should, in the near term, prepare a document setting forth lines of action for forming closer strategic ties with China.
China took the first step in this direction in November 2008, when it issued a policy paper on Latin America and the Caribbean.
The coordination needed to prepare a response to China’s document could pave the way for the holding of a first Summit of Heads of State of China and Latin America and the Caribbean in the coming years.
A meeting of this sort would provide the opportunity to agree upon a shared agenda of trade and investment projects.
The recently created Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) could build this issue into its agenda of work.
While the emerging areas (the South) recovered rapidly from the crisis and are already recording high growth rates, the industrialized countries (the North) are experiencing serious difficulties.
In fact, it is some time since the major emerging economies regained their pre-crisis GDP and trade levels; several of them have been growing above potential in 2011 and even running the risk of overheating.
The industrialized economies, on the other hand, in addition to their struggle to regain their pre-crisis levels, are facing unprecedented challenges in terms of fiscal consolidation and sovereign debt sustainability.
In the absence of any precise or effective signals of how these challenges will be tackled, the world economy will continue to be plagued by high levels of volatility and uncertainty.
Three years after the collapse of Lehman Brothers, the world economy has been unable to shake off the legacy of the financial crisis and risk and uncertainty are still exacting heavy tolls.
Sovereign debt crises and huge fiscal deficits continue to plague the euro, even after the second bailout package for the Greek economy.
Fiscal consolidation and the limit on the public debt in the United States are keeping the world economy on tenterhooks and on the verge of a possible recessionary shock, lest Congress fail to arrive soon at a consensus as to how to cope with this challenge.
Notwithstanding the huge monetary and fiscal support programmes for reviving the United States economy, the trend at the moment bears no resemblance to the typical pattern of post-war recovery.
Per capita income in many emerging countries is growing at a fast pace and tending to converge more rapidly with that of the industrialized countries.
A structural change is taking place in the geography of world growth with the first group of countries being the Asia-Pacific economies, led by China.
However, indications are that these gaps will shrink fairly rapidly, at rates that were unimaginable a few years ago.
The movements in the different global economic variables underlying this fundamental trend deserve some attention and not only in terms of average magnitudes.
Indeed, the South still has only a minority share in world GDP and world trade, although for some years now it has been contributing more than the industrialized countries to the growth of both variables.
The faster growth of the emerging countries reduces the North-South divide in world production and consumption.
The South still has a minority share in trade in goods and services, but its role in those aggregates is growing rapidly.
For example, it accounts for a majority share of production and consumption of various commodities (including aluminium, copper, grains, oil and soybean).
Within the group of emerging economies, China stands out in terms of its high growth and demand for commodities, its expansionary policy in the monetary and foreign-exchange spheres and its investments worldwide.
Commodity prices and exports worldwide are increasingly influenced by China, which favours commodity-exporting countries.
China is, moreover, an increasingly influential stakeholder in the global business world with investments in Europe, Asia, Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean, and has been the main underwriter for the debt of the United States and other advanced countries.
It is now the second leading economy in the world, the largest exporter and the second-largest world importer of goods.
For several Latin American, Asian and African countries, the most or second-most important destination for their exports or source of their imports is China.
Similarly, companies in the South are beginning to invest in various continents, with special emphasis on South-South investments.
China is gaining ascendancy in the world economy, trade and global finance, to the extent that it continued to perform robustly even at the height of the international crisis, thanks to a vigorous recovery programme underpinned by expansion of the domestic market.
Globally, China accounted for over 30% of cotton and rice production (in 2008-2009) and more than 20% of maize production.
It also accounted for more than 20% of soybean flour and oil production.
In terms of world imports, China bought 53% of soybean exports, 28% of soybean meal and 23% of soybean oil.
The emergence of China and the rest of the South is closely linked to the geographic fragmentation of world production and the spread of global value chains (GVC).
Value chains are a key feature of the way international trade is currently organized.
Exports of finished goods account for a smaller share in global trade, with trade in inputs and intermediate goods on the rise and increased specialization in specific phases of production.
In this regard, the GVCs focus attention on the globalization process of companies in the region with emphasis on the quality of international partnerships that could be forged in production, foreign trade, innovation and exchange of technology.
The value chain phenomenon is particularly widespread in China and the rest of East Asia, but it has gradually been gaining ground worldwide.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, the growing importance of trans-Latins is a clear expression of this trend.
In the future, the South and, in particular, the middle class in these countries will be the principal locus and engine of growth in the coming decades.
Asia-Pacific, in particular, is expected to account for two thirds of the global middle class in 2030.
The middle class in China is already the second-largest in the world, after that of the United States (Kharas, 2010).
The increase in per capita income forecast for the coming decades will contribute to an increase in purchasing power in these countries, particularly for the middle class.
For example, growth in per capita income in China, India and Asia-Pacific —and the diversification of consumption concomitant with this process —will make these economies the major market for food products.
As producers of these products, several Latin American economies enjoy significant comparative advantages.
Overall, while the current multi-speed world economic situation is accelerating income convergence, this is unsustainable.
While the emerging areas have recovered rapidly from the crisis and are recording high growth rates, the industrialized countries are continuing Of course, this means that it will be necessary to build up critical masses of human, financial and technological resources.
These are dealt with in chapter III of this document. to be beset by serious difficulties: high unemployment, lacklustre growth and serious fiscal and financial difficulties.
The emerging economies enjoyed a rapid recovery and by the end of 2010 had already regained their pre-crisis levels of GDP and trade.
In fact, as already mentioned, several of the main emerging economies have been exceeding their growth potential and face the risk of overheating.
The economies of the European Union, Japan and the United States are grappling with severe fiscal difficulties and the available margin for monetary policy is virtually exhausted.
The good prospects of the emerging countries could be undermined if the industrialized countries do not manage to overcome these difficulties.
If the slower growth trend persists in the second half of 2011 and in 2012, the economies in the region with the strongest export ties with the United States, namely, Mexico, the Caribbean and Central America, could see their exports to that market slow, their foreign direct investment (FDI) inflows dry up and their inward remittances from migrant workers slump.
Those categories of products that the region exports to the European Union could also be affected if niches are not found in more robust markets.
To the extent that the sluggish growth trend may last for several years in the industrialized countries, one strategic approach would be to seek to diversify export markets, optimize intraregional trade and pursue better ways of taking advantage of South-South trade.
All of this has deepened the climate of uncertainty that has halted investments, loans and private spending.
The most likely scenario for the coming years in the industrialized economies is one of slow growth and financial turmoil.
The fiscal difficulties and sovereign debt in Europe and the United States are likely to lead to a scenario of low growth, high unemployment and sluggish adjustment of corporate and household loan portfolios.
For the time being, capital is taking refuge in currencies such as the Swiss franc or in gold or investments in commodities.
Meanwhile, other investors are seeking high returns in the emerging markets which withstood the financial crisis and maintain high growth rates.
It was during the 2008-2009 crisis that global disequilibria started to correct themselves (high current account deficits in the United States and surpluses in China, the emerging economies and oil-producing countries).
However, once the risk of a depression in the world economy had dissipated, the disequilibria that had set off the 2008-2009 crisis reappeared.
In this climate of high uncertainty, a prudential stance is preferable and international cooperation efforts aimed at resolving complex global economic dilemmas should be pursued in a coordinated way.
Changes in the world economic structure have accelerated following the 2008-2009 crisis, and adjustments are required in institutions responsible for economic governance.
The stronger impact of the emerging countries on macroeconomic variables justifies their claiming more scope and a more prominent role in those bodies.
Although some steps have been taken in this direction, more must be done to ensure that they are recognized in international forums.3 Once the South has acceded to a more prominent role in international governance, it will be in a position to make more substantive contributions towards solving global challenges.
Of the countries that recorded positive performance in 2009, China, India and Indonesia accounted for 81% of growth.
The former G7 was expanded in 2005 to include a group of emerging countries, which resulted in the formation of the current G20.
Emergence from the crisis led by international trade The rally in trade originated in the South International trade has contributed significantly to the economic upturn following the 2008-2009 economic and financial crisis.
Free trade and open markets averted a worsening of the crisis and subsequently transmitted the signals of a rebound in demand for end products.
The substantial contribution of international trade to gross domestic product (GDP) growth is explained in part by various effects that have temporarily increased the output elasticity of trade.4 The international trading system managed to contain protectionist excesses during the worst international crisis of the past 80 years.
Agreements by the Group of the 20 leading economies (G20) since 2008 to curb protectionist measures contributed to this outcome.
There was a strong upsurge in international trade following the crisis in 2010, in particular in the emerging economies.
In fact, the volume of trade grew at its fastest rate (15%) since records were first taken 60 years ago.
This rally more than reversed the 12% fall in the previous year (see figure I.1).
In value terms, world trade rebounded by 22% in comparison with the previous year, thanks in part to the upturn in commodity prices and the depreciation of the United States dollar against the other main currencies (WTO, 2011; CPB, 2010).
Normalization of financial conditions was another factor which re-established accessworld trade: value and volume compoA.
Contribution of regions to global export growth (percentage annual growth rate) (percentage points) sition effect, since easier access to credit facilitates the acquisition of consumer and capital durables produced in international value chains.
Faced with the rally in demand, companies rebuilt their stocks, which fuelled demand and stimulated the operation of pro15 duction units at the upper end of the chain (the bullwhip effect).
First, demand for durables (such as transport equipment or machinery) recovered more than demand for other, non-durable goods (such as food and garments), generating a “composition” effect.
Normalization of financial conditions was another factor which re-established access to credit and strengthened the composition effect, since easier access to credit facilitates the acquisition of consumer and capital durables produced in international value chains.
Faced with the rally in demand, companies rebuilt their stocks, which fuelled demand and stimulated the operation of production units at the upper end of the chain (the bullwhip effect).
South-South trade, led by China and the rest of emerging Asia, is the main engine of growth in world trade.
Of the emerging countries, China recorded the strongest rate of recovery in trade in 2010.
Exports grew by 28% in volume, in an impressive reversal of the 10% fall in volume registered in 2009.
This growth was almost twice the global growth rate observed in the same year and was not confined to China.
In fact, exports from the developing countries grew by 17% in volume terms in 2010, compared with 13% for the industrialized countries and a world average of 15%.
Developing country imports grew by 18% in 2010, compared with 11% in the industrialized countries.
By the end of 2010, the exports and imports of the emerging economies overtook their pre-crisis levels in value terms.
Thus, the industrialized economies are still benefiting from the robust external demand of the developing countries at a time when their domestic demand is still faltering.
Commodity exports from Africa, Latin America and, to a lesser extent, Asia benefited the most from China’s strong demand for imports.
The economies of these regions benefited from a sharp rally in demand for foodstuffs, hydrocarbons, metals and minerals.
These products accounted for more than a third of the increase in imports in 2010.
The value of imports from Africa and Latin America climbed to 55% and 41%, respectively (see table I.1).
Africa consolidated its position as a key oil supplier to China, as reflected in various energy and investment agreements in countries such as Angola, Gabon, Kenya, Niger, Nigeria and Sudan.
South Africa has also become a key supplier of metals and other raw materials.
Within Latin America, the countries that took advantage of China’s high demand for foodstuffs, metals and oil were those of South America.
Other beneficiaries of the robust demand from China are the sellers of spare parts, components and capital goods.
Many of these countries (in Asia, Germany and the United States) participate in global value chains concentrated in China.
These countries sell spare parts and components to China, which, in turn, assembles the end-product.
Following the crisis, this “factory Asia” benefited from the modest recovery in demand in the United States and Europe and a more buoyant consumption of durable goods in China and other emerging countries, which boosted production and trade, at least temporarily, thus adjusting inventories.
At the same time, Germany, whose exports to China consist mainly of heavy machinery and electrical equipment, benefited from the increase in demand spurred by the infrastructure stimulus programme launched in 2008.
China’s buoyant imports contribute significantly to the increase in its partners’ exports (the marginal variation), but these imports account for a smaller absolute percentage of their export basket.
This is shown in table I.1, where the fourth column indicates that the weight of the Chinese market in exports in 2009 was only 5% for the industrialized (Northern) countries and 11% for the developing (Southern) countries.
However, the percentage contribution of China’s demand to the 2010 rise in exports of each partner was more than double (see fifth column).
In some cases such as Germany, the rest of the European Union and Africa, this contribution was more than three times the absolute weight.
In this crisis, world trade (exports plus imports) started to fall in July 2008.
By March 2009, following eight months of decline, the value of trade bottomed out at a level 37% below its pre-crisis peak.
This period is longer than after the Asian crisis (1998) and the global recession of 2001, which is partly due to the fact that the two previous crises were not as deep.
Nevertheless, recovery from the current crisis was more rapid than following the 1929 crisis, which was similar in intensity to the current one.
The Latin American and Caribbean region regained its level of trade in December 2010, one month earlier than the rest of the emerging regions and well before the industrialized economies.
The region’s trade had fallen more sharply than that of emerging regions as a group, because of the drop in both volumes and prices of its commodity exports.
Up to July 2011, the advanced economies had not yet regained their pre-crisis trade performance level.
This is because they are still mired in the post-crisis phase, which has undermined domestic and external demand.
Dynamism by groups of products and regions The rapid recovery in trade in the emerging areas masks widely diverse performances.
Commodity exporters, in particular Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa, recorded smaller expansions in volume.
Conversely, exports from manufacturers such as China and other countries in emerging Asia achieved higher average rates of growth in volume (see table I.2).
The pace of recovery in trade varied considerably in the group of industrialized countries as well.
For the United States, the export and import volume growth rate was close to the world average.
The performance of the European Union was more sluggish partly owing to its slow recovery and the fiscal position and complicated sovereign debt situation of several countries in the euro area.
This not only depresses domestic demand and imports, but also has a dampening effect on the growth of its exports, since their regional market absorbs two thirds of their overall exports.
Moreover, their two main extra-regional markets (the United States and Japan) have staged a weak economic recovery.
One exception within the European Union is Germany, which recorded higher GDP and trade growth rates, in part because its close trade linkage with China boosted its exports substantially.
Lastly, in 2010, Japan had the highest growth rates for exports and imports among the industrialized countries.
This is due to sharper falls in its trade in the previous year and to its increasingly close trade ties with China.
The earthquake and tsunami in April 2011 had a significant human and social impact but the implications for trade have been limited.
World trade in manufactures continues to be dominated by products with a higher technology content.
Growth in trade in manufactures was higher in volume terms but lower in value terms than growth in commodities trade.
Towards the end of 2010, exports of manufactures came close to the pre-crisis peak (see table I.3).
Nevertheless, some categories such as mediumtechnology products (for example, motor vehicles) and resource-based manufactures, including iron and steel, remained below pre-crisis levels.
In the case of the motor vehicle industry, this is partly due to the fact that this was the sector that recorded the steepest fall during the crisis (down 51%).
Nevertheless, world trade in high-technology products such as office and telecommunications equipment declined less than other products and their recovery has been more than proportional.
For those categories for which there were no reporting countries, mirror statistics were used, supplementing the missing bilateral relations with structural information for 2009 and the growth rate reported by the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The same procedure was followed for the Latin American countries, with information on national sources for 2010.
This lower growth rate in comparison with the upturn in trade in goods largely reflects the more limited decline in trade in services during the 2009 crisis.
Unsurprisingly, transport was the most vibrant services category, given that it is closely linked to trade in goods, which recorded a strong recovery.
Tourism and business travel as items of world trade grew at a similar pace as trade in services as a whole, while other services were below average.
The problematic situation of the industrialized countries The industrialized economies are still suffering from the repercussions of the financial crisis with low economic growth rates and an unhealthy fiscal situation.
In 2010 and in the first half of 2011 growth in the United States was stronger than in the euro area but lower than in Japan (see figure I.3).
Forecasts for the entire year 2011 for the United States and Japan are being revised downward for various reasons.
The euro area, Japan and the United States also share other features: high fiscal deficits and public-debt-to-GDP ratios, a vulnerable financial system (especially the euro area), slow credit recovery (especially in the United States and the European Union) and still-expansionary monetary policies.
Furthermore, in all three cases, the space left for monetary policy is limited.
All the industrialized countries marked an upturn in their exports in 2010, with the intensity varying with the extent of the fall of 2009.
Although the higher commodity prices pushed up inflation and inflation expectations in these countries, the rates are still under control since the economies have been growing below their potential and, with unemployment high, labour costs have not increased.
The upturn in the United States seemed to be slightly stronger than in the European Union despite the high levels of unemployment, a stagnant real estate market and the gloomy outlook in terms of fiscal adjustment.
In 2010, the United States economy grew by 3%, led by a rebound in investment in equipment and software (15%).
But private consumption did not bounce back with any strength as unemployment remained persistently high (at around 9%) (BEA, 2011), the real estate market remained stagnant with considerable housing stock for sale and household income was at a low ebb.
In volume terms, exports expanded by 12%; imports were up by 13%.
Both flows signalled a clear recovery compared with 2009 when exports were down by 12% and imports by 14%.
In 2010, exports and imports to and from China and the rest of developing Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean grew faster, while sales and purchases in Europe grew more slowly.
In short, following an improvement in the trade balance up to the end of 2009, the trade deficit widened again, this time even further (see figure I.4).
The Federal Reserve has maintained its expansionary monetary policy, at a time when the recovery seems to be faltering.
The sluggishness of the upturn has led the United States Federal Reserve to maintain the benchmark rate at historic lows and it may adopt a third phase of quantitative easing (or QE III) to compensate for the weakness of the recovery.
The two phases of quantitative easing (QE I and QE II) were implemented in 2009 and between November 2010 and June 2011.
In the case of QE II, the purchase of bonds supported debt and asset values and is estimated to have added 0.6 percentage points to GDP growth (Mufteeva and Julien, 2011).
However, towards the middle of 2011, the United States economy proved to be weaker than expected.
At the beginning of 2011, growth for the year was forecast at 3.5%.
The revised data for the first half-year indicated growth of under 1%, despite strong fiscal and monetary stimulus.
Construction remains sluggish and is not expected to recover fully for another two to three years.
As regards the labour market, the slight downtrend in unemployment in 2010 may have bottomed out in March 2011 (see figure I.4).
Just before the 2 August 2011 deadline, the authorities reached an agreement to raise the sovereign debt limit by US$ 2.4 trillion in two phases, which should enable the Government to finance its expenditure at least until the end of 2012.
The agreement is that the debt ceiling, currently at US$ 14.3 trillion, should be raised by US$ 900 billion up to February 2012 and by US$ 1.5 trillion up to the end of 2012.
To offset this increase in debt, the deficit and public spending will be reduced by the same amount.
Further cuts of between US$ 1.2 billion and US$ 1.5 billion will be defined by a new bipartisan super committee, made up of an equal number of members from each of the two parties (Democrats and Republicans), before year-end 2011 (Steinhauer, 2011).
This agreement could paralyse the fragile recovery of the United States economy, with serious consequences for the Latin American economies.
GDP growth has been slow in the past quarters and cuts in public spending will probably further weaken the economy and hamper future growth, with an adverse impact on fiscal revenues.
The difficult political debate on the raising the debt ceiling has underscored how difficult it is for the Government of the United States to implement economic recovery policies.
It was mainly for this reason that Standard & Poor’s lowered the sovereign risk rating of Treasury bonds from AAA to AA+ in August 2011.
This flight to quality suggests that the austerity policies may jeopardize the recovery in the industrialized countries and the probability of a second recession is high.
Other possible impacts of the loss of momentum in the United States are a fall in commodity prices, a slowdown or reduction in FDI by United States firms in Latin America and the Caribbean and a decline in remittances and migratory flows.
The euro area Europe is in a weaker position than the United States.
Unlike European sovereign bonds, United States Treasury bonds continue to be a refuge against the crisis so that even in these exceptional circumstances with the lower debt rating, the medium-term rates for these notes are continuing to fall.
The banking system in the United States is less at risk than in Europe, since the United States has gained in terms of solvency and its risk exposure is lower.
Companies have posted substantial gains and built up cash reserves while continuing to postpone investment decisions.
On the other hand, Greece and Portugal remain in recession; those European economies that are going through a critical period are borrowing at rates that will make repayment practically impossible; a significant number of European banks are committed to the economies in crisis, and the slow progress of the European institutions adds further uncertainty to the scenario.
The euro area’s recovery has been weak, partly owing to intense fiscal consolidation albeit with different realities among its 17 member countries.
Following massive public interventions designed to bail out the financial sector and support domestic demand in 2009 and 2010, the member countries are now in a the throes of fiscal consolidation in a bid to put the fiscal deficit and public debt on a more sustainable footing in the long term.
For Greece and some other European countries, these measures do not solve the public debt problem and therefore, in order to avoid default, greater support will no doubt be needed from the European economies, the multilateral agencies and private banks.
The countries in the most critical situation are Greece, Ireland and Portugal.
These countries are characterized by structural fiscal deficits and low levels of domestic saving, due to a ballooning public debt and a permanent current account deficit.
The risk-rating agencies have downgraded the debt rating of those countries because of doubts concerning their sustainability.
Between January and March 2010, Spain and Portugal also announced plans to restructure following forecasts of record high deficits and Ireland announced a bailout plan for its banking sector.
In May 2010, the euro area, with the participation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF), set up the European Financial Stability Facility (EFSF) to help solve the fiscal crises in the periphery countries.
During the same month, the European Union and IMF approved an initial 110 billion euro (€) bailout plan for Greece in exchange for a commitment by the government to saving € 30 billion.
In November 2010, the European Union and IMF agreed to an € 85 billion bailout plan for Ireland, of which € 35 billion was contributed by the banks.
In May 2011, a € 78 billion rescue package was announced for Portugal in exchange for commitments to cuts in public expenditure.
In July 2011, at a high-level emergency meeting, a second bailout plan was worked out for Greece totalling € 158 billion.
The banks and other private creditors will play a substantial part in this plan.
In addition, it is planned to extend the maturity and lower the interest rates.
The euro area has also decided to ease EFSF conditions, for example to use funds for precautionary loans and for recapitalizing banks.
Two weeks after the package was approved, Spain’s and Italy’s risk premiums soared close to the levels which had prompted bailouts for Ireland, Greece and Portugal.6 Worse still, the measures’ ineffectiveness is exacerbated by their slowness, inasmuch as they still have to be approved by a number of European parliaments.
Within the European Union, Germany and the Nordic countries seem to be in the best position, registering growth above the average for the region.
Germany recorded the highest growth rate in the euro area in 2010, largely because of its buoyant export sector, which is taking advantage of the persistently strong demand for its products from China and other countries.
Investment and private demand are also on the rise following the drop in the unemployment rate to below pre-crisis levels.
Germany’s vibrant economy is helping it to consolidate its public finances, contributing to the lowest fiscal deficit of the G7 countries.
Nevertheless, data for the second quarter of 2011 show a stagnating economy and the forecasts are not encouraging.
In 2010, exports from the European Union grew by 18%, boosted by robust demand from China.
The fastest-growing destination markets were China (39%), Japan (21%), six countries from within the region, the Russian Federation and the United States (18%).
The most buoyant export products were crude and refined oil, transport equipment, chemicals, rubbers and plastics.
Mexico was the fastest-growing importer of refined oil, and Brazil was the fastest-growing destination for transport equipment and chemicals.
Imports expanded by 18%, with the Russian Federation being the leading source (40%) followed by China (32%), four European Union countries, two from the rest of Europe, and the Republic of Korea (20%).
The imports registering the most robust growth were refined and crude oil, electronic products, chemicals and electronic equipment.
The bailout plans may not be sufficient to avert debt restructuring in the affected countries.
Austerity plans agreed with the international community will probably not be sufficient to ensure the sustainability of their debts.
Several experts have suggested restructuring the debt with the objective of reducing the servicing burden and increase the probabilities of compliance.
Such a solution is hampered by the resistance of private creditors to accept a plan that would reduce their wealth and by the possible contagion in other countries with high debt levels (ECLAC, 2011).
The steep stock market falls in Europe and the United States following the agreement to increase the sovereign debt ceiling in the United States led the European Central Bank (ECB) to depart from its previous stance and buy bonds from countries under heavy pressure, including Italy and Spain, which helped to lower risk premiums. 3.
Japan Japan was one of the industrialized economies hardest hit by the crisis, but staged a remarkable recovery in 2010.
In fact, growth in Japan in 2010 was 4%, one of the fastest rates among the industrialized economies.
This rebound was triggered by a considerable fiscal stimulus package and a strong recovery in exports.
However, in March 2011, Japan was devastated by the earthquake, tsunami and the interruption in its nuclear power generation.
The 9.0 MW earthquake of 11 March, followed by the tsunami which battered the country, caused grave human and economic impacts.
The United Nations estimates that the impact will be equivalent to 5% of GDP (United Nations, 2011a).
The Government of Japan estimated that the area devastated by the catastrophe accounts for only 2.5% of the country’s economic activity.
Thus, the United Nations reduced its growth forecast for Japan from 1.1% (United Nations, 2011b) to 0.7% (United Nations, 2011a), while IMF decreased its expected growth figure from 1.6% in January to 1.4% in April and, later, to -0.7% in June 2011.
Notwithstanding the significant difference in the forecasts of these two agencies for 2011, both agree that 2012 will see a strong recovery with growth predicted to reach 3%.
Exports have been lower in the short term, especially for medical products, plastics, electrical machinery (computers, television sets, audio equipment, telephones and their components) and for transport equipment.
These lower export figures jeopardize the value chains which use their inputs as components in the manufacture of more complex items.
The expansion in imports for reconstruction covered foodstuffs, fuel, minerals and textiles (Ministry of Finance of Japan, 2011), areas in which the Latin American and Caribbean region boasts significant advantages, which it should be able to maximize.
The large size of the Japanese economy and its critical role in global supply chains have inevitably had an impact on the world economy (Altomonte and Ottaviano, 2009).
Since the 1970s and 1980s, Japan has been a key centre for Asian production chains and some global products.
The disaster interrupted the supply of inputs from the Japanese region affected by the disaster.
In fact, in April and May, Japanese exports of various parts and components, such as semi-conductors and components for audiovisual appliances, diminished by between 7% and 33%.
They found that those most affected by the price increase were small economies that are deeply integrated in supply chains.
Conversely, the impact on larger economies such as China and Indonesia was less significant, although some industries are expected to feel the ill effects.
The United States is the country least affected owing to its size and the predominance of the local market as a source of intermediate consumption.
The decline in exports may be attributed to a number of factors: loss of life, including that of economically active persons, destruction of physical capital associated with the export sector and damage to public infrastructure such as roads, railways, telecommunications.
In addition, imports increased because materials had to be 4. brought in from abroad for the reconstruction effort. global Rebalancing the The upturn reversed the reduction in global imbalances during the crisis, mainly between the country with the largest surplus (China) and the economy with the largest deficit (the United States).
In the economic and financial crisis of 2009, China’s current account surplus and the United States’ deficit fell significantly (by 31% and 43%, respectively).
In addition, imports increased because materials had to be brought in from abroad for the reconstruction effort. economy with a further 3% increase in China’s surplus and an additional 24% increase in the United States’ deficit.
In 2000, China contributed only 4% of the positive current account balances.
At the same time, the United States current account deficit represented 40% of the world total in 2010.
This proportion has fallen from 71% in 2002, partly because of the depreciation of the dollar against the renminbi.
The outlook for the world economy for the rest of 2011 suggests that the imbalances on the current account will remain at these worrying levels (see table I.4).
In the wake of the disaster, the price of some specific models of flash drives for flat screens increased by as much as 20% (Escaith and others, 2011).
The imbalance between the current accounts of the main economies and their trading partners is closely linked to their real exchange rates.
In the United States, the dollar has been losing value steadily since the end of 2001.
In China, the exchange rate of the renminbi followed the trend set by the dollar up to October 2005.
From this date, the authorities defined a gradual appreciation in the renminbi against the dollar (figure I.5).
In order to obtain a less fragile global recovery and more sustainable growth in the world economy, the huge current account surpluses of China, Germany and Japan need to be reduced.
In other words, these economies must boost their domestic consumption and promote imports over exports, thereby reducing the contribution of net exports to the growth of their economies.
To the extent that this greater expenditure on imports is reflected, for example, in higher exports from the United States (the economy with the largest trade deficit and the largest current account deficit), the global economic recovery should be more stable and balanced.
The divergent cycles between the industrialized countries and the emerging economies call for different economic policy responses.
Concerned about the high levels of indebtedness and the fiscal deficit in 2011, the Governments of the industrialized countries abandoned their support for the lacklustre post-crisis upturn and adopted contractionary fiscal policies.
The weakness of domestic demand in the advanced countries should be partly counterbalanced by stronger net exports to the emerging economies.
The latter have, however, been showing signs of overheating with an increase in inflation expectations.
In view of this situation, the monetary authorities are raising interest rates while they dismantle the fiscal stimulus packages introduced during the crisis.
The buoyancy of the emerging markets during 2010 and 2011 suggests that they are more decoupled from the industrialized countries than in previous years.
The more significant recent decoupling, especially in China, India and the rest of developing Asia, is partly attributable to the stronger role of domestic demand and the fact that economic growth is less dependent on international trade.
Towards mid-2011, however, the leading indicators of the BRIC countries (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India and China) showed clear signs of slowing down, which suggests that the stagnation in the industrialized countries is affecting them (see figure I.6).
It includes both quantitative and qualitative indicators, notably the stock-exchange index, foreign trade, manufacturers’ orders, the monetary base, the interest rate and consumer confidence.
Among the emerging countries, those with greater exchange-rate flexibility and capital account openness accounted for the greater part of the rebalancing of global demand.
For example, in 2010, inflows into the seven largest Latin American economies totalled US$ 266 billion, or more than five times the average for 2000 to 2005.
This resulted in a strong acceleration in the growth of these economies beyond their potential.
The emerging countries, especially those Asian economies with less exchange-rate flexibility and relatively closed capital accounts, have hindered the correction of these imbalances.
China is a case in point, as its currency is still overvalued in relation to medium- and long-term fundamentals.
China’s high trade surplus has contributed to a significant build-up of reserves, which has been an obstacle to the rebalancing of world demand.
The country’s main motive in accumulating reserves is to prevent a sharp appreciation in the renminbi.
It is imperative that the G20 seek ways of reconciling diverse national interests and the diverging business cycles of its members.
In the emerging economies with large external surpluses, a rise in the value of the currency will be a welcome means of improving domestic equilibrium —halting the inflationary pressure and the excessive expansion in credit and helping to rebalance global demand.
Prudential instruments and capital controls can play a useful complementary role but cannot replace macroeconomic adjustment.
Although these macroeconomic policy proposals were very well received at the meeting of the G20 in Seoul in November 2010, the political will to cooperate started to wane once the crisis had bottomed out.
The advanced economies must implement their fiscal adjustment, while the emerging economies with a surplus should eliminate the distortions that are hampering the rebalancing of global demand.
Other trends affecting international trade Higher commodity prices Since early 2009 there has been a new upswing in commodity prices, which accelerated from the second half of 2010, with many product prices outstripping their pre-crisis levels.
The steep increase in commodity prices in recent years stands in sharp contrast to the trends in the prices of manufactures, which have risen only slightly (see figure I.7A).
Even though the rise in commodity prices came to a halt in May 2011, the highly volatile nature of these prices makes it too soon to tell whether the trend has reversed.
Energy products saw the highest increases during this period (about 120%), after experiencing the sharpest fall in the second half of 2008 (a little over 60%, compared with an average drop of 35% for other commodities).
Prices of minerals and metals grew more modestly, presenting a cumulative increase of about 75%.
Agricultural products recorded the lowest growth during the recent price upswing (about 60%), although that growth accelerated in the second half of 2010 (see figure I.7B).
In the agricultural products group, the price of raw materials went up sharply in 2009-2011, while the price surge for foodstuffs slowed significantly.9 Prices for energy products and minerals and metals saw somewhat faster growth during the same period.
In the case of raw materials, the cumulative increase during this new upswing was 90%, compared with less than 20% in the period January 2006-June 2008.
For foodstuffs, the cumulative increase The new upswing in energy prices is attributable mainly to demand factors, unlike in the early 2000s when lack of investment in extraction, production and refining capacity restricted growth in supply.
In addition to the long-term factors that have influenced the price surges of other commodities (see box I.2), oil has also been affected by the political instability affecting oil-producing countries in the Middle East and North Africa since early 2011, which has led to fears of supplies being interrupted.
Furthermore, increased imports of oil and gas by Japan in the wake of the earthquake that hit the country in March 2011 exerted upward pressure on energy prices.
In the first category are the long-term factors, related to structural changes in the supply of and demand for these products.
In the second category are the factors related to shortterm supply and demand shocks that are specific to certain markets.
Although some of the factors in the second category are more recent, this type of factor has been contributing to price rises in many markets since the early 2000s.
One long-term factor is the rising demand for commodities owing to robust economic growth in emerging countries, which interacts with the short-term inelasticity of supply.
The strong and sustained growth of China, India and other emerging economies has stimulated demand for natural resources and energy, putting upward pressure on prices.
Higher per capita income and changing eating habits in those countries, combined with population growth, have driven up demand for food.
On the supply side, low levels of investment in agriculture in previous decades has resulted in slow growth in agricultural productivity and the resulting reduction of inventories makes supply even more inelastic.
Higher oil prices led to an increase in the costs associated with fertilizers and transportation, which pushed up agricultural production costs.
In the case of agricultural products, the long-term supply and demand trends have been exacerbated by a series of short-term factors.
The vigorous expansion in the production of biofuels, driven by ever-higher oil prices and the policies adopted in some developed countries to promote the replacement of traditional fuels, has led to greater demand for some agricultural products (particularly maize) and intense competition for arable land.
More frequent extreme weather events (from droughts to floods) affecting farmlands have led to crop losses, thus contributing to higher prices.
Inadequate policy responses (such as export prohibitions, price controls and stockpiling) have further aggravated the situation (Lora, Pollew and Tavella, 2011).
Financial factors have also played a role in the commodity price surge in recent years.
For example, fluctuations in exchange rates and interest rates have had a notable effect on prices, especially since the crisis broke out in 2008.
Lower interest rates affect the performance of assets such as bonds, which makes commodity-based assets more attractive and pushes up the prices of these products.
Furthermore, low interest rates reduce the opportunity cost of holding inventories of commodities, thus adding upward pressure on the demand for those products.
The countries whose currencies are appreciating against the dollar will see an increase in their international purchasing power, which enables them to sustain the demand for commodities, thus putting upward pressure on their prices.
As for minerals, metals and agricultural products, the price trend is attributable to a combination of demand-side (real and financial) and supply-side factors.
The higher prices for minerals and metals are the result of a strong upturn in demand from emerging economies (in particular, China) and inadequate supply, which led to a reduction in the inventory maintained to lessen the impact of shocks.
The high cost of energy, the relative weakness of the United States dollar and investor pressure also pushed up prices.
As for agricultural products, the main causes of the price hikes that began in 2009 were higher oil prices, adverse weather conditions in various key farming areas, low inventories and a resurgence in demand in emerging countries.
This commodity price surge has been brought to a halt by the uncertainty generated by the sovereign debt problems in Europe and the United States.
The marked volatility in the world’s major stock markets and the fall of the value of the dollar relative to gold, the Japanese yen and the Swiss franc have also contributed to a sharp drop in commodity prices.
However, it is too soon to draw any definitive conclusions about these trends.
For example, in the case of agricultural products, better weather conditions could lead to a rebound in production in the short term, thus alleviating the pressure generated by lack of supply.
Nevertheless, the global slowdown in yield improvements of various important crops will continue to exert upward pressure on prices, which will remain high compared with previous decades What is clear, however, is how volatile these prices can be and, therefore, how necessary it is to seek global mechanisms to dampen that volatility.
It shows that constant efforts are warranted to limit the transmission of these shocks to the domestic economy, either through mechanisms for saving transitory income, through fiscal structural rules or other mechanisms that base the planning of public spending on medium-term income projections.
The sharp upswing in commodity prices in the last few months contributed to an increase in world inflation.
Owing to the greater weight of food products in consumption baskets, the more intensive use of energy in production processes and the growth of domestic demand in emerging and developing countries, rising international prices have led to increasingly widespread inflationary pressures.
In the advanced economies these pressures have been less intense; however, there exists the risk that the constant hikes in oil and other commodity prices, coupled with the slow recovery of activity levels, could lead to episodes of stagflation.
Another challenge in relation to higher commodity prices is their impact on the poorest sectors of the population.
Since poor households spend a greater proportion of their income on food, they are affected to a greater extent by higher prices for these products, which significantly reduce their purchasing power.
Higher international prices feed through to local prices, which in turn affect inflation and the cost of living.
As lower-income groups spend a larger proportion of their income on food, the price surges mainly hit the poor, reducing their purchasing power and increasing undernutrition levels.
The proportion of persons suffering from undernutrition in the region reached 53.1% in 2009, representing a significant figure 1).
It is important to bear in mind that child undernutrition will have longterm consequences.
The surge in commodity and food prices pushed up poverty levels in many countries in the region.
This increase is attributable mainly to the impact of the food and economic crises in 2008-2009.
For example, Zezza and others (2008) found that in Guatemala in 2000 only 8.8% of the population were net sellers of the main food staples (maize, beans and wheat), while in rural households that percentage rose to 13.6%.
In Nicaragua, 9.6% of all households were net sellers of food staples (maize, rice and beans) in 2001, while that percentage stood at 21.5% for rural households.
In Panama, 3.8% of all households and 10.3% of rural households were net sellers of food staples (wheat, maize and rice) in 2003.
A simulation of a 10% increase in the price of these staple foods shows a well-being loss of 1.4% for rural households and 1% for urban households in Guatemala and Nicaragua; the projected loss for Panama is less than 1%.
Zezza and others, “The impact of rising food prices on the poor”, ESA Working Papers, No. 08-07, Rome, 2008 [online] ftp://ftp.fao.org/docrep/ The Caribbean countries are more vulnerable than those of Central America to commodity price changes.
Caribbean countries are running a trade deficit in the three categories of food and beverages, minerals and metals, and energy.
The situation is different in the countries of Central America where the weight of the energy deficit stands at over 4% of GDP in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras and reaches as much as 13% in Nicaragua.
The energy trade deficit in Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay is also high.
The exports basket for Central American countries is dominated by manufactured goods, whose prices have dropped as a result of the global recession.
As shown in table I.5, these countries experienced acrossthe-board deterioration in their terms of trade in 2010.
In the Caribbean, the changes in the terms of trade were mixed, reflecting the heterogeneity of the subregion’s economies and their export sectors.
The high commodity prices, especially food prices, and their considerable volatility have become a cause for concern among the leaders of the Group of Twenty (G20).
A successful conclusion to the Doha Round would contribute to resolving food price volatility.
In the current international context, reducing agricultural subsidies in the United States and the European Union (which prevent agricultural markets from functioning efficiently) would help to reduce the fiscal imbalances in those economies.
At a time of high international prices, this option would meet with less political resistance from producers in industrialized countries.
Furthermore, the elimination of such subsidies would stabilize the supply conditions in developing countries, improving the prospects for employment and growth in the rural areas of those economies.
Trade policies The periodic monitoring of national trade policies, initiated by the World Trade Organization (WTO) and other institutions following the outbreak of the global crisis in 2008, has continued post-crisis.
One analysis, focusing in particular on G20 member countries, drew two main conclusions.
First, the adoption of trade restrictive measures by the major world economies remains at a moderate level, covering less than 1% of total world trade in goods.
Second, the adoption of this type of measure nevertheless increased significantly between mid-October 2010 and April 2011 (WTO, 2011).
In relation to the previous reporting period (mid-May to mid-October 2010), both the number of trade restrictive measures and their coverage more than doubled: the number of measures rose from 54 to 122, thus increasing the coverage from 0.2% to 0.5% of total world goods imports (see tables I.6 and I.7).
Almost all the trade restrictive measures introduced by the G20 members between October 2010 and April 2011 were trade remedy measures (mainly initiations of anti-dumping investigations) and border measures on imports (such as higher tariffs and non-automatic import licensing).
However, there is growing concern about the increase in export restrictions, which include export duties and quantitative restrictions such as quotas or prohibitions.
This type of measure is applied in particular to food products and certain minerals.
Restrictions are imposed on food products in response to the surge in various commodity prices, with a view to guaranteeing the availability of food products for the population of the exporting country (as well as for its processing industries).
The aim of the restrictions on minerals is to guarantee the supply of those minerals to the local industries that use them as inputs.
No matter how valid governments’ motives may be for introducing export restrictions, these can have a negative impact on other countries, especially on those that are dependent on food imports.
The risks are multiplied because the WTO rules on export restrictions are considerably more lax than those on import restrictions.
For example, WTO allows Governments to temporarily introduce export prohibitions or restrictions to prevent or relieve critical shortages of foodstuffs or other products essential to the exporting country, but it does not establish any criteria for determining when such a shortage exists (nor when it has come to an end).
Discussions on the need to strengthen multilateral disciplines on export restrictions have intensified in recent months within the context of greater food price volatility (FAO and others, 2011), and in fact this issue has made its way onto the G20 agenda.
From a medium-term perspective, there are still significant risk factors in the global economy that could lead to a further scaling-up of the trade restrictions that have been introduced since the end of 2010.
These risk factors include the persistence of global imbalances between surplus and deficit countries; high levels of unemployment in the industrialized economies; the concerted fiscal consolidation process taking place in Europe, which is hitting the economies of Greece and Portugal, for example, particularly hard; political turbulence in several oil-exporting countries; and the aforementioned food price volatility (WTO, 2011b).
Similarly, high capital inflows into emerging economies can generate pressure for greater protection as they lead to currency appreciations that make imports more competitive than local production (ECLAC, 2010a).
In this context of considerable uncertainty, concluding the Doha Round of negotiations among the WTO membership would contribute substantially to reducing the scope for further deterioration of the environment in which international trade is conducted.
Nevertheless, the outlook for the Doha Round itself is highly uncertain (see box I.4).
Recent trends in regional agreements With the relative stagnation of the multilateral trade negotiations, efforts have been stepped up to conclude regional agreements in various parts of the world.
This trend is also being driven by the pressing need to guarantee a constant, rapid and secure flow of goods, services and investments required as a result of the diffusion of value chains in international trade.
The majority of these regional agreements seek deep integration and cover trade in goods (generally without exclusions), as well as trade in services and other aspects of trade, such as public procurement, intellectual property and competition policy.
Given the broad diffusion of value chains in the Asia-Pacific region, that is where efforts have been focused on achieving greater integration among countries. (a) Asia-Pacific Since 2010, the main initiative in Asia-Pacific has been the negotiations to enlarge the Trans-Pacific Strategic Economic Partnership Agreement (TPP).
These agreements are in keeping with India’s strategy of forging closer ties with East Asia and SouthEast Asia, which began with the signing of an agreement with the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) countries in 2009.
This agreement complements an agreement that was previously signed between China and New Zealand, allowing Hong Kong to be used as a base for companies that wish to do business in China.
The agreement confirms New Zealand’s intention to pursue a process of increasing economic and trade integration with its trading partners in Asia.
This commitment has already been shown through its existing agreements, including bilateral agreements with Singapore, Thailand, China, and Malaysia, and multilateral agreements, such as TPP and the Agreement establishing an ASEAN-Australia-New Zealand Free Trade Area.
New Zealand is currently negotiating free trade agreements with India, the Republic of Korea and the Russian Federation, as well as taking part in the process of enlarging TPP.
Most of the major disagreements that have arisen over this period have been in connection with the negotiations on agriculture, and in particular the size of the reduction of agricultural subsidies in the industrialized countries.
However, at present, the main differences are in connection with the trade liberalization of manufactured goods.
Specifically, the United States is demanding that some of the main emerging economies (in particular, Brazil, China and India) should participate, along with industrialized countries, in sectoral tariff-elimination agreements in the chemicals, industrial machinery and electronics sectors.
Brazil, China and India have rejected these demands, arguing that, according to a previous agreement, participation in sectoral initiatives on tariff elimination is voluntary.
They have expressed a willingness to move towards greater liberalization in these sectors by applying the tariff-reduction formula that has already been agreed, but not to the extent of eliminating the majority of tariffs.
The average levels of tariff protection in the three aforementioned sectors in Brazil, China and India are higher than in the industrialized countries, which is why a tariff-elimination agreement would require a greater effort on the part of those emerging economies.
The main difference between Brazil and India, on the one hand, and China, on the other, is that the applied tariff rates in the first two are much lower than the WTO bound tariff rates, while in the case of China, the differences are generally minimal, as a result of its negotiations to join WTO in 2001 (see figure).
In April 2011, WTO Director-General, Pascal Lamy recognized that the gaps relating to industrial products seemed to be unbridgeable and would put at risk the progress made in all other areas of the Doha Round.
This is because this Round is being negotiated on a “single undertaking” basis, under which the outcome of every item of the negotiation is part of a whole and indivisible package.
Several analysts have indicated that if the Doha Round is not concluded in 2011, it will be very difficult to finalize in 2012 when several key countries (including France, India and the United States) will be holding elections (see, for example, Baldwin and Evenett, 2011).
However, the WTO membership has already recognized that it will be impossible to conclude the Round in 2011, given the magnitude of the differences.
The future of the Doha Round is therefore expected to dominate the discussions at the eighth Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization to be held from 15 to 17 December 2011 in Geneva.
Beyond losing out on commercial gains if the Doha negotiations are ultimately abandoned or postponed indefinitely, such an outcome could have far-reaching systemic consequences.
First, it would undermine the credibility of WTO as a forum for negotiating issues of global interest in the coming years, such as the relationship between trade and climate change and export restrictions on commodities.
Second, it would erode the capacity of WTO to perform other basic functions, such as resolving conflicts between its members and monitoring trade policies (which is recognized as having played an important role in containing protectionist pressures during the recent global economic crisis).
Third, it would exacerbate the already marked tendency towards the proliferation of preferential agreements, with the consequent increase in transaction costs and fragmentation of international trade flows.
What is more, when these agreements are of the North-South variety, it is even more difficult to achieve balanced outcomes for developing countries.
Lastly, if Doha became the first failed multilateral round, it would set a negative precedent for the chances of reaching multilateral agreements in other areas, such as climate change or reforms to the international financial architecture.
Ultimately, it would be taking a step towards a situation in which the most powerful countries could increasingly opt for unilateralism, which would leave the poorest and smallest countries increasingly exposed to risk.
This is the first agreement between the European Union and an Asian country.
It is estimated that this agreement could lead to the creation of 250,000 jobs in the long term (BBC, 2011).
In three years, 96% of tariffs on goods from the European Union will be eliminated, while 99% will be eliminated for goods from the Republic of Korea.
To avoid imbalances, the free trade agreement provides for the progressive elimination of tariffs and allows for the application of temporary bilateral safeguard measures with a view to preventing a disproportionate rise in imports into either of the two markets.
The exports from the Republic of Korea to the European Union that are exempt from tariffs include automotive, mobile telephone and refrigerator components.
However, the tariff elimination process will take three years for larger and medium-sized cars, and five years for compact cars, photographic cameras and televisions.
For the moment the Republic of Korea will not eliminate the tariffs on food products from the European Union: the tariff elimination period will last between five and ten years for pork and between three and ten years for cheese.
The European Union has been very actively pursuing trade negotiations with Latin America in recent years.
The European Union and the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) relaunched negotiations in 2010, after having suspended the process in 2004.
Similarly, the European Union and Ecuador are in talks to relaunch bilateral negotiations.
Should all these negotiations come to a successful conclusion, the European Union would have a preferential trade link with about 30 countries in the region by 2012-2013 (see chapter II).
The role of the crisis in ramping up the South’s share of the world economy The convergence of per capita income The recent global financial and economic crisis and the different paths taken by the emerging and industrialized economies in the post-crisis period led to an acceleration towards the convergence of income in the two groups of countries.
The continued growth in the emerging economies, led by China, compared with the crisis in the industrialized countries has brought forward the date of productive, technological and industrial convergence between emerging and industrialized countries.
Even though the world faced the worst crisis in eight decades in 2009, the emerging and developing economies continued to grow at a rate of 2.7%, owing to the impressive performance of developing Asia, and China in particular, which grew at rates of 7.2% and 9.1%, respectively.
Thus, in the midst of the crisis, the emerging economies gained greater weight in the world economy.
Increasing trade links between developing countries made it possible for those economies to decouple somewhat from the negative cycle of the advanced economies of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD).
During the world growth boom in 2003 and 2008 and the two post-crisis years, Latin America and the Caribbean managed to reduce the gap between its per capita income and that of the industrialized countries.
Between 1980 and 2010, the region went through three periods with distinct trends.
During the lost decade of the 1980s, a significant divergence was seen with the gap between per capita income in the region and that in the advanced economies growing by an average of 3.5 percentage points per year (see figure I.8B and table I.8).
Between 1991 and 2003, this process of divergence continued but at a considerably lower rate of 0.8 percentage points per year.
By contrast, from 2004 to 2008, the region reduced the income gap with the advanced economies by an annual average of 2.1 percentage points.
The pattern in this regard in the largest economy in Latin America and the Caribbean, Brazil, is similar to the regional average (see figure I.8).
The region’s experience stands in stark contrast to the situation in China and the recently industrialized economies in Asia.
China has also been steadily closing the gap since the beginning of its economic reforms.
In several cases, the per capita income gap narrowed more rapidly in the post-crisis years.
While the economies of the advanced countries stagnated in 2010 and 2011, the majority of the emerging countries maintained high, steady growth rates, thus enabling the majority of the latter group to close their per capita GDP gap at a faster rate.
An upward slope indicates a widening gap (divergence), while a downward slope indicates a narrowing gap (convergence).
A negative number indicates a reduction in the gap (convergence). a A The increased weight of emerging countries in global production and consumption Rest of world L ti A i d the Caribbean (33 countries) Advanced economies The share of developing countries in global economic growth is increasing.
According to projections, in 2016 the advanced economies’ contribution will account for only one quarter of total world growth.
In other words, their contribution halved in 15 years (see figure I.9).
While China has been gaining ground in terms of economy, trade and global finances over the last couple of decades, without doubt the pace of its rise has accelerated since the recent economic and financial crisis when it managed to maintain a high level of growth even as industrialized countries stagnated.
The evidence indicates that this divergence in performance will continue over time and that China’s GDP will surpass that of the United States Growing demand in China led to a faster rise in consumption of metals and oil than food.
Over the last seven years, annual average growth in imports of metals and oil was 34%, while for food that figure stood at 21%.
It also exceeded 20% of world production of flour and soybean oil.
However, in terms of global imports, China bought 53% of soybeans, 28% of soybean meal and 23% of soybean oil on the world market.
In 2010, China’s share in world consumption was as high as 40% for lead, nickel, tin, zinc and steel, which was higher than in 2009.
It is estimated that by around 2014 China’s demand for steel will have increased by 22% and for energy by 50%.
This situation will benefit countries that export products such as iron, oil and copper.
The upsurge in domestic consumption has reached unprecedented levels and could climb even higher in the near future.
In the last five years, China has constructed the equivalent of the entire housing stock in Europe: every two weeks the equivalent of all the housing in Rome is built, totalling 2 billion square metres of housing per year.
Consequently, there is a large scope for growth in sectors such as infrastructure, retail and services, particularly in the middle-sized cities.
According to IMF projections, China’s economy will According to the World Bank, if the country’s economy continued to grow at an annual rate of 8%, it would be double the size of the United States economy by 2030, even though its per capita income would still be half of that of the United States.
If these projections came to pass, an unusual international scenario would arise: the world’s largest economy would maintain a relatively low per capita income and would continue to be a developing economy.
With regard to its financial weight, China’s reserves exceeded US$ 3 trillion in March 2011.
China’s sovereign wealth fund is looking at using reserves to establish new funds, each with a specific focus such as energy, precious metals and currency stabilization.
The fund is to receive an additional US$ 200 billion from the government, of which it has already earmarked US$ 110 billion for offshore investments.
The middle class in China, made up of 157 million individuals, is already the second largest in the world, after that of the United States (Kharas, 2010).
China has already overtaken the United States as the largest market in the world for cars, and it is also the largest world market for mobile telephones.
Although the Chinese middle class represents less than 12% of the country’s total population, the increase in per capita income predicted for this group over the coming decades will contribute to its purchasing power.
The rapid expansion of the middle class in China and India could offset in part the stagnation expected in the expansion of the middle class in North America and Europe (see figure I.10).
This situation is in keeping with the greater emphasis that the Chinese authorities are gradually placing on domestic demand (and, as part of that, consumption) in connection with future growth, partly in response to the need to reduce imbalances between rural and urban areas and between the dynamic coastal area and the less developed interior of the country.
South-South trade Over the period 1985 to 2010, emerging economies outperformed industrialized countries on trade.
In 2010, the South was responsible for over 40% of world exports, while exports from the North declined to 56%.
Similarly, South-South trade already represents almost a quarter of world exports (see figure I.11B).
If this trend continues, South-South trade may account for a greater proportion of world trade than North-North trade by around 2017.
The tendency for exports from the South to grow more vigorously has been observed since the late 1980s, but it became more pronounced during the past decade, when exports from countries of the South expanded at annual rates of close to 10%.
The recent crisis, while causing a dip in exports from the South in 2009, does not appear to have affected this long-term trend.
Over the same period, the South-North share of trade grew by just 1 percentage point, while the share of North-North trade contracted significantly.
First, a large proportion of manufacturing production has been transferred from industrialized to emerging countries to save money and optimize international production and value chains.
Second, unilateral, bilateral and multilateral trade liberalization has facilitated trade between countries.
Third, many developing countries have experienced strong growth, increasing their share of world trade (see table I.9).
Developed country exports, meanwhile, recovered in 2010 but have yet to return to 2008 levels.
More manufactured products have been traded among emerging economies than between North and South in recent years (see figure I.12).
In addition, the countries of the South exchange more medium- and high-tech manufactures compared with South-North trade.
Over time, the composition of the South-South trade basket has changed dramatically: the share of low-tech manufactured goods has shrunk, while the share of commodities and high-tech manufactured goods has grown.
More trade between the developing countries of Asia, led by China, is the main reason for the rapid growth of South-South trade.
Almost 60% of total South-South trade from 2008 to 2010 corresponds to trade within developing Asia.
This is largely due to China’s strong trading links with neighbouring economies, which have experienced double-digit growth for over a decade.
Developing Asia’s trade with other emerging zones represents 26% of South-South trade.
Developing Asia principally trades with the Middle East (as an exporter, 5% of total South-South trade and as an importer, 6% of the total) and with Latin America (as an exporter, 5% of total South-South trade and as an importer, 3% of the total).
In other words, developing Asia is by far the main engine of South-South trade and the world’s best example of production complementarity (see box I.6).
Latin American intraregional trade accounts for only 5% of total South-South trade.
However, this percentage is higher than that of the other emerging regions, except for developing Asia (see table I.10).
The concept of a “global value chain” comprising supply and demand factors arose out of the realization that activities in the value chain could be optimized by dividing them among several companies and sites.
Chain governance concerns a company’s level of control over its upstream suppliers and its downstream buyers.
This geographical fragmentation of production has given rise to a new trade reality which has heightened the interdependence between countries.
The value chain phenomenon has become particularly common in East Asia, owing to a combination of political, technical and institutional factors.
For instance, Asian countries are so open to international trade that the tariffs on imports, especially on manufactures, are quite low.
The spread of value chain fragmentation has boosted trade in inter mediate goods, especially manufactured products.
These have become the most dynamic category of world trade, representing over 50% of non-fuel world trade.
Trade in parts, components and accessories encourages economies to specialize, leading to a trade in tasks that adds value along the production chain.
Specialization no longer depends on a countr y’s balance of comparative advantages in the production of a final good, but rather on its comparative advantage in performing tasks at specific stages of the production process.
Changes in the production structure reflect changes in demand, especially the rise of mass marketing and developments in the consumption structure of the United States.
The close relationship between the United States and Asia in terms of supply and demand brought about a restructuring of Asian economies according to their respective comparative advantages.
Over time, this led to a clustering of production activities in countries based on their industrial interconnections.
This has paved the way for greater regional integration, which facilitates trade within the supply chains.
Services, represented by transport, communications and commerce, are increasingly central to global production networks.
Commercial and infrastructure services, for example, are vital to the smooth operation of global value chains.
Singapore and Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China have become core distribution and logistics hubs, while India and the Philippines have evolved into major service providers, especially in the information technology sector and in business process outsourcing (BPO).
As trade in intermediate goods expanded, foreign direct investment (FDI) in Asia rose sharply, doubling its share of world flows.
Initially, these resources were concentrated in China, but India has gradually increased its share.
Multinational companies use FDI as part of their intra-firm trade strategy, and although a significant proportion of FDI goes to non-tradable service sectors, these are in fact key to the development of global value chains.
Structural diversity and Asia/United States complementarity are among the distinctive features of Asian value chains.
Through the reorganization of production systems, there is increasing convergence towards similarity between Asian industrial profiles and greater complementarity, which in turn provides more opportunities for intra-industry trade and economic interdependence.
Analysing the development of production networks in Asia and the United States helps shed light on Asian value chains, revealing the interconnections among Asian economies and between them and the United States market.
In 1985 there were only four major actors in the region: Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia and Singapore.
In the 1990s they were joined by the Republic of Korea, Taiwan Province of China and Thailand as Japan expanded its supply networks and the United States began to outsource.
China’s rise from 2000 transformed the regional network, and by 2005 the network’s centre of gravity had shifted there.
Chinese supply chains evince a high degree of sophistication that reflects not only low production prices but also the complex intermediate goods imported from other countries, whether from Asia or the rest of the world.
Measuring this trade presents another challenge for analysts endeavouring to understand value chain functioning.
For instance, attributing value only to the final stage of the production chain significantly distorts the analysis, which could have major implications for trade policy and negotiations.
One solution is to calculate value added, which provides a clear picture of the vertical integration of the export sector and of the true value of bilateral trade flows.
Using value added reduces the 2008 United States trade deficit with China by 42%.
The regions of the South vary widely when it comes to the importance of other countries of the South as export markets.
Between 2008 and 2010, the South as a whole exported 54% of its products to the rest of the South, and 46% to regions of the North.
South-South trade accounts for a growing proportion of Latin American and Caribbean trade.
As a destination, the South receives 38% of total regional exports, and 53% excluding Mexico.
The other destinations receive only a small percentage of exports from the region. (see table I.11).
The 2010 data were put together using figures covering 85% of world trade (77.5% from COMTRADE and 7.5% from EUROSTAT (Austria, Spain, Latvia, Malta, Netherlands and Poland)).
In specific instances of bilateral trade without reporting countries, the 2009 structure was used and the growth rate provided by the World Trade Organization (WTO) (India, Philippines, Republic of Korea and Singapore).
The same procedure was followed for the Latin American countries, using information from national sources for 2010. (b) Latin American and Caribbean links with Africa Comparatively speaking, the region trades very little with the African continent.
In 2009, Africa accounted for 2.5% of total regional exports and 1.8% of imports.
While this percentage is low, it did maintain an upward trend throughout the decade (see figure I.13).
To break into this market, Latin American business operators must work on forging closer biregional ties in trade and investment through various forms of business association.
Recently, the region’s trade with Asia, dominated by soaring exports to China, has outstripped its trade with other major partners.
Regional imports from AsiaPacific, particularly from China, have also grown more vigorously than total imports.
The region imports more than it exports in its trading relationship with Asia-Pacific, and this has generated a widening trade deficit with the latter (see chapter II for more details).
Along with several neighbouring countries, China is evolving into an export platform.
Although Latin America continues to supply China with primary and naturalresource-based products, it exports far less of the latter to China than its rivals.
It competes in the Chinese market with the ASEAN countries, Australia, India, New Zealand and the United States as a supplier of primary products and with Japan and the Republic of Korea as a supplier of natural-resource-based manufactures (ECLAC, 2010b).
One striking aspect of this bilateral trade is the narrow range of countries and products.
Countrywise, the main trading partner is Brazil, which is responsible for over half of total regional trade with Africa.
Brazil has strong historical roots and a shared culture with the former Portuguese colonies in Africa.
Over the past decade, trade involved fewer countries, and relations therefore did not develop much further.
It is nevertheless interesting to observe the emergence of new trading partners (such as Belize and Trinidad and Tobago), which are beginning to have an impact.
In terms of products, the region exports oil, copper and agricultural commodities (such as soybean and sugar) and manufactured goods (from Mexico) to Africa.
Imports from Africa mainly consist of oil, gas and fertilizers (Brun, 2009).
Given the similarity of these regions’ exports to China, there is some competition between the two, above all in the case of crude oil and some minerals. (c) Links between Asia and Africa Trade relations between China and Africa have deepened, particularly over the past decade.
In fact, bilateral trade between China and Africa surged from US$ 10.6 billion in 1990 to more than US$ 100 billion in 2010; this increase corresponds to an annual growth rate of over 30%.
These additional flows are mainly attributable to rising Chinese demand for commodities and Africa’s comparative advantages in this regard.
Another contributory factor has been the closer cooperation between the two continents, following the creation of the Forum on China-Africa Cooperation (FOCAC).
Between 2000 and 2009, FOCAC met four times and set itself ambitious goals, including a target of US$ 100 billion in trade annually.
Although China’s role in Africa is controversial, China is clearly a key player in the region and has had a major impact in a large number of African countries.
The Government of China has supported development in areas such as infrastructure, energy and agriculture.
Within the framework of FOCAC, to year-end 2009, Chinese business activity in Africa increased: over 2,000 companies were set up in different countries, more than 300,000 jobs were created and US$ 1.44 billion was invested, up from Thanks to a number of initiatives taken by the Government of China, the trade deficit with Africa has narrowed.
In addition, in July 2010 the Government of China eliminated import duties on 60% of imports from 26 less developed countries in Africa that maintain diplomatic relations with China.
This percentage will be raised to 95% in China’s imports of natural resources and its exports of various manufactured goods are the distinctive features of this booming trade relationship.
Three quarters of China’s imports from Africa consist of mineral resources, while it exports a wide array of goods to Africa: apparel, footwear, plastic products, machinery and transport equipment are the five main products.
Notably, China’s imports from Africa are far more geographically concentrated than its exports.
Two thirds of Chinese imports come from three African countries: Angola, South Africa and Sudan.11 By contrast, China exports to countries with a large population or high per capita GDP, mainly Nigeria, South Africa and the countries of northern Africa.
Foreign direct investment by multinational companies of the South In 2010, for the first time, FDI in developing and transition economies accounted for more than half of world FDI.
Although global FDI grew by 5% in 2010, investment levels remain 15% below average pre-crisis levels (UNCTAD, 2011a).
The weak recovery is partly explained by a drop in investment flows from and to industrialized countries, which are still suffering the effects of a sluggish recovery and, in the case of Europe, the sovereign debt crisis.
Indeed, FDI in developing countries rose by 10% and fell by 7% in developed countries.
As a result, for the first time half of FDI went to developing countries; in line with this trend, FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean was up 40% on the previous year Includes the territory now known as the Republic of South Sudan.
The 2009 crisis may have marked the beginning of a long-term trend, shifting the emphasis over to emerging economies (“the South”) as recipients of world FDI.
Between 1970 and 2007, the South’s share of the total ranged from 10% to 45% (in 1982, just before the debt crisis), but generally fluctuated between a quarter and a third.
However the financial crisis may have contributed to a major shift in FDI flows from industrialized countries to emerging economies (see figure I.14).
Among emerging economies, developing Asia doubled its share (from 16% to 30%), as did Latin America and the Caribbean (from 5% to 10%), while that of Africa held steady at between 3% and 4%.
Developed countries continue to be the main source of FDI, although the increasing share of developing and transition economies is striking and reflects their growing contribution to the global economy and trade.
Having doubled their share over the past decade, the developing and transition economies contributed 22% of the total in 2010.
Similar to the region’s growth as a destination of FDI, Latin America and the Caribbean’s performance as a source of investment placed it as the most dynamic region in 2010.
The slow but steady rise of developing countries will be a key characteristic of FDI flows in the years to come.
Firms in Brazil, Chile and Mexico, and more recently, Colombia, became the most internationalized over the past decade.
The internationalization process occurred mainly in commodity industries (hydrocarbons, mining, cement, pulp and paper, and iron and steel), mass consumption manufactures (food and beverages) and some services (energy, telecommunications, air transport and the retail trade).
The rise in outward FDI in 2010 is therefore explained by larger investments by companies from Mexico, Brazil, Chile and Colombia, which accounted for over 90% of the flows.
Much outward investment by Latin America is directed at neighbouring countries: 47% of mergers and acquisitions by Latin American companies in 2010 took place within the region.
For the most part, countries in the region invest in neighbouring countries and in industrial and services sectors.
These sectors generate more employment, as opposed to the raw materials sector, which receives most Asian investment.
For instance, Chilean outward investment in the past 20 years amounted to US$ 56.789 billion, 85% of which was invested in other countries in the region (83% in Latin America and 50% in MERCOSUR countries).
These investments resulted in the creation of around 196,000 direct jobs and 135,000 indirect jobs (DIRECON, 2011). (b) Trans-Asians Asian countries have increased their share of outward FDI over time.
China and India have thus become key players in terms of their contribution to global FDI, particularly in emerging and developing economies both within Asia and in Africa and Latin America.
To sustain their economic growth, China and India need a continuous supply of raw materials and to capture new external markets so they can develop their domestic industry according to their individual strengths.
In parallel, trade in goods and services has progressively taken over a bigger share of their economies.
Chinese investment in developing economies has typically targeted natural resource extraction, mainly hydrocarbons and mining.
However, as a share of total Chinese overseas investment, these flows are shrinking, owing to growing competition from these same economies with China.
Their lower costs in some factors of production are forcing China to participate in stages further up the value chain, where it competes with developed economies.
Here, its investments take the form of acquisitions or joint ventures in higher value areas, thereby enabling technology to be transferred to China.
Unlike China, India has invested overseas by way of mergers and acquisitions in higher value added services or manufacturing.
Developed countries are therefore the main recipients of these investments, particularly the United Kingdom and the United States, which totalled US$ 80 billion between 2000 and 2010.
The principal aim of Indian investment is thus to capture new markets, rather than to obtain a supply of raw materials for the domestic industry.
In addition, Indian companies face domestic barriers to investment, mainly in the form of higher prices for factors of production, with the corresponding rise in inflation and interest rates, and a regulatory framework that has been slow and inconstant in facilitating investment.
The rise of trans-Asian companies and investments is apparent in a number of spheres.
It is, for example, clearly demonstrated by the position of Asian firms in world rankings in recent years.
In one of the best-known ranking lists, Fortune Global 500, 16 Chinese companies were among those with the highest revenues in 2005; by 2010 this had risen to 48.
Over the same time frame, the number of Indian companies rose from 5 to 8 (CNNMoney, 2011).
Reflecting the pace of growth, the latest figures for 2011 (22 July) show that there are now 69 Chinese firms in the top 500.
Five Asian companies (three of them Chinese) are now among the top 10 grossing firms in the world.
A substitution effect has taken place among Asian companies: for instance, in 2005 the top five Asian companies were Japanese, while in 2011 the top three were Chinese (all energy companies), having ousted the big Japanese automotive firms.
Meanwhile, in 2005 there were five Latin American firms in the top 500 (three Brazilian and two Mexican).
By 2009 this had jumped to 11, most related to the energy or banking sectors.
PDVSA, the Venezuelan State-owned oil company (with revenues of US$ 126.364 billion and profits of US$ 7.451 billion) led the pack, in 27th place.
There were four Mexican companies on the list: Pemex, América Móvil (273rd), Comisión Federal de Electricidad (370th) and the cement company Cemex, the third-largest of its kind in the world (421st).
That year, in addition to Petrobras, other Brazilian firms included three banks (Bradesco, Itaú and Banco do Brasil), the mining giant CVRD (now known as Vale), and the steel company Gerdau.
In 2011, there were 13 Latin American companies in the top 500, with Brazilian firms particularly prominent.
The Venezuelan oil company dropped to 66th place and was overtaken by two other oil firms, Petrobras and Pemex.
These are now among the 50 biggest companies in the world, with revenues of over US$ 100 billion.
Outlook and risks Volatility and uncertainty have now returned to worrying levels.
Since the United States Congress reached an agreement on the public debt ceiling and Europe and IMF bailed Greece out for the second time, there have been wild swings in the main stock markets, which have plummeted in a manner resembling previous financial crises and then rebounded.
During 2011, growth rates for these economies have been systematically revised downward.
Their economic policy stance still appears to be misdirected, focusing on reducing the fiscal deficit rather than a recovery of employment and growth.
The financial markets’ sudden, adverse reaction to the agreement on the public debt ceiling was not due to insolvency fears or the threat of inflation, but rather to the poor outlook for growth.
At the end of the first half of 2011, economic activity remained below 2007 levels, while the employment figures for June 2011 show that the employment rate remained below that of June 2009, when the recession officially came to an end (Krugman, 2011).
The legacy of high public debt left by the crisis in Europe and in the United States will cast a shadow over these economies for many years to come.
As a result of the crisis, fiscal accounts in these countries have deteriorated to an unprecedented level.
Projections indicate that, even assuming that fiscal policy is gradually tightened, this could climb to 126% of GDP by 2020 (Deutsche Bank, 2011).
Without a change in policy, it could reach 150% of GDP (134% in the case of the United States).
This outlook spells several years of underperforming economies, high unemployment rates and latent financial threats, because the situation is relatively unstable and the markets are nervous.
The inability of the political authorities to coordinate robust and sustainable solutions to fiscal and sovereign debt problems adds a further layer of uncertainty.
In the case of the emerging Asian economies, growth is anticipated to slow down only marginally compared with the high levels seen last year.
The stoppages in regional production networks (owing to Japanese supply shortages) appear to have been resolved, although some sectors, especially automobiles and electronics, may experience difficulties throughout the northern hemisphere summer.
Latin America will be driven by exports and domestic demand, but the pace will slacken in some economies (Brazil, in particular) where more restrictive policies are being implemented.
The time may have come for innovative solutions that seek to deepen European integration.
It will be difficult for Europe to weather the present crisis if it does not buttress solidarity mechanisms and regional cooperation.
The question is whether greater or lesser integration is the answer to the crisis.
Maintaining the current policies could lead to a grave crisis for the euro and badly affect the prospects for its own integration process.
Sooner rather than later, the recovery of growth will require serious consideration of a mass purchase of debt by the European Central Bank or the issuance of European debt in lieu of national debt, together with credible commitments to fiscal consolidation.
In that scenario, most of the risk would fall to the worst affected economies, allowing for the structural reforms needed to regain competitiveness.
Without a doubt, this would require more sovereignty to be ceded, this time in the fiscal domain, and probably a new community treaty.
In this context, Germany and France submitted a proposal in August 2011 to form a regional economic government and take disciplinary measures in the event of non-compliance with pre-established rules for countries in the euro area.
The proposal sought to avert a further crisis by strengthening governance and integration in the euro area.
In the current climate, there is limited political scope for substantive agreements on governance of the globalization process.
The economic turmoil and high unemployment in industrialized countries bring protectionist tendencies to the fore, making action on the main issues raised by globalization less likely.
For example, the Doha Round has been unable to achieve the minimum level of agreement needed to bring it to a close, after 10 years of unproductive negotiations.
Following the preliminary announcements from the G20 regarding reform of the international financial system, this topic appears to have disappeared from its agenda.
Successive summits on climate change seem to have been equally unsuccessful in tackling the subject with sufficient urgency.
In turn, the growing weight of the emerging economies in the main variables of the global economy tends to provoke fear Export growth (volume) the basis of United Nations, World Economic Situation and Prospects 2011, New York, January.
The heavy flows of private capital pouring into developing economies, eager to exploit higher activity levels and interest rates, may exacerbate inflationary pressures.
In particular, emerging economies which are experiencing an above-trend rate of growth must protect their macroeconomic balances and exercise more vigilance over macroeconomic aggregates and financial sector activities.
A weaker dollar may prove to be a competitive disadvantage for emerging economies and lead to new trade protection measures.
A possible third round of quantitative easing (QE3) and the announcement of a closeto-zero interest rate for the next two years will heighten the liquidity of the dollar in the financial markets, at a time of marked weakness for industrialized economies.
Monetary cycles in industrialized and emerging economies are likely to continue to take divergent paths, increasing the pressure towards currency appreciation for the latter.
High capital inflows in Latin America exert pressure on real exchange rates and act as an incentive to specialize in the production and export of primary goods, in order to benefit from the high prices.
This leaves economies of the region more exposed to external shocks and generates greater volatility in domestic macroeconomic aggregates, such as investment; the overall impact is to stunt these economies’ ability to grow, create productive employment and reduce inequality.
The authorities of the region have responded to these complex macroeconomic policy dilemmas by implementing measures designed to ease pressure on exchange rates.
These combine, to varying degrees, interventions in foreign-exchange markets, capital controls and financial regulations (ECLAC, 2011).
Low economic growth is looking increasingly likely, in view of the potential loss of confidence in the peripheral countries within the euro area.
From a Latin American and Caribbean perspective, a world economic slowdown, a gradual decline in global liquidity and a higher risk component in financial assets, especially of some European sovereign debt, could prolong the “flight to quality”.
This would mean, as borne out in the recent crisis, greater demand for dollar-denominated assets and a sudden reversal in capital flows (ECLAC, 2011a).
Rising food and energy prices also represent more direct risks for economic growth because they affect consumers’ real incomes and, in some countries, because they trigger social unrest.
A steep increase in prices is probably more likely in the energy sector, owing to the deepening political crisis in some of the main oilproducing countries.
At the next G20 meeting in France in November 2011, a variety of urgent matters must be addressed.
First, the member countries must set out their position and coordinate in the short term to reduce the likelihood that the global economy will slip once again into recession, and in the medium term to inject life into their economies.
The second question is how to curb the extreme volatility of capital flows, in particular the vast amount of capital entering and leaving emerging countries.
Other subjects in need of attention are the sustainability of the sovereign debt of several industrialized countries and the impact of the decisions made by credit rating agencies regarding this.12 In brief, the outlook for 2012 is extremely uncertain, and Latin American economies must adopt prudential macroeconomic policies.
Economies in the region with greater financial and market depth are grappling with financial volatility; the slowdown in Europe and the United States will limit export growth, affecting prices, as the new monetary easing measures in the United States could exacerbate currency appreciation in countries that are already under strain from high capital inflows.
Latin American and Caribbean economies should keep a close eye on the sustainability of their fiscal and external accounts and consolidate their macro-prudential measures, guided by the long-term performance of the main economic variables.
In some cases, this may mean regulating excessive capital inflows, particularly when these are the main cause of currency appreciation.
Prudential macroeconomic management must be accompanied by enhanced regional cooperation (see chapter III).
A further commitment to regional integration and cooperation will help cushion the impact of a potential global deterioration, supporting intraregional trade and preserving macroeconomic and social progress by moving closer towards the formation of a larger regional market.
There is plenty of scope for trade facilitation initiatives and greater cooperation on physical infrastructure, transport, logistics, customs rules and innovation and technology.
Such initiatives will not only open up an interesting area of activity for exports by small and medium-sized enterprises, which are more intensive in manufactures, but will also underscore the appeal of the region as a trading partner and as a destination for FDI.
Credit rating agencies played a key role in fuelling the financial market bubble that led to the 2008 crisis.
By assigning ratings to financial instruments created based on subprime mortgage debt, the agencies gave the impression that the systemic risk associated with this methodology was low and that these assets were more liquid and secure than they really were.
Moreover, the agencies were unable to accurately rate the risks of financial institutions holding these assets in their portfolio.
For example, Standard & Poor’s gave Lehman Brothers an AAA rating just one month before it went bankrupt.
El Mercurio (2011), “Mayor integración económica en la eurozona: Las cinco medidas disciplinarias que quieren imponer Merkel y Sarkozy”, 17 August.
Trade growth to ease in 2011 but despite 2010 record surge, crisis hangover persists”, Press release, No.
Introduction This chapter examines the main trends, especially during the past decade, in trade and investment relations between the region and its three main extraregional partners: the United States, the European Union and the Asia-Pacific region.
It begins with an analysis of the evolution of trade and investment flows, both in overall terms and by sector and product, and then reviews the strategy underlying the ties with each partner, including trade negotiations and economic cooperation initiatives.
Section B gives an overview of the main aggregates of the region’s trade relations with the United States, the European Union and the Asia-Pacific region, while sections C, D and E analyse the ties with each partner in greater depth.
Overview of trade relations between the region and its main partners During the past decade, China emerged as an increasingly important trading partner for Latin America and the Caribbean, while the role of the United States diminished and trade with the European Union stagnated.
Although the United States remains the region’s main trading partner, its share in regional exports sank from 58% in 2000 to 40% in 2010, while its share in imports dropped from 49% to 32% in the same period.
As for the European Union, the region’s second largest trading partner, its share in regional exports grew slightly from 12% to 13%, while its share in imports remained stable at 14%.
By contrast, China’s share in regional exports climbed from 1% in 2000 to 8% in 2010, and its share in regional imports rose from 2% to 14% (see figure II.1).
As a result, they may not coincide with the national data reported by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, which are used in tables 1 and 2. b Includes Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore and Thailand.
A country analysis confirms the growth of the AsiaPacific region as a destination for regional exports in the past decade.
Between 2000 and 2010, the share of Asia-Pacific in total exports grew for all countries in the region except Ecuador, Guatemala and some Caribbean countries.
By contrast, the share of the United States in total exports from all countries of Latin America shrank.
The past decade saw significant growth in the Asia-Pacific region’s share in imports to all countries in the region, with the exception of three Caribbean countries.
By contrast, the share of the United States in imports to all countries except Cuba, Ecuador and Uruguay shrank considerably (see table II.2).
In most of the past decade, the region posted surpluses in its goods trade with the United States and the European Union, but a deficit with China and the rest of Asia.
The deficit with China and the rest of Asia reflects the differentiated pattern that has emerged in the region’s trade relations with Asia.
While several South American economies send a significant proportion of their exports to Asian markets —especially commodities and natural-resource-based manufactures — Mexico, the Central American countries (except Costa Rica and Panama) and the majority of the Caribbean countries (the only exception being Cuba) send only a small fraction of their exports to Asia.
At the same time, Asia’s share in total imports to these countries grew considerably in the past decade, resulting in sharp trade deficits with that region (see figure II.2).
This differentiated pattern is explained in more detail in section E of this chapter.
The data for the Caribbean (excepting the Dominican Republic) are from the Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS) database. a Figures for 2000 for members of the Central American Common Market include maquila exports, which are counted as exports to the United States.
The data for 2000 are from COMTRADE, whereas those for 2010 are from national sources.
Exports from the region to its three main extraregional markets became more concentrated by product category during the past decade —a result of a renewed emphasis on primary production, a trend that was triggered by high commodity prices throughout most of the period.
The increased concentration was especially evident in the case of Asia, where exports from Latin America and the Caribbean were already highly concentrated at the start of the last decade (see figure II.3).
This reflects the proportion of commodities and natural-resource-based manufactures in the region’s exports to Asia, which is significantly higher than is the case with exports going to Europe and the United States.
Manufactures make up a larger proportion of the exports of Latin America and the Caribbean to other countries within the region and to the United States than to the European Union and Asia.
If it is between 0.10 and 0.18 they are considered to be moderately concentrated and if it is above 0.18 they are considered to be highly concentrated.
The data are based on mirror statistics to ensure comparability, as a result of which they may not coincide with national data reported by countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. b Asia includes China, India, Indonesia, Japan, Malaysia, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Singapore and Thailand.
However, even in the case of exports to the United States, the share of primary products and natural-resource-based manufactures has increased markedly since the start of the last decade (see figure II.4).
Latin America and the Caribbean export far more products to the intraregional market than to extraregional markets.
Over the past decade, the number of products exported from the region to all its main markets rose considerably, but the relative importance of those markets remained the same.
At the end of the decade, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean were exporting, on average, 70% more products to other countries within the region than to the United States and over 100% more to the European Union.
The difference is even more striking in the Asian markets: on average, the Latin American and Caribbean region exports ten times more products to other countries within the region than to China and more than four times more than to the rest of Asia (see table II.3).
These figures attest to the importance of the regional market for exports of Latin American and Caribbean manufactures and for the development of regional value chains, topics that will be explored further in chapter III.
In the past two decades, trade between the United States and the region has grown more quickly than trade with any of its other main partners, except China.
In 2010, Latin America and the Caribbean absorbed 23% of United States goods exports, making it the country’s main export market, just ahead of Asia.
In the same year, the region was the source of 18% of United States goods imports, which was equivalent to the European Union’s share and slightly smaller than China’s share (see table II.4).
In 2010, Mexico alone accounted for nearly two thirds of exports from the region to the United States and more than half of that country’s imports.
As for exports, the Andean countries constitute the region’s second largest exporter to the United States, and together with the countries of the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) they accounted for a quarter of the value of the region’s exports to the country in 2010.
That order is reversed for imports: MERCOSUR is the second largest market for the United States in the region, followed by the Andean countries (see figure II.5).
The importance of the United States as a trade partner varies widely within the region.
In 2010, the United States received 80% of Mexico’s exports and supplied 48% of its imports.
The foreign trade (both exports and imports) of the economies of Central America and the Caribbean is also heavily oriented towards the United States market, whereas the United States plays a less prominent role in South American trade, especially among the MERCOSUR countries and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (see figure II.6).
The region’s trade surplus with the United States is mainly the result of the favourable balances of Mexico and, to a lesser extent, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In fact, the Mexican surplus alone is larger than the total regional surplus.
By contrast, the MERCOSUR countries have collectively experienced a growing trade deficit with the United States since 2007.
The growth in the deficit has been especially marked in the two largest MERCOSUR economies, Brazil and Argentina (see table II.5).
The relatively small share of primary products and natural-resource-based manufactures in the region’s exports to the United States mainly reflects the high proportion of manufactures in Mexican exports, especially medium- and high-technology manufactures (see figure II.7A).
If Mexico is excluded, the composition of exports from the region to the United States is more similar to the pattern of its exports to destinations such as China (see figure II.7B).
Even if Mexico is excluded, the composition of exports from the region to the United States varies considerably by subregion.
Exports from the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic comprise the largest proportion of manufactures (mainly lowtechnology manufactures such as textiles and garments).
Exports from the MERCOSUR countries and the Caribbean are somewhere in the middle, while exports from the Andean countries consist almost exclusively of commodities and, to a much lesser extent, natural-resource-based manufactures (see figure II.8) —mainly crude oil, the principal product exported to the United States by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador.
State of) In the past two decades, exports from the region as a whole to the United States have become more concentrated, as reflected in the trend of the HerfindahlHirschman index, which rose from 0.12 to 0.15 between 1990 and 2010.
However, there is considerable variation between countries with regard to export concentration (see figure II.9).
Countries sending a large number of products to the United States, such as Argentina, Brazil, the Dominican Republic, Mexico and Peru, show the lowest levels, whereas countries sending a much smaller number of products to the United States —generally primary products— have much higher levels.
Among the countries in the region, Mexico is by far the one with the highest level of intra-industry trade1 with the United States.
This is evident from its high Grubel-Lloyd index for bilateral trade (see figure II.10).
This type of trade between the two countries is particularly marked in industries such as vehicle parts and electrical machinery.
Other countries with high levels of intra-industry trade with the United States are Brazil (in the automobile and chemical sectors, among others) and the Dominican Republic (in the electronics, plastics and paper sectors).
Investment Over the past decade, foreign direct investment flows from the United States have been more stable than those from the European Union, the other main source of foreign direct investment in the region (see figure II.11).
Those economies in the region that have the closest ties with the United States market are also those for which foreign direct investment from the United States is relatively more important.
This is especially true of Mexico and the countries of Central America and the Caribbean.
By contrast, among the MERCOSUR countries the largest proportion of foreign direct investment comes from the European Union (see figure II.12).
The region as a whole accounted for 8% of the total foreign direct investment of the United States in 2009.
The figure rises to 19% if the Caribbean financial centres are included (see table II.7).
Intra-industry trade occurs when two countries export goods from the same sector to each other.
A value above 0.33 indicates a high level of intraindustry trade, while a value of between 0.10 and 0.33 indicates the existence of potential intra-industry trade.
Strategy underlying bilateral relations Since 2007, there have been no major developments in trade negotiations between the United States and the region.
In that year, a free trade agreement was concluded between the United States and Panama, although it has yet to be submitted to the United States Congress for ratification.
The free trade agreement concluded in 2006 between the United States and Colombia is also pending approval.
By contrast, numerous agreements have been negotiated in recent years between the various Latin American and Caribbean countries and their European and Asian partners (see sections D and E, respectively).
A review of the current priorities in United States trade policy shows that the country lacks a strategic vision for Latin America and the Caribbean.
Both schemes were suspended as a result of pressure from protectionist interests in the United States Congress.
Recent developments suggest that the United States Congress could approve the agreements with Colombia and Panama in 2011.
During President Obama’s visit to Brazil in March 2011, the two countries concluded an economic cooperation and trade agreement, which includes in its programme of work the facilitation and liberalization of bilateral trade and investment.
In addition, since 2010, the Government of Panama has introduced several amendments to its labour regulations and has undertaken to increase the transparency of its tax system, also in response to demands made by the United States Congress.
In May 2011, President Obama’s administration officially reported that it was ready to hold the technical discussions required to submit the pending agreements with Colombia and Panama, along with an agreement with the Republic of Korea, to Congress for approval.
However, linkage of the approval of pending agreements with approval of the Trade Adjustment Assistance scheme could entail another delay in the entry into force of the agreements with Colombia and Panama.
In May 2011, the Obama administration indicated that the three pending agreements would be submitted to Congress only after a bipartisan political agreement had been reached to renew the Trade Adjustment Assistance programme.
Created in 1974, the programme is designed to help workers who have lost their jobs as a result of the stiffer competition generated by international trade.
However, the increased coverage ended in February 2011 and returned to the level of before the 2009 reform.
Several Democratic members of Congress have made their approval of the pending trade agreements conditional on reintroduction of the benefits provided under the 2009 reform, which is a fundamental demand of the Democratic Party.
Trade agreements between the United States and the region are based on a “hub and spokes” model, which fails to take advantage of the opportunities that could result from linkages.
In the current model, the United States is the hub and its Latin American and Caribbean partners are the various spokes (see figure II.13), which means that the benefits that could flow from cumulation of origin are not being realized.
To date, the main initiative of the administration of President Obama in relation to trade negotiations has been the expansion of the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Agreement.
Australia, Malaysia, Peru and Viet Nam are also participating in the negotiations, and other countries from Asia and the Americas, including Canada, Colombia, Japan and the Republic of Korea, have expressed interest in, or are considering, joining the process.
The aim of the United States in joining TPP is not chiefly to seek new markets in the short-term.
This is because the other eight participating economies are relatively small and the United States already has free trade agreements in force with four of them, namely Australia, Chile, Peru and Singapore.
Rather, joining is a strategic move aimed at making TPP a vehicle for trans-Pacific economic and trade integration (Herreros, 2011).
In that context, the United States authorities have expressed their intention of making TPP a twenty-first century agreement, one which sets a high standard in respect of both trade matters and labour and environmental protection issues and one which other countries from the Pacific Rim might join in the future.
In terms of obtaining preferential access to new markets, the TPP negotiations are currently of limited appeal to the two Latin American participants.
Chile, a founding member of TPP, has bilateral free trade agreements in place with Australia, Peru and the United States; signed an agreement with Malaysia in November 2010; and successfully concluded negotiations on an agreement with Viet Nam in June 2011.
Peru already has bilateral free trade agreements in force with Chile, Singapore and the United States, and the other five TPP participants (Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, New Zealand and Viet Nam) together accounted for only 0.6% of its total exports in 2010.
It is also unclear whether the outcome of the current TPP negotiations will include the possibility of cumulation of origin among all parties.
This is because the United States has opted to negotiate the provisions relating to market access exclusively on a bilateral basis and only with countries with which it has no trade agreements in place.
Consequently, from a trade standpoint, the appeal of TPP for the countries in the region depends on new economies, especially Asian countries, joining the negotiations.
While the expansion of TPP affords opportunities, it also poses risks for the countries of the region involved in the process.
As noted above, the United States is seeking to use TPP to set higher standards than those established under its previous agreements on issues such as intellectual property and labour and environmental protection.
In addition, it is seeking to establish high standards in other areas not included in previous agreements, such as regulatory coherence.
Countries in the region that have already negotiated on these issues in their respective free trade agreements with the United States, such as Chile and Peru, run the risk of having to make even more onerous commitments on politically sensitive matters in a wide range of public policy areas.
Conclusions and recommendations Despite the economic growth registered in Latin America and the Caribbean since the last decade, the United States has lacked an overall trade strategy for the region in recent years.
Its lack of strategy dates back to the stalling and subsequent abandonment of the negotiations to create a free trade area of the Americas.
Those negotiations brought to light the diversity of trade interests in the region.
In that context, the United States adopted a new strategy to forge links at the subregional level, or sometimes the bilateral level, with those countries in the region that were most willing to strengthen their trade ties with the United States.
However, the United States has encountered increasing difficulty in achieving congressional approval of its trade agreements, including those with countries in the region, because trade has become a highly sensitive political issue in the country in recent years.
In that context, ECLAC has proposed a new hemispheric alliance between the United States and the region to tackle common challenges and thus increase the region’s participation in the international economy.
The possibility of establishing cumulation of origin between the United States and its trading partners in the region is especially relevant for two reasons.
First, the foreign trade of the majority of the countries concerned is strongly oriented towards the United States market.
Second, the economies of these countries are highly integrated with each other, not only de facto but also by means of trade agreements.
This is especially true of Mexico and the countries of the Central American isthmus.3 In that context, cumulation of origin4 would expand the range of suppliers that producers in the region could use without losing access to tariff preferences in the United States market, which would generate efficiency gains and encourage the development of subregional value chains.
In short, cumulation of origin would make the agreements with extraregional partners —in this case the United States— more consistent with the realities of current trade and would strengthen Latin American and Caribbean integration.
This integration would be strengthened by the negotiations currently under way between Mexico and the Central American Common Market countries aimed at replacing the three free trade agreements currently in force (Mexico-Costa Rica, Mexico-Nicaragua and Mexico-Northern Triangle of Central America) with a single partnership agreement.
To date, cumulation of origin is occurring only on a very limited basis between the United States, Mexico, the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic.
It has been agreed that the United States will grant duty-free access for certain clothing products manufactured in a Central American country or the Dominican Republic using Mexican inputs, and Mexico will do the same for certain clothing products manufactured in a Central American country or the Dominican Republic using inputs from the United States.
Ensure prompt renewal (during 2011) of ATPDEA and the Generalized System of Preferences for a sufficiently long period to provide a stable timeframe for beneficiary countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Seek approval of the pending free trade agreements with Colombia and Panama by the United States Congress in 2011.
Promote the inclusion of interested countries in the Americas in the negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) Agreement.
Ensure a balance between the outcomes of TPP negotiations on “new” issues (such as intellectual property, investment, services, labour and environmental regulations and regulatory coherence) and those on traditional matters and other areas of particular interest to developing country participants (anti-dumping provisions, market access for agricultural products, movement of people and transport services, among others).
Strategic dialogue Establish a regular dialogue between the United States and the other countries from the Americas represented in the Group of Twenty to discuss and seek coordinated approaches to issues of systemic importance, such as reform of the international financial architecture, rebalancing of the global economy, measures to combat climate change and methods for dealing with commodity price volatility.
Economic cooperation Establish an integrated hemispheric economic cooperation programme, funded by national governments, regional development banks and other sources (for example, the Aid for Trade initiative of the World Trade Organization).
The programme could build on the experience gained since 2008 as a result of the Pathways to Prosperity initiative, although unlike that initiative the programme would include the entire region.
It would cover the following areas: Development of transport and logistic infrastructure across the Americas (ports, airports, roads).
Trade facilitation, including reducing red tape in Latin American and Caribbean countries and assisting them to meet United States security requirements.
Assistance for the implementation of programmes in Latin America and the Caribbean designed to assist and retrain workers who have lost their jobs as a result of import competition, building on the United States experience with the Trade Adjustment Assistance (TAA) programme.
Enhanced availability and quality of information about the opportunities and requirements associated with free trade agreements.
Support for Latin American and Caribbean companies to enable them to meet United States quality, technical, health and other standards.
Internationalization of companies: promote partnerships between companies from Latin America and the Caribbean and the United States, especially small and medium-sized enterprises, including through the participation of SMEs in regional value chains Assurance of stable and adequate financing for trade, especially for countries in the region with limited access to private sources.
Mexico subsequently halved the retaliatory tariffs that it had been applying to 89 products exported from the United States since March 2009. b In early July 2011, an agreement was reached in the United States Senate to eliminate the import tariffs on ethanol as from August 2011, replacing them with subsidies for United States producers of corn-based ethanol.
The main priority of the United States in relation to trade negotiations is currently the Asia-Pacific region, as evidenced by the leading role that it has assumed in the negotiations on the expansion of TPP.
Given the countries currently involved, these negotiations are of limited appeal to the two Latin American participants, Chile and Peru, in terms of obtaining access to new markets.
Furthermore, the expansion of TPP poses risks for the countries of the region involved in the process, as they may be forced to make new, onerous commitments in areas such as intellectual property and labour and environmental regulations.
Aside from the technical aspects, the participation of countries in the region in TPP could have implications for their relations with China and the rest of the AsiaPacific region, which need to be carefully assessed.
The leading role assumed by the United States in the negotiations to expand TPP partly reflects its interest in counterbalancing China’s integration initiatives in Asia.
Moreover, the countries of the region —especially those on the Pacific Rim— have other institutional frameworks for jointly approaching the Asia-Pacific region, such as the Latin American Pacific Rim Forum and the recent initiative to establish a deep integration agreement comprising Colombia, Chile, Mexico and Peru (see chapter III).
Although these initiatives and TPP are not mutually exclusive, because they involve only countries in the region, they could better serve the interests and priorities of the region in its relations with the Asia-Pacific region.
Trade between European Union members themselves accounts for roughly two thirds of the foreign trade of the European Union, a proportion that has grown in the last three decades.
By contrast, the share of Latin America and the Caribbean has shrunk and currently represents less than 3% of both European Union exports and imports (see table II.8).
Even if trade between European Union members is excluded, the region accounts for only 5% of European Union foreign trade, including both exports and imports.
Trade between the region and the European Union is concentrated in a few countries, with MERCOSUR accounting for nearly half of the total.
If Mexico is included, the five countries accounted for 61% of regional exports to the European Union and 69% of imports (see figure II.14).
The shares of the region’s various partners in trade with the European Union remained relatively stable during the last decade.
Except in the case of Mexico, exports from all Latin American countries and subregions to the European Union are mainly natural resources or natural-resourcebased manufactures.
These two categories make up the bulk of exports from Chile (raw and refined copper) and the Andean countries (refined and unrefined energy products), while in the countries of MERCOSUR and the Caribbean Forum of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (CARIFORUM) they account for more than 70% of sales to the European Union.
Only in the case of Mexico, and to a lesser extent Central America, do medium- and high-technology products make up more than 40% of exports to the European Union.
The technological pattern of regional exports has changed very little in the last 10 years, except for an increase in the share of primary products in exports from the Caribbean countries and of medium- and high-technology manufactures in exports from the Central American countries (see figure II.15).
Latin American exports to the European Union are very concentrated and comprise mainly commodities such as bananas, coffee, coal, beef, copper, gas, iron, steel, petroleum and soybean.
Only in the case of Mexico and Costa Rica is there more than a manufactured product in the top five products exported to the European Union (see table II.9).
By 2012-2013 the European Union could have preferential trade arrangements with around 30 countries in the region.
Its strategy has been to prioritize the negotiation of partnership agreements on a bloc-tobloc basis with the four main subregional integration schemes.
It concluded partnership agreements with the Caribbean (CARICOM plus the Dominican Republic, grouped together as CARIFORUM), in 2008, and with the members of the Central American Common Market (plus Panama) in 2010.
In 2010, it also concluded a free trade agreement with Colombia and Peru, in which it temporarily opted for the bilateral route because of the difficulties encountered in negotiations with the Andean Community that began in 2007.
However, the European Union still aims to achieve a bloc-to-bloc agreement with the Andean Community.
The agreements with Central America and with Colombia and Peru are expected to enter into force in 2012, joining existing agreements with Chile, Mexico and CARIFORUM.
In addition, negotiations on a partnership agreement between the European Union and MERCOSUR, which had stalled in 2004, were resumed in June 2010 (see table II.10).
Only limited progress has been made however, mainly because of the sensitivity of agricultural matters within the European Union and industry issues within MERCOSUR.
The partnership agreements negotiated between the European Union and the region differ significantly from the free trade agreements negotiated between the region and its other extraregional partners.
In addition to free trade, the agreements between the European Union and the region include provisions for political dialogue and cooperation, which are essential in order to ensure a virtuous relationship among political consensus-building, economic and trade development and social cohesion.
In short, these agreements reflect a more comprehensive vision of development than strictly trade-related agreements.
Another key difference between the agreements negotiated between the region and the European Union and those concluded with other partners is that the former are explicitly designed to strengthen the Latin American and Caribbean subregional integration schemes. 2.
Investment In the decade between 2000 and 2010, the share of the region —including financial centres— in foreign direct investment flows originating in the European Union was larger than that of Asia, and the European Union became the main source of foreign direct investment in the region.
Since the introduction of various economic reforms in the 1990s, flows of foreign direct investment into Latin America and the Caribbean have grown significantly.
Much of this investment has come from European countries, which took advantage of privatization in areas such as banking, telecommunications and other services.
Although investment from the United States also grew, it did so at a slower pace, causing a shift in the composition of cumulative flows as the European Union became the leading source of such investment in the past decade, accounting for 43% of total cumulative flows (see table II.11 and figure II.16).
Worthy of particular note are the capital investments in international holding companies with European owners (mainly from Luxembourg, the United Kingdom or the Netherlands) made with a view to taking advantage of the fiscal benefits available in certain Central American and Caribbean countries (including the Bahamas, Bermuda, the British Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands and the former Netherlands Antilles).
In some cases, these financial centres are in turn the origin of new investments in Mexico and South America.
The European Union’s foreign direct investment elsewhere in Latin America and the Caribbean (i.e. outside the Caribbean financial centres) is concentrated in a few countries.
One of the factors contributing to the surge in investment from the European Union —in addition to trade liberalization, financial deregulation and privatization— has been the internationalization of numerous European business groups, especially Spanish groups.
In fact, Spanish investment continues to account for almost half of total European investment in Latin America, followed by investment from the United Kingdom in a distant second place (see figure II.18).
European companies, several of which are global leaders in this area, have invested in the generation of wind energy in particular, although there has also been investment in other alternative energies such as biofuels and solar power (see table II.12).
Strategy and cooperation Since 1999, the biennial summits of the Heads of State of Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union have been looking for ways to strengthen biregional integration and strategic cooperation between the two regions.
A strategic partnership between Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union was formed at the summit held in Rio de Janeiro in 1999.
Since then, these biennial meetings have been crucial for identifying priorities relating to integration and cooperation.
Discussion of economic and trade integration has been a constant at the summits, as reflected in the agreements between the European Union and CARIFORUM, Chile, Mexico, Central America, Colombia and Peru.
Production of wind energy with a total installed capacity of 250 MW and three new wind farms under construction with total capacity of 306 MW.
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Peru Generation of electricity in hydraulic, thermal and wind plants with total installed capacity of around 15,000 MW (58% hydraulic, 41% thermal and just under 1% wind).
Brazil, Mexico Generation of wind power with total installed capacity of 166 MW.
GDF SUEZ (Gaz de France) Generation of hydroelectric, thermoelectric, wind and biomass energy, with total installed capacity of 6,500 MW.
Four wind farms under development, with total capacity of nearly 1,000 MW.
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay Projects under development for the installation of several wind farms, with total potential capacity of 35,000 MW.
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Jamaica, Mexico, Uruguay Generation of wind power with total installed capacity of 350 MW and new farms under construction with a predicted total capacity of 400 MW.
Madrid Reaffirmation of the strategic partnership, conclusion of negotiations on the agreement between the European Union and Chile, restart of negotiations with MERCOSUR and commitments to hold negotiations on cooperation agreements between the European Union and the Andean Community and between the European Union and Central America.
Guadalajara Political consensus on the agenda items, progress towards a future partnership between the European Union and Central America and between the European Union and the Andean Community, and launch of the EUROsociAL programme.
Vienna Official launch of the negotiations on partnership agreements between the European Union and Central America and between the European Union and the Andean Community, incorporation of new participants into the official dialogue and the holding of a business summit and alternative summit.
Lima Launch of the EUrocLIMA programme for cooperation in mitigating the effects of climate change and announcement of the establishment of a strategic partnership between the European Union and Mexico.
The cooperation between the European Union and Latin America is guided by a medium-term strategy covering the period 2007-2013, which focuses on social and territorial cohesion, regional integration and higher education.
Latin America is the beneficiary of a major medium-term (2007-2013) European Union cooperation programme worth 556 million euros.
More than half of that amount will be devoted to promoting social and territorial cohesion and regional integration.
Activities in the latter area include encouraging the internationalization of small and medium-sized enterprises and the development of the information society.
The other cooperation programme funds are intended to improve the quality of higher education in Latin America through links with counterpart institutions in the European Union.
In addition, several cooperation networks have been created, linking universities and technology centres in the two regions for the purpose of fostering environmental technology transfer (see table II.14).
Between 2007 and 2010, these areas were promoted by means of separate programmes.
The purpose of this mechanism is to mobilize additional financing and thus to encourage beneficiary governments and public institutions to make crucial investments which cannot be financed by the market or by development finance institutions alone.
Its three interconnected strategic objectives are to: (a) improve interconnectivity between and within Latin American countries, in particular by establishing better energy and transport infrastructure; (b) strengthen protection of the environment and support climate change adaptation and mitigation measures; and (c) promote equitable, sustainable socio-economic development through the improvement of social services infrastructure and support for small and medium-sized enterprises.
The mechanism can support different types of operations, including grants to cofinance investments in public infrastructure projects, financing of loan guarantees, interest subsidies, technical assistance and risk capital operations.
The eligible financial institutions are European multilateral or national development finance institutions and Latin American financial institutions with European Union capital.
Latin America: Costa Rica, Mexico European Union: Finland, France, Italy, Spain Improve the quality of research and technology transfer at Latin American universities, strengthen their role in sustainable socioeconomic development, and encourage cooperation between higher education institutions in Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union in applied research and the transfer of technology relating to climate change.
Conclusions and recommendations Over the past three decades, the share of the European Union in Latin American and Caribbean trade has declined.
Although the European Union remains the region’s second largest trading partner, it could be overtaken by China by the mid-2010s (see section E).
The region of Latin America and the Caribbean imports mainly manufactured goods from the European Union, whereas its exports are predominantly commodities, which make up a larger proportion of its exports to the European Union than of its exports to other destinations, including the region itself and the United States.
In recent years, Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union have sought to give fresh impetus to their economic relations.
These efforts are reflected in the partnership agreements concluded by the European Union with the Central American countries (including Panama) and with the Caribbean (CARICOM countries plus the Dominican Republic), as well as in the free trade agreement concluded with Colombia and Peru.
There is a window of opportunity to infuse new energy into the strategic partnership between Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union.
In a context of low economic growth in the European Union and relatively strong growth in Latin America and the Caribbean, the region has increasing appeal for European exporters and investors.
Moreover, the European Union —the largest integrated market in the world and one with high per-capita income— continues to be a leading destination for Latin American and Caribbean exports.
Furthermore, the European Union produces numerous goods and services that are key inputs for the region’s production processes and that increase the competitiveness of its producers.
It has therefore become a major partner in the transfer of technology and knowledge to the region.
The European Union is a global leader in environmental protection, measures to combat climate change and corporate social responsibility, all of which contribute to broader and more inclusive development.
The European Union accounted for between 30% and 38% of all the patents granted worldwide between 2004 and 2006 in various categories of environmental technology (ECLAC, 2011c).
Furthermore, for more than a decade European Union institutions have been promoting the systematic incorporation of the concept of corporate social responsibility in the strategies of European companies.
Strengthening corporate partnerships between the region and the European Union should therefore contribute to the achievement of goals of achieving growth with greater equality and developing a less carbon-intensive competitive advantage, which should steer public policies in Latin America and the Caribbean in the next few years.
Given the highly complementary characteristics of the two regions, there is considerable potential for strengthening their economic ties.
To that end, the following initiatives are recommended: • The negotiations between MERCOSUR and the European Union should be concluded as soon as possible. • Cumulation of origin should be allowed under all agreements between the European Union and countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, as the European Union has done in its agreements with Mediterranean countries.
This would encourage the integration of production in the region and the development of regional and transregional value chains. • The European Union should continue to support the strengthening of the various subregional integration schemes in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Trade relations between Latin America and the Caribbean and the Asia-Pacific region Trade During the past decade, the region’s trade with the Asia-Pacific region showed much stronger growth than its trade with other major partners.
Between 2006 and 2010, Latin American and Caribbean exports to Asia-Pacific countries grew at more than three times the rate of the region’s exports to the rest of the world.
To a large extent, this was the result of a steep rise in exports to China, which grew at five times the rate of total exports to the rest of the world.
The region’s imports from the Asia-Pacific countries, in particular from China, have also grown more vigorously than total imports.
Imports outweigh exports in the region’s trade relationship with the Asia-Pacific region, which has generated a widening trade deficit with that region.
Trade between Latin America and the Caribbean and China passed the US$ 100 billion mark in 2007 and stood at US$ 183 billion in 2010; trade with China now accounts for half of all trade with the Asia-Pacific region (see table II.15).
The relative importance of each trading partner in the Asia-Pacific region has changed significantly over the past quarter-century, the most notable development being the waning share of Japan and the increasing prominence of China.
While in 1985 Japan was the destination for 50% of Latin American and Caribbean exports to the Asia-Pacific region and the source of 70% of the region’s imports, its share in both has fallen steadily.
By contrast, China’s share of Latin American and Caribbean exports to the Asia-Pacific region has risen steadily (from the mid-1990s), as have its imports to the region (from the early 1990s).
Consequently, between 2000 and 2005, China overtook Japan as the region’s leading Asia-Pacific trading partner (see figure II.19).
India, meanwhile, in spite of strong growth over the past two decades, receives only 6.4% of Latin American and Caribbean exports to the Asia-Pacific region and supplies 3.4% of its imports.
This places it behind the Republic of Korea as a trading partner for the region.
China is poised to overtake the European Union as the region’s second trading partner around the middle of the present decade.
If demand for the region’s products in the United States, the European Union and the rest of the world continues to grow at the current pace, and demand from China grows at just half the rate recorded during the past decade, China will overtake the European Union in 2014 and become the second largest market for the region’s exports.
A similar outcome is projected for imports, and China is expected to surpass the European Union in 2015 (see figure II.20).
The relative importance of Asia as a market for Latin American and Caribbean exports varies significantly from country to country.
While on average Asia accounts for slightly over 16% of the region’s exports, it receives 50% of Chilean exports, 30% of Cuban exports and over 25% of Brazilian and Peruvian exports.
At the other extreme, Asia receives 5% or less of total exports from Mexico, Central America (except for Costa Rica) and most Caribbean countries.
Asia is more important to the region as a source of imports than as a destination for exports, although this also varies widely among countries.
Asia’s share of total imports is equal to or greater than 20% for the South American countries (except for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) and Mexico, and is generally smaller for the Central American and Caribbean countries.
The pattern is similar in the specific case of Chinese imports and exports (see table II.16).
During the second half of the last decade, the Latin American and Caribbean region was China’s most dynamic trading partner and Japan’s second most dynamic partner.
Between 2005 and 2010, China’s exports to Latin America and the Caribbean and its imports from the region grew at almost double the rate of total imports and exports (see table II.17).
The region’s share of trade with China has increased gradually, rising from a very low starting point to a 6% share of total Chinese exports and imports in 2010 (see figure II.21).
Japanese exports to Latin America and the Caribbean grew faster than its exports to any other destination, while Japanese imports from the region were surpassed only by those from the Commonwealth of Independent States (see table II.18).
During the last decade, Latin America posted a deficit in its trade with Asia, owing to the growing trade deficit of Mexico and Central America.
As mentioned earlier, only a small proportion of those countries’ exports go to Asia, while an increasing percentage of their imports come from that region.
The result is a widening trade deficit with China and the rest of Asia (see figure II.22B).
Meanwhile, the South American economies, many of which send a high proportion of their exports to Asia, registered a more even trade balance with China and the rest of Asia during the last decade (see figure II.22A).
That outcome was largely the result of the fact that prices for the commodities exported to Asia by South American countries rose during much of the decade.
Latin American and Caribbean exports to Asia are more concentrated than the region’s exports to other major markets.
Primary products and natural-resourcebased products (mainly processed mineral products) dominate the region’s exports to China, India, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Manufactures make up a slightly larger proportion of exports only in the case of countries that are members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) (see figure II.23).
Owing in large part to rising demand from China, commodities are once again playing a leading role in the region’s export structure, contributing to a renewed emphasis on production of primary products in the region’s export sector in recent years (ECLAC, 2010b).
Except in the case of Costa Rica and Mexico, the export mix of the countries of the region to Asian countries remains concentrated, comprising a few commodities.
In almost every country except for Mexico, the three main export products represent over 80% of the value of total exports to the main destinations in Asia.
It is worth noting that high-tech products figure among the main products exported by Costa Rica, El Salvador and Mexico (see table II.19).
Of particular note – although it is an exceptional case – is Costa Rica’s success in staking a place in Asian value chains in the electronics sector.
According to figures from the World Trade Organization (WTO), trade between Costa Rica and China in parts and components associated with such chains jumped from 2.2% of bilateral trade in 1995 to 47% in 2008 (WTO, 2011b).
Asia is beginning to import new products from the region, although they do not generally feature among the top three export products.
These products include poultry, vegetable oils, fresh fruit, frozen fish, crustaceans and molluscs, fruit and vegetable juices, wine and processed woods.
Some fall into the category of primary products, but they are not considered commodities because there may be some qualitative differentiation among them.
As family incomes rise in Asia, and the region’s consumption patterns gradually become similar to those of the West, Asian demand for these products could expand considerably in the near future.
The study defines the global middle class as those households with daily expenditure of between US$ 10 and US$ 100 per capita in purchasing power parity terms.
Although many Latin American countries are major suppliers of natural resources for China, that country has diversified its sources of supply, reducing the region’s bargaining power.
In many natural resource sectors the region is competing with a handful of developed economies, such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United States, some developing countries in Asia (in particular those belonging to ASEAN) and some African countries (see table II.20).
However, this competition could open the door to attractive trade partnerships, in both production and technology, if approached from a strategic perspective.
Since the recent international financial crisis, Chinese exports have regularly been the target of antidumping investigations around the world, including in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Nonetheless in 2010 the number of investigations launched against China for dumping fell sharply with respect to 2009 in Latin America and the Caribbean (see figure II.24).
The recovery of demand in the region was probably a major reason for this, as this would have eased the competition between domestic producers and their overseas competitors.
These are also the countries that have the largest manufacturing sectors in the region, and their products compete with Chinese products in a number of areas.
Mexico is worthy of special mention, as Chinese imports have generated fierce resistance among the production sectors affected.
In response to pressure exerted by these sectors, Mexico signed a transitional trade agreement with China in June 2008.
Under this agreement, the so-called “compensatory quotas” applicable to 204 tariff headings, mainly in the textile, garment and footwear sectors, were extended until December 2011.
Mexico is therefore able to impose tariffs higher than those agreed within the World Trade Organization on Chinese imports covered by these headings.
With these quotas set to expire shortly, the parties will need to agree on mechanisms to avoid renewed tensions in bilateral trade.6 2.
Investment The region has gradually gained importance as a destination for foreign direct investment (FDI) from Japan and the Republic of Korea.
According to official data, total Japanese FDI in the region at year’s end in 2010, excluding investment channelled through the financial centres in the Caribbean, stood at over US$ 44 billion.
This constitutes the largest amount of cumulative Japanese FDI invested in emerging economies outside of Asia.
As of March 2011, the Republic of Korea had invested over US$ 7.1 billion in the region, again excluding funds flowing through Caribbean financial centres.
This figure is equivalent to total Korean FDI in Eastern Europe and Russia, and exceeds the amounts invested by that country in the Middle East and Africa (see figure II.25).
The region’s share of total FDI from these two countries is 5% and 4%, respectively.
These issues, including the search for ways to reduce Mexico’s trade deficit with China, were discussed at the Second China–Mexico Strategic Dialogue, held in Beijing in July 2011.
China’s foreign direct investment in the region has historically been very low, especially when compared with its high levels of bilateral trade.
The level of China’s bilateral trade with Latin American and Caribbean countries (almost US$ 125 billion in 2009) contrasts sharply with its foreign direct investment in the region (US$ 255 million in 2009, excluding investment through Caribbean financial centres) (ECLAC, 2010b).
This figure represents 0.6% of total Chinese direct investment worldwide and 0.3% of FDI inflows to Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, 2011a).
According to official Chinese sources, total Chinese FDI in the region up to year’s end in 2009, excluding the Caribbean financial centres, amounted to US$ 1.958 billion, or 0.8% of the total.
In that year, China invested over US$ 15 billion (ECLAC, 2011a), giving it a 9% share and making it the third largest foreign investor in Latin America and the Caribbean, after the United States (17%) and the Netherlands (13%).
Chinese investment has mainly targeted Brazil, Argentina and Peru, countries with which it maintains significant trade relations.
Over 90% of these investments have gone to natural resource extraction, mainly in the hydrocarbons sector and to a lesser extent, mining.
Total Chinese investment in the region announced for 2011 amounts to US$ 22.7 billion (see table II.21).
Time will tell whether this trend is temporary or whether 2010 marked the beginning of a new era in economic relations between China and the region, one in which high levels of trade will be accompanied by increasing investment (ECLAC, 2011d).
Asian FDI in Latin America in recent decades has been prompted mainly by three factors: access to natural resources, access to markets and greater efficiency in production and administration (efficiencyseeking FDI).
In the manufacturing sector, Asian industries, including textiles, paper, automobiles, electronics, information technology and communications, have selected Mexico or MERCOSUR countries —Brazil in particular— as the site for their first production bases in Latin America.
This move affords them a means of gaining a foothold and expanding their presence in the NAFTA and MERCOSUR markets.
In addition, Mexico can facilitate access not only to the United States but also to the countries of Central America and the Caribbean, while MERCOSUR can offer a potential platform for export to other Latin American countries, enabling them to capitalize on geographical proximity and the network of MERCOSUR trade agreements in the region.
Provided that salaries in developing countries in Asia continue to rise, this type of FDI could become an important Asian platform for offshore exports to markets in the United States, Europe and even Latin America.
Efficiencyseeking FDI inflows tend to boost the recipient country’s manufacturing exports, enhancing its international competitiveness through transfer and assimilation of foreign technology, training of human resources, creation and expansion of production chains and development of local businesses.
There are nonetheless some drawbacks to this kind of FDI, such as low value added, with an emphasis on static rather than dynamic local comparative advantages; heavy dependence on imported components; and absence of industrial clusters.
These disadvantages have been seen in a number of FDI projects in Latin America, regardless of origin.
Latin America has also recently invested substantial sums in various sectors in China.
The largest investments were made in the aeronautical, electrical, information technology, agro-industrial and footwear sectors.
One of the main Argentine investors is the Techint group, which has invested heavily in the iron and steel sector in China (ECLAC, 2010c).
Arcor, an Argentine food producer, has set up a complex distribution network encompassing 50 Chinese cities.
Mexican investors include Bimbo, the country’s largest food producer, and Grupo Maseca, also a food corporation, which opened a factory in Shanghai with an investment of approximately US$ 100 million in 2006.
Thus, though incipient, Latin American investment in China, especially by trans-Latin firms, is growing.
Strategic aspects of the biregional trade relationship In the past few years integration in the Asia-Pacific region has evolved from a de facto situation towards a more formal structure.
ASEAN has spearheaded this de jure integration process through a series of trade liberalization initiatives with other Asian countries.
Following the signing of multiple trade agreements in the Asia-Pacific region, some kind of tariff preference now applies to almost half of all trade within Asia.
At the same time, with various objectives in mind (in particular, greater market access), Australia, China, Japan, India, the Republic of Korea, Singapore and other Asia-Pacific economies have signed free trade agreements and established strategic partnerships with Latin America.
The de jure economic integration process in the Asia-Pacific region has not been uniform, and has taken different paths and proceeded at different rates of implementation.
The impact on Latin America and the Caribbean of the proliferation of trade agreements in the Asia-Pacific region is difficult to predict, and will depend to a large extent on the evolution of the various initiatives currently being negotiated or studied.
These include a project to create a free trade area covering the 10 ASEAN members, plus China, Japan and the Republic of Korea (known as ASEAN+3), to which Australia, India and New Zealand might eventually be added (known as ASEAN+6).
In addition, negotiations are under way to expand the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP).7 Latin American exports face strong competition in the Chinese and Indian markets from ASEAN economies.
Although currently China relies more on Latin America and the Caribbean than on ASEAN for its primary products, ASEAN supplies a bigger share of its natural-resource-based manufactures, an area in which the region’s potential for export expansion and diversification should become evident in the years to come.
In the case of India, the share of the ASEAN countries is greater than that of the region in both categories (see table II.22).
This process, in which two countries of the region (Chile and Peru) are participating, is being led by the United States.
As trade barriers between Asian countries are progressively dismantled, more trade may be diverted away from Latin America and the Caribbean.
China, India, Japan, the Republic of Korea and other Asian economies all maintain high tariffs in sectors in which the region has an export interest, such as agriculture, textiles and garments and some machinery sectors (see table II.23).
As a result, the reduction or elimination of these tariffs in the framework of existing agreements between ASEAN and each of the four countries mentioned above, in addition to that of a future ASEAN+3 agreement, would give the ASEAN countries an advantage over the Latin American and Caribbean region.
The trade lost by Latin America and the Caribbean could be substantial unless proactive policies are put in place through bilateral or subregional trade agreements to enable the countries of the region to access the main Asian markets on an equal footing with their Asian counterparts.
Chile and Peru have been the most proactive in this regard, as the two countries in Latin America and the Caribbean that send the largest proportions of their total exports to the Asia-Pacific region.
They have been joined recently by Costa Rica, which has signed free trade agreements with China and Singapore, and Colombia, which is negotiating an agreement with the Republic of Korea (see table II.24).
These initiatives demonstrate that Latin American countries are endeavouring to take a longer-term view of their relations with the Asia-Pacific region, although to date there is no common strategy.
Japan’s experience with economic partnership agreements highlights the importance that it attaches to cooperation as a complement to trade liberalization and investment.
In the six years since this agreement has been in force, Japan has expanded and deepened its cooperation in all these areas.
Likewise, Japan’s international cooperation in Asia has complemented and deepened economic integration efforts in that region (ECLAC, 2009).
The Latin America and Caribbean region is seeking to emulate this integrated approach in its economic ties with other Asian partners such as China and the Republic of Korea.
Conclusions and recommendations China is emerging from the crisis with a stronger production, technology and finance base, and with closer ties with the Asia-Pacific economies.
Recent estimates suggest that its gross domestic product, measured in terms of purchasing power parity, will surpass that of the United States in 2016, making it the world’s largest economy.8 This trend coincides with a considerable strengthening of China’s trade links with emerging and developing economies.
The severe impact of the world crisis on industrialized economies and China’s remarkable resilience, coupled with its closer ties with developing economies, explain the current two-speed recovery of the global economy.
Asia-Pacific is the most dynamic region in the world economy, and Latin American and Caribbean countries should strive to forge a new relationship with it.
These efforts will be more fruitful if the region adopts a coordinated approach, since, by taking advantage of synergies, economies of scale and combined political will, it will be able to aspire to more ambitious trade and investment goals.
Current economic and trade conditions are highly favourable for pursuing a new kind of relationship between the two regions.
Indeed, the favourable growth outlook in both regions offers a unique opportunity to lay the foundations for a new era in trade and investment relations.
Such forums already exist for dialogue with the European Union and the United States, but not with China.
Set up in 1999, the Forum brings together 18 Latin American countries and 16 Asia-Pacific countries, including all the region’s main trading partners, except India.
Its main objective is to promote closer economic, political and cooperation ties between the two regions.
Five ministerial meetings have been held for that purpose since 2001, the most recent in Argentina in August 2011.
In addition to maintaining a dialogue with the Asia-Pacific region as a whole, Latin America and the Caribbean should establish individual strategies for some Asia-Pacific countries, given the dissimilarities among them.
Because of those differences, and the varying levels of interest in and importance of relations between the Asia-Pacific countries and Latin America and the Caribbean, individual dialogues and activities should be organized, at least with four key players: China, Japan, the Republic of Korea and ASEAN.
Appropriate action needs to be taken to address concerns about and defensive attitudes towards China’s industrial exports in the region.
In this area and in other manufacturing industries, Chinese and Latin American producers perhaps need to adopt a more coordinated, medium-term perspective, focusing on complementarities and opportunities for cooperation.
In the absence of such dialogue, trade conflicts are likely to continue, prompting new dumping accusations and giving rise to non-tariff barriers.
The huge excess savings of China and other Asia-Pacific countries make them superb potential investors in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The Asia-Pacific countries, especially China, have money available that could provide additional funding for important infrastructure, energy, transport and logistics projects in the region.
In this context, the governments of the region should consider assembling a joint portfolio of investment projects designed to attract funding from Chinese banks and companies and the Chinese government.
Investment by China in infrastructure and energy projects would not only strengthen its economic relations with the region, but would also generate positive externalities for the process of Latin American regional integration.
Infrastructure projects developed within the framework of the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA) and the Meso-America Project would be natural candidates for such investment.
Efforts to strengthen economic relations with Asia should not focus only on trade and investment; they should also seek to foster cooperation.
The region can learn a great deal from Asia and would benefit from closer interregional cooperation.
The integrated three-prong approach taken by Japan, incorporating trade, investment and cooperation, offers a particularly good model.
The region should seek to emulate this comprehensive approach in its relations with other Asian counterparts.
The time is right for the Latin American and Caribbean countries to come together and set regional priorities for their relations with the Asian countries, proposing a mutually beneficial strategic partnership.
China, for its part, could make good use of its vast international reserves by supporting such investments and by capitalizing on its presence in regional multilateral banks to encourage projects aimed at modernizing the production methods and technology and enhancing the export capacity of small and medium-sized enterprises in Latin American and the Caribbean.
It could also foster a more active exchange between universities and technology centres, and a closer dialogue between business organizations, in order to explore and promote mutually advantageous agendas that will help forestall potential trade disputes through dialogue and shared benefits.
Introduction This chapter describes some of the main challenges that the transformation process under way in the world economy poses to the economic integration efforts of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Following the introduction, section B summarizes the changes that have the greatest influence on the region’s international integration in the future, while section C briefly reviews the main assets that the region can use to tackle those transformations.
Section D examines the region’s trade integration performance based on different variables, including current and potential share of intraregional trade in the region’s total trade, intraregional share in the region’s manufacturing exports, and the effect on intraregional commerce of the trade in parts and components (widely used as an indicator of the presence of value chains).
That section also gives an overview of the main arguments why strengthening integration is vital to improve the region’s international standing.
Section E presents some policy guidelines in that vein, while section F provides some conclusions.
The international context The Latin American and Caribbean region is both a witness and a protagonist in the changing world economy, as the economic centre of gravity moves towards what are known as emerging countries.
As described in chapter I, in recent years emerging countries have become more important, not only in terms of world output, but also in trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) flows, in international reserve holdings and even in new patents.
Thus for the first time in 2010, emerging and transition economies received over half of total foreign direct investment flows.
These countries were also the source of 29% of FDI flows, their largest share ever.
The bulk of FDI originating in developing countries went to other developing countries (UNCTAD, 2011).
If current trends continue, emerging economies will be responsible for half of world output and exports by the end of this decade.
The international governance structure represented by the Bretton Woods institutions appears ill-equipped to tackle these major changes.
As emerging economies have grown in importance, international governance forums have been forced to reflect this reality.
This can be seen in the difficulties during discussions to reform international financial institutions and the Doha Round negotiations of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
More recently established bodies, such as the Group of Twenty and the BRIC Group (Brazil, Russian Federation, India and China), which seek more decision-making power for emerging countries in major international debates, are not yet in a position to take a leading role.
They do, however, have the necessary clout to negotiate with industrialized economies.
These opportunities are unprecedented, and they should be encouraged so that developing economies can combine growth and equality with international integration.
This shifting centre of gravity in the world economy is being led by Asia-Pacific, which highlights that region’s growing importance for Latin America and the Caribbean.
This importance is attributable not only to Asia-Pacific’s rapid economic growth (see chapter I), but also to its large and growing population.
Although this proportion is expected to decline gradually over the next four decades (mainly as a result of slower population growth in China), there is still a contrast with the expected standstill in population figures in the European Union (see table III.1).
The expected surge in Asian middle classes over the next few decades (see chapter I) offers a major opportunity for the Latin American and Caribbean exporters.
The consumer patterns of the middle classes usually reflect a demand for differentiated services, which could create openings in areas such as agroindustry or niche tourism.
This suggests that, over the next few decades, the quality of the region’s international economic integration will be strongly determined by its links with other emerging economies.
The main channel for these links today is the region’s trade with other developing countries (South-South trade).
Another channel that has been gaining in importance is investment, both in terms of inflows of Asian capital including FDI and in terms of outward investments made by the region’s companies (especially trans-Latins) in Asia and other emerging regions.
There is also considerable scope for developing partnerships between Latin American and Caribbean companies and those of other emerging regions in the form of a variety of production arrangements that are becoming increasingly common in the context of global value chains.
Such forms of transborder activity have greatly increased in recent years, and this is particularly significant in developing countries As far as trade is concerned, developing economies have become an increasingly important destination for the region’s exports.
Over the past 10 years, the share of industrialized economies in the Latin American and Caribbean region’s exports fell from 76% to 61%, while the share of developing economies rose from 24% to 39%.
This trend is even sharper if Mexico —which sends over 80% of its exports to the United States— is not included.
In that case, over half the region’s exports go to developing economies (see table III.2).
The developing economies are increasingly important export markets for almost all subregions and countries within Latin America and the Caribbean, but there are substantial differences.
The members of the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) rely much more on emerging economies as export markets —for two thirds of their total exports on average— than the Central American and Andean countries, Mexico and the Caribbean.
On the other hand, most South American economies that export natural resources have gradually shifted their sales to China and the rest of Asia (see chapter II).
Along with the growing weight of emerging countries, other hallmarks of the world economy in the next few years will be the structuring of production into value chains,1 intensive technological change and the need to move to lower-carbon production patterns.
These three elements will shape an international context in which competitiveness is increasingly dependent on countries’ capacities to absorb new techno-economic paradigms that embed more knowledge into goods, services and production processes.
In addition to offering considerable opportunities, this new international framework requires the region’s countries to make major efforts to generate and absorb technology, as well as develop human resources C.
The region’s assets The recent global financial crisis showcased the increased robustness of macroeconomic policies in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Although the region’s output, employment and social indicators were not spared the negative impacts of the crisis, they proved more resilient than in previous episodes (when smaller shocks caused worse economic and social consequences).
The region’s unprecedented resilience in coping with the crisis is a reflection of the economic capacities built up during the favourable international economic cycle and the implementation of good macroeconomic management practices, including fiscal responsibility, control over inflation and external accounts, and maintaining an appropriate level of international reserves.
These were the strengths that, for the first time and unlike in previous episodes, enabled the region not only to avoid crises related to exchange rates, finances and the balance of payments , but also to adopt countercyclical measures to reduce the impact on employment and social conditions in the case of most countries.
As a result, regional GDP has experienced a dramatic upturn, with growth of 5.9% in 2010 and projected growth of 4.4% in Improved social indicators and the growth of the middle class in recent years have helped to increase the strategic value of the Latin American and Caribbean market.
The region’s solid growth performance over most of the last decade went hand in hand with a steady rise in per capita income between 2003 and 2008 (climbing again from 2010 onwards).
And, in step with the upturn in the regional economy since 2010, the considerable progress made in reducing poverty and unemployment during the favourable 2003-2008 cycle (poverty down from 44% to 33%, and unemployment down from 11% to 7.4%) has resumed.
The projected fall in regional unemployment to pre-crisis levels in 2011, and the increase in formal wage employment as a proportion of total employment in several countries, should lead to further poverty reduction (ECLAC, 2011b).
The backdrop to all of the above is the expansion of the middle classes in Latin America over the past two decades.
Between 1990 and 2007, the number of middle-class households increased by 56 million in the ten Latin American countries that represent 80% of the region’s population, bringing the total number of such households to 128 million (Franco, Hopenhayn and León, 2011).
This widening of the consumer market increases the region’s attractiveness as a trading partner and destination for foreign investment.
The Latin American and Caribbean region is a major global agricultural producer, particularly for soybean (with the region accounting for almost half of See chapter I and WTO and IDE-JETRO (2011). worldwide production), beef (generating nearly a third of production) and milk (accounting for just under a quarter of production) (see table III.3.A).
The region is responsible for over 45% of world copper production, and more than 20% of global production of molybdenum, zinc and tin (see table III.3.B).
In terms of energy, the region represents 40% of world biofuels production (see table III.3.C).
The Latin American and Caribbean region has the world’s largest freshwater reserves.
The region hosts one third of the planet’s entire water reserves (see figure III.1).
This is a massively important asset, given the increasingly strategic nature of water.
Indeed, water is as essential for socioeconomic development as it is for ecosystem conservation.
However, the world as a whole (and many water basins in the region) is showing signs of relative water scarcity, such as environmental degradation, pollution, aquifer depletion, unsustainable usage and problematic allocation.
One in every three people in the world is facing a water shortage (Comprehensive Assessment of Water Management in Agriculture, 2007).
Projected world population growth will probably exacerbate this situation in the decades to come.
The region is thought to have around 885 million hectares that could be brought under crop production, which represents a third of worldwide availability (see table III.4).
Indeed, given projections for world population growth, by 2050 it is estimated that annual cereal production will have to increase by 1.0 billion additional tonnes, and beef production by 200 million tons (Campbell, 2011).
Integration and the region’s challenges in developing its international linkages The Latin America and the Caribbean region has failed to significantly increase its share in global merchandise exports over the past three decades.
Despite the high prices recorded between 2003 and 2008 for many of the region’s commodity exports, its share of world goods exports was practically the same at the beginning of this decade as at the end of the last (see figure III.2a).
This represents a slack performance in terms of export volume (see ECLAC, 2009, chapter II).
In any event, this stagnation was largely determined by the sluggish performance of Mexican exports: while this country’s share in world merchandise exports fell from 2.6% in 2000 to 2% in 2010, the rest of the region’s share rose from 3% to 3.8% in the same period.
This pattern was strongly influenced by the growth of South American exports of natural resources to Asia, again confirming the existence of two different patterns in the region, one complementing and one competing with Asia.
Also in the past three decades, the region’s share in global service exports has slipped from 4.5% in 1980 to 3.4% in 2010.
Of even greater concern is the region’s small share in “Other business services”, the fastest-growing export category worldwide during the past decade (see figure III.2b).
This category includes the most technologyand knowledge-intensive activities, such as engineering, architecture, design, information technology, and legal and accounting services.
The region’s lag in producing and exporting these services has direct and indirect effects on its merchandise export performance and on its international competitiveness in general.
This is because production support services (such as financial, telecommunications and professional services) are key to the manufacturing process, as well as representing a significant proportion of the final price of finished manufactures.
In an international context characterized by the growing participation of emerging economies in world exports, the region’s performance appears rather sluggish.
Over the past decade, the volume of the region’s merchandise exports and the value of its service exports grew more slowly than the respective world averages (2.1% versus 3.4%, and 7.3% versus 9.3%, respectively).
Only the value of merchandise exports in the region came close to the world average (7.4% versus 7.6%), thanks to high raw material prices during much of the past decade (see ECLAC, 2009, chapter III).
These are all worrying facts because achieving sustained high growth rates will require the region’s countries (especially small and medium-sized ones) to continue basing growth on export development.
Although there are considerable differences across the subregions as regards export orientation, a problem they all share is the lack of value added and embedded knowledge and technology.
South American countries specialize mainly in exporting primary products and processed primary products, which has been reinforced by strong demand from Asia (particularly China).
Central American countries and Mexico have deepened their specialization in exports of garment and some electronic and electrical items (and automotive industry outputs in the case of Mexico).
Many of these exports come from maquila operations or free zones, and mainly take the form of assembly activities.
Lastly, Caribbean countries have increased their specialization in services, particularly tourism, financial, back-office and call-centre services.
The common denominator in all three patterns is specialization based on static competitive advantages, such as abundant natural resources or unskilled labour, and the lack of value added or knowledge creation for the final products and production processes.
Irrespective of the category, the region’s export products have become commodities with unstable prices that are sensitive to economic conditions in developed countries.
Furthermore, they are very import-intensive (particularly those based on assembly operations), which affects the trade balance and hinders the building of linkages with the rest of the production system.
The emergence of global value chains and the growing importance of innovation in international production and trade are forcing the region to take new steps to integrate into the world economy.
Since the 1980s, the region’s countries have made huge efforts to open their markets and reduce anti-export bias, first by means of unilateral liberalization and then through trade agreements.
Nevertheless, openness and liberalization have been necessary but not sufficient conditions for increased For instance, the possibility of using free trade agreements with socalled “mega markets” (including the United States, the European Union and China) as an export platform for several neighbouring integration can thus provide regional public goods that neither markets nor national governments alone can provide successfully.
For instance, the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA) and the Meso-America Project are institutional arrangements that aim to coordinate national efforts to develop a good regional physical infrastructure.
In addition, national specificities tend to become diluted in the face of major global economic trends.
The region’s economies (with the exception of Brazil and Mexico) are not big enough to be attractive by themselves unless they form part of a regional bloc.
Intraregional trade within Latin America and the Caribbean remains limited compared with other regions.
Throughout this period, however, the share of intraregional exports in the region’s total exports has never exceeded 20% (see figure III.3).
This percentage is lower only in sub-Saharan Africa, and is far from the 46% average for intraregional trade in East Asia and the Pacific between 2006 and 2009.
It is only in the Central American Common Market that intrasubregional trade has represented a steady 25% of total exports over the past decade.
At the other extreme are Andean Community countries, where the intrasubregional market has never represented more than 10% of total exports during the past 20 years (see figure III.4).
The first is to find a strategic vision that links policies on export promotion and diversification, innovation and technological dissemination, FDI attraction and human resource training.
The second is to promote public-private partnerships to define common aims and work together to achieve them, thus emulating (while adapting to the various national situations) the experiences of many countries in Europe, Asia and Oceania that have successfully integrated into the world economy (Devlin and Moguillansky, 2010).
Failure to do so would leave them at risk of being increasingly passed over by private economic agents and even national governments themselves.
In this record, there are many reasons why the regional market is essential for improving the international integration of Latin America and the Caribbean and moving towards changing production patterns with equity.
In addition to these conventional reasons for integration, there is also the fact that in today’s globalized economy, competitiveness increasingly involves regional elements.
In fact, competitiveness includes aspects such as adequate infrastructure, efficient transport systems, telecommunications connectivity and simple and streamlined customs procedures.
All of these rely competitiveness levels being similar in the participating economies.
In contrast with East Asia and South-East Asia, intraregional trade in Latin America and the Caribbean remains dominated by trade in final goods.
The rapid growth of Asian intraregional trade has been closely linked to the increasing geographical fragmentation of production along value chains, and has therefore been characterized by strong growth in trade in parts and components (see WTO and IDE-JETRO, 2011).
Several studies have found that the various subregions of Latin America and the Caribbean, and the region as a whole, are not fully exploiting the potential offered by intraregional trade.
Various estimates of potential intraregional and intrasubregional exports, based on historical flows and the structural characteristics of integration scheme members (including income levels, distance and degree of openness) reveal higher levels than those currently observed for all schemes (Durán and Lo Turco, 2010).
These gaps are thought to be wider for MERCOSUR and the Andean Community (see figure III.6).
There is also considerable scope for increasing the mutual trade flows of the region’s countries with Mexico, given that a high proportion of this country’s foreign trade is with the United States.
Although the gap between actual and potential intraregional trade is The definition of parts and components includes machinery, transport equipment and electronics.
It does not therefore reflect the production integration that may exist among countries in other sectors such as agroindustry or the chemical industry. probably around 20% for the region as a whole, alternative estimates based on gravity models incorporating a higher number of variables4 point to a gap of closer to 30% (IDB, ECLAC and World Bank, 2011).
In terms of export structure, there is greater potential to expand intraregional trade in medium- to high-technology manufactures and natural resources (see figure III.7).
The regional market has a strategic value, given both its significant share as a destination for Latin American and Caribbean manufacturing exports and its growing middle class.
Over half of the manufacturing exports (not based on natural resources) of 14 Latin American and Caribbean countries go to other countries within the region.
In fact, if Mexico is excluded, 52% of the region’s manufacturing exports go to other countries in the region itself (see table III.5).
The region itself is also the main export market for SMEs in Latin America and Caribbean (ECLAC, 2009, chapter III).
The regional market today is clearly the most important for high-valueadded and knowledge- and labour-intensive exports.
As such, these exports are the most conducive to inclusive and environmentally sustainable development based on dynamic competitive advantages (as opposed to the region’s traditional static comparative advantages associated with its abundant natural resources and low-cost labour).
The regional market is even more attractive given the surge in its middle classes over the past 20 years.
Lo Turco “El comercio intrarregional en América Latina: Patrón de especialización y potencial exportador”, Los impactos de la crisis internacional en América Latina: ¿Hay margen para el diseño de políticas regionales?, M.I.
Raw materials Natural-resource- Low-technology based manufactures manufactures Gap between actual and potential figures Values observed the basis of J.
In this context, it would be valuable to deepen economic integration in the regional sphere.
For those countries (mainly South American ones) that have intensified their specialization in commodities in recent years, increased regional economic integration would balance growing Asian demand for such products by reducing exposure to commodity price volatility and helping to develop more sophisticated export categories.
Greater integration would also help to open new niches for those countries (mainly Mexico and Central America) whose manufacturing exports are facing increasing Asian competition in their main traditional market, the United States.
The small percentage of intraregional trade in Latin America and the Caribbean is partly attributable to the natural-resource-based export pattern of many of its economies, but it also has to do with the lack of an integrated economic space.
Despite significant progress, trade liberalization remains incomplete, both among subregions and within integration schemes.
More specifically, there are non-tariff barriers that may be more restrictive than tariffs themselves, given their often opaque and discretional nature.
Recent episodes of trade friction within the region show that much remains to be done in this regard.
Furthermore, there is insufficient political will to move forward with the accumulation of origin agenda, and this limits the opportunities to creating regional value chains.
The development of value chains in the region is restricted not only by persistent obstacles to merchandise trade and limitations on cumulation of origin, but also by the uneven treatment of regulatory issues.
The experiences of East Asia and Central and Eastern Europe appear to bear out the idea that functional value chains require a minimum level of regulatory harmonization among participating countries.
In those regions, de facto (market-led) integration has been accompanied by formal integration (led by governments and represented by various trade agreements).
This is known as the “deep integration” agenda, as opposed to “superficial integration”, which consists simply of removing tariff and non-tariff barriers at borders.
Formal trade agreements ultimately consolidate the results of de facto integration and promote further integration by fixing transparent and legally enforceable rules of play.
The pending agenda in the region is particularly important from the point of view of deep integration.
Trade in services is lagging even behind merchandise trade with regard to liberalization (even within integration schemes).
The progress made in defining common regimes has been insufficient in crucial areas such as treatment of foreign investment, public procurement and incentive policies.
In these and other areas, there are major differences in the scope and depth of commitments made within the various schemes.
Such shortcomings are magnified by the lack of credible mechanisms for settling trade disputes.
Frustration at these shortfalls and other factors have led some of countries to conclude free trade agreements with partners from outside the region, although these do not constitute a true alternative to regional integration.
These agreements improve access to important markets but usually lack a broad development focus, and therefore do not guarantee increased international competitiveness.
In particular, agreements with industrialized countries tend to contain provisions in aforementioned areas (including services, investment, government procurement, intellectual property, and environmental and labour measures) that may limit the public-policy autonomy of the region’s countries.
This is the case whenever such provisions impose stricter commitments than those laid down in agreements of the World Trade Organization (WTO) (Rosales and Sáez 2010), and are not necessarily appropriate for the level of institutional development or the development priorities of the region’s countries.
In the subregional or regional spheres, on the other hand, Latin American and Caribbean countries have greater autonomy to agree on appropriate levels of regulation in such matters.
As noted earlier, integration is an obvious way to provide important regional public goods, which are generally missing from the agenda of agreements with partners outside the region.
The clearest examples are the Association Agreements concluded between the European Union and Central and Eastern European countries in the 1990s, through which the latter gradually acquired the same corpus of regulations as the European Community.
This made it possible to consolidate and intensify the de facto integration that had been under way since the fall of the Berlin Wall.
This process led to most Central and Eastern European countries joining the European Union from 2004 onwards. made it possible to consolidate and intensify the de facto integration that had been under way since the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Some policy guidelines Tapping the considerable potential offered by the regional market will require action on several fronts.
Progress needs to be made in the regulatory dimension of integration, as well narrowing the physical infrastructure gaps that limit regional connectivity (and with it the possibility of balanced territorial development).
This section introduces some policy guidelines to make better use of the potential of trade integration.
These guidelines have formed part of ECLAC recommendations for several years (for instance ECLAC, 2009 and 2010a) and the international context facing the region today has made them that much more relevant.
Economic and trade integration There is broad scope for generating synergy and increasing convergence among the various components of the region’s economic integration architecture.
First, it would be advisable to complete the network of preferential agreements among the region’s economies, with the main missing links being those between Mexico and South America.
Second, progress should be made towards greater convergence among the various preferential agreements in the region, so as to maximize synergies and minimize problems of fragmentation.
Given the size of the economies involved, the link between Mexico and MERCOSUR is the only element missing in the network of preferential trade links within the region.
Except for the free trade agreement between Mexico and Uruguay that has been in force since 2004, the relationship remains regulated by partial scope agreements that basically deal with the automotive trade.
This explains the importance of the decision by the Governments of Brazil and Mexico in November 2010 to open negotiations for a strategic economic integration agreement.
If the agreement comes to fruition, it could energize the entire process of Latin American economic integration, acting as a catalyst for convergence between South America and Meso-America.
The agreement could also help to reduce the strong dependence of Mexican exports on the United States market (ECLAC, 2010b).
In any event, progress is continuing in new preferential links between Mexico and Central America, and between Mexico and South America, on the other.
This was demonstrated by Peru’s recent signing of free trade agreements with Mexico (in April 2011), Panama and Costa Rica (both There are also new initiatives under way to achieve greater convergence among countries and integration schemes.
First, Mexico and the Central American countries are moving forward with negotiations aimed at combining their three existing trade agreements into a single accord.
Second, the official launch of the initiative known as the Pacific Alliance, which is aimed at forming a deep integration scheme encompassing Colombia, Chile, Mexico and Peru took place in April 2011(see box III.1).
As is already happening in Meso-America, South American countries should take up the agenda of economic and trade convergence in their subregion.
Over several years, there have been technical proposals on the table for moving forward with this aim.
For instance, in 2006 the Secretariats of MERCOSUR, the Andean Community and the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) produced a series of proposals along these lines, in accordance with the mandate conferred on them in September 2005 by the Heads of State and Government of the then South American Community of Nations.
This mandate referred back to the aim of gradually forming a South American free trade area (ECLAC, 2010a).
These proposals include a wide range of issues,6 providing a good technical basis to resume discussions on a possible trade convergence process within South America.
These include tariffs, rules of origin, customs valuation, trade protection mechanisms, non-tariff measures, technical barriers to trade, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, trade in services, investment, intellectual property, competition policy, public procurement and dispute settlement.
Its main aim is to set up an area of deep integration to encourage regional integration, as well as to increase the growth, development and competitiveness of member economies.
Gradual progress will therefore be made towards the free circulation of goods, services, capital and people among member countries.
The Lima Declaration states that the Pacific Alliance is open to Latin American countries that share its goals, and that it aims to contribute to the consolidation of the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative (of which all the Alliance’s countries are members) as a space of discussion and a mechanism for approaching Asia-Pacific.
In the first stage, the work of the Pacific Alliance will be concentrated in the following areas: (i) movement of business workers and facilitation of migratory flows (including police cooperation); (ii) trade and integration, including trade facilitation and customs cooperation; (iii) services and capital, including the possibility of integrating stock markets; and (iv) cooperation and dispute-settlement mechanisms.
The Lima Declaration lays down the following mandates, on which progress will be assessed at a meeting in Mexico in December 2011: To formulate a draft framework agreement, in order to standardize existing free trade agreements among member countries, to be submitted to Presidents for their consideration in December.
To drive processes of physical and electrical interconnection within existing bilateral and subregional working groups.
To set up a high-level group to oversee the progress of technical groups, assess new areas of work and prepare a proposal for approaching and relating to other regional groups or agencies, especially in Asia-Pacific.
A useful first step towards convergence and greater productive integration would be to allow cumulation of origin among the region’s countries.
Some of the economic complementarity agreements (ECA) concluded in the framework of LAIA already provide for cumulation for materials originating in nonmember countries.
However, most of the other ECAs do not yet consider this possibility (see LAIA, 2011).
This reduces the opportunity for developing regional and subregional value chains, thus limiting the possibilities for greater productive integration.
The region already has some multilateral initiatives under way to promote cumulation of origin.
One initiative is the aforementioned negotiations between Mexico and Central American countries.
In the latter case, efforts have been hampered by the fact that some member countries have not concluded free trade agreements with each other.
As the number of non-preferential trade relations within the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative comes down (for instance, with the entry into force of recent agreements between Peru and Costa Rica, Mexico and Panama), it should become easier to work towards broad cumulation of origin among the 11 members.
Another major challenge is to preserve as much as possible the tariff preferences and normative commitments between the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and member countries of the Andean Community.
In this context, bilateral negotiations have been held between each of the remaining members of the Andean Community and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, with a view to concluding new productive and economic complementarity agreements that make it possible, inter alia, to preserve the tariff arrangements.
Meanwhile, it has been agreed that Andean preferences will now remain in force until Trade facilitation Latin America and the Caribbean lags behind the world leaders in terms of costs associated with foreign trade operations.
In most of the region’s countries, the cost of exporting —and especially of importing— a container is several times higher than in Singapore, the world’s most efficient economy (see figure III.8).
This is due to various shortcomings, including transport infrastructure deficiencies, inefficient customs procedures and an insufficient supply of quality logistics services at internationally competitive prices.
In this context, trade facilitation should be understood as a broad concept that includes not only reduced red tape and shorter completion times for foreign trade, but also adequate availability of infrastructure for transport and logistics services.
As a result, this involves gradually filling the wide infrastructure deficit in the region.
That will require huge investment, which means that the resulting benefits will necessarily take a long time to mature (see section E.3).
Notwithstanding, efficiency gains can be made in the shorter term and at a lower cost by further streamlining customs and other procedures that affect merchandise trade across national borders.
Examples include reforms aimed at introducing one-stop windows for foreign trade and programmes for authorized economic operators.
The implementation of reforms such as those described falls mainly within the competence of national governments, including the strengthening of cooperation among various agencies (such as customs, health and migration services).
However, the subregional or regional coordination of national efforts may create significant synergies in this area.
One example of this is integrated border control and standardized procedures and formalities, which can all help to reduce overlap and cost, as well as facilitating the smoother movement of goods across borders.
Certain recent experiences illustrate the potential of subregional cooperation for trade facilitation.
Members of the Meso-America Project are gradually implementing the Meso-American procedure for the international shipment of goods (TIM).
This consists in introducing IT systems and standardized procedures at border checkpoints, so as to optimize customs and quarantine procedures and formalities for international goods in transit.
Pilot tests for the TIM procedure at the El Amatillo border crossing between El Salvador and Honduras have resulted in a reduction in average transit time from over one hour to eight minutes (ECLAC, 2010a, chapter V).
Based on this experience, and as part of efforts to set up a customs union, members of the Central American Common Market have set the target of implementing an electronic customs system by 2015.
This includes the compulsory use of electronic declarations, full interconnection of the computer systems of national customs, harmonization of customs procedures and the introduction of a virtual onestop shop for foreign trade (Pellandra and Fuentes, 2011). 3.
Infrastructure Latin America and the Caribbean is well known for having a wide infrastructure gap.
The quality of transport infrastructure (including roads, ports, airport and railways) in particular falls short of the world average in almost all of the region’s economies, and is below the South-East Asian average in all countries in the region (IDB, ECLAC and World Bank, 2011).
This has a negative impact not only on the quality of the region’s integration in the world economy, but also on its capacity to achieve territorial development along with growing social cohesion (ECLAC, 2011a).
Economic infrastructure refers to all the permanent engineering structures, equipment and physical facilities that are the basis for providing energy, transport, telecommunications, water and sanitation services to productive sectors and households Projections of needs for the next few years leave no doubt that Latin America and the Caribbean is allocating insufficient funding to economic infrastructure.
The lynchpins of transborder development, including bioceanic corridors, may have a doubly positive impact.
First, they help to increase the competitiveness of the countries and regions they link by reducing transport time and costs associated with intraregional and extraregional trade.
Second, they contribute to a more balanced territorial development among countries, and among regions within a country, by opening up new production and communication opportunities (ECLAC, 2010a).
In this context, some important developments have taken place in the framework of the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA) and the Meso-America Project, involving intergovernmental coordination efforts to define, finance and implement a given portfolio of high-impact regional projects in the areas of transport, energy and communications (see box III.2).
These results assume 3.9% annual growth in regional GDP and 1% annual population growth (ECLAC, 2011a).
As of mid-2011, the IIRSA project portfolio contained 524 transport, energy and communication infrastructure projects, divided into 10 integration and development pillars, which could generate estimated investment of US$ 96.111 billion.
Although a project’s inclusion in the portfolio does give it initial priority, this is no guarantee of funding or implementation.
According to the most recent data published by the Initiative, concrete progress had been made on 73.7% of IIRSA portfolio projects (which is 386 projects): 53 projects (10%) were already concluded; 176 (34%) were being implemented; and 158 (30%) were at the preparatory stage.
With the creation of the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) in May 2008, and its South American Infrastructure and Planning Council (COSIPLAN) in August 2009, IIRSA was incorporated into that framework as a technical advisory forum for the Council, and as a priority item on the common agenda of UNASUR.
The UNASUR countries are preparing a new priority project agenda and a 2012-2022 strategic action plan (with the assistance of ECLAC for formulation and implementation), and these will be defined and approved by the ministers of COSIPLAN at the end of 2011.
The aims of the 2012-2022 strategic action plan include: to enhance methodologies and tools in order to implement and complete projects; to incorporate social participation mechanisms; to focus on funding for highimpact projects in the region; to carry out project monitoring and assessment; and to move forward with harmonizing regulatory and institutional frameworks.
Meso-American Integration and Development Project (Meso-America Project) The Meso-America Project was officially launched in mid-2008 (although its work began in 2001 under its predecessor, the Puebla-Panama Plan) with the aim of promoting cooperation, development and integration among 10 countries (from Mexico to Colombia, plus the Dominican Republic), through the development of infrastructure and social projects.
Its agenda covers many areas, including transport, energy, telecommunications, trade facilitation and competitiveness, health, environment, natural disasters and housing.
Other vital issues, such as short-haul maritime transport, are currently being discussed as a matter of priority.
ECLAC is taking part in the Interinstitutional Technical Group, as well as contributing technical cooperation in the areas of infrastructure, transport, energy, competitiveness, information society, and disasters and climate change, further to a mandate handed down by the Summit of Heads of State and of Government of the Tuxtla Mechanism for Dialogue and Concertation.
In terms of transport, the most recent mandates relate to public policymaking for transport, logistic chain security and transnational infrastructure projects.
The region could benefit more from aid for trade, as a means of tackling its shortfalls in physical infrastructure and trade facilitation.
Despite considerably improving access to its main markets thanks to trade agreements, the Latin American and Caribbean region still has major internal barriers to improving its integration in world trade flows.
These include the aforementioned shortcomings in terms of trade facilitation and infrastructure, as well as insufficient information on trade opportunities, inadequate financing for SMEs and problems complying with standards of quality, safety or environmental sustainability demanded by the most stringent markets.
The WTO Aid-for-Trade initiative set up in 2005 aims to assist developing countries in overcoming limitations such as those listed above.
The region’s share in these flows was 8% in 2009 (the most recent year for which regionally comparable information is available).
This figure is much lower than those for Asia and Africa (the main destination regions of aid for trade) (see figure III.10).
This is partly because most of the region’s economies are considered as middle-income countries.
However, there is scope for Latin America and the Caribbean to increase its share of aid for trade flows.
For this to happen, the region’s countries would have to define priorities and identify and present relevant projects that could receive new inflows of resources.
In this sense, the region should prioritize attracting funds for projects, such as those being developed by IIRSA and the Meso-America Project, that involve several countries and include a clear trade facilitation component.
In addition, those subregional integration schemes that have recently concluded association agreements with the European Union —such as the Central American Common Market and the Caribbean Community— may benefit from the latter’s technical and financial assistance for moving towards the free circulation of goods and services.
Strengthening the social component of integration and tackling asymmetries Integration is not limited to the economic and trade dimensions, and social aspects should be given more prominence in integration, especially in a region characterized by inequality.
This does not imply focusing less on economic and commercial aspects, but rather building up complementarity between these and social issues.
In this context, it is vital to promote integration arrangements that help to reduce the sharp development asymmetries among and within the various subregions and integration schemes in Latin America and the Caribbean.
For instance, MERCOSUR accounts for much of the region’s territory and output, as well as the highest average per capita income and social spending (see table III.6).
However, these averages conceal major disparities within MERCOSUR, as there is a very wide gap in terms of these indicators among member countries (see table III.7).
The situation is similar within other subregions and integration schemes in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Reducing such asymmetries is a prerequisite for the sustainability and legitimacy of integration processes (ECLAC, 2010a).
As such, special efforts are required to ensure that all areas of integration adopt an asymmetric benefit approach to the advantage of less developed economies.
This requirement was a key part of the recommendations on open regionalism formulated by ECLAC in the mid-1990s (see point 5 in box III.3).
In addition, greater efficiency may be reflected in higher levels of savings, in more investment and in greater productivity of the factors of production overall.
Fur thermore, the benefits of integration apply to the economic and institutional system in general, by contributing to economic stability and the credibility of member countries.
Another impor tant potential of integration has to do with absorption of technological progress and production linkages.
To drive changes in production patterns, intraregional trade liberalization should be promoted to expedite the intraindustrial specialization process currently under way and boost employment for skilled labour, while strengthening enterprises and building closer ties between suppliers and users.
In addition, countries undertaking joint physical and energy infrastructure projects may also achieve economies of scale and obtain greater returns on their investment.
Lastly, integration can help to achieve a development model which facilitates economic growth and social equity simultaneously, by expanding demand both horizontally through market integration and vertically though social integration at the country level.
Towards open regionalism (a) International linkages and integration agreements All the region’s governments have made efforts in recent years to improve their competitiveness and their linkages with the international economy by means of intraregional trade agreements.
Integration commitments are therefore seen as policies that complement efforts to achieve more open and transparent economy.
What differentiates open regionalism from non-discriminatory openness is that it includes the preferential element of integration agreements, while at the same time eliminating the barriers applicable to third parties and making it easier for new members to accede to the agreements.
First, it needs broad liberalization at the sector and country level to encourage investment growth, absorption of technical progress and the use of economies of scale.
It must also be governed by stable and transparent rules to eliminate uncertainty around broad market access, and also in order to allow for the future multilateralization of processes as new countries become members.
Accordingly, building infrastructure, harmonizing rules and regulations and implementing institutional reforms play an important role in integration.
Regional institutions that work to shore up the balance of payments should be legally and financially strengthened.
This would help the countries to adjust their external accounts by degrees, thereby encouraging their participation in integration processes.
The need for flexible, open sectoral arrangements An integration process intended to promote technological progress requires governments to act as catalysts by generating flexible business coordination structures that facilitate the intermediation of technology transfer and the creation of information networks.
Generally speaking, it is vital to boost supply and implement institutional arrangements to help capture the full range of potential benefits of trade liberalization.
Making it easier for SMEs to obtain financing and technology could help to drive change in production patterns with social equity.
Similarly, the absorption of technologies should be expedited at the regional level by various means, such as through greater mobility of skilled labour from one enterprise to another, reciprocal investment, the joint use of infrastructure and inputs and the generation of links with highly innovative countries.
Equality of opportunities for all countries The unequal distribution of the benefits of integration is a concern to the region.
This is especially true for less developed or smaller economies, which show less capacity to make use of economies of scale, access to technology and inputs or the systemic conditions in which enterprises operate.
Medium- and long-term policy coordination Trade integration may increase the need to coordinate policies.
As first, this coordination could include information exchange, cooperation and harmonization in areas such as labour regulations and standards and mobility of people (which involves complex regulation if each country has a different policy) or in terms of supranational competition policies that may complement liberalization policies.
Once the trade integration process is sufficiently established in the region, some macroeconomic policies could be loosely coordinated.
Institutional aspects The institutions in charge of implementing economic integration processes must reflect the degree of advancement of those processes.
More complex processes that contemplate policy coordination require more highly developed institutions.
At any rate, it would be advisable to favour flexible schemes that are adaptable enough to ensure that the pace of institutional development is determined by the momentum of the process itself.
It would also be desirable to encourage and facilitate greater participation by organizations representing various social interests.
The MERCOSUR Structural Convergence Fund (FOCEM) remains the region’s main benchmark in terms of institutional arrangements aimed specifically at tackling asymmetries.
Its aim is to fund programmes to: (i) promote structural convergence; (ii) develop competitiveness; (iii) promote social cohesion, especially in the smaller economies and less developed regions; and (iv) support the functioning of the institutional structure and strengthen the integration process.
Since the Fund was set up, financing has been approved for 38 projects, worth a total of US$ 850 million.
The Fund is made up of financial contributions from MERCOSUR member States, and the distribution of contributions, as well as the funds paid out, is skewed in favour of the two smallest members (particularly Paraguay) (see figure III.11).
Increasing regional cooperation on innovation and competitiveness The Latin American and Caribbean region is lagging behind in terms of international competitiveness.
This is consistently borne out by the results of various international indices.
The GCI is calculated using 12 pillars reflecting the wide range of spheres that influence the systemic competitiveness of an economy.10 The most recent GCI results for 2010-2011 reveal that only two of the region’s countries (Chile and Barbados) rank in the top 50 (see figure III.12a).
Generally speaking, the region’s performance in the last NRI survey (2010-2011) did not rank among the top positions (see figure III.12b).
In fact, the region is below the world average for the three sub-indexes that make up the NRI (environment, preparedness and usage).
In terms of environment, the area where the region scored lowest (in relation to the world average) was the political and regulatory environment, which assesses the extent to which national legal frameworks facilitate innovation and penetration of ICTs.
The region is also behind in terms of “government preparedness”, which measures the priority afforded to ICTs on the national agenda and in national competitiveness strategies.
Lastly, the results for usage of ICTs show that the region lags behind in terms of penetration and diffusion of ICTs among individual users, which is measured by indicators such as total number of Internet users, telephone subscribers with data access and Internet access in schools.
The GII aims to reflect a broad vision of innovation, by including not only traditional variables such as research and development investment, but also indicators of innovation-enabling environments.
The III is based on information on five areas: institutions, human capital and research, infrastructure, market sophistication and business sophistication.
The IOI is constructed from data on two areas: scientific production and creative production.
The GII results for Latin America and the Caribbean show that, out of the 20 countries evaluated (out of a total of 125), only Chile (ranked 30), Costa Rica (ranked 45) and Brazil (ranked 47) were in the top 50.
More specifically, in comparison with the top five economies in the world, the region lags far behind in investment in human capital and research, market sophistication and scientific production (measured by the creation, impact and dissemination of knowledge) (see table III.8).
Taken as a whole, these results show the region is lagging far behind in precisely those areas that are of growing importance in the context of the knowledge economy.
This is largely because, with the notable exception of Brazil, the region’s countries allocate limited resources to research and development.
For instance, this could be achieved by integrating national technological centres into plurinational research activities and business ventures, thereby generating synergies and a critical regional mass of human and financial resources.
Using the link with Asia-Pacific to deepen regional integration The Chinese authorities understand the region’s need to diversify its exports to China.
CCPIT is taking a number of steps in this direction, making use of its links with the Bi-national Chambers of Commerce.
Nevertheless, coordinated actions among the region’s governments are required to make the most of these preliminary initiatives and open the way for a more robust programme that reflects the urgent need to diversify exports as part of the region’s development. creation of public-private partnerships for the sharing of information and the definition of jointly agreed aims.
Chapter I offers a medium-term view of the current international economic conditions, examining in particular the variables that are most likely to shift global scenarios and affect the position of the Latin America and Caribbean economies in the world economy.
The crisis has triggered or accentuated trends such as the growing significance of the emerging economies (with the resulting impact on the region’s trade flows), and the differentiated patterns of world trade in manufactures, commodities and services.
Chapter I also reviews the debates currently taking place in international forums on climate change and trade, and the various forms of protectionism that have arisen as a result of the crisis.
Chapter II looks at the immediate and long-term implications of the current crisis for regional trade patterns, in terms of origins, destinations and the sectoral composition of trade flows.
It also analyses the behaviour of commodity prices, terms of trade, international trade in services, tourism, foreign direct investment (FDI) and remittances.
The new international conditions call for greater cooperation among the countries of the region, not only to contain the fallout from this crisis, but also to improve the region’s position in the global economy.
With this in mind, seven areas of cooperation are proposed: infrastructure, trade facilitation, innovation, reduction of asymmetries, social cohesion, climate change and closer ties with Asia-Pacific.
These are all determinants of the region’s competitiveness, innovation and productivity in the medium and long terms.
In this regard, the consequences of losing the global competitiveness race would be much worse than the effects of the current crisis which, painful as they may be, will be temporary.
Conversely, lags in competitiveness, innovation and productivity represent a permanent obstacle to the implementation of growth-with-equity strategies.
These include the differentiated dynamics between the industrialized economies and those of China and India and how these impact the region’s trade flows, and the differentiated global trade patterns affecting manufactures, commodities and services.
The chapter also considers recent international debates on the links between climate change and trade and the main types of measures that may affect trade among those deployed in response to the international economic crisis.
Between the second semester of 2008 and the first semester of 2009, the financial crisis deepened and plunged the global economy into recession.
The crisis spread almost instantaneously across the globe, owing to the close financial and trade ties developed among countries as a result of the process of globalization of the last few decades.
Thus the global economy entered the deepest and broadest recession seen since the 1930s, which put an end to what had been the greatest boom cycle for forty years (2003-2008).
This crisis is unprecedented in terms of its scope, its point of origin in the most dynamic segment (investment banking) of the world’s foremost economy, and the simultaneity and speed of its impacts on output and international trade.
Faced with a crisis of this magnitude, the largest economies have responded with massive fiscal and monetary packages.
The United States is deploying the largest fiscal stimulus in the world and the impact of this should be felt most strongly in the second half of 2009.
The European Union has adopted a more modest plan, given its powerful automatic fiscal mechanisms.
China’s stimulus package is one of the largest and represents over 12% of its GDP.
The financial crisis leaves a number of lessons about the limitations of self-regulation in financial markets, in a context of international inter-dependence.
The global recession, triggered by the bursting of the property bubble in the United States (the subprime crisis), threw into sharp relief the structural disequilibria in the global economy and revealed the flaws in domestic financial systems —particularly in the United States and Europe— and their international interconnections.
They include combating distortive accounting practices by incorporating off-balance-sheet transactions, limiting excessive risk-taking and leveraging, reducing information asymmetries, avoiding conflicts of interest and improving the oversight of rating agencies.
Given the scope of these issues and the magnitude of the interests at stake, it is not inconceivable that the momentum of reform will slacken once the economy gradually recovers.
As a result of the crisis, world trade plummeted even faster than during the Great Depression.
The drop in the volume of international trade for 2009 overall is expected to be close to 10%.
Although export values have tumbled in all the regions of the world, industrialized and developing countries differ in terms of the volume/price breakdown of the drop (see figure 1).
In the industrialized countries, the contraction reflected mainly lower volumes of industrial goods exported.
In the second group, the drop stemmed mainly from lower prices for commodity exports; the volume of exports fell less sharply, partly owing to steady demand from China.
Global trade in services has suffered less than merchandise trade, owing basically to the resilience of trade in “other services”, such as financial, business and software services.
Other country groups correspond to the definitions employed by the World Bank.
One structural trend that has been sharpened by the crisis is China’s rise in the global economy.
In the course of this decade, China has come to play a major role in production, international trade and FDI and has recently increased its international reserve holdings and the internationalization of its companies.
For the region, especially for South America, recovery from the current crisis depends largely on sustained growth in the Chinese economy.
One of the collateral effects of the crisis is that the developing countries, led by China, have gained greater weight in the global economy and in its governance.
Between 2000 and 2008 this group of countries accounted for two thirds of world output growth, increasing their share from 37% to 45%.
The group of countries known as the BRICs (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India and China) have assumed a greater role in international financial governance, by transferring resources to the International Monetary Fund (IMF) at the peak of the financial crisis.
This crisis has also led to the Group of Twenty (G20), which includes the main emerging countries, displacing the traditional Group of Eight (G8) as the foremost international forum of economic decision-making.
The G20 is expected to foster greater coordination as regards fiscal stimuli, financial stabilization and the reform of the international financial system.
These are, admittedly, long-term goals, and thus far those expectations are not being fulfilled.
Large numbers of developed and developing countries have introduced trade measures to try to contain the impact of the global crisis on their economies.
These measures include tariff hikes, antidumping duties, non-tariff barriers such as import licences and more stringent technical standards, subsidies to the banking sector, the automobile industry and agriculture, discriminatory public procurement practices and restrictions on immigration or on the hiring of foreign workers, among others.
Despite these signs of protectionism, the experience of the 1930s is unlikely to be repeated, owing to the existence of global value chains and a multilateral framework of rules in the World Trade Organization (WTO), and the fact that nowadays most countries have flexible exchange rates.
Nevertheless, the protectionist measures taken in response to the crisis highlight the need to conclude the Doha Round of trade talks as soon as possible.
Another issue that has come strongly to the fore recently is the need to combat climate change and resist what is known as “green protectionism”.
Climate change is being addressed in many forums today, both at the multilateral level and within some of the world’s largest economies.
A new multilateral framework for reducing greenhouse gas emissions, engaging all the largest emitting economies, is one of the goals of the fifteenth session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), to be held in Copenhagen in December 2009.
Should such an agreement fail to be reached, the industrialized countries are more likely to take unilateral measures that could restrict the region’s exports to their markets.
It is therefore essential that the Latin American and Caribbean countries participate in an active and coordinated manner in the negotiations under way in UNFCCC.
This will require full respect for the principle of common but differentiated responsibilities.
Developing countries must also be guaranteed access to the financial and technological resources they need in order to undertake greater commitments, without compromising their development strategies and free from protectionist measures in third markets.
The talks on the liberalization of trade in environmental goods and services in the framework of WTO offer interesting opportunities for the region.
The negotiations have identified a broad range of goods and services that can be used for different environmental purposes (such as wind or hydroelectric turbines, photovoltaic cells, solar water heaters, and equipment for renewable energy production and for the management of solid and dangerous waste), and for mitigation of climate change.
Lower tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade in these goods would make them more accessible and thus help to shift the region’s production patterns towards lower carbon emission levels.
It is therefore essential that the countries of the region engage actively in the negotiations, ensuring that their particular circumstances are taken into consideration.
The impact of the crisis goes beyond present circumstances and recovery will be slow and uncertain.
Growth in the industrialized countries will be sluggish in the near future owing to slack global demand, given the huge impact of the crisis on wealth across the globe and the high unemployment rates expected in Europe and the United States in 2010-2011.
The financial sector could remain weak because of balance sheets which have yet to be cleaned up, the impact of the recession itself and the fact that the banks have yet to find a substitute for earnings from real estate securitization.
In spite of the uncertainty, however, the structural tendency towards globalization will likely persist, driven by technological developments.
The crisis will not slow the pace of technological change nor the speed of its spread to production and international trade.
In the post-crisis period, there will still be rewards for exportoriented economies that are based on competitiveness and technological innovation.
After two or three slacker years, international trade will again be a source of opportunities, particularly for firms that form part of global value chains.
Despite its historic magnitude, the crisis is temporary and the global economy will return to a path of globalization and expansion.
Crises are a source of opportunities: the firms to gain most from new opportunities will be those that, as well as making shortterm adjustments in response to the crisis, adopt mediumand long-term international positioning strategies.
The Latin American and Caribbean region is losing ground at the global level, not only in manufacturing value added but also in natural resources and services, particularly modern services (see chapter II).
Efforts are needed to deepen the export industry by diversifying, incorporating more knowledge and reorienting towards fast-growing products and services.
In order to rise to the challenges of the post-crisis period, governments need to play a stronger role in the economy (the “visible hand”).
Few can now doubt that stronger State involvement is needed in regulation, bailing out crisis-hit sectors, promoting growth, compensating for social imbalances, driving innovation and mitigating the effects of climate change.
The problem is that governments in the North are highly indebted, which limits their room for manouevre.
The fiscal space is also shrinking in Latin America and the Caribbean, and the public sector is still in need of extensive modernization and reform.
With an uncertain global economy, balancing market and government is essential for reforming the global economic system.
So are public-private partnerships for rising to the challenges of competitiveness, innovation and export diversification.
The crisis makes it all the more important for the countries of the region to expedite and intensify changes in their production structure with social equity.
International integration policies in Latin America and the Caribbean have evolved from the trade liberalization of the 1980s to the export orientation strategies adopted today.
The impact of the crisis on regional trade The region has endured an external shock greater than those caused by either the Asian crisis or the external debt crisis.
In fact, projections for 2009 show year-on-year drops of between 35% and 45% in FDI flows, between 5% and 10% in remittances, 29% in the prices of the region’s export commodities and 25% in export values.
The external shock has not drastically impacted GDP or employment, which shows that the region is better prepared this time thanks to the combination of an international boom period (2003-2007) and improved economic policy management.
Since the crisis broke out, trade flows have fallen substantially across the region, regardless of origin and destination.
China is the only country to have maintained steady demand for commodities and this has helped to offset the region’s poor external trade conditions overall.
Latin American worldwide exports will increase in value in the second semester of 2009, so that the drop for the year overall (25%) will be smaller than that seen in the first half of the year (31%).
Nevertheless, ECLAC estimates that the volume of regional trade (exports and imports) will shrink by 13% in 2009, more than the 10% projected for world trade (see figure 2).
In 2009 the volume of exports of the Latin American and Caribbean region will drop by 11% and its imports by 14%.
The contraction of regional exports masks major differences among subregions and countries.
Mexico and the countries of South America and the Caribbean will see their export values drop considerably this year, but the downturn will be smaller in Central America.
The dip in manufacturing exports in the Central American countries is party due to those industries’ vertical integration into global chains, which have suffered from subdued final demand for their products.
Those lower export volumes have not been exacerbated by falling prices, however, which has helped to contain the fall.
Conversely, several South American commodity exporters have seen a smaller contraction in export volumes, but a sharp fall in prices.
On the import side, the slowdown is more evenly spread among the subregions.
By category of goods, in keeping with global trends, the contraction in regional exports is sharper in mining, petroleum and manufactures than in agricultural goods.
Exports of some agricultural goods have picked up a little in 2009 and a similar trend (in volume terms) is occurring in some metals and minerals, owing mainly to continued strong demand from China.
Imports into the region slowed heavily across all sectors in the first half of 2009.
Although the greatest percentage drop was in fuels, over half of the contraction in total imports was attributable to intermediate and capital goods.
Given the direct link between those categories of imports and investment, this drop lessens the region’s prospects for a quick recovery.
The smaller drop in services trade as compared to goods trade is confirmed by the data available for the first quarter of 2009.
The worst affected category was transport, especially in Costa Rica and Uruguay.
This contrasts with the considerable resilience shown by travel —despite the additional shocks to the sector, especially the outbreak of influenza A(H1N1)— and the category “other services”.
Generally speaking, few steps have been taken in the region to restrict trade flows, despite the pressures generated by the crisis.
Foreign trade policy responses have varied considerably from one country to another and include measures to increase protection as well as policies to promote trade.
The governments of the region have implemented a variety of trade restrictions, tending to prefer border measures to subsidies.
The most common measures are tariff hikes (usually envisaged as temporary), the introduction or increased use of import licences and benchmark values for imported goods, the establishment of import quotas for some products and greater use of trade protection measures, particularly antidumping duties.
In some cases the crisis has strengthened calls to explore administered trade options, through sectoral agreements between exporters and importers, for example.
The governments have also taken a number of measures to promote trade, including tariff reductions (mainly in capital and intermediate goods and foodstuffs), cuts in export taxes (especially for agricultural goods), trade facilitation measures and additional export promotion efforts.
Many governments have also attempted to find new sources of trade finance to offset the effects of the credit crunch triggered by the crisis.
In general, the region’s behaviour in the area of trade policy compares favourably with that of the industrialized economies.
This represents a sign of maturity that should be valued and encouraged, since greater protectionism would only worsen the crisis and delay recovery.
Nevertheless, certain trade restrictions have had an impact on intraregional trade, especially in South America, where tensions have arisen within both MERCOSUR and the Andean Community.
World trade projections for the next two to three years suggest modest growth amid protectionist pressures and competitive tensions arising from excess production capacity in some sectors.
This will fuel mergers and acquisitions, especially in light of the asset value depreciation caused by the crisis.
China and other developing Asian countries will continue to become more competitive.
Here again, the countries of the region have not yet fully exploited their comparative advantages in sectors linked to natural resources and ecosystems suitable for tourism, among others.
Opportunities for cooperation and regional integration Given the magnitude of this crisis, the region is clearly holding up much better than in previous —and in fact smaller— crises.
The macroeconomic strengths built up in the boom cycle of 2003-2007 explain the greater resilience to the crisis this time around.
This is the first time that the region has faced severe global or regional economic conditions without running into exchange-rate difficulties or badly missing inflation targets.
Thanks to the fiscal space achieved in this period and the build-up of international reserves, most of the countries have been able to deploy countercyclical policies, also something unseen in earlier crises.
In South America, the relative resilience has also been a reflection of rapid economic growth in China, which has generated a steady demand for natural resources.
In the first half of 2009, the value of intraregional exports dropped by 33% with respect to the same period of 2008, that is by slightly more than the region’s total worldwide exports (31%).
This is consistent with the traditionally procyclical behaviour of intra-Latin American exports.
Trade within the various subregional integration schemes also contracted sharply in the first half of 2009, especially in South America (down 31% in MERCOSUR and 24% in the Andean Community).
For the first time in the 2000s, there was a drop in trade among the Central American Common Market (CACM) countries (down 18%).
The countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), together with Mexico and Chile, also recorded a sharp drop in their exports to the Latin American region (see figure 3).
In order to avoid the errors committed during previous crises, the governments of the region should aim to adopt coordinated, participatory and mutually informed policy responses.
The new international conditions call for greater regional cooperation, not only to contain the fallout from this crisis, but also to improve the region’s position in the global economy.
In this regard, the consequences of losing the global competitiveness race would be much worse than the effects of the current crisis which, harsh as they may be, will be temporary.
Conversely, lags in competitiveness, innovation and productivity represent a key obstacle to the success of growth-with-equity strategies.
Cooperation on competitiveness and innovation issues is, then, the main challenge facing Latin America and the Caribbean.
The differences that exist in the region today on trade matters should not represent an obstacle to making progress on other, perhaps more pressing, issues.
ECLAC proposes pursuing regional cooperation efforts in seven areas: infrastructure, trade facilitation, innovation, reduction of asymmetries, social cohesion, closer ties with Asia-Pacific and climate change.
Measures taken to advance this agenda will give a powerful signal of practical commitment to integration.
This, in turn, will enable progress towards unification of markets in the region, by stimulating intraregional trade and investment, improving the region’s international position and addressing social challenges and asymmetries.
Headway in those areas will not be possible without a more solid and effective regional institutional framework built up around the subregional integration agreements.
These institutions must play a central role in protecting the interests of the smaller countries and helping to mediate among member countries when conflicts of interest arise.
Both these roles would help to build confidence in the integration processes.
In the coming years the region will need to preserve the pillar of macroeconomic stability and develop joint programmes of investment in such areas as infrastructure, trade facilitation and innovation.
Accordingly, it will be necessary to make available more financing for trade, especially intraregional trade, and to strengthen international financial institutions and endow them with more capital and greater capacity to lend rapidly to avert balance-of-payments crises.
Regional financial institutions must be enhanced through increased capitalization and complementarity with development banks.
It is important to integrate trade policy with policies on productive development, innovation and FDI.
A key objective of internationalization strategies should be integration into global production and marketing chains linked to natural resources, by forging mutually beneficial technology partnerships (for example, to apply biotechnology advances to agro-industry, mining, forestry and fisheries).
The countries of the region must strengthen links between goods, services and investment.
As services become increasingly important in the value chain, they represent the principal source of value added in many products.
This is particularly true for consultancy, advertising and marketing services, legal advice, accounting and finance, information and communications technologies (ICTs), and engineering and quality control.
As new technologies spread, competitive leads tend to take the form of international value chains.
Massive access for companies, especially SMEs, to modern services is crucial for stimulating productivity.
Other trade-related services, such as transport, infrastructure and financial services, are important components of systemic competitiveness.
Transport costs can strongly impact competitiveness, sometimes even more than tariff levels or exchange rates.
Greater use of ICTs can help to make trade facilitation measures (port logistics, customs procedures, harmonization of standards, e-commerce and management of rules of origin) into key tools of export competitiveness.
Developing competitiveness also requires stronger rating and oversight institutions and the adaptation of exports to technical standards (ISO 9000 and ISO 14000) and sanitary and phytosanitary rules.
In all these areas more rapid progress can be made if existing regional cooperation forums are used to coordinate action.
It would be a mistake to underestimate the potential of natural-resource-based activities to drive high levels of productivity, technology spillovers and forward and backward linkages.
The production and export of certain primary goods can make intensive use of skilled labour, technology and know-how.
In manufacturing, the challenge is to join the respective global production and marketing chains with higher-value-added inputs and components to promote horizontal intra-industry trade and attract the type of FDI that grows linkages with the rest of the economy.
Export diversification and technology-building strategies are more likely to bear fruit in the presence of a strong public-private alliance that can survive changes of government and adhere to a long-term vision.
Links between firms, universities and technology centres must be strengthened so as to increase public and private investment in innovation.
Otherwise it will be possible neither to diversify exports nor to build in know-how and technology.
It is necessary to combat protectionism and work towards a swift conclusion of the Doha Round negotiations.
Traditional protectionist threats have reemerged across the globe and new issues have arisen, such as security, private quality standards and diverse measures on trade and climate change.
Given the seriousness of the international situation, the Doha Round of trade talks should be concluded as soon as possible, seeking a balanced outcome that reflects the declared objective of contributing to development.
This is urgent since, as things stand, the countries could raise tariff levels right up to the bound tariff ceilings without breaching their WTO commitments.
It is also essential to avoid protectionism, particularly the sort that could limit intra-regional trade.
Regional integration must not be allowed to become a victim of an international crisis that was not of the region’s making.
In facing the new challenges, much would be gained from defining common criteria and acting with a single voice in the respective international forums.
The Latin American and Caribbean countries need to take a more coordinated approach to tightening ties with Asia-Pacific.
The Latin American and Caribbean region has yet to fully assimilate the significance of Asia-Pacific, despite that region’s growing importance as a trade partner.
Still less has any sort of coordinated strategy been developed among countries or groups of countries to forge closer trade and strategic investment links.
Thus far, approaches by the Latin American countries have tended to be sporadic and isolated, and a number of bilateral trade agreements have been signed.
Although these agreements are important, they are not enough to generate the scale and critical mass needed to encourage trade and technology partnerships between the two regions, nor to reduce the sharp asymmetry between the large volumes of trade and small levels of investment.
In a less favourable global context than in previous years, the region needs to redouble its efforts to build broadened regional economic forums and undertake cooperation initiatives that can unlock the synergies of the different subregions.
Increased cooperation within the Caribbean, South America and Mexico-Central America is no longer merely a major political objective, but also an economic imperative if the region is to integrate into a global economy that is less dynamic but more competitive and increasingly structured around global value chains.
Chapter I The crisis and its future impact on the global economy A.
Introduction This chapter examines the medium-term outlook for the international economy and identifies the more structural trends that have emerged or intensified as a result of the crisis, particularly in the realm of international trade.
The chapter also considers recent international debates on the links between climate change and trade and examines the various trade-related measures adopted in response to the international economic crisis.
The last section of the chapter analyses several of the significant transformations that will be wrought in the global economy as a result of this crisis, which has exacerbated some latent trends and initiated new ones.
Slower growth in the world economy over the next few years, protectionist measures that will not be easily eliminated when economic activity picks up again, more limited access to external financing, and the need to tackle climate change are some of the issues examined.
First, recovery will be slow, gradual, and subject to numerous risks associated mainly with the time needed to restore the health of the banking sector in several countries.
Second, establishing new global regulations to address both structural imbalances (savings-investment) and financial regulation will be extremely difficult.
The financial sector will undoubtedly not be the same after the drastic reduction of worldwide reserves, the drying up of liquidity, the increase in risk aversion and the measures adopted to lower the risk, leverage and opacity of financial instruments.
Third, the growing fiscal deficits and publicdebt levels of many countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) will need to be reined in, which will have a negative impact on financing for developing economies.
Fourth, the crisis has underscored the increasingly influential role played by China in the world economy; this country is now the third largest economy and the second largest exporter in the world, as well as the gravitational core of global industry and one of the fiercest competitors on the international market.
On its heels and heading in the same direction are Brazil, the Russian Federation and India (which together with China constitute the “BRICs”).
Latin America and the Caribbean will become increasingly dependent on China, India and the other Asian economies to fuel the region’s export growth.
Fifth, the crisis has accelerated the restructuring of production around the globe, which has implications for competitiveness and will require the adoption of more up-to-date production and international marketing models.
Strengthening the presence of regional firms in Latin American and global value chains is one of the main challenges of internationalizing production.
The region needs to, above all, boost its presence in the modern services sector.
Finally, climate change is also reshaping global production chains (see section H for further details).
From financial crisis to global crisis The global crisis and the outlook today During the second half of 2008 and the first half of 2009, the financial crisis worsened and hit the global economy hard.
The close financial and trade ties forged among economies by the globalization process over the preceding decades enabled the crisis to spread almost instantaneously to practically every country of the world.
This triggered the deepest and broadest recession since the 1930s and ended the growth cycle that had lasted from 2003 to the first half of 2008 and had been the most expansionary in four decades.
In the aftermath of the major recession of 2009, the European Union, Japan and the United States will most probably post weak growth in 2010 (see table I.1).
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have been affected by the global economic slowdown in different ways according to their trade and financial ties.
Mexico, for example, has been hit the hardest on account of its close links with the United States economy.
One outcome of the crisis is that the advanced and the emerging economies will tend to converge more rapidly.
The financial crisis Between the second semester of 2008 and the first semester of 2009, the financial crisis worsened and spread around the globe, causing the deepest and broadest recession since the 1930s and triggering a simultaneous plunge in production and international trade.
This crisis is unprecedented in terms of its scope, its origin in the world’s dominant economy (specifically in investment banking, the most dynamic segment of the United States economy), and the simultaneity and speed with which it was transmitted to every corner of the globe.
In a context marked by turbulent financial markets, limited access to credit, rising unemployment and a substantive devaluation of assets, the world economy will contract in 2009 for the first time since the Second World War.
One of the main consequences of the crisis has been the drastic decline of world trade, generated largely by the sharp drop in lending for trade transactions and the greater vulnerability of traded goods to the fall in worldwide demand.
As a result, global trade is expected to shrink by about 10%.
The previous contraction in world trade occurred in 1982 and was less severe.
Not since the 1930s has the world experienced a trade slump of this magnitude.
The onset of this recession signalled the end of the most expansionary cycle in 40 years: the growth period that stretched from 2003 to mid-2008.
One unique feature of this cycle was that the savings surpluses of the South, mainly through the current account surpluses of China, the other Asian economies and the oil-based economies, financed the real-estate and stock market bubbles of the North.
This enabled the United States to grow beyond its potential, without inflationary pressure and with low interest rates, which resulted in a large current account deficit and soaring debt levels among families, businesses and government alike.
The bursting of these bubbles shook the United States economy, the very heart of the world financial system, as well as the Japanese and European economies, and did not spare the developing countries as many were unprepared from a financial viewpoint.
The crisis also severely affected several small and open emerging countries, which are more reliant on the European and United States markets and in whose national economy manufacturing exports play a larger role.
This accentuated some of the trends seen prior to the crisis: the shift from the Atlantic to the Pacific of the driving force of the global economy; and the growing weight of China and the increasing number and strength of its ties with the other Asian economies.
The recessionary shock rocked the foundations of the most buoyant segment of the world’s predominant economy, the United States financial sector, and its most dynamic element, investment banking, in particular.
The bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers and the bail-out of American International Group Inc. (AIG) in October 2008 marked the start of the second phase of the financial crisis.
The demise of two of the financial sector’s most influential institutions had a devastating effect on financial markets.
Prior to the folding of Lehman Brothers, the action taken by the authorities had suggested that efforts would focus on stemming systemic risk, in other words, on preventing the failure of large financial establishments that could cause the credit markets and economic activity to tumble with them.
Allowing Lehman Brother to collapse, however, sent out a completely different message: it seemed that the authorities were, in mid-crisis, going to prioritize controlling moral hazard; and financial entities, regardless of their size, could go bust.
Credit evaporated and, for a couple of weeks, the world was on the verge of financial collapse (Machinea, 2009).
Uncertainty about the health of other banking and non-banking institutions produced a widespread plunge in demand for debt instruments, and hence the total collapse of their prices and market.
This forced credit rating agencies to lower the ratings of several prestigious institutions that had operations all over the world.
Entities with ties to these institutions had to lower their debt exposure and began to call in their loans, which created a vicious circle.
The collapse of Washington Mutual at the end of September signalled the biggest commercial banking crisis in the history of the United States, and the large European banks also began to find themselves in troubled waters.
The panic in the financial sector abated somewhat only when the United Kingdom made a series of announcements on the recapitalization of the banking sector, the clean-up of impaired assets (“toxic assets”), and the extension of guarantees on bank liabilities and when substantial and coordinated injections of liquidity were made by the world’s main central banks.
In Europe, assets linked to the United States financial market risked incurring huge losses.
The fear of contagion had a devastating effect on credit markets and resulted in many bank interventions.
The most dramatic case occurred in Iceland, where the collapse of the banking system and the inadequate response of authorities plunged the country into economic and political turmoil.
The other European governments, recognizing the strong financial connections in the region, took decisive action to minimize the repercussions of Iceland’s financial collapse on other economies.
The crisis also had a disproportionately heavy impact on Eastern Europe, where economies had been growing at rapid rates on the back of abundant external borrowing.
Latvia, for example, had problems managing the sharp contraction of its economy, which was marked by considerable exchange-rate instability, high unemployment, civil unrest and limitations imposed by the austerity programme agreed to with the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
Other countries in the area are encountering similar difficulties and several have resorted to IMF loans to tackle the crisis.
The high levels of short-term external debt of Eastern European countries are forcing them to seek financing just when international markets are facing serious liquidity constraints.
The financial crisis has provided a number of lessons on the limitations of self-regulation in financial markets with high levels of international interdependence.
The global recession, set in motion by the bursting of the property bubble in the United States (the subprime mortgage crisis), revealed the structural disequilibria in the global economy and uncovered the flaws in domestic financial systems —particularly in Europe and the United States.
The crisis has also exposed the notable deficiencies of financial regulation and supervision, particularly with regard to the principal financial instruments and markets.
Today, all international organizations agree on the need for stricter and more technically advanced oversight, especially of high-risk funds, leverage ratios in financial institutions and the activities of credit-rating agencies.
The recessionary shock and the global economy In the second half of 2008, the severe financial crisis and the loss of confidence worldwide plunged the global economy into the worst recession since the Second World War.
Another factor contributing to the world economic slowdown was the restrictive monetary policies applied in several countries up to the third quarter of 2008 to contain inflationary expectations.
With slumping production in OECD countries and the sharp deceleration of economic activity in the rest of the world, global economic growth turned negative in the fourth quarter of 2008.
The recession is unique in its synchronicity around the globe (see figure I.1).
The main international organizations have projected a drop in the volume of world trade in 2009 of between 10% and 13%, the first contraction since 1982 and the largest since the Great Depression.
In the second quarter of 2009, the United States economy posted its fourth consecutive quarter of negative GDP growth (see figure I.2.a).
Comparison of the annualized variation between consecutive quarters shows a smaller downturn in the second quarter than in the three preceding quarters, however, thanks to smaller negative rates in non-residential investment and in exports.
The financial crisis, weak external demand and a surge in unemployment pushed the euro area into a recession in the third quarter of 2008.
Austria, Germany, the Netherlands and Slovakia witnessed the steepest drops in economic activity but, at the end of 2008 and the beginning of 2009, it was the countries of Eastern Europe that suffered the largest slumps, posting year-on-year contractions of between 40% and 50%.
The recession in the Japanese economy started earlier and was deeper than the recession in the United States and the euro area, largely on account of the significant decline in net exports, which have a greater impact on GDP in Japan than in the other advanced economies.
In addition to facing lower external demand, Japanese exports suffered from the marked appreciation of the yen.
The plunge in exports, in turn, hit private investment and triggered a sharp increase in bankruptcies.
Private consumption also came down in the last few quarters as a result of worsening conditions in the labour market, which resulted in high unemployment.
In Asia, the weight of manufacturing and “Asian Factory” exports in the region’s economies have translated into major economic contractions.
The SouthEast Asian countries have suffered from the decline in Chinese exports, which was in turn triggered by the slump in demand for manufactures in industrialized countries (see figure I.2b).
China and India, in comparison, have much larger domestic economies, which have enabled them to sustain high growth rates (see figure I.2.c).
In the case of China, the relative importance of processing trade with its low value added, means that the decline in demand for manufactures has had only a limited impact on the country’s economy.
The impact of the slowdown in the world economy has affected the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in different ways according to their trade and financial ties (see figure I.2.d).
In Mexico, the sharp downturn in the United States economy has resulted in a plunge in exports and a sharp contraction of the domestic economy.
Argentina and Brazil experienced a major slowdown at the end of 2008, but their trade ties with China and their greater dependence on agricultural commodity exports —demand for which has been less severely affected by the crisis (see table I.2)— have partially offset the impact of the contraction of the industrialized economies.
Economic policy to the rescue The magnitude of the crisis sparked intervention by fiscal and monetary authorities on a scale never seen before, and this extraordinarily bold reaction helped to stave off systemic collapse.
The United States has applied the largest fiscal stimulus package in the world.
In February 2008, signs that economic activity would experience a sharp deceleration led the United States Congress to approve a US$ 168 billion tax relief programme.
One year later, in February 2009, the government approved an economic recovery plan, estimated at US$ 787 billion (5.5% of GDP).
Of this amount, US$ 288 billion are tax reductions and the rest are investments in infrastructure, renewable resources, research and development, technology and education.
Funds were set up for the unemployed and for public health care, together with programmes to support the worst-hit sectors, such as the automobile industry (see box I.1).
Among the hardest-hit industries is the automobile sector, which has posted unprecedented losses.
Revenue of the United States automobile industry declined by 2.5% in 2008, but the crisis will have a stronger impact in 2009.
The United States’ Big Three (General Motors, Ford and Chrysler) took drastic measures to remain in business and negotiated industry-support plans with the federal government.
The first plan provided US$ 17.4 billion for General Motors and Chrysler (Ford did not receive assistance) in loans to cover operating costs while the companies restructured.
The second plan included a further loan to assist automobile makers while they go through the bankruptcy process and negotiate with their creditors.
The aim is for the companies to shed their liabilities in an orderly, expeditious manner and to form alliances with other firms to create more efficient and competitive organizations.
On 30 April 2009, Chrysler announced that it was filing for bankruptcy and planning to restructure, and many of its assets were bought by Italian automaker Fiat.
Its European subsidiary Saab also filed for bankruptcy protection, while Opel was sold to a Canadian autoparts manufacturer.
Another initiative to hasten the sector’s recovery was the introduction of a system of rebates that allowed buyers to trade in used vehicles as partial payment on new ones.
In 2009, the industry’s output is expected to fall by 20% (equivalent to 60 billion euros) in the 27 countries of the European Union.
European governments have recognized the importance of supporting the industry and its value chain.
In October 2008, France and Germany announced 20 billion euros in assistance to be provided over the next four years through a fund to support production, along with higher competition, innovation and technology standards.
In an initiative similar to the rebate programme in the United States, several countries have also announced incentive schemes to spur auto sales.
The impact of the stimulus package is expected to peak towards mid-2009.
Most spending (84%) consisted of transfers to local governments and physical persons, and 13% went to tax relief (Zandi, 2009).
The package is only part of the government’s plan for tackling the crisis, however.
This figure is not the total cost of these initiatives because, according to the methodology used, it shows the currently established ceiling for the funds provided and/or the costs of the programmes.
The European Union The stimulus package adopted by the European Council boosted fiscal spending by 200 billion euros (1.5% of the region’s GDP).
The European Commission hopes to orient the investments under the plan towards increasing the region’s competitiveness in the medium term.
Investments were designed to increase energy efficiency, stimulate the development of eco-technology in the automobile and construction sectors and upgrade transportation and information infrastructure.
The data obtained by the European Commission and the European Trade Union Institute as at June 2009 China is implementing the second largest and second most effective stimulus package in the world.2 On 9 November 2008, the Chinese authorities announced a RMB 4 trillion (US$ 586 billion) stimulus package, equivalent to 12.5% of GDP in 2008.
Also, during the first quarter of 2009, bank loans mushroomed to RMB 4.6 trillion, more than the amount of the economic stimulus package itself.
This unparalleled credit explosion occurred in a very short time span.3 The initial programme received some critcism and was redefined.
Its alleged overly heavy focus on physical infrastructure was shifted towards sectors that could contribute most towards raising family incomes and private consumption.
These figures do not take into account the effect of the automatic stabilizers of national budgets, however, such as health insurance and unemployment benefits, which could represent an additional 200 billion euros.
The plan also includes an innovation and competitiveness programme that will run until 2011.
This programme targets 10 sectors, including the automotive, steel, shipbuilding, industrial machinery, textiles and light industry, and electronics and information technology sectors.
The government plans to spend RMB 600 billion on the extension and integration of three networks: next-generation Internet, third-generation wireless and digital television.
An increase in public funds to subsidize automobile purchases in the countryside (RMB 5 billion) is also scheduled.
The subsidies for trading in old vehicles have been raised by 40% to RMB 1 billion, and sales tax rebates have been implemented to promote the manufacturing and sale of small-engine (less than 1.6 litres), low-emissions vehicles.
This subsidy programme is combined with a special 13% discount and RMB 140 billion of subsidies for the purchase of up to two electrical or electronic devices per family.
Impact of the crisis on world trade The downslide in the world goods trade World trade plummeted as a result of the financial and economic crisis.
The world economic crisis has slashed demand drastically, which in turn has driven down international commodity prices.
Between the record high posted in July 2008 and May 2009, the value of world trade diminished by 37%, of which 16% was accounted for by the drop in prices (see figure I.3).
Between November 2008 and March 2009, for example, over 90% of OECD countries experienced monthly decreases of over 10% in their imports and exports in comparison with the same period the previous year (Araújo and Oliveira Martins, 2009).
As a group, the emerging economies have witnessed the sharpest decline in export prices (21%) and a slightly smaller dip in export volumes (18%).
Part of the plunge was associated with a contraction of consumer spending as expectations worsened suddenly among households and businesses around the globe and unemployment rose.
Thanks to the buoyancy of the Chinese economy, international demand for mining and energy commodities remained high in the first half of 2009.
The novel aspect of this crisis for South America, which specializes in exporting commodities, is that it is hastening the shift from reliance on the business cycle of the United States towards reliance on that of China and Asia as a whole.
The drop in world trade in goods has been steeper and has occurred faster than in previous crises, even than in the Great Depression of the 1930s (see figure I.4).
During the Asian crisis, the decline in world trade was no more than 6% after 10 months.
In the first nine months of this crisis, world trade plummeted 37%.
A similar downturn was recorded during the Great Depression, but only 20 months into the crisis.
The starting point is the month at which trade peaked before the crisis.
The drop in world trade has been greater than the fall in global GDP for several reasons.
This means that a downturn in final demand immediately sends demand for imported goods into a tailspin, and negative shocks spread much more quickly along the value chain among different countries.
Also, as trade flows are measured in gross values, inputs cross borders more than once, multiplying the original effect of the decline in demand for final imported goods.4 Second, traded consumer durables and investment items are more sensitive to variations in demand than non-tradable goods and services.
Third, the fall in trade was accentuated by the need to reduce inventories as demand plummeted abruptly.
The effect of inventory reduction on world trade should lessen in the next few months, however.
Fourth, the more limited availability of trade financing is a particularly serious problem in global value chains whose functioning basically depends on funds being opportunely available at different stages.
Over 2008, because of reduced global liquidity and the reassessment of customer and country risk, spreads on 90-day letters of credit rose from 10 to 16 basis points and, on letters of credit from emerging economies, from 250 to 500 basis points.
Average spreads on trade credits increased from a factor of 10 to a factor of 50.
In July 2009, the World Trade Organization warned, “Anecdotal evidence shows that the global market situation remains tense, with increased payment defaults and high costs of credit” According to the International Money Fund, external financing has a significant impact on impor ts, with a negative elasticity of 9.5% for each 10% change in net capital flows (Thomas, 2009).
The same is true of the impact on exports: for each 10% cut in financing, commodities exports fall by 12.7%.
The World Bank has also noted the significant impact that financing has on trade and the need to assist developing countries.
Nevertheless, case-studies-based evidence from the Institute of Development Studies of the University of Sussex indicates that a lack of credit did not contribute significantly to the drop in exports from February to March 2009 for a group of sub-Saharan countries (Humphrey, 2009).
For a more thorough discussion on the expansionary role of the vertical specialization of world trade flows, see Yi (2003) and (2009).
There are two types of explanations for this gap between supply and demand.
According to public institutions, in crisis situations like the current one, private agents follow the herd, especially when they confuse the risk of a particular operation with country risk.
The result is a massive shift of credit from developing countries towards less risky ones.
On the other hand, commercial banks (which represent 80% of the world trade financing market) argue that the imposition, as of 2007, of new capital requirements as a result of the Basel II agreements has had a procyclical effect on capital supply.
When market conditions are unfavourable, capital requirements associated with trade financing increase significantly, especially in developing countries.
Some banks therefore are advocating a loosening of these requirements for foreign trade transactions, given their low default rate and the existence of collateral (the exported goods) (Auboin, 2009).
About half the drop in the value of international trade corresponds to a reduction in the prices of tradable goods, particularly commodities.
The prices of these products rose sharply up to mid-2008, came down in the second half of the year and then recovered slightly in the first half of 2009 (see box I.3).
The data for imports of China, the European Union and the United States suggest that the volume of world trade in manufactures seems to have diminished more than the volume of trade in commodities.
During the period spanning January-May 2009, import volumes shrank by approximately 25% in the United States and by 16% in the European Union in comparison with the same period the previous year.
Prices fell in both areas in similar proportions except in the case of manufactures.
Chinese imports of agricultural goods such as soybean and cereals remained buoyant in terms of quantity in early 2009, growing by 28% and 49%, respectively.
However, minerals and manufactures have fared worse, mirroring the trend seen in Europe and the United States.
The rapid price rise that had begun in 2005 came to a halt in mid-2008 and was followed by a sharp decline in all commodity groups in the second half of the year.
Energy prices experienced the strongest surge in the first half of 2008, and fell more sharply than did other commodities in the second half of the year.
In the first quarter of 2009, some prices stabilized while others rose.
Among the commodities that recovered are sugar, wheat, maize, coffee, soybean, copper, zinc and petroleum.
Steel, aluminum, coal and natural gas prices appear to have stabilized since January 2009.
Despite the recent recovery, however, prices for all commodity groups in 2009 are expected to end up below the levels seen during the 2008 boom.
Prices for foodstuffs, except for sugar, will fall by between 20% and 40%, approximately, depending on the product (see table).
The price of oil is expected to show a drop of 40% owing, among other factors, to shrinking demand in 2008 and continued weak demand in 2009.
The increased output capacity of the members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC) is helping keep a lid on oil prices.
Metal prices are also expected to decline, by an average of 39%, in 2009, with steel products and aluminum projected to fall the most.
Trade in (modern) services is faring better than trade in goods Amid the general gloom surrounding the collapse in world trade, there are some signs of hope in the trade in services sector (see figure I.5).
World services data for the first quarter of 2009 show that exports in the transportation (see box I.4) and travel segments shrank at the same pace as goods exports, but that the “other services” segment, which includes financial, business, information and construction services, has weathered the crisis better.
There are several reasons why trade in “other services” seems to be withstanding the current crisis better than trade in goods (Borchert and Matoo, 2009).
Trade in other services, especially business services, which is conducted electronically, depends less on financing than trade in goods because companies in this field do not tend to operate on credit as they have little tangible collateral.
Consequently, there is less movement of inputs across multiple borders than in vertically specialized goods industries.
Finally, demand for some services, such as business services, is more stable than demand for goods.
The outsourcing of certain services, such as accounting and information handling, are key to a company’s competitiveness and do not require economies of scale.
Another notable factor is that a large proportion of business services are based on long-standing relations built up over the years of interaction between buyer and seller.
The crisis seems to have generated new markets for a series of additional services, such as debt processing and legal services for companies facing bankruptcy.
The apparent ability of the services trade to withstand the crisis may, however, be threatened by protectionism.
Trade volumes plummeted and, as a large portion of imports and exports are transported by sea, the natural consequence was a reduction in sea transport.
Maritime transport is divided into two large markets: goods transported in containers and goods transported in bulk.
The volume of bulk dry cargo transported by sea is expected to be 5% lower in 2009 than in 2008.
In most countries in the world, exports and imports of bulk dry cargo continue to fall, with the exception of Chinese iron and coal imports.
Low steel production levels have caused trade in steel and coal to drop even lower: aggregate world trade in steel is projected to fall by 7.3%, year-on-year, and world trade The volume of container freight has also dropped, although less sharply than that of dry bulk.
The reason for this decline is weak demand for transportation services and the excess supply of transport capacity currently available.
ECLAC projects slight growth in container freight for the third quarter of 2009.
Nevertheless, similar to the dry cargo fleet, container transport is expected to continue to suffer from excess supply.
Two important examples of this are the “Buy American” government procurement clause of the American Recovery and Investment Act and the “Buy China” incentives programme introduced in China (see section C.3) Trade in mode-3 services (sales made by local subsidiaries of transnational companies) also seems to be suffering.
Over half of the world services trade is carried out through sales by subsidiaries abroad, and foreign direct investment (FDI) is therefore a key instrument in this sector.
According to preliminary data, global FDI fell in the first quarter of 2009, which will have a marked impact on mode-3 services exports.
The new role of China and the other BRICs in the world economy China: the economic star of the decade Together with the other large emerging economies like Brazil, the Russian Federation and India, China has become a leading actor on the world stage.
Between 2000 and 2008, the so-called BRICs accounted for over half of world economic growth and increased their contribution to global GDP from 16% to 22%.
It is coming out stronger from the crisis, which will provide an additional boost to the country’s investment plans abroad and the internationalization of its companies.
Together with India, China is one of the few large economies still expanding.
According to World Bank estimates (2008), countries showing positive growth will account for 1.49 percentage points of global growth.
China is also emerging from the crisis as a leading actor in international financial markets as it has accumulated 29% of total world reserves and is the largest holder of United States government securities.
Since September 2008, China has significantly increased its purchases of United States securities, especially Treasury bills, and has accumulated 24% of all government securities issued by the United States Treasury (see figure I.6).
The Chinese economy suffered less than other developing economies from the global financial crisis because its domestic financial system is less exposed to external shocks thanks to its more closed nature and the controls it imposes on international capital flows.
A large fiscal and monetary stimulus package is also managing to reverse the negative trends in industrial output, retail sales and fixed investment and to stem the slowdown of the economy as a whole.
In mid-2009, IMF raised the growth projections for China in 2009 to 7.5%, very close to the 8% projected by the Chinese Government.
This is largely on account of the massive and effective Chinese economic stimulus package.
The question now is how long this mode of growth can be sustained: in the first half of 2009, exports dropped by more than 25% while public investment was up by almost 40%.
China’s trade figures fell spectacularly in the first few months of 2009.
Between January and April 2009, imports and exports tumbled 28% and 20%, respectively, in comparison with the same period in 2008.
In the same period in 2007, by contrast, these indicators had climbed by 28% and 21% (see figure I.7).
China’s exports to its largest markets, the United States (19% of total exports) and the European Union (20% of total exports), shrank by 16% and 24%, respectively, while those to the AsiaPacific region fell by 23%.
The crisis has had a greater impact on imports from neighbouring countries, which represent half the country’s total imports.
The principal goods are transportation equipment and machinery, two products that are highly sensitive to the business cycle in the developed countries.
The contraction of demand in the current crisis has been much sharper than during the Asian crisis or the dot-com crisis in 2001 (IMF, 2009b).
The collapse of demand in the industrialized countries is still having serious repercussions on intra-Asian trade based on Asian value chains (the so-called “Asian Factory”).
This trade has China as its hub and consists mainly of transportation equipment and machinery (ECLAC, 2005, 2008c), and serves as a platform for its neighbours’ exports to the developed countries.
In the last decade, the country has taken a dominant position in global trade and become a major trading partner for many of the world’s countries, including the economies of Latin America (see table I.4).
The trade leaps China has recorded in the past 10 years are astounding, in terms of both imports and exports.
In 2000, China was the United States’ tenth export market and the twenty-second largest market for the European Union.
By 2008, it was the third most important destination for United States goods and the fifteenth for the European Union.
Similar jumps have been observed in its relations with the African economies, but the most notable progress has been in its trade with the economies of Latin America: China is now the region’s second largest export destination and its second largest import supplier.
In the case of the European Union countries, trade with other member countries is calculated on an individual basis.
The BRICs and changes in global governance The group of countries known as the BRICs have a major part to play in international financial governance.
China, the Russian Federation, India and Brazil ranked first, third, fourth and seventh, respectively, as holders of international reserves at the end of 2008.
These contributions have given the BRICs greater legitimacy within IMF, inasmuch as they were actually lending to the Fund in the midst of the financial crisis and the OECD-wide recession —circumstances in which developing countries would in the past normally have flocked to IMF for financing.
The economic and financial crisis has raised the profile of the main emerging economies in world economic governance.
In previous crises, the international financial system was controlled exclusively by the Group of Seven (G7) countries.
This time, however, decisions are being made by an expanded group known as the Group of Twenty (G20), which includes the main advanced and emerging countries.9 This group is the formal expression of a new world.
At the London meeting, G20 approved a US$ 1.1 billion support package to stimulate credit, growth and employment in the global economy, with fresh resources for IMF and additional lending through multilateral development banks.
The Group also took a number of steps to strengthen the global financial system by setting up a Financial Stability Board (FSB) including all G20 countries, Financial Stability Forum members, Spain and the European Commission.
FSB will work with IMF to provide early warning of macroeconomic and financial risks and define appropriate compensatory measures.
G20 also decided to extend regulation and oversight to all financial institutions, instruments and markets including, for the first time, hedge funds.
Other measures refer to the prevention of excessive leveraging and the creation of buffers of resources to be built up in good times, which can be used to soften the impact of crises when conditions change.
Regulatory oversight will extend to credit rating agencies to ensure that they meet the international code of good practice, particularly to prevent unacceptable conflicts of interest.
At the G20 meeting in London a major reform of IMF was also announced, which will triple its resources to support additional lending and change lending procedures in order to offer larger amounts under conditions more conducive to stability.
As a sign of the changing times on the international stage, the crisis led the BRICs to meet for the first time.
Although China’s rise in the global economy is the most prominent development, the BRIC concept overall is gaining importance on the international agenda as the four countries become increasingly coordinated (see box I.5).
The BRICs do, however, have to deal with trade and strategic challenges before they can define common stances.
Brazil and the Russian Federation are commodity exporters, whereas China is a major importer.
China’s manufactures are beginning to compete with those of Brazil in the South American market.
Several developing country members of G20 have filed antidumping complaints against Chinese manufactures.
The crisis has showed that the relative strengths of the BRICs vary widely in terms of competitiveness, innovation and financial and technological capacities.
Accordingly, whereas China and India continued to register rapid economic growth even at the peak of the crisis, output contracted in other two countries.
Underlying this disparity are differences in economic and institutional strengths that will hinder any decision-making by the BRICs that could have a substantial impact on the world economy, at least in the short run.
This group of ministers of finance and presidents of central banks was created at the end of the 1990s after the Asian crisis, and seeks to foster global economic and financial stability by making proposals to reform the international financial architecture and through national policy cooperation and coordination.
The BRICs, which represent 40% of the world’s population and 22% of world GDP (in PPP terms), took the opportunity to engage with a number of issues, but did not adopt common measures.
Among other things, they discussed the reform of the international financial architecture with a view to better regulation and the creation of a more stable and predictable reserve currency, reform of the United Nations and the tightening of intra-BRIC links.
China is the highest-ranking trading partner for both Brazil and the Russian Federation, for example.
The Chinese Development Bank is to lend US$ 10 billion to PETROBRAS (Brazil) for developing recently discovered oil reserves.
In addition, the Chinese State oil company Sinopec will conduct oil explorations in two areas of Brazil.
As well as their growing trade and financial ties, the BRICs are considering the use of their own currencies in bilateral trade, consistently with China’s strategy of increasing the yuan’s prominence with respect to the dollar.
The Russian Federation already sells oil to China in roubles and Brazil and China are exploring a number of mechanisms for using their own currencies in trade operations.
In addition, China holds US$ 95 billion in swap contracts with six countries in Asia and Latin America and is in talks with several others.
The use of swaps heightens the importance of the yuan as an international currency.
China also operates a number of bilateral payment agreements with its trading partners.
Brazil set up a system of local currency payments for its trade with Argentina at the end of 2008 and is studying a similar arrangement with China.
Containing protectionist pressures and concluding the Doha Round Engaging in protectionist measures is a risky response to the current crisis.
Protectionist measures are damaging to consumers and business competitiveness and they delay necessary adjustments that would generate new opportunities and stimulate investment, which would help to fuel the global recovery.
Protectionist and discriminatory measures can also generate chain reactions, making all the economies worse off.
As well as tariffs and import quotas, other types of measures can be protectionist, such as direct subsidies to domestic producers.
Once granted, subsidies are difficult to withdraw and they tend to be regressive since they often respond more to political and business pressure groups than to the needs of, say, SMEs.
Subsidy-based competition places developing countries at a disadvantage, since they lack the fiscal space to compete with the industrialized world on this footing.
The industrialized countries have responded to calls for subsidy protection from sectors hurt by the crisis, such as the automobile industry, financial services and agriculture.
The developing countries, on the other hand, have made greater use of tariff rises, import licences and minimum customs values, among other measures.11 This difference between the two reflects the fact that the developing countries have fewer budget resources for industry support than the developed countries.
According to the World Bank, despite the commitment adopted by the G20 leaders in November 2008 to avoid taking protectionist measures, 17 of the 20 members had introduced trade restricting measures by late February 2009 (Newfarmer and Gamberoni, 2009).
See also WTO (2009a). 11 For a review of the measures adopted in Latin America and the Caribbean, see chapter II and ECLAC (2009b).
Many developing countries have bound their tariffs under WTO at much higher levels than the tariffs they actually apply.
They could, therefore, raise their tariff protection up to the bound tariff ceiling without breaching any multilateral commitments.12 Although tariffs have been raised at times in a number of countries since the crisis broke out, there has been no widespread move in that direction as yet.
Subsidies as a form of protectionism The automobile and financial services sectors have been massively subsidized in the industrialized countries.
These supports have often taken the form of rescue packages and have sometimes involved the nationalization of the subsidized firms.
The sheer magnitude of the transfers involved raises questions about their potential trade-distorting effects.
According to Newfarmer and Gamberoni (2009), the automobile sector had received some US$ 48 billion in subsidies by the end of February 2009, of which US$ 42.7 billion (89%) were granted in industrialized countries.
In other words, they can be disputed under the WTO dispute settlement mechanism.
But Brunel and Hufbauer (2009) argue this is unlikely to happen in the case of the automobile sector, however, since almost all the main automobile-exporting countries are subsidizing their respective industries.
These authors also draw attention to the risk of this situation, inasmuch as a proliferation of specific subsidies not questioned under WTO may gradually lead to de facto exemption of the automobile sector from the multilateral rules, which would establish a dangerous precedent for other industries.
The situation is even more complicated in the services sector, owing to the lack of strong multilateral disciplines.
Unlike the provisions concerning merchandise trade, the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) under WTO does not establish broad disciplines on subsidies.13 Accordingly, WTO members have considerable leeway to subsidize services without contravening their multilateral commitments.
Massive subsidizing of financial services sectors in the developed countries has underscored the need to reach agreement on services disciplines in the framework of the respective Doha Round negotiations.
In the last 20 years, the magnitude of support for agricultural producers, as a proportion of their gross income, has decreased in OECD countries (see figure I.8).
There are signs that this trend has been reversed since the outbreak of the crisis, however.
The industrialized countries have bound their agricultural subsidies in WTO at much higher levels than they have actually disbursed, which gives them plenty of room to increase them.
Gamberoni and Newfarmer (2009) have projected a 22% increase in tradedistorting domestic support for United States agriculture in 2009, as a result of the fall in the international prices for a number of products since mid-2008 (see chapter II).
All this is building up an environment of subsidy-based competition which is hurting exporters in developing countries (including several in the region) that do not subsidize their agricultural exports.
Austria, Finland and Sweden are included in the OECD total for every year, and in the total for the European Union as of 1995.
Bouët and Laborde (2008) estimated that, in an extreme scenario in which all WTO members raised their applied tariffs all the way up to currently bound tariff rates, the average level of protection would double and world trade would shrink by 7.7%. 13 GATS simply established a mandate to begin negotiations with a view to establishing multilateral disciplines on subsidies.
This issue forms part of the talks on services taking place in the framework of the Doha Round.
Protectionism in government procurement In addition to subsidies, a number of government procurement measures discriminate basically against developing countries.
China has gone in this direction too, with a “Buy China” policy.
In June 2009, as part of its economic stimulus package, China adopted a plan under which government investment projects must use locally produced goods and services unless these cannot be obtained under reasonable commercial conditions in China (Financial Times, 2009).
The Chinese authorities have indicated that this plan is intended to counteract alleged discrimination against Chinese suppliers by local Chinese governments in public procurement processes associated with the economic stimulus package.
A number of foreign suppliers have said that the opposite is true, however, inasmuch as Chinese products are favoured in those processes.
Unlike the United States and like most of the developing countries, China is not a signatory to the WTO Agreement on Government Procurement and therefore has a wide margin to favour local producers in this area.
Given the difficult global economic conditions, it is not a good sign that some of the world’s largest economies are taking measures of this sort.
There is a greater risk of protectionism in government procurement than in other areas, since it is not regulated by multilateral disciplines.
Other protectionist measures The possible impact of other decisions should also be monitored.
These include increased use of antidumping measures, financial protectionism and barriers to worker migration.
This is in addition to measures linked to climate change which are being studied or implemented in industrialized countries and could have major protectionist effects (see section G for more details on the link between trade and climate change).
The incidence of antidumping measures increased in the second half of 2008.
The start-up of investigations and the adoption of antidumping duties both increased in relation to the second half of 2007, by 17% and 45%, respectively.
Most of the new investigations were initiated by developing countries (led by India), while the imposition of definitive duties was led by the United States.
China was the main target, both of new investigations and of definitive duties and, in both cases, the main sectors involved were metals, chemicals, plastics and textiles (WTO, 2009a).
A number of measures adopted in the financial sphere are biased towards local firms, even though at the London summit the G20 leaders pledged to avoid restricting world financial flows.
According to a recent report from the Institute of International Finance, such measures include discrimination against branches of foreign banks in the distribution of bailout funds, the requirement for nationalized banks to confine lending to local clients, and the requirement for banks that conduct international transactions to maintain higher levels of liquidity in their home country.
For example, Evenett and Jenny (2009) note that British banks that have received government assistance have been encouraged to redirect their lending towards the local market.
The task of evaluating the extent and impact of financial protectionism is complicated by the difficulty of distinguishing between the direct effects of government policy and the effects of the market.
The data provided by the Bank for International Settlements show a sharp contraction in bank lending to emerging countries.
Combined bank assets in the four emerging regions (Eastern Europe, Latin America and the Caribbean, Africa and Asia-Pacific) shrank by 10% (US$ 282 billion) in total, and those of Asia-Pacific banks, which accounted for about half of the percentage drop registered during the Asian crisis, contracted 18%.
This is not the consequence of regulatory action taken in the banks’ origin countries alone, but also of greater risk aversion and the global liquidity crisis (financial deleveraging).
Even without pressure from governments, in the circumstances, financial institutions are likely to confine their activities to their main geographical markets at the expense of secondary markets in other countries.
Although such action does not contravene any international legal obligation, such as the GATS, it can exacerbate financial problems in developing countries.
Several industrialized country governments have taken steps to limit immigration, giving rise to what has been called “people protectionism” (The Economist, 2009a).
Although demographic dynamics mean that the population reaching retirement age in 2015 will exceed the number of young people entering the labour market, the major economies have recorded steep drops in the hiring of immigrants, both in absolute terms and as a percentage of occupied posts.
Several countries have reduced the number of immigrants admitted under official programmes.
Other countries that have taken similar measures include Italy (which is admitting no seasonal workers in 2009), the Republic of Korea and Australia.
A number of countries (such as Spain) that maintain lists of occupations for which there is a shortage of domestic workers, giving foreigners with the appropriate skills preferential treatment, have reduced the scope of such lists drastically.
Others, such as the United Kingdom and Canada, have introduced more stringent rules for employers wishing to hire foreign workers.
In the United States, the “Employ American Workers Act” attached to the fiscal stimulus bill imposes strict conditions on any company that receives government bailout money and wants to hire foreigners under the country’s H-1B visa programme.
Some industrialized countries, including Spain and the Czech Republic, are even paying immigrants to return to their countries of origin, on the condition that they do not re-enter the country to which they had emigrated for a given period (for example, three years).
A report by OECD (2009b) found that it is easier to tighten controls than to loosen them when the economy starts growing again.
OECD countries also have genuine shortages of workers in some professions, such as medicine, which cannot readily be covered using only local labour.
As a result, these countries could find themselves short of labour when the economy begins to pick up again.
A longterm perspective is needed on this issue, to ensure that immigration flows can respond efficiently and flexibly to labour demand.
These measures have an impact on developing countries too, mainly through steep falls in remittances.
Furthermore the spread of the crisis could encourage people to migrate illegally.
Responses by the World Trade Organization and incentives to avoid protectionism The World Bank and, especially, WTO have been monitoring trade policy developments across the globe since the crisis broke out with the aim of discouraging excesses of protectionism by means of transparency and public scrutiny.
In his report of 1 July 2009 to the Trade Policy Review Body, the Director-General of WTO, Pascal Lamy, noted that, “In the past three months, there has been further slippage towards more trade restricting and distorting policies, but resort to high-intensity protectionist measures has been contained overall”.
Lamy added that: “There have been signs of an improvement in the trade policy environment in the form of more governments introducing trade-liberalizing and facilitating measures, but there is no general indication yet of governments unwinding or removing the measures that were taken early on in the crisis” (WTO, 2009a).
Despite these protectionist outbreaks, however, a number of factors make a repetition of the experience of the 1930s unlikely.
First, the rapid spread of vertical specialization in recent years means that countries have fewer incentives to raise barriers to trade.
Countries that produce highly vertically specialized goods or whose export products rely on imported inputs have little incentive to raise tariffs or other barriers to trade, since raising their import costs would simply push up their own export production costs.
Second, the trade liberalization rules and commitments negotiated over the last 60 years within the multilateral trade system, first in the framework of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and, since 1995, in WTO, form a safeguard against a widespread return to protectionism.
The multilateral framework is reinforced by a binding dispute settlement system within WTO.
Additional resistance to protectionist pressure is provided by the network of preferential trade agreements which has been growing since the 1990s, many of which go beyond the commitments reached under WTO.
Third, at an ideological level, isolationist views have been giving way the world over to views that advocate integration into the world economy as a development tool.
The depreciation of several currencies against the dollar has helped to contain imports and protect the domestic tradables sector.
These regimes have, in turn, helped to avoid a wave of competitive devaluations such as those that occurred during the Great Depression.
The Doha Round The intensity of the crisis has shown the urgent need to conclude the Doha Round.
The outbreak of this crisis and the resulting increase in trade restricting measures in a large number of countries have led many stakeholders —governments, business circles and academics— to reassess the importance of bringing the Doha Round of trade talks in WTO to a rapid conclusion.15 The suspension of the negotiations is partly attributable to election cycles in major countries.
For all practical purposes the talks have been suspended since the failure of the “mini-ministerial” meeting of July 2008, pending the conclusion of elections processes in two key countries: India and the United States.
Precisely those two countries’ differences on agricultural market access were singled out as the main cause of the failure of the mini-ministerial.
In June 2009, following the respective elections, the new trade authorities in the United States and India expressed their interest in resuming the talks with a view to concluding them at the end of 2010.
The immediate challenge is still to reach an agreement on modalities for agriculture negotiations and non-agricultural market access (NAMA).16 This would enable the talks to move into the final phase in other areas of the agenda (such as services, rules, trade facilitation, and trade and the environment).
The possibilities of concluding the Round will be determined to a great extent by the stance taken by the United States.
The negotiators maintain that, for United States agricultural, industrial and services exporters, the potential benefits of market access as they see them today are uncertain and do not justify the high economic and political costs of reducing agricultural subsidies and tariffs in sensitive manufacturing sectors (such as textiles and clothing).
The United States has affirmed that this imbalance cannot be redressed unless the advanced developing countries (particularly Brazil, China and India) assume greater liberalization commitments, especially in industrial goods and services.
In WTO language, modalities are basic parameters for drawing up lists of commitments.
In the case of agriculture and NAMA, the main parameters to be agreed upon are the percentages by which agricultural and manufacturing tariffs and agricultural subsidies will be reduced.
The most recent proposed modalities were presented by the chairs of the two negotiating groups in December 2008.
Combating climate change and resisting ecological protectionism In the last few years, the environmental sustainability of economic activities, including trade, has reached the core of international debate, especially with regard to climate change.
The issue of climate change is being addressed in many forums today, both at the multilateral level and within some of the world’s largest economies.
At the multilateral level At the multilateral level, climate change is being addressed under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and in WTO.
The negotiations under the Convention are aimed at defining commitments to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions as of 2012, when the first commitment period of the 1997 Kyoto Protocol ends.
In particular, broader reduction commitments are being sought from all the largest pollutors.
This means that, unlike the Kyoto Protocol, whose binding commitments apply only to the industrialized countries, the new instrument will widen commitments to at least the main developing economies.
It is hoped that agreement can be reached at the fifteenth Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change to be held in Copenhagen in December 2009.
Negotiations on trade and the environment are also taking place in the framework of the Doha Round of WTO and aim, among other things, to liberalize trade in environmental goods and services (see box I.6 for a summary of the main links between climate change and trade).
The underlying issue is the balance between the need to foster economic growth and the need to cap carbon dioxide emissions.
Generally speaking, there is a disagreement between the industrialized and the developing countries on this issue.
The industrialized countries aim to achieve significant reduction commitments from all the main emitting countries (including the emerging economies), whereas the developing countries argue that any commitments made should not curtail their growth and development possibilities and stress that they need technical and financial assistance to assume greater commitments.
Thus far, the OECD countries account for 77% of all GHG emissions, but emissions from developing countries are steadily increasing.
Between 2005 and 2030, the volume of GHG emissions from OECD countries is projected to increase at an average annual rate of 0.5%, while that of developing countries will rise at 2.5% per year.
The success of the Copenhagen conference is important to future efforts to combat climate change.
Developing countries must also be guaranteed access to the financial and technological resources they need in order to undertake greater commitments, without compromising their development strategies or being penalized by protectionist measures in third markets.
A number of modalities are being considered for establishing commitments on greenhouse-gas reduction in a post-Kyoto-Protocol regime.
One reduction modality would be to apply certain country parameters, such as level of income, volume of emissions per capita, growth rate and other indicators.
A second modality would be to apply an emissions ceiling to certain industries (such as cement, steel, paper and pulp, metallurgy, chemicals, aluminium, and air and maritime transport) and allow more efficient units to trade reductions with less efficient ones in order to meet the sector’s overall commitments.
A third possibility would be to raise barriers to imports from countries whose climate change mitigation measures are weak or non-existent, based on the carbon content of products, including transport, or on the protection measures adopted by the exporting countries.
The fourth modality would be to impose an internationally agreed —but locally collected— levy on the carbon content of different fossil fuels.
This last option appears to be the one that would least distort markets.
It would also allow some of the resources raised to be channelled to the least developed countries through an international fund (ECLAC, 2009a).
Regardless of which option is chosen, there is an obvious effort to make reduction modalities more flexible, which contrasts with the single dimension approach (a certain percentage with respect to base-year emissions) established in the Kyoto Protocol.
This greater flexibility, together with the adoption of binding commitments by the United States and the main developing economies, should lead to a more effective regime than the current one.
Whatever multilateral framework emerges, it must respect the basic principles established under WTO and in other international agreements.
For example, given that mitigation and adaptation measures will be applied to sectors that are open to international trade, some of them —such as the extension of free emissions permits— could be considered subsidies, which are governed by the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
Although some rules are relevant to mitigation and adaptation measures, doubts exist as to their interpretation and applicability in this context (see section G.3).
These talks have identified a broad range of goods and services that can be used for different environmental purposes and for climate change mitigation.18 Lower tariff and non-tariff barriers to trade in these goods would make them more accessible and thus help to shift the region towards lower-carbon production.
Moreover, some of the region’s countries, including Argentina, Brazil and Mexico, are major world exporters of some renewable energy product lines.
At the national level At the country level, numerous initiatives have been taken on climate change, especially in the industrialized nations.
In the United States, the House of Representatives approved a bill on climate change in June 2009 (see box I.7).
Other industrialized countries, especially in Europe, are considering the possibility of applying measures to imports in relation to the traceability of GHG emissions generated in the process of production and transport to destination markets (what is known as the “carbon footprint”).
For example, as of 2011 France will require all locally-produced and imported goods that cause an environmental impact, including foods and related products, to carry carbon footprint data.
Some supermarket chains in the United Kingdom, such as Tesco, have shown an interest in creating and promoting the use of carbon-footprint labels on their products.
Country-level initiatives in this areas fall into three categories: (i) border adjustment measures (basically taxes on imports levied according to particular criteria); (ii) public financing and subsidies for promoting the use of renewable energy and low-emissions technologies; and (iii) energy labelling schemes that require products to carry carbon footprint data that encompasses production and transport to destination.
There is a risk that some of these initiatives may be used in a protectionist manner.
Many of them, in fact, are explicitly intended to compensate for the competitive disadvantages of certain industrialized-country production sectors as compared with their developing-country competitors that are not subject to binding emissions reduction commitments.
The potential impact on competitiveness is directly related to the problem of carbon leakage, since the competitiveness losses arising from the application of more stringent environmental requirements encourages energy-intensive firms to move to countries where restrictions are slacker.
For example, wind or hydroelectric turbines, photovoltaic cells, solar water heaters, and equipment for renewable energy production and for the management of solid and dangerous waste.
These outcomes will, in turn, alter comparative advantages and geographic production patterns, mainly in the agricultural and food industries.
The geographic realignment of producers will facilitate a shift between supply and demand, but also bring protectionist pressure to bear on traditional producer countries as well as those that suffer the greatest disruptions in their supply, transport and distribution chains.
According to WTO (WTO/UNEP, 2009, p. xi), trade affects the environment through changes in the volume of economic activity (scale), in production structures (composition) and in the use of more advanced production methods (technology).
The net impact depends on each country’s production structures, but empirical studies show that more open trade leads to higher carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) emissions in developing countries, since the volume effect tends to neutralize the technology and composition effects.
Conversely, in the OECD countries, increased trade translates into an environmental improvement.
At the global level, the effects tend to work in opposite directions.
The reallocation of production among countries could help reduce emissions, provided that the most energy-intensive activities are transferred to locations with higher energy efficiency.
However, this effect would be offset by higher emissions resulting from increased international transport.
Ninety percent of the volume of global trade (excluding trade among European Union countries) is carried out by sea.
This is, in fact, the most efficient transportation method, since it contributes only 12% of all annual CO2 emissions from the transportation sector.
By contrast, highway transportation accounts for 73% of all emissions from this sector.
More than 30% of intraregional trade in Latin America relies on this inefficient method, owing to the region’s economic and geographic characteristics.
Investment and upgrading work in the region’s transportation infrastructure would, therefore, have a strong impact on trade-related emissions.
The purpose of the legislation is to reduce greenhouse gases (GHGs) to no more than 17% of their 2005 level by 2050 by establishing an emissions trading system.
The bill proposes distributing 85% of the permits free of charge at first, then phasing out free permits starting 2026.
The law would raise production costs for companies in the United States owing, among other things, to the need to purchase emissions credits, the requirement to use more environmentally friendly production techniques and the effect of the new rules on the price of energy inputs.
This additional cost could diminish business’ ability to compete with producers in other countries and might even lead to carbon leakage —the relocation of energy-intensive industries to countries with fewer restrictions.
The bill includes measures to offset United States companies’ possible competitiveness losses.
Starting in 2020, a border tax would be charged on goods produced in countries that had not adopted emissions-reduction commitments under a relevant international agreement or had not independently adopted reduction commitments equivalent to those in effect in the United States.
The provisions have spar ked debate in the United States regarding their compatibility with World Trade Organization rules.
President Obama himself has expressed doubts as to whether unilateral measures of this nature would be appropriate.
Such measures could have a strong impact on both the volume and the profitability of exports from Latin American and the Caribbean to the United States.
In the coming months, the Senate must draft its own bill on climate change.
Then the two versions —those produced by House and Senate, respectively— must be reconciled in order to produce a definitive text.
World Trade Organization rules Indirect border tax adjustments appear to be permitted under existing rules.
Under article II of GATT, a border tax adjustment is a levy on an imported product similar to the tax applied to a comparable domestic product.
The GATT Working Party on Border Tax Adjustments determined that taxes levied on products (indirect taxes such as consumption, sales and value added tax) were eligible for adjustment, but direct taxes borne by producers, such as property or income tax, were not.
Here, doubts have arisen as to whether firms’ participation in cap and trade systems may be included in the category of domestic taxes or charges, which would make it eligible for border adjustment.
Paragraph 2(a) of article II of GATT cites two types of border adjustment: (i) a charge on an imported product similar to a domestic product, and (ii) a charge on articles from which the imported product has been manufactured.
This second category is now a matter of debate, however.19 Two major challenges are involved in implementing border measures.
One is to substantiate the measure (that is, to place a precise value on losses in competitiveness and those caused by carbon leakage) and the other is to determine a fair price to be applied to foreign products in order to harmonize prices with the domestic cost of complying with an emissions trading regime (WTO/UNEP, 2009).
Exceptions to the GATT provisions could be justified in virtue of article XX of the Agreement, which allows WTO members to take measures to protect human, animal or plant life or health or to conserve exhaustible natural resources.
The manner in which this exception is interpreted will be crucial for limiting the protectionist impact of the border measures now being discussed in a number of countries, principally the United States.
The issue is still fraught with major ambiguities, however, which will probably be gradually cleared up as jurisprudence of the dispute settlement panels evolves.
Perspectives and long-term impact of the economic and financial crisis The impact of the crisis will be felt for some time Recovery will be slow, gradual and perhaps inconsistent, given the magnitude of the negative wealth effect and the lagged effects in the job market.
Given that the evolution of the labour market lags behind investment and production, after two semesters of recession in the industrialized economies, the OECD countries will register unemployment rates close to or slightly above 10% in 2009 and 2010.
This worsens the uncertainty surrounding bank solvency and the resurgence of protectionist measures.
There are many risks along the road towards even a slow recovery, however, and much will depend on how long it takes to clean up bank balance sheets in several countries.
It is not simply a matter of outlawing subprime mortgages in the United States; now there are also the bad loan portfolios resulting from the recession and the effects of the economic slowdown on credit card lending and traditional bank loans.
Banks need further capitalization, especially in Europe, and financing gaps need to be closed in Central and Eastern Europe.
One of the greatest challenges is the need for overall regulation of the economy, both to correct structural imbalances (saving-investment) and to govern financial affairs.
The crisis showed that deregulated financial markets are not self-correcting and do not advance economic and social efficiency.
In the absence of external rules and better internal ethics, it will be difficult to prevent the financial sector from externalizing risks and costs and passing them to other stakeholders, parasitism will prevail and the market will correct itself only when forced to do so by a severe crisis.
In the context of global financial crisis, regulation cannot be limited to the national domain since finance is globalized.
Effective financial regulation calls for the implementation of global standards or at least reasonable convergence between the national standards of the largest economies.
Otherwise regulatory arbitration will cancel out the effects of isolated national efforts.
Underlying the financial crisis are structural disequilibria that need to be redressed.
During the boom cycle of 2003-2007, the savings surpluses of the South —mainly through the current account surpluses of China, the other Asian economies and the oil-exporting economies— financed much of the real estate and stock market bubbles of the North.
In this period, global demand was driven by the United States economy, owing to private spending which grew at rates well above potential output.
This did not translate into inflationary pressures thanks to an abundant supply of low-priced manufactures, basically from China.
The results were large trade and current account deficits in the United States and hefty surpluses in China.
As a counterpart to this massive trade imbalance, China built up large stocks of United States financial assets, which enabled the United States to finance its deficit without having to raise interest rates.
Accordingly, at the end of 2007, before the subprime mortgage crisis broke out, the United States was absorbing 49% of world savings and China, Japan and Singapore were generating over a third of them (21%, 12% and 2%, respectively) (Rosales, 2009).
This pattern of huge deficits in the United States and no less massive surpluses in China cannot go on indefinitely and United States households will have to adjust their portfolios and cut back their debt.
They will thus cease to drive the world economy, at least to the extent they did in the boom years.
China, meanwhile, must afford greater priority to its domestic market and limit its support for exports.
For now, interest rates are low and the Treasury has been able to continue auctioning bonds.
However, the combined effects of dollar value erosion, interest rates converging on zero and market conditions could push interest rates up in the short term.
This, together with rapidly expanding public debt, could lead to higher interest payments and a larger portion of public spending going to service the debt.
In the European Union, the fiscal deficit and public debt are rising rapidly, partly as a result of the recession and the fiscal responses to the crisis.
Reflecting the larger fiscal deficit, the national account balances of the industrialized economies are expected to show higher total debt figures in the next few years.21 The industrialized countries’ fiscal imbalances will dictate heavy borrowing requirements, which will compete with the financing needs of the developing economies.
This will push up international interest rates, making external financing more costly for developing nations.
The need to narrow the fiscal deficit will also erode the contribution of public spending to economic activity.
As a result, at least for the next three years, the developing economies will need to increase their domestic savings rate in order to finance the required levels of investment.
Even when the OECD economies recover, a return to the excessive levels of risk, leveraging and opacity of financial instruments seen before the crisis seems unlikely.
The crisis has also slashed wealth stocks all over the world, especially in the industrialized countries.
Accordingly, the scenario of virtually infinite, low-risk liquidity has been replaced by one of tighter liquidity and variable risk.
The link between financial and production flows Forecasts issued by the White House.
IMF estimates bear this out, with a gross debt projection of 63% of GDP in 2009 for the United Kingdom, 115% for Italy and 217% for Japan. and foreign trade will have to be redefined.
With global liquidity in shorter supply, capital flows to developing countries will shrink and, as noted earlier, the high borrowing needs of OECD governments will compete with the needs of developing countries.
The impact on trade and the organization of global production The sharp contraction in global trade in 2009 will be followed by a modest 1% upturn in 2010.
According to WTO (2009a) projections for 2009, the volume of trade will drop by 10% in real terms, as exports will contract by 14% in the industrialized economies and 7% in the developing countries.
Projections by IMF and OECD for world trade are even more negative, at -11% and -13%, respectively.
ECLAC estimates an 11% fall in the volume of the region’s exports (see chapter II).
The global economic crisis has severely curtailed world trade, FDI and private bank lending, which has produced a short-term deglobalization process.
It will take a few years to regain the more dynamic trends seen before the crisis, but the partial deglobalization in finance will probably be temporary, reversed by the prevailing structural trends of rapid technology change and its yet faster application to production activities.
The main innovations are those taking place in information and communications technologies (ICT), biotechnology and nanotechnology.
As progress in those areas converges, it will reconfigure firms’ technology and production capacities and external competitiveness, as well as relations among the different sectors of the economy.
Given the current economic crisis, future achievements depend more than ever on the ability to absorb the new techno-organizational paradigms in a creative manner (ECLAC, 2008a).
One structural trend that has been intensifed by the crisis is China’s rise in the global economy.
Although to a lesser extent, this trend also encompasses the other BRICs: India, the Russian Federation and Brazil.
As in 2008, the industrialized countries’ GDP will suffer heavily in 2009 and 2010, while China and India will continue to experience rapid economic growth.
Consequently, China and India will gain greater weight in the world economy in 2010 and will continue to do so throughout the decade.
Today China is the world’s third largest economy and second largest exporter.
It consumes about a quarter of the global annual supply of steel, aluminium, copper and iron and a third of the world’s annual oil supply.
By dint of massive investments in education, infrastructure and innovation, China is becoming one of the leading competitors in the world today.
In the next few years the country will become even more influential and will accordingly claim a greater role in the reform of the international financial system and in the governance of the international economic system.
If the experience of China and other Asian economies in the last three decades shows anything, it is that convergence with the income levels of the central economies, albeit slow, is possible.
A number of these peripheral economies are approaching the technology frontier in several fields and are major exporters of manufactures, services and certain technologies.
They are also the largest holders of international reserves and suppliers of world savings.
It may be time to bring these factors into the analysis and acknowledge the existence of two different groups on the periphery: the traditional exporters of raw materials with little value added and the innovators that can compete successfully in the global arenas of the knowledge economy.
The next step should be to look into the possibility that intra-periphery relations too may be prejudicial to peripheral economies that still export natural resources with little value added (Rosales, 2009).
This is an increasingly important concern, given that South-South trade is developing into an engine of world growth and that the Latin American and Caribbean region is developing ever closer economic and trade ties with China.
The crisis will intensify processes of production restructuring and will have an impact of competitiveness.
Tighter international financing will affect investment, especially in sectors where investment is long-term, such as energy and mining, and in areas that require a high level of investment to stay at the forefront of technological progress, like some manufactures.
The crisis caught a number of sectors with excess capacity, so weaker demand will hasten corporate consolidations, mergers and acquisitions.
The incentive to purchase cheap assets —whose value has been eroded by the crisis— is generating good opportunities for those who can raise the requisite financing.
The post-crisis period will thus be characterized by greater economic concentration, and competition policies will become more important in domestic economies and in world trade.
Models of production and foreign trade will need to be adapted to the new post-crisis conditions.
As noted earlier, trade and international financing will be sluggish in the immediate post-crisis period and will face greater competitive pressure and vestiges of protectionism that may take some time to subside.
Businesses’ typical short-term reaction when such a major crisis occurs is to cut costs, postpone investment, shorten decision-making horizons and try to protect main markets and clients.
As well as responding defensively, however, firms need to reformulate their long-term business models and give due consideration to the opportunities that arise.
Detecting and locking into new opportunities and using the latest technology and business organization tools could in fact help companies to redefine competitive advantages.
Using outsourcing or offshoring as part of a prospective business strategy is more enticing than using them to do the same as before.
Post-crisis global and regional value chains will tend to be reconfigured as a function of their ability to recover from the crisis, their access to scarce raw materials and the revaluation of geographical or logistic advantages, such as proximity to the main centres of consumption or the possession of critical masses of human resources in specific technological areas.
Strengthening the presence of regional firms in regional or global value chains is one of the main challenges involved in internationalizing production.
This effort should start with the activities most closely linked to the main export products, by exploring forward and backward linkages and developing competitive advantages in engineering, biotechnology or related business services, for example.
This will pave the way for diversifying exports and enable exporters to gain a foothold in other new business networks and engage in a corporate learning process that can serve as a basis for scaling up their operations regionally or globally.
The work of internationalization stands to benefit from convergence between trans-Latin enterprises and the regional cooperation and integration processes.
Trans-Latins have made more progress along this road than any other type of firm in the region.
A closer study of these firms’ development and an evaluation of the benefits of such convergence would serve not only to update the integration schemes but also to make them more relevant to business decisions and to the design of policies on trade, innovation and production support.
For example, if training and quality certification efforts were focused on SMEs that met the specific requirements of certain segments of trans-Latin value chains, those SMEs would stand a better chance of joining trans-Latin value chains as indirect exporters.
The data on the impact of the crisis on international trade show that services are holding up better than merchandise and that, within services, the “other services” category (all services other than transport and travel) is proving least affected.
This last category includes communications, informatics, insurance, financial services, franchises and business services (legal, accounting, auditing, consultancy, advertising, research and development, environmental and other services), which are essential for enhancing competitiveness and productivity.
The Latin American and Caribbean region lags particularly in these “other services”, which are the fastest-growing segment in world trade (see table I.5).
The Asian countries as a group have increased their share of global services exports.
China and India, this group’s foremost exporters, more than tripled their market share thanks to the dynamic growth of their “other services” export component (for an analysis of these modern services and the region’s lag in this regard, see ECLAC (2007) chapter III).
If the region is to progress towards the timely provision of services in this category, it must make progress in the formation of value chains, gain a larger competitive presence in outsourcing and offshoring operations and reduce logistics costs.
Accordingly, strengthening the role of services in regional integration is another major challenge for the region on the road towards achieving greater competitiveness.
For the Caribbean, as well as continuing to upgrade tourism activities, more resolute exploration of health service exports and related services could be a worthwhile route to take (Bernal, 2007).
In the case of the percentages for the world total, the figures refer to annual growth rates between 1990 and 2008. d Association of South-East Asian Nations.
In the agricultural sector, cooler temperatures at low latitudes will reduce the productivity of the main cereal crops, which will be damaging for many of the developing countries.
In the other regions, higher temperatures will have a positive impact on agricultural output, but over-heating would be prejudicial.
Water is expected to be in shorter supply, owing to glacial melting, reduced precipitation and droughts.
Higher sea levels and more frequent extreme weather events pose risks to trade infrastructure (port facilities, buildings, roads, railways, airports and bridges) and trade routes (ECLAC, 2009a).
Natural-resource-exporting economies —like those in South America— have not been hit so severely, since China’s high growth rates have kept international demand for those products high.
Conversely, Mexico and Central America have faced tougher competition from Chinese manufactures in the United States, which could hasten structural changes in certain industries, especially in maquila.
The manufacturing segments likely to be the worst hit by the crisis are clothing and textile inputs.
The slowing momentum of these two industries was further weakened by the expiry in early 2005 of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing, which pitted them in stiffer competition against Asian countries such as China, India and Bangladesh.
Bloomberg (2009), “Climate plan faces challenge after narrow US House victory”, 29 June.
Bridges Weekly Trade News Digest (2009b), “Climate talks in US Senate expose divide among democrates”, (2009a) “Criticism grows as ‘Buy American’ rules written into law”, vol. 13, No. 6, 18 February.
Financial Times (2009), “’Buy China’ policy set to raise tensions”, 16 June.
Humphrey, J. (2009), “Are exporters in Africa facing reduced availability of trade finance?”, Brighton, University of Sussex, unpublished.
Introduction As indicated in chapter I, the dramatic outbreak of the global economic crisis in September 2008, followed by its transmission from the financial sector to the real economy, triggered a sharp contraction in the volume of world trade and the emergence of protectionist signals —most worryingly in the industrialized economies.
Latin American and Caribbean countries despite weathering this crisis better than previous ones have had to deal with sharp drops in their trade levels as well as serious constraints on the variables linked to the external sector.
Various border measures have been applied in the region to close widening trade deficits by restricting imports.
While these do not add up to a systematic trend towards curtailing trade flows, they have had a less than desirable effect on subregional trade circuits, particularly in South America.
The overall regional picture is mixed: although some countries have introduced measures to restrict imports, several others have taken steps to boost them.
This chapter reviews the trend of regional trade during the current financial crisis, by comparing it with various stages of the region’s economic development, particularly the Great Depression of the 1930s.
The chapter also reviews the behaviour of raw materials prices; the evolution of the terms of trade; and flows of services, tourism, foreign direct investment (FDI) and migrant remittances.
In short, the aim of the chapter is to assess the effect of the crisis on the external sector of the region's economies.
The chapter goes on to review the trade-policy responses to the crisis adopted in the region and closes with a number of conclusions and policy recommendations.
The Latin American and Caribbean region has not been immune to the strong external shock.
Preliminary estimates for 2009, compared with those of the same period in 2008, suggest a 35%- 40% drop in FDI inflows, a 9%-10% decline in remittances, a 29% slump in the international prices of the region’s commodity exports and a 24% slide in the value of its exports (see figure II.1).
In other words, the region is reeling under the impact of a more powerful external shock than that caused by the Asian crisis or the external debt crisis.
Overall, it has been coping without suffering drastic repercussions in terms of GDP growth or employment, thanks to the combination of the favourable business cycle from which it is emerging (2003-2007) and improved economic policy management.
General trends in the regional trade in goods In 2009, regional trade volumes shrank by around 13%, and exports and imports are predicted to contract by 11% and 14%, respectively.
The severe international financial crisis that has buffeted the region since September 2008, spread vigorously into the region’s goods markets in the last quarter of 2008 and early months of 2009, causing a substantial and widespread reduction in trade flows.
The foreign trade index, which measures the trend of Latin American and Caribbean imports and exports, clearly captures the synchronized decline in both the value and the volume of trade during those periods.
By the end of the first half of 2009, trade flows had shrunk to levels last seen in the first quarter of 2006 —a steeper decline than that recorded following the Asian crisis (see figure II.2 and box II.1).
Nonetheless, there was a slight upturn in the eighth month, when exports tended to rise before stabilizing, whereas in the Asian case, pre-crisis levels were not regained before month 20.
Given that the initial fall in exports was far steeper in the current crisis, it is unlikely that pre-crisis export growth levels will be regained in 2009 (see figure).
The main causes of this sharp slowdown in trade flows include the following: • the contraction of international demand; • lower prices for certain commodities (see box II.2); • trade financing difficulties, particularly in the last quarter of 2008, and • a stronger procyclical trend in intraregional trade flows, primarily in South America.
Between 2003 and 2008, the region experienced a major upswing thanks precisely to the boom in commodity prices, which favoured countries that were net exporters of foodstuffs (especially the Southern Cone), mining products (the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Mexico and Peru, among others) and energy (the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador and Mexico).
This steep climb in commodity prices peaked in mid-2008, to be followed by a steep slide in the second half of the year, which changed the optimistic tone of the regional export market.
In the first half of 2009, commodity prices have been highly volatile, and prospects are uncertain in both the short- and the medium-term.
The decline in prices, compounded by the intense slowdown in global demand, have had profound effects on the trade flows of the countries of the region, causing a deterioration in the terms of trade in most cases (see figure (b)).
The extent of this depends on the composition of the export basket and consumption patterns, although in the latter case there is less variety between the countries.
As also shown in figure (b), countries whose terms of trade improved while commodity prices were rising are those likely to be worst affected in 2009.
The deterioration will be particularly severe in countries with fuelheavy export baskets, since the relevant prices declined by over 50% between July As the countries of Central America are net commodity-importers, they have benefited from the steep fall in commodity prices since the second half of 2008.
To find a similar situation of falling volumes and prices in the region’s trade indices, it is necessary to go back 72 years (to 1937) in the case of exports and 27 years (to 1982) in the case of imports.
This implies a historical record that is only surpassed by the sharp slowdown in trade that occurred immediately after the crisis in 1929 (see figures II.3c and II.3d).
The relevant baseline series correspond to the period between January 1990 and the last month for which information was available when the estimates closed (April and May 2009, depending on the country).
Estimates for the full year are an aggregation of the months reported by the national bodies in question, plus those estimated for the second half of the year in all countries of the sample.
In the first half of 2009, the value of the region’s exports contracted slightly more than that of its imports.
Indeed, the value of regional exports fell by 31% compared with the same period of 2008, with a 15% decline in volume and an 18% drop in prices.
During the same period, imports were down by 29% in value, by 25% in volume and by 5% in price (see table II.2).
This contrasts sharply with the trend during the period between 2003 and the first half of 2008, when the region enjoyed a strong expansion in trade flows (both exports and imports).
The Caribbean appears to be the subregion most seriously impacted by the fall in export values, while Mexico and Central America have recorded the sharpest declines in import values.
The expected contraction in regional export values masks a wide disparity between the different subregions.
Whereas Mexico and the countries of South America and the Caribbean will suffer a sharp contraction in exports this year, the problem will be less severe in Central America.
Manufactured exports in the Central American countries have declined, partly because a large proportion of them are vertically integrated in global chains which have suffered from a drop in final product demand.
The result of the smaller volume of external sales, however, has not been compounded by lower prices, so export values have fallen less sharply than in other subregions.
For their part, South American commodity-exporting countries have experienced a smaller contraction in export volumes,1 but a sharp fall in prices, although an upturn has been observed in several of them since the second quarter of 2009.
In the case of imports, a slowdown is expected across the board (see table II.1).
The value of Latin American exports to the rest of the world is expected to increase in the second half of 2009, such that the fall for the entire year will be less than that reported in the first half.
Countries that export commodities, particularly oil and minerals, have been hit hardest by the deteriorating terms of trade.
The slump in commodity prices is particularly affecting exports from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador (oil), Colombia (oil and coal) and the Plurinational State of Bolivia (natural gas).
In 2009, the terms of trade are forecast to decline by 32.6%, for these four countries as a whole and by 41.9% in the case of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
In contrast, the Central American countries, whose terms of trade worsened between 2005 and 2008 because they are net importers of fuels and food products, are expected to see their terms of trade recover in 2009 (see box II.2).
Export volumes for products such as copper, zinc and aluminium have actually increased, mainly because Chinese demand has held up, stimulated by the low prices of these products.
Information on the Caribbean obtained from the United States Department of Commerce and the Statistical Office of the European Communities (EUROSTAT). a Average annual growth rates in the period, based on the aggregate figures for each subregion.
The monthly price indices available at the national level were used in each case. b Preliminary figures.
Regional trade patterns, by origin and destination The region’s exports and imports have declined across the board, irrespective of destination or origin.
The monthly trend in Latin American and Caribbean trade flows with the main world regions and partner countries displays a clearly synchronized slowdown followed by contraction from the third quarter of 2008 through to the end of the first quarter of 2009.
Information on the Caribbean obtained from the United States Department of Commerce and the Statistical Office of the European Communities (EUROSTAT). a The figure in brackets indicates the share of each subregion or country in total trade flows (exports plus imports) for the 15 countries considered in the period January-June 2009.
Trade with the United States and the European Union decreased significantly in the first half of 2009.
Trade flows with the United States retreated on a widespread basis, not only in the case of Mexico and the Central American countries, for which a significant decline was expected.
In fact, the value of exports to the United States market fell by even more in the case of the Andean Community (CAN) and the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) (see figure II.5).
Trade with the European Union also slackened generally as a result of the recession.
Although the contraction of exports to this market was sharpest in Chile and Mexico, it was also considerable in all subregions —except for Central America where levels of bilateral trade between the two zones are small (see figure II.5).
The region’s exports to Asian countries declined by substantially less (between 18 and 19 percentage points) than those targeting the European and United States markets (see figure II.5).
This verifies the growing importance of China as a regional export destination.
Trade has declined less with China than with the region’s other main trading partners.
Official Chinese data report a substantial slump in its trade with Latin America in the first three months of 2009, owing to the fall in commodity prices.
Nonetheless, preliminary figures for the first half of the year show that Chinese imports of certain commodities are actually propping up the region’s exports to this country, which —with a growth rate of 8% forecast for 2009— continues to absorb large volumes of raw materials.
To some extent, the Chinese domestic market has rescued Latin American exports, in particular benefiting several net commodityexporting countries in South America, for which reason the subregion has again posted surpluses in its bilateral trade with China (see figure II.7).
In contrast, Mexico and Central America continue to display deficits, reflecting to the sharp asymmetry in trade flows with China.
Export-oriented production in Mexico and Central America is more heavily based on manufactures, and their exports consequently complements China less than the commodities exports of South America.
As shown in figure II.6, only MERCOSUR succeeded in increasing its exports to China in the first half of 2009 compared to the same period in 2008, although their rate of expansion slowed sharply.
At the opposite extreme is the Andean Community, whose exports slowed abruptly owing to the huge drop in oil and copper prices.
On the import side, the region’s demand for Chinese goods has weakened generally, although by less than in the case of United States, the European Union and for goods from within the region.
This has caused problems for productive sectors that compete with Chinese imports.
The financial crisis and price falls have triggered the implementation of anti-dumping measures, permits and quotas, among other barriers,3 on products such as textiles, crockery, steel chains, cutlery, tyres and footwear, particularly of Chinese origin.
Section G gives details of some of the trade policy measures implemented by the region’s countries in the current crisis.
The trade flows of each country and/or subregion with Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole recorded huge drops that were similar in size to those recorded by world trade, on average falling by over 30% (see figure II.8).
This pattern was observed in each of the region’s four subregional integration schemes, where trade flows displayed procyclical behaviour (see chapter III).
For the first time in a long while, the pattern was also replicated in intrasubregional trade in Central America, which had tended to be less procyclical in the past.
Recent events in Honduras might aggravate this trend in the second half of 2009.
Regional trade patterns, by product group As has been the case worldwide, the slowdown in regional exports is more pronounced in mining, oil and manufactured products.
While the value of the region’s agricultural exports has decreased by less than its total exports, foreign sales of mining products and oil have dropped by over 50%, and manufacturing exports have fallen by 24%, particularly those destined for the United States and European markets (see table II.4).
These two items account for 92% of the decline in the region’s total exports in the first half of 2009, compared to the same period a year earlier.
Despite the weaker commodity prices, export volumes have grown significantly, thus mitigating the effects of the price fall (see box II.2).
A more detailed product breakdown reveals a sharply falling trend among certain manufactures, such as imports by the United States of motor vehicles, iron and steel, plastics and metal products from the region, which reported variations of -48%, -52%, -50% and -22% in the first half of 2009, respectively.
In contrast, preliminary figures for this period report slight growth in the United States’ agricultural imports from Latin America and the Caribbean.
In addition, purchases of the region’s agricultural products by the European Union have decreased by less than the overall figure, also with a smaller share (see table II.5).
In 2009 to date, the strong performance of Chinese demand has underpinned recovery among some of the region’ commodity exports (particularly agricultural ones), in both price and volume terms.
In the first half of 2009, for example, Chinese purchases of soybeans worldwide grew by 36% in volume compared to the same period in 2008.
This contributed to an expansion of exports from Brazil of soybeans (7.4%) and soybean flour (5.2%) in the first three months of the year, during which its sales of maize were also up by 28%.4 Agricultural exports from Argentina declined sharply, however.
The performance of the mining sector in Latin America shows that world demand for its products remains strong, driven largely by China, which helped to cushion the adverse effect of lower prices on the region’s balance of payments.
Although Chinese oil imports continue to grow, in 2009 thus far there has been a slight reduction in demand from OECD countries, and as a result, global demand is down by 2%.5 Even so, the volume of oil exported by the region’s countries has fallen by less than its price.
Thus, in the first quarter of 2008 and the same period in 2009, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela exported just 2% less oil, although the value of its oil exports declined by 55% owing to the price effect.
At the same time, the value of Mexican oil exports declined by 58%, reflecting not only lower prices, but also an 11% drop in volume exported.
This adjustment, which is normal in a crisis that has a major effect on the real economy, occurred suddenly and even before the current financial crisis became more acute.
It should be noted that the fuel imports index started to fall as early as mid-2008, whereas the capital goods and intermediate inputs index was slowing down and dropped definitively only in October 2008 (see figure II.9).
Most of the fall in imports is occurring in capital goods and intermediate inputs.
Of the overall reduction in imports, 55% is accounted for by capital goods and intermediate inputs.
When the decline in fuel purchases is factored in, these three segments account for 77% of the total reduction (see table II.5).
These figures should be treated cautiously, however, given the direct link between imports of capital goods, intermediate inputs and investment, and, hence, with the region’s future recovery prospects.
General trends in the trade in services Service exports decreased by less than goods exports in the first quarter of 2009.
Balance-of-payments data for the first three months of 2009, available for nine of the region’s countries, confirm the global pattern of a smaller reduction in trade in services than in merchandise trade.
According to the Energy Information Administration of the United As can be seen in figure II.10, which shows growth rates for the first quarter of 2009 compared to the same period a year earlier, the worst affected sector has been transport, particularly in Costa Rica and Uruguay.
On average, the decline was no greater than 10% (see figure II.10c).
Despite additional factors adversely affecting the travel sector, particularly the influenza A virus (H1N1), exports of relevant services remained relatively stable.
Trade in other services followed a quite similar pattern, declining by about 6%.6 For the region as a whole, the situation of the various components of the trade in “other services” has varied considerably.
The available information on tourist arrivals for the first quarter of 2009 also shows a slight decrease on the order of 5%.
This confirms the relative stability of income from the sale of travel services up to the end of March (see figure II.11).
An analysis of import-related data (see figure II.10b) reveals a general drop in imports in the transport sector in all of the countries studied, averaging around 25%.
This reflects the continuing weakness of the world economy and lower activity levels across the region.
Activity in the tourism sector, which had contracted in 2008, will continue to decline as a result of the crisis and the health problems caused by the A(H1N1) influenza virus.
The economic crisis generated a large slump in demand for tourism services in high-income countries, particularly Europe and the United States.
The fall is expected to be even greater in the rest of 2009, as a result of the worsening of the crisis in the real sector of the economy in developed countries and upheavals caused by the A(H1N1) influenza virus in Mexico and the Caribbean.
Inbound tourism to those destinations has fallen off sharply since April 2009.
The Caribbean Tourism Organization expects arrivals in the Caribbean zone, the region’s tourism hub, to drop by between 20% F.
Trends in the other components of the balance of payments The financial crisis has shifted to other domains of the region’s participation in the international economy, such as foreign direct investment (FDI) and remittances sent from abroad.
Although FDI posted a historical record in the region in 2008, it is expected to retreat in 2009 owing to the smaller number of investment projects.
Inward FDI flows to Latin America and the Caribbean posted a new historical record in 2008, despite slowing sharply compared to the previous year, while investment by Latin American and Caribbean firms reached its second highest level ever.
These figures should be interpreted with caution, however, since much of the investment undertaken in 2008 reflected decisions taken before the crisis.
This is particularly noteworthy, given a 25% decrease in investment flows to developed countries and a 15% reduction worldwide.
Nonetheless, the aggregate figures conceal a highly varied subregional reality (see table II.7).
Inward FDI to South America grew by 24% compared to the 2007 figure, fuelled by high commodity prices and strong subregional economic growth.
In contrast, in Mexico and the Caribbean Basin, FDI declined by 5% over the same period, largely reflecting this zone’s close relations with the United States economy.
FDI flows to the region as a whole are expected to fall off sharply in 2009, as the effects of the current financial crisis intensify.
Total remittance flows to developing countries, amounting to US$ 328 billion, were up by 15.1% in 2008 in relation to the previous year’s figure, while flows to the region grew by just 1.4% (see table II.8 and figure II.12).
This largely reflected the adverse effects of the United States recession on the employment and income of Latin American immigrants, particularly in the construction sector.
The World Bank expects remittance flows to the region to decrease by between US$ 58 and US$ 60 billion in 2009, in other words between 6% and 9%.
Although a slight recovery is expected in 2010 under the baseline scenario, there will be a slight reduction if the pessimistic scenario prevails (see table II.8).
It should be noted that remittances are the main source of income for the economies in the Caribbean basin and Central America.
As can be seen in figure II.12b, several of these have suffered a substantial drop in remittances received in 2009 thus far, contrasting with the growth of remittances received by several Asian countries.
Regional trade-policy responses Despite the crisis the region has generally resisted the temptation of protectionism.
Despite the pressure for greater protection that tends to arise in a crisis as serious as the current one, there has been no widespread move to restrict trade.
In fact, the international trade responses vary significantly by country and include both measures to increase protection and others pointing in the opposite direction.
Appendix II.A-1 contains a table summarizing the measures adopted by the various countries since September 2008, which gives rise to a number of observations.7 Some of the region’s countries have introduced trade restriction measures.
In addition, in some cases the crisis has reinforced pressure to explore “managed trade” options, such as sector-wide agreements between exporters and importers themselves.
There have also been moves towards greater openness, export promotion and trade facilitation.
Trade liberalization or promotion measures adopted recently in the region include the following: • tariff cuts, especially on capital goods, intermediate goods and food products (the latter particularly in Caribbean countries); • reduction in export taxes, particularly on agricultural products; • trade facilitation measures, and • various efforts to intensify export promotion.
Also worth noting is the general action by governments in the region to increase the provision of trade finance, to mitigate the credit crunch caused by the crisis (see chapter I).
In South America, a group of countries made some US$ 3.7 billion available for trade financing, while members of the Central American Common Market (CACM) decided to set up a special fund for this purpose in the framework of negotiations on a prospective partnership agreement with the European Union (see table II.9).
The region’s countries have also applied measures such as streamlining VAT rebate mechanisms for exporters and increasing the number of firms eligible for export credit lines.
The countries of the region have opted for border measures rather than subsidies.
The trade policy measures adopted in the region since September 2008 are consistent with the pattern detected in several recent studies (see, for example, Newfarmer and Gamberoni, 2009).
Thus, while the industrialized countries have responded to domestic demands for protection mainly by granting subsidies to various industries in vulnerable situations, developing countries have preferred to use border measures —both tariff and nontariff.
Naturally, this reflects the lesser availability of financial resources in developing countries to directly subsidize productive sectors.9 In particular, the region has plenty of room to raise tariffs.
The current crisis has highlighted the space available to the region’s countries to increase applied tariffs (under the most favoured nation (MFN) clause, without exceeding bound rates (the maximum levels committed to in the WTO).
As can be seen in figure II.13 and table II.10, the average bound tariff (considering both agricultural and non-agricultural products), is three times higher than the applied tariff in South America and Mexico and six times higher in the case of Central America and the Caribbean.
Following an invitation by the Brazilian Government, the group met to propose solutions to problems of international trade financing in November 2008.
As an exception to this rule, the Government of Brazil has granted US$ 1.7 billion in loans to the automotive sector (WTO, 2009a).
Nonetheless, this reflects the trend to support that industry that started in the United States and has since spread to most of the main producer countries (see chapters I and IV).
The possibility of raising tariffs is to some extent limited by the various trade agreements signed between the countries of the region.
This is particularly true in the case of intraregional trade, which takes place under the various subregional integration schemes — The Andean Community, MERCOSUR, the Central American Common Market and CARICOM — and a vast network of agreements linking those schemes with each other and also with Chile, Mexico and Panama.
Nonetheless, there are substantially fewer restrictions of this type in the case of trade with partners outside the region, since this is largely conducted on an MFN basis.
Thus far, however, since September 2008, only two countries have raised tariffs on a significant number of products.
These are Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, and their respective cases are described below.
In the agriculture sector, only the preferences negotiated in intraregional agreements were taken into account, except in the cases of Mexico and Chile.
Regional results are weightings based on data on the countries’ imports of agricultural and non-agricultural products.
In January 2009, Ecuador adopted a balance-ofpayments safeguard measure consisting of raising tariffs or introducing import quotas on 630 10-digit tariff items from all origins, for a one-year period.
The items covered account for 8.7% of the total universe of 7,230 items and in 2008 represented an import volume of US$ 4.3 billion (23% of the total).
According to the Ecuadorian authorities, this measure was taken to restrict imports to correct the country’s balance-of-payments deficit.
It should be remembered that Ecuador cannot adjust the level of imports through the exchange rate, since its economy is dollarized.
As part of this agreement, Ecuador undertook to suspend the measure no later than 22 January 2010 and to replace most of the newly introduced import quotas with tariffs by 1 September 2009.
Before introducing the balance-of-payments safeguard, Ecuador had made major adjustments to its tariff structure between late 2007 and late 2008, affecting around 5,100 items (70.5% of the total).
This entailed lowering tariff rates on a large number of products, especially raw materials, intermediate goods and capital goods not produced locally.
As a consequence, the number of tariff lines with a zero tariff grew from 248 (3.4% of the total) to 3,637 (50.3% of the total); but at the same time tariffs were raised on over 1,200 items (mainly consumer goods) to levels above 20%, which in many cases coincide with the WTO bound rates.
Ultimately, although these changes increased Ecuador’s tariff dispersion, average tariffs fell from 11.7% in 2007 to 10.2% in March 2009, even when the effect of the balanceof-payment safeguard is factored in (WTO, 2009b).
For its part, in June 2009, the Plurinational State of Bolivia added a new 35% rate to its tariff structure, which previously had only ranged from 0% to 20%.
The new rate is applicable to 324 tariff lines representing textile, clothing and furniture products.
The reason for this measure, as stated in Supreme Decree No. 0125 introducing it, is to protect domestic industry and to encourage the consumption of Bolivian-made products through tariff measures, without affecting the prices of the basic consumption basket or supply to the domestic market.
The main tariff reduction in the region over the last few months is being implemented progressively by Mexico between 1 January 2009 and 1 January 2013 as part of its foreign trade simplification programme.
Under this measure, rates of duty will be lowered on 10,900 tariff lines, equivalent to 77% of the universe in the industrial sector.
This reform has been accompanied by many trade-facilitation measures and announcements, including those aimed at promoting the use of information and communication technologies in trade-related procedures.
In addition, Paraguay cut tariffs from 6% to 2% on a large number of capital goods including boilers, condensers for steam machinery, hydraulic cylinders, pistons, freezers and agricultural machinery sourced from non-MERCOSUR member countries.
These goods are included in Paraguay’s schedule of exceptions to the MERCOSUR common external tariff.
The increase in the number of anti-dumping investigations initiated worldwide in the second half of 2008 was even more pronounced in the region, although not on a generalized basis.
At the world level, the initiation of anti-dumping investigations increased by 17% in the second half of 2008 —when the effects of the crisis started to intensify— compared to the same period of 2007 (WTO, 2009d).
This trend was also seen in more widespread form in the region, where new anti-dumping investigations increased by 87% in the same period.
As a result, in the second half of 2008, Brazil and Argentina were ranked second and fifth, respectively, among WTO members that had initiated the largest number of antidumping investigations (see table II.11).
Percentage This increase in the number of investigations in Latin America and worldwide, in the second half of 2008, will probably lead to a larger number of definitive anti-dumping measures towards the end of this year or in the first half of 2010, since the investigation process generally takes between 12 and 18 months.
In the first case, this has shown mainly through frictions between the two leading economies, Brazil and Argentina.
Although these involve problems that existed prior to the current financial crisis, the crisis helped to magnify them, particularly in the industrial trade area.
On 27 March 2009 that institution’s General Secretariat issued Resolution 1227 authorizing Ecuador to extend the safeguard to intra-subregional trade until 21 January 2010.
Nonetheless, it objected to the Ecuadorian national tariff also being applied to imports, since this would not respect the preferences negotiated in the CAN framework.11 Following a petition for reconsideration submitted by both Ecuador and Peru, dated 22 June, the General Secretariat of Taiwan Province of China and India.
Nonetheless, some of the investigations currently under way concern imports from the region’s own countries.
In terms of the products involved, all are in the manufacturing sector and include various types of textiles, footwear, tyres, crockery, cutlery, electrical appliances and laminated floors, among other products (see annex table II.A-1).
Available data for the current year suggest that Argentina and Brazil continue to lead the investigation and application of anti-dumping duties in the region, and China remains their main target.
In response to a new resolution, dated 25 June, confirming the Secretariat’s decision, Ecuador reinstated the tariff preferences granted to its CAN partners and the other countries with which it has trade agreements.
On 6 July 2009, however, the country decided to apply a one-year safeguard to 1,346 products from Colombia, which consisted of making them subject to the national Ecuadorian tariff.
The rationale for this measure, according to the corresponding resolution, was the need to “make corrections for the alteration to the normal conditions for competition caused by the devaluation of the Colombian peso” (Resolution No. 494 of the Foreign Trade and Investment Council, 6 July 2009).
The disagreements that have arisen between Colombia, Peru and Ecuador over the safeguard imposed by the latter could make it harder for these three countries to achieve joint positions in the negotiations for an economic partnership agreement with the European Union.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia, the fourth member of CAN, withdrew from the talks in June 2008. (b) Central America Central American governments have made considerable efforts to tackle the crisis in a coordinated manner.
In December 2008, Heads of State and Government of the countries of the Central American Integration System (SICA) approved a plan of urgent measures to cope with the impact of the international financial crisis on the region.
This included a commitment to strengthen the subregional financial system, move towards setting up the customs union, coordinate productive policies, stimulate productive chains, promote intraregional trade (particularly in agricultural products) and prioritize investment in infrastructure to support production.
Trade facilitation has played a key role in the Central American regional integration strategy.
Although member States have made significant progress in liberalizing intraregional goods trade, which mostly takes place tariff-free, other domains of the integrated economic space are lagging behind significantly.
These areas include services, investment, sectoral and social policies, government procurement and the coordination of monetary and fiscal policies (Thomas, 2009).
In the case of extraregional trade outside the region, the most important event of the last few months was the provisional entry into force, in December 2008, of the economic partnership agreement between the Caribbean Forum of the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (CARIFORUM), which includes the Dominican Republic, and the European Union (see box II.3).
In terms of national responses to the financial crisis, since the outbreak of the crisis several members of CARICOM have temporarily suspended the common external tariff.
This mainly affects food products —with the aim of compensating for the rise in their international prices— along with capital goods and raw materials (see the annex).
The agreement aroused mixed feelings in the Caribbean, both in academic circles and the business community and among economic analysts, and even among some of the governments of the subregion, which resulted in the postponement of the actual signing of the agreement until October 2008.
The agreement replaces the system of preferences established within the framework of the Cotonou Agreement of 2000, which regulates financial, trade and development ties between the group of former European colonies known as the African, Caribbean and Pacific States (ACP) and the European Union.
The new partnership agreement is the first to establish formal trade arrangements between the European Union and a subregional group in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It also marks the first time that Caribbean countries participate in a reciprocal trade liberalization scheme with a major and economically heftier trading partner.
The agreement covers all the main aspects of trade relations: in addition to market access for goods and services, it covers investment, regulation of the services sector, competition, government procurement, trade facilitation and intellectual property rights.
The agreement therefore imposes stricter obligations than those established in the World Trade Organization.
Given the huge asymmetries between the European Union and CARIFORUM in terms of size, level of development and economic might, the costs of adhering to the commitments assumed under the agreements will be far higher in the case of the Caribbean countries.
Two instruments have been put in place to address this imbalance: asymmetrical liberalization (both in terms of the products of each party that are covered and the timetables involved) and financial and non-financial assistance for implementing the agreement and strengthening subregional integration.
Many Caribbean countries’ exports are heavily concentrated in the services sector, and greater access to the European market in this sector represents a major opportunity for their economies.
On the other hand, Caribbean firms will face stiff competition from European service suppliers.
Although there is some asymmetry in the scope of the liberalization of services in the partnership agreement, the obligations assumed by the Caribbean countries largely exceed the commitments of developing countries in WTO.
The agreement also opens up some possibilities of temporary employment for Caribbean professionals in Europe.
Access to the labour market in the European Union will depend, however, to a great extent, on each member country’s specific regulations, and de facto access will certainly be defined by those regulations, particularly with regard to the technical qualifications required of professionals and the application of economic needs analyses.
The agreement’s supporters claim that it will boost development in the CARIFORUM countries by increasing trade, strengthening regional integration and attracting investment.
The basic premise of the agreement is that trade is the main vehicle for stimulating development.
The agreement’s detractors maintain that it is not strongly development-oriented because liberalization alone cannot generate growth and the assistance-related provisions are too vague.
Critics point out that the agreement was not preceded by a solid socio-economic impact analysis.
Another concern is that it will not be easy for countries with a limited institutional capacity to implement such a deep and far-reaching agreement.
Also, the countries of the Caribbean will have to cope with the fiscal impact of a reduction in tariff revenues.
Furthermore, within the framework of the agreement, the CARICOM States will grant the Dominican Republic the same treatment they give the European Union and vice versa, which will cause complications because there is no customs union between the Dominican Republic and CARICOM.
The main challenge posed by the new economic partnership agreement, however, is to diversify the export base of the CARIFORUM countries because at the moment their exports are concentrated in a few basic products and services.
Only China is showing a sustained demand for basic products, which has made it possible to offset the adverse situation facing the region’s external trade.
The damaging results of a trade crisis that has no precedent in recent times —it is necessary to go back more than 70 years to find a similar situation— underscores the need to think carefully about the nature of the changes facing the region, since some may well prove structural rather than circumstantial.
Projections for world trade over the next two years suggest a modest growth scenario, with many competitive pressures stemming from excess capacity in several production sectors, as China and the Asia-Pacific region become ever-more competitive.
The worsening of the crisis has destroyed export industries that previously had substantial importance and led to highly dynamic technical changes being introduced.
This group includes the automotive, iron and steel, chemical and petrochemical industries, all of which display significant reductions not only in domestic industrial production in the individual countries, but also in international trade flows.
The depth of the changes will vary according to the extent and specific pattern of each country’s internationalization.
Nonetheless, there is a clear need to rethink the region’s international engagement, recognizing once again the need for greater efforts to exploit natural comparative advantages in sectors in which the region is relatively strong, including its abundant natural resources, water and an ecosystem suited to tourism.
Innovation and technological development are at the heart of the debate that will orchestrate an orderly exit from the crisis.
In any event, the region will find it hard to emerge favourably without harnessing the momentum to promote a broader market and achieve greater cooperation on issues for which progress is lagging (see chapter III).
As in the case of trade flows, the effects of the crisis were not fully reflected in the 2008 figures on foreign direct investment, remittances and tourism in the region.
Nonetheless, data available for the second half of 2009 show all of these variables deteriorating sharply.
Despite the gravity of the current crisis and the pressures that naturally arise in this situation, thus far the region has generally been able to resist the temptation to indulge in protectionist practices.
In this respect, the region’s behaviour on trade compares favourably with that of the leading industrialized economies.
In view of the slump in demand in nearly all of the leading markets outside the region, Latin American and Caribbean governments need to do their utmost to keep intraregional trade open.
The specific characteristics of this trade, particularly the involvement of a large number of small and medium-sized businesses and the fact that its composition contains a high density of manufactures and knowledge, make it particularly important to support recovery.
Moreover, from a post-crisis standpoint, Latin America and the Caribbean needs to harness the regional integration process to help it cope better with the broad trends unfolding in the world economy.
The next chapter explores current openings in Latin America and the Caribbean for strengthening regional cooperation and moving ahead in less conventional aspects of integration.
INTAL (Institute for the Integration of Latin America and the Caribbean) (2009a), “Recesión y proteccionismo “dentro de las reglas”: los riesgos para el sistema multilateral de comercio”, Carta mensual, No.150, January. (2009b), “El comercio internacional, amenazado por la falta de financiamiento”, Carta mensual, No.
WTO (World Trade Organization) (2009a), Report to the TPRB from the Director-General on the financial and economic crisis and trade-related developments (JOB (09)/2), Geneva, January. (2009b), Consultations with Ecuador.
Overview of the situation and outlook for the balance of payments taking into account internal and external factors that affect the situation.
Reduction of withholding on exports of wheat, maize, fresh fruit and vegetables.
Elimination of export tax (5% as from August 2006) on 35 tariff lines in the dairy product sector.
Resumption of maize and wheat exports, which had been closed since June 2008.
Authorization to export 6 million tons of maize and 520,000 tons of wheat.
Since March 2009, the private sectors in Argentina and Brazil have worked to reach understandings to regulate bilateral trade in sensitive sectors.
These negotiations have produced agreements on goods such as dairy products, furniture, batteries, vehicle brakes, paper and footwear.
These agreements normally include the introduction of market quotas or minimum import prices.
Application of definitive anti-dumping duties on the following goods: • Electric irons from China; • Bicycle frame and fork parts from China; • Low-carbon steel chains from China; • Air-conditioning equipment from Thailand; and • Electrical connection terminals for cable sections from Germany and China.
Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Tariff increase to 35% on 324 tariff lines, including textiles, apparel and furniture, since June 2009.
Application of provisional anti-dumping duties on bus and truck tyres from China.
One-year suspension of definitive anti-dumping duties on imports of ammonium nitrate from the Russian Federation and Ukraine.
Removal of seven iron and steel products from the Brazilian schedule of exclusions from the MERCOSUR common external tariff.
As a result, these products cease to be duty-free and pay a tariff between 12% and 14%.
Extension until 30 June 2009 of import quotas on retread tyres from Paraguay and Uruguay.
Inclusion of 306 products on the “ex-tariffs” list (a mechanism that temporarily lowers duties on products for which there is no similar domestic product), favouring the acquisition of imported products in the capital goods, electric, metallurgy, paper and pulp, graphics, medical-hospital, automotive, electrical-electronic and other sectors.
Tariff cuts on 3,267 tariff lines corresponding to raw materials (from 7.6% to 3.8%) and capital goods (from 6.3% to 2.3%) not produced locally.
Ecuador Imposition of a balance-of-payments safeguard by raising tariffs or introducing import quotas on 630 tariff items at the 10-digit level, from all origins for a one-year period. d Elimination of tariffs on imported hybrid automobiles.
Counter-crisis programme including a buy-national plan giving a 70% preference for domestic firms in government procurement processes.
Paraguay Rise in tariffs to levels of 10% and 15%, until 31 December 2009, on 19 tariff lines in the chemicals and related sectors (insecticides, fungicides, paints, varnishes and other items), to correct trade distortions within MERCOSUR.
Reduction from 6% to 2% of the import duty on certain capital goods from non-MERCOSUR member countries, from 1 July Temporary increase in the rate of drawback of taxes on non-traditional exports (from 5% to 8%).
Postponement of the reduction from 2% to 1% of the consular levy on imports, scheduled for June 2009.
The advance payment of the Economic Activities Income Tax (IRAE) will be increased from 4% to 8%, which is paid by importers of certain consumer goods such as clothing and footwear.
Announcement that customs valuation procedures will be strengthened to prevent the value of clothing and footwear imports being understated.
Announcement of a review of tariff protection for vehicles in specific segments.
Venezuela (Bolivarian Introduction of an import quota on vehicles from Colombia (maximum 10,000) in 2009.
Republic of) Central America and Mexico Costa Rica Submission to Congress of a draft law setting performance requirements for imports of beans and white maize with a preferential tariff in the case of supply shortages.
The bill aims to provide incentives to purchase domestically-produced version of these goods.
Should domestic production be insufficient, they can be imported at reduced tariff rates.
The new law would not be applicable to imports from the rest of Central America or countries with which Costa Rica has free trade agreements.
Guatemala Nicaragua Regional Increase in export promotion efforts by opening new trade offices and speeding up negotiations aimed at signing free trade agreements, including the one with the European Union.
Import tariffs temporarily lowered or eliminated on various products (edible oil, beans, food pasta and barley, among others) to offset the rise in international food prices.
Announcement of steps to open new markets and strengthen trade with the Russian Federation, the Islamic Republic of Iran and countries of the Bolivarian Alternative for Latin America and the Caribbean (ALBA).
Customs agreement between El Salvador and Guatemala, which will help streamline trade.
Application of tariffs of between 10% and 45% on 89 agricultural and industrial products from the United States, representing annual imports of US$ 2.4 billion, in retaliation for the elimination of a 2007 pilot programme allowing a limited number of Mexican trucks to enter the United States.
Under NAFTA, there should have been free trade between the two countries since 2000.
Dominican Republic Initiation of a safeguard investigation on imports of glass bottles.
Jamaica Elimination of tariffs on imports of capital goods and raw materials, as part of the stimulus package.
Saint Kitts and Nevis Suspension of the common external tariff on 31 food- and non-food products.
Saint Lucia Suspension of the common external tariff and consumption tax on nine products.
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Revision of the common external tariff on certain basic products.
Trinidad and Tobago Elimination of tariffs on imports of food products such as cheese, rice, oil, sugar, milk and other dairy products.
Not all criterion values are applicable to imports from all origins, and, if several products, their application is expressly restricted to certain groups of countries.
This tends to be the case with the so-called “group 4” consisting exclusively of Asian countries. d This measure, notified to WTO by Ecuador on 18 February 2009 (WTO, 2009b), is based on Article XVIII.B and the Understanding on the Balance of Payments provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) of 1994.
The tariff hike amounts to 30% and 35% ad valorem, in some cases from applied levels and in other cases from bound levels, and affects 75 sub-items.
Lastly, quantitative restrictions were imposed on 23 and 248 sub-items, equivalent to 65% and 75% of their 2008 C.I.F. import value, respectively.
The main sectors affected are: consumer durables, transport equipment, textiles, apparel and footwear.
Restrictions were also applied on certain fruits, agribusiness products and ceramics, among others. e The products for which tariffs are lifted represent approximately 77% of the universe of industrial products.
In the case of the remaining 23%, 20% already have a zero MFN tariff.
Introduction Compared with 2003-2007, which was the most favourable period the world and regional economies had seen in 40 years, the outlook for the future is less encouraging.
In the early 2010s the world economy and world trade will experience reduced growth rates, increased competitive tension and protectionist pressure, and tighter access to financing than in 2003-2007.
The worldwide post-crisis situation will be marked by the restoration of fiscal equilibrium in the industrialized economies and the need to take decisions on tackling climate change, which will lead to increased costs for businesses and have a decisive impact on the competitiveness of national economies.
Consequently, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean will have to redouble their efforts to build enlarged regional forums and undertake cooperation initiatives that can unlock the synergies of the different subregions.
Closer cooperation within the Caribbean, South America and the Mexican and Central American subregion is no longer merely a major political objective, but also an economic imperative if the region is to integrate into a global economy that is less dynamic but more competitive and increasingly structured around regional or subregional value chains.
Thus, measures in areas such as infrastructure, energy, connectivity and trade facilitation will be crucial for competitiveness and growth.
In the current conditions, with demand for the region’s products from most of its major partners sharply down, intraregional trade has a key role to play in shoring up demand.
This has yet to occur, however, partly because of the emergence of trade-restricting measures, as discussed in chapter II.
Intraregional trade must be kept open, which requires, at the least, observance of the liberalization commitments already entered into.
The worst effects of restrictions on intraregional trade flows are borne by SMEs and by those exports that are labour-intensive and higher in value added.
Regional integration must not therefore be allowed to fall victim to an international crisis not generated by the region.
In light of these considerations, this chapter will examine the scope for regional cooperation, focusing on seven areas: infrastructure, trade support, innovation, reduction of asymmetries, social cohesion, closer ties with Asia-Pacific and climate change.
The new global context requires greater regional cooperation Given the scale of the current global crisis, the region is clearly holding up much better than in earlier —and in fact smaller— crises.
The macroeconomic strengths built up during the boom years of 2003-2007 explain the region’s greater resilience this time round.
As a result, the region’s GDP has fallen fairly moderately in comparison with the steep drops in output seen in the G8 countries (Mexico is an exception to this, owing to its high trade dependency on the United States).
In South America, the resilience has also been a reflection of high economic growth in China, which has generated a steady demand for natural resources.
This has been reflected in rising world prices for a number of the subregion’s export commodities.
External shocks —falls in export volumes and prices, declining income from tourism and remittances, together with a contraction in foreign direct investment (FDI) flows— are putting serious pressure on the region’s public finances.
The region has withstood those shocks reasonably well in 2009 on the back of strong fiscal indicators and a solid external sector, but these may deteriorate if the world economy is too slow to recover.
Of the variables cited, export prices respond quickest to a recovery, so the pace of the central economies’ revival will be crucial in preventing the impact of the crisis from growing further.
Ensuring a swift recovery and, in the meantime, facilitating prompt access to international financing are the keys to preventing a significant worsening of the region’s economic —and even social and political— prospects.
To avoid repeating the errors made during previous crises, the governments of the region should aim to produce coordinated, participatory and mutually informed policy responses (Velasco, 2009).
In particular, policies must be coordinated in the following areas: • Countercyclical fiscal policies, since the absence of coordination reduces incentives to continue advancing in that direction. • Financial regulation, since lack of coordination allows room for regulatory arbitrage.
Beyond containing the fallout from the current crisis, greater cooperation is needed to improve the region’s position in the world economy.
This implies dealing with the challenges of productive complementarity, competitiveness and innovation, which will certainly play a greater role in the well-being of the population in the medium and long terms.
The consequences of losing the global competitiveness race would be much worse than the effects of the current crisis which, harsh as they may be, will be temporary.
Lags in competitiveness, innovation and productivity, on the other hand, represent permanent obstacles to progress in growthwith-equity strategies.
Cooperation on competitiveness and innovation issues is, then, a central challenge facing Latin America and the Caribbean.1 “The greatest challenge now being faced around the world is that of technological progress and knowledge.
In this regard, there is concern over whether multilateral, regional and bilateral trade rules leave room for supporting production sectors or enterprises threatened by the recession or by subsidies in the central economies.
The answer is that they do, subject to certain requirements set out in trade agreements or stemming from principles of sound economic policy management.
Some of the basic requirements for any policies to support the production sector are listed below: Observance of international commitments: The commitments undertaken in the World Trade Organization (WTO) and other trade agreements which countries have signed must be honoured.
By contrast, selective policies are fully warranted —preferably in the framework of public-private partnerships— in the case of measures to promote c o m p e t i t i ve n e s s, i n n ova t i o n , production clusters, adaptation to stricter environmental standards and alliance-building among SMEs.
Strictly temporary nature: The precise duration of the measures should be specified, to avoid permanent, unjustified support and to provide beneficiary industries or enterprises with a clear planning horizon.
Limitation of measures to those strictly necessary: The measures might, for example, be indispensable to protect an industry that is crucial for employment in a given region.
In such a case, the authorities must explicitly state that the intervention will be limited to special cases and thus discourage the rapid emergence of protectionist lobbies.
The application of measures should, preferably, be subject to commitments from business: Lobbying by interest groups may be reduced if government support —temporary and with a precise end date— is made subject to commitments by beneficiary business sectors.
These may require businesses to maintain hiring levels, raise competitiveness and prepare plans to innovate or adopt less polluting technologies.
A strong future vision: Support can create a huge fiscal burden if it merely artificially prolongs a decline in production sectors that began before the crisis and was aggravated by it.
In such cases, it is more advisable to promote worker training and retraining and the conversion of production assets to be used in sectors with a higher competitive potential.
Avoidance of measures that would discourage entrepreneurs: measures such as import restrictions must not be allowed to undermine the growth of competitive activities that are integrated into global supply chains that need to import inputs in order to export.
Regional integration offers the opportunity to broaden national markets and production scales and to promote trade in services and intraregional investments.
It also helps SMEs owing to their larger relative weight in intraregional trade, and stimulates diversification of production by supporting exports with higher value added and manufacturing content.
Regional integration can also encourage the formation of regional value chains and constitutes a learning platform which can lead to improved competitiveness at the worldwide level (ECLAC, 1994).
The traditional arguments in favour of integration are reinforced by needs arising out of the current phase of globalization, such as the need to create strategic international partnerships in production, logistics, marketing, investment and technology.
In order to achieve growth with equity in the present-day world, countries now need expanded markets, legal certainty and the convergence of standards and disciplines, together with progress in infrastructure, energy and connectivity and integration into global value networks.
The Latin American and Caribbean region has come a long way in freeing up intraregional trade, especially in goods.
Major challenges remain, however, which must be tackled if the region is to move towards the formation of a regional expanded market.
The most significant of these include convergence in the tariff-reduction schemes agreed upon in the framework of the various subregional agreements, and the need to strengthen commitments in areas such as services, investment and government procurement, in which the region’s negotiating experience is more recent and therefore more limited.
Integration can and should be renewed, but with realistic commitments All the integration schemes in Latin America and the Caribbean show progress in a number of important respects.
For example, MERCOSUR has made a noteworthy contribution to the creation of peaceful conditions and democratic stability in the subregion.
Advances in the institutional structure of the Andean Community, the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) and the Central American Integration System (SICA) are such that they can now undertake new tasks made possible, precisely, by their institutional maturity.
These integration schemes have created a sense of belonging, as well as political, business and academic links which can serve as the basis for undertaking new challenges.
Notwithstanding this progress, there are some shortfalls in fulfilment of commitments —in the area of trade, for example— and a number of lags in respect of the countries’ own expectations of the integration schemes.
The challenge for the integration schemes is to achieve renovation in a way that improves the region’s international integration.
The time has come to seek greater complementarity between integration into the world economy and regional or subregional integration schemes.
The region needs to advance towards deeper integration, with shared disciplines, legal certainty and joint initiatives in infrastructure, energy and connectivity, including cooperation on trade facilitation, logistics and technological partnerships of the type being constructed in the Asia-Pacific region.
Deeper integration in the framework of open regionalism will promote competitiveness because integration into the main world markets will be complemented by the stimulus of intraregional trade and the share of SMEs in export flows will rise.
This would not only promote trade within the region but would also help to attract FDI and create “trans-Latin” corporations.
Integration would thus begin to pay back old debts in terms of contributing to the region’s development and competitiveness.
The most demanding is to create a common market, including policy convergence and community institutions.
While the gradual and realistic establishment of incremental goals can contribute to progress in that direction, the current challenge is much more modest: to protect what already exists, comply with commitments entered into and build bridges of convergence between the various subregional groups.
A pragmatic revision of the existing agreements and the establishment of a realistic timetable for effective compliance, including the incorporation of community agreements into national legislation, would do more than anything else to boost economic actors’ confidence in integration.
ECLAC is driven by conviction and doctrine to affirm the need for regional integration, and has done so at length in a great number of publications.
But even in the favourable years —politically and economically speaking— of 2003-2007, too little progress was made on integration and particular difficulties arose in South America.
As a result, a number of strategic issues arise: • Recognizing diversity among the subregions Mexico and Central America, on the one hand, and South America, on the other, are clearly at different places as regards integration and trade initiatives, with the first generally much more open to international trade and trade agreements.
Given the scale and diversity of problems, the most appropriate integration strategy is necessarily different for each subregion.
Even while upholding the ideal of Latin American and Caribbean integration, it must be acknowledged that analyses and proposals need to be differentiated if they are to be effective.
It is obviously difficult for progress to be made on integration policies in these circumstances.
To be realistic, it must be recognized that the lack of progress in the areas of infrastructure and energy is not solely a matter of economic constraints.
There are considerable political differences concerning the meaning of these initiatives and until those are tackled and resolved, it will be hard to achieve more satisfactory progress.
It is important to create awareness that integration cannot be limited to countries which share ideological affinities.
Rather, integration is a matter of finding the lowest common denominator which will serve the various national interests involved.
By definition, it transcends governments, since it must become a State policy. • Building areas of convergence, accepting diversity South America shows a broad range of international integration modalities.
These clearly reflect conceptual discrepancies in the approach to trade, integration, innovation and competitiveness, in sum, on how to approach the challenge of globalization.
It would be unrealistic to pretend that these differences do not exist or that they are likely to disappear in the short term.
The challenge of integration in the modern world requires that these differences be understood and accepted, and that priority be given to forums for dialogue and convergence that enable progress based on concrete initiatives and interests shared by all parties.
Also needed now is more collective and flexible leadership, according to the issues under consideration. • Creating opportunities for subregional cooperation and integration The areas of cooperation which arouse the greatest interest, such as infrastructure, energy, connectivity, logistics, aid for trade and trade facilitation, are very much territorially driven.
Making those links clear will open up even greater scope for coordination initiatives between subnational governments whose geographical proximity may dictate a greater interest in joint projects with neighbouring provinces in other countries than in centralized projects in which they would have only a minor role.
In the region there are numerous subnational joint initiatives in export and FDI promotion, twinning of local governments and cross-border production programmes.
Integration is typically viewed in the light of the European experience, in which the surrender of degrees of sovereignty has enabled the creation of a single-currency economic union and free movement of goods, services and factors of production, as well as strong community institutions.
Apparently, the time has come to recognize that the region’s integration model is far removed from the European one, and will remain so for a long time.
This in no way signifies that the region should renounce goals as ambitious as those attained in Europe.
What it does mean is that proposals for integration in the region should be consistent with the real strengths and weaknesses of the existing integration schemes.
The European route is not necessarily the only way to move forward on regional integration, and the sooner the realities of Latin American and Caribbean integration are made explicit, the easier it will be to agree on the road towards deepening it.
Today regional cooperation is more important than progress in trade liberalization Although it is important to make progress on freeing up intraregional trade, the proposals made here reflect a greater emphasis on other aspects of regional cooperation.
Differing views coexist within the region today as to the role of international trade and modalities of integration into the global economy.
Discrepancies on market access issues should not prevent progress on other matters that may be more urgent for dealing with competitiveness challenges in the region.2 Trade issues are not necessarily any more complex than, for example, cooperation on energy and infrastructure.
On the contrary, experience shows that the latter areas involve larger numbers of public and private entities and greater regulatory complexities, and that taxation factors and exchange-rate risks are more significant than in trade issues.
In any case, these are issues that need to be approached from the viewpoint of regional integration if the emphasis is to be on a future agenda.
In any case, many of the proposals presented below relate to trade facilitation and financing, which are of interest to all the countries of the region and do not give rise to the same disagreements as trade liberalization.
This is the case, for example, of areas that share a border or of businesses and communities that have the complementarities or affinities to form clusters. • Regional cooperation at work, reflected in an approach based on action, coordination and results rather than on “foundational” goals.
In short, rather than expending efforts and resources on sweeping reforms which are scarcely viable in the short term, the idea is to adapt to existing resources and institutions, establish which measures and initiatives garner the greatest consensus, and foster the convergence of public and private stakeholders around practical proposals of mutual interest.
In the mid-1980s, intraregional trade —measured as intrasubregional exports within each integration scheme as a proportion of each group’s worldwide exports— represented less than 15% of all trade.
In the early 1990s this trade began to expand steadily, eventually reaching just over 20% in the Latin America and Caribbean region as a whole and 25% within MERCOSUR and the Central American Common Market (CACM).
From 1999 onwards, trade in the region was significantly curtailed by the repercussions of the Asian financial crisis.
Exchange-rate turmoil in MERCOSUR and the Andean Community subsequently led to a drop in trade among the South American countries.
Some 10 years after the Asian and Russian crises, and despite the boom period from 2003 to 2008, intraregional trade did not return to its maximum historic level until 2008 (see figure III.1).
More worrisome still, in the first half of 2009 it was down by around 33% on the first half of 2008 —a slightly sharper fall than the decline in the region’s worldwide exports.
Trade among the CACM countries declined for the first time in the 2000s (down 18%).
In the specific case of MERCOSUR, intra-group imports of manufactures and of mining and petroleum products dropped sharply from September 2008 onwards.
Trade in agricultural goods fell less steeply and recovered somewhat in the first quarter of 2009 (see figure III.2).
The proposals on infrastructure, aid for trade, innovation and social cohesion are the result of joint efforts over a number of years, corresponding to a forthcoming publication by the Andean Development Corporation and ECLAC.
The low levels of intraregional trade in Latin America and the Caribbean also show up when compared with those for other regions.
In the European Union, intraregional trade stands at 67% of total exports, reflecting the depth of integration and the density of intra-industry trade in Europe, and intraregional trade among the Asian economies also far exceeds the figures for Latin America and the Caribbean (see table III.2).
Intraregional trade is mostly based on manufactured goods, especially those with a high natural-resource content, and on low- and medium-technology products (see figure III.3).
Processed foods, chemicals and pharmaceuticals, plastics, major appliances (such as cookers, washing machines and heaters), motor vehicles and textiles are among the goods usually exported through intraregional trade networks.
Those segments are all largely dependent on SMEs and a small group of large corporations which are highly internationalized within the region.
It shows that manufactured goods dominate intraregional trade and that the regional market accounts for over 40% of total exports in a number of products.
The motor vehicle sector is particularly noteworthy as a mainstay of intraregional trade in Latin America.
SMEs play a crucial role in the export of highvalue-added products to the regional market.
Although exports by SMEs revolve around a limited number of sectors, particularly foodstuffs, drinks and tobacco, chemicals, petroleum refining and the metalworking industry, their trade profile differs from that of the large export firms.
The region’s SMEs export a more diversified range of products, with a larger proportion of labour-intensive goods (involving both skilled and unskilled labour) and products which are differentiated and dependent on economies of scale and on linkages with national goods and services providers.
Although the large export firms also operate in some of these sectors, they are located mainly in capitalintensive, natural-resource-based and large-scale segments (FUNDES, 2007; see figure III.4).
As for the destination of manufacturing exports, the main blocs are the same for both SMEs and large corporations.
Proposals for fostering regional cooperation Protecting and promoting infrastructure investment Infrastructure is critical for economic growth, productivity and balanced territorial development, and expanding it helps to reduce regional and local inequalities.
To a great extent, infrastructure advances or lags determine transport costs, whose effects on trade equal —and sometimes exceed— the cost of tariffs or exchange-rate fluctuations.
The available estimates show that trade flows have an elasticity of over 2 with respect to transport costs; in other words, a 10% increase in transport costs may lead to a 20% fall in trade volumes (Martínez and Suárez, 2005).
Latin America and the Caribbean suffers from a severe infrastructure deficit (see figure III.5).
In the current crisis conditions, it is therefore vital that infrastructure investment is not allowed to fall, as occurred during the external-debt crisis.
If infrastructure spending is once again allowed to suffer, this will weaken the region’s ability to bounce back when the world economy recovers, and its lag in competitiveness will worsen.
While countries and subregions in Latin America and the Caribbean show differing levels of development in terms of transport infrastructure, they also share a number of common challenges.
The main road arteries lack capacity and there is a shortage of competitive rail services for freight transport.
International transport networks suffer from operational restrictions, deficient interconnections and technical asymmetries between modalities, countries or both.
Compliance with government regulations is not properly enforced and standards differ between countries and between jurisdictions within countries.
There are also failings in planning, public policy design and the allocation of roles to the public, private and international sectors.
Regulatory frameworks are insufficient, and contracts are weak and insecure (Sánchez and Wilmsmeier, 2005).
Some of the region’s countries have developed publicprivate partnership mechanisms that leverage resources for high-cost infrastructure works, freeing up public funds for smaller projects such as rural and approach roads, small fishing harbours and other ventures that have a direct impact on the living standards of the most disadvantaged areas and social groups.
Such projects show both achievements and weaknesses, and their dissemination could encourage binational initiatives that could take advantage of good practices.
Regional cooperation could help to narrow the “infrastructure gap” in the Latin American and Caribbean region.
In this regard, the following measures are proposed: • Agree upon an indicative regional or subregional target for infrastructure investment, which might be on the order of 5% of GDP, taking into account the specificities of each subregion or country.
Complement national or regional efforts by mobilizing greater volumes of resources from private capital, sovereign funds and transnational corporations. • National authorities should improve their own capacities in the following ways: –– Move forward towards national and regional infrastructure, transport and logistics strategies which are clear, shared, integrated and sustained over time.
It is suggested that part of such a programme would be the establishment of a regional aid for trade fund, with contributions from donors, associated agencies and other international and private sector entities.
The fund would provide support for building funding packages such as co-financing deals, loans, capital contributions or guarantees.
Some of the activities such a fund could support are described below. (a) Short-term financing of intraregional trade A central issue in the current financial crisis is dealing with liquidity constraints in external trade transactions.
Financing is crucial to facilitate international trade, especially at the level of SMEs, be they exporters or importers.
Following the outbreak of the crisis the cost of credit rose sixfold in just a few months.
This caused considerable adversity, given that some 90% of the US$ 14 trillion in world trade is financed by short-term loans.
Estimates by the World Trade Organization (WTO) suggest that the liquidity shortfall was around US$ 25 billion by November 2008.
Although the situation now seems to have improved compared with the fourth quarter of 2008, financing for trade remains tighter than before the crisis.
Since part of the shortfall is affecting intraregional trade, short- and medium-term measures are needed to deal with the situation.
National and regional finance bodies should rapidly expand their risk coverage and increase liquidity for external trade transactions, to ensure credit for exports and imports.
In the medium term, finance institutions should take steps to inform businesses about the characteristics of their instruments and make them aware of how risk is assessed and trade financing data collected.
Much would be gained from expanded regional collaboration in this area among private banks, public bodies, international financial institutions and export credit agencies.
Also along these lines, a number of countries are looking at the possibility of regional or subregional mechanisms to allow a higher proportion of intraregional trade to be conducted in local currency (see box III.2).
Hence, the countries of the region are seeking mechanisms to reduce their respective transaction costs.
The only regional mechanism that promotes the use of local currencies is the Agreement on Reciprocal Payments and Credit, created in 1982 by the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA).
Under the Agreement, the central banks of 12 countriesa process and clear payments on mutual bilateral trade in goods and some services quarterly.
At the end of the consolidation period the participating central banks calculate their net bilateral balances, which are expressed and settled in dollars.
The Agreement was widely used in the 1980s —accounting for nearly 90% of intraregional trade in 1989, owing to the widespread liquidity squeeze at that time in the region.
During the 1990s, use of the system gradually became less prevalent and by 2003 it had nearly fallen into disuse.
Today the Agreement is used for approximately 10% of intraregional trade —primarily that of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, all of whose trade must be channelled through it owing to foreign-exchange controls, and to a small extent that of Brazil (the operations of the National Bank for Economic and Social Development, or BNDES) and Colombia.
Various factors explain the limited use of the Agreement today, particularly the high credit risk incurred by central banks (which guarantee payments), the high interest rates charged for debits in Agreementbased accounts compared with other international rates and the growing ease of conducting financial transactions over private banking networks.
In the current economic climate, with foreign currency scarce and financing for trade tight, there is renewed interest in creating a mechanism to facilitate intraregional trade through the use of local currencies.
Various proposals have been put forth, such as updating or complementing the arrangement provided for under the Agreement on Reciprocal Payments and Credit, or replacing it with a regional-trade clearing house that would improve on the limitations of the Agreement and would follow the best practices recommended by the Bank for International Settlements.
Such an arrangement could also adopt various features of the Brazil-Argentina Local Currency System, which began to operate experimentally for bilateral trade in October 2008.
Under the proposed clearing system, countries would use mainly their own currencies for trade operations.
Transactions would be conducted in the exporter’s local currency, which would then be converted to the currency of the importing country based on the daily average bilateral exchange rate.
Exporters would thus be paid in their own currency, while importers would assume the foreign-exchange risk.
The daily exchange rates of local currencies would be calculated in relation to a widely traded currency (the euro or dollar).
In addition, the central bank of the exporting country would not be credited until the central bank of the importing country had received the corresponding funds from the importer’s commercial bank.
Central banks would not therefore assume any counterparty risks beyond that of a trade deficit or surplus.
A regional financial entity would serve as a clearing house, adjusting daily or weekly balances based on a widely used currency.
A mechanism such as this could reduce the use of foreign currency in intraregional trade by 70%.
The new system would have to be highly efficient to be able to compete with other forms of payment.
The adoption of a system based completely on local currency is not considered viable, because countries running a surplus would build up reserves in the currency of those running a deficit, thereby paying them seigniorage.
Moreover, liquid spot markets or futures markets do not exist for all the currencies that might be expected to participate.
First, if the crisis becomes prolonged, the countries of the region could continue to trade among themselves, using mainly their own currencies —provided the crisis does not trigger great volatility in the price of national currencies.
Second, the mechanism would be of particular benefit to micro-enterprises and SMEs, which have difficulties accessing futures markets and, in addition, are responsible for most of intraregional trade.
In the framework of WTO, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have put forward proposals on technical assistance and capacity-building, special and differential treatment and other cross-cutting issues relating to negotiations on trade facilitation.
This enthusiasm to some extent reflects the lag the region suffers in that area.
The countries of the region should consider implementing those proposals at the national or regional level, regardless of progress in the Doha Round.
Furthermore, at the regional level it would be feasible to implement additional measures beyond the commitments negotiated in WTO.
Emphasis should be placed on initiatives to improve transport and logistics, especially in the case of landlocked countries, in accordance with the Almaty Programme of Action.
All these are essential at a time of crisis such as this, when cost control is a determining factor in business decisions.
Within WTO, trade facilitation involves the systematic rationalization of the procedures and documents involved.
These constraints include lack of information on trade opportunities, excessive red tape for exporting or investing, a shortage of financing for SMEs and infrastructure problems.
The aid-for-trade initiative introduced by WTO in 2005 aims to reduce these constraints.
In 2007, the region represented 8.7% of total aid-fortrade flows, quite a modest figure compared with 44% for Asia and 40% for Africa.
Scope for growth therefore exists, provided that the countries articulate their needs coherently.
The challenge is to identify substantial projects that can unlock additional flows of resources through more effective and efficient programme management, in accordance with the principles of additionality, sustainability and effectiveness of aid.
Naturally, the realities of the subregions, and therefore their needs, are different.
Nevertheless, efforts should aim to attract grants not only for national projects but also for those that involve several countries, such as IIRSA and the Meso-America Project, and have a clear trade facilitation component.
The Caribbean subregion will require considerable assistance in fulfilling the commitments arising from the economic partnership agreement concluded recently with the European Union.
Increasing regional cooperation on innovation and competitiveness In recent years and until the outbreak of the crisis, the Latin American and Caribbean region achieved considerable export growth and improved its access to main markets.
One of the obstacles to greater competitiveness and higher growth rates has been the region’s weakness in areas such as the development of new products and processes, the formulation of business strategies that enable companies to engage more productively in international value chains, and the incorporation of new technologies, including ICT.
The real challenge in this regard resides in changing production patterns, that is, in the capacity to diversify the production and export base and incorporate greater value and knowledge into exported goods and services.
For this it is necessary to strengthen the links between exports of primary goods, manufactures and services through production clusters or value chains, encouraging SMEs to participate in them as direct or indirect exporters.
This, in turn, requires greater coordination within government and between government and the private sector.
The most successful international positioning efforts7 show that it is necessary, on the one hand, to create close public-private partnerships to encourage innovation and investment in export industries and, on the other, to increase coordination among the various public institutions involved in providing productive and technological support to SMEs, promoting exports and FDI, implementing innovation policy and developing human resources.
A number of these issues figure on national competitiveness agendas in the region (ECLAC, 2008c).
A targeted strategy is needed in order to move forward on these challenges, with specific targets and guaranteed financing of policies and programmes.
This is illustrated, for example, by Brazil’s production development policy (PDP), which builds on measures to generate positive externalities in the production apparatus, strategic targeting of issues that are important for the country’s long-term development and structural programmes focused on the various production systems.
Given the scope of these tasks, which tend to exceed national capacities, regional cooperation is an important alternative that can enable countries to combine their efforts to attain the levels of quality, scale and productivity required in the world economy.
The countries of the region could make use of regional forums for dialogue and experiencesharing between public and private stakeholders on successful initiatives in innovation, competitiveness and social cohesion.
The following section proposes a regional forum for innovation which could play a part in these tasks.
At first glance, the current crisis may not appear to offer the most propitious conditions for developing policies on changing the production structure, increasing competitiveness and strengthening international integration.
Yet crises bring opportunities as well as threats and often generate efforts to find new paths and build new consensuses.8 Use should be made of existing openings for cooperation.
In recent years, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have made some progress in cooperation.9Rep. of) has enabled a degree of coordination Venezuela (Bol.
This in science, technology and innovation, but still too little to generate synergies that impact decisions relating to Jamaica trade, investment and international partnerships involving technology Costa Rica businesses and innovation.
The private sector, especially in the information Salvador technologyEl industry in countries such as Colombia, Mexico and several Central American countries, has been Ireland signing cooperation agreements to create synergies through initiatives, New Zealand partnerships and joint activities.
These strategic Australia efforts are aimed at encouraging the opening of new Norway markets, designing and executing training and technologySweden Finland transfer programmes, coordinating and supporting events held to disseminate knowledge30 software 60 70 80 90 on 40 50 and ICT and Better promoting experience-sharing among countries.
In the context of the knowledge economy, innovation and competitiveness cannot be properly fostered without trained human resources, especially in fields in which the region has or might acquire competitive advantages.
The linkages between the educational system and the productive system must be strengthened so that the former can provide the skills needed by the latter.
It is clear today that regional synergies between education plans and human resource training are being underused.
Much could be gained from sharing innovative, successful experiences on curricula, management, the adoption of new technologies, teacher training and refresher courses, online classrooms and distance education.
The region could also benefit from examining the international best practices arising from the evaluation of work in the European Union and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
It is no coincidence that the radical strategies undertaken to change production patterns in Finland, Ireland, Malaysia, the Republic of Korea and Singapore were developed in response to grave crisis situations.
Sixteen countries participate in CLARA, which seeks to promote cooperation in educational, scientific and cultural activities and coordination between national and international academic networks.
At the 2008-2009 intersessional panel meeting of the United Nations Commission on Science and Technology for Development, the competent ministers signed an agreement to create a forum for dialogue and proposals on managing and implementing science, technology and innovation policies.
A decisive approach to asymmetries One of the original aspirations for integration agreements was that they would achieve greater cohesion among the parties.
Every Latin American and Caribbean integration project has recognized the structural disparities between its members’ respective degrees of development (see table III.5 for indicators of asymmetries and box III.3 for a summary of how the various integration schemes treat these asymmetries).
Undoubtedly, low income level, small size and scale of production, small population or landlocked or island status are among the factors that can hamper the economic growth or international integration of a country or its regions, since these factors raise transaction costs and make it difficult for certain sectors of the economy to compete in the global marketplace.
In addition to the asymmetries stemming structural differences, both between countries and between or within regions, others result from the cross-border effects of discretionary public policies adopted mainly by the larger countries.
These asymmetries are effectively externalities arising from policy implementation —macroeconomic or microeconomic— and resulting in loss of export competitiveness for relatively less developed countries or in undesirable responses such as higher trade barriers or protectionist measures within integration projects.
These effects are likely to be especially harmful when the members of an integration scheme depend heavily on each other for their trade.
Therefore, more decisive steps must be taken to implement measures that limit the adverse consequences of this type of asymmetries.
In addition to special and differential treatment, other measures were introduced to benefit the smaller economies in order to avoid relying solely on market mechanisms to reduce disparities.
Such measures were intended to enhance the competitiveness of less developed economies through the use of policy instruments that would encourage industrial development, investment and special project financing.
However, because of the external debt crisis and, later, the Asian crisis, as well as the underdevelopment of institutional and physical infrastructure to address asymmetries, these measures were piecemeal and achieved few successes.
In the 1990s, with the initiation of new regional integration projects, nonreciprocal treatment of the relatively less developed economies lost currency and became limited to giving them longer deadlines to attain tariff convergence in the construction of customs unions.
This approach stemmed from the agreements of the World Trade Organization negotiated during the Uruguay Round and stressed market mechanisms and national polices as the main instruments for narrowing competitiveness gaps and structural asymmetries among countries and regions participating in integration schemes.
Only in recent years has renewed concern arisen over asymmetries and the need to implement more effective regional measures to mitigate them, given the failure to narrow the gaps that existed when integration processes began.
The Community also decided to maintain the preferences for relatively less developed countries in terms of participation in regional project financing as well as trade and tariff rules on market access.
The Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas (2001), which succeeded the 1973 charter agreement of CARICOM, addressed asymmetries through special and differential treatment.
It also imposed import restrictions to protect the less developed countries in the group.
The most noteworthy aspect of this treaty is that it provides for the creation of a regional development fund to provide technical and financial assistance to disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors.
The regional development fund was to be capitalized with US$ 250 million, US$ 120 million of which would be contributed by member States and the remainder by the main developed members.
The proposal is in the drafting stage and still subject to regular revision.
The aim of the fund is to help reduce the development disparities between the various subnational regions and contribute to making up the lag of the least advantaged.
The Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) addressed the topic in 2003 and 2004, with the member countries agreeing on a series of measures intended to favour the smaller economies.
These four areas correspond to the four programmes under which the countries may submit projects.
FOCEM was set up with US$ 100 million, of which Brazil provided 70%, Argentina 27%, Uruguay 2% and Paraguay 1%.
Contributions are made annually, and FOCEM may receive funding from international organizations, institutions or third countries.
The Fund’s resources are distributed so as to favour projects in the group’s relatively less developed countries, with 48% allocated to Paraguay, 32% to Uruguay, and 10% each to Argentina and Brazil.
Unless asymmetries are adequately addressed, the smaller countries will not view the current integration schemes as the best way to boost economic growth and diversify their exports.
A special effort must be made to ensure that the various policy areas —infrastructure, logistics, trade facilitation, energy, and so on— take an overarching approach that seeks to asymmetrically benefit smaller economies.
The MERCOSUR Structural Convergence Fund (FOCEM) has represented a step in this direction and could be strengthened to give beneficiary countries greater technical capacity to evaluate and propose projects.
Additional efforts must also be made in favour of the landlocked countries —Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia— which suffer the worst structural asymmetries.
Owing to the characteristics of their production structure and their higher transportation costs, they are also the most dependent on the regional market, with 60% of their goods exports being traded within South America.
In particular, such efforts should focus on facilitating customs procedures for goods in transit (see the proposals on trade facilitation in this chapter), the construction of border infrastructure and equipment and the provision of financial and technical support for rural development, the environment and education.
In South America, the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) could become a forum for cooperation and for the eventual convergence of the region’s different integration schemes.
UNASUR should explicitly develop policies to reduce asymmetries by setting up financial funds or mechanisms, developing intraregional production chains, promoting physical and energy integration and cooperating on the management of scarce natural resources.
In the Mesoamerican context, the agreements reached at the Summit of Heads of State and Government of the member countries of the Tuxtla Mechanism for Dialogue and Coordination on the conversion of existing trade agreements between Mexico and Central America into a single partnership agreement provide a framework in which preferential treatment for relatively less developed countries could be addressed.
For this to happen, the political will is essential, as is the conviction that the region’s potential is enhanced through the progress of all of its members.
Strengthening the social aspect of integration Social affairs must be a part of any regional cooperation proposal.
These include aspects of social cohesion, multiculturalism and inclusion, which is the ultimate aim and rationale of integration and of efforts to build regional competitiveness in a way that is compatible with social equity.
The countries of the region should take steps to strengthen the complementary dynamics among the social, economic and trade aspects of integration.
Efforts should be redoubled to build subregional value chains to enable export to third markets and to bring businesses from the least developed economies into those chains.
This would help to reconcile growth with the quest for third markets and social cohesion.
Structural support to reduce asymmetries among countries would help to generate a competitive export supply in the relatively less developed ones.
Such a fund —which would be endowed with an institutional structure to ensure that it is properly managed— could complement the structural funds of MERCOSUR and draw on European experience.
The respective European entities and regional and multilateral financial institutions would be requested to collaborate in its design and implementation. • Create a social inclusion observatory that would provide governments, academic institutions, congresses and civil society with data needed to monitor social policy and create opportunities for exchanging experiences and disseminating best practices.
Deepening regional integration through ties with Asia-Pacific From 2003 to 2007, per capita GDP in Latin America and the Caribbean rose by more than 3% per year, making this the strongest growth period in 40 years.
This was largely the result of the region’s growing ties with Asia-Pacific, and in particular with China.
China has become a significant trading partner for most of the Latin American economies and is the largest export market for Brazil and Chile and the second largest export market for Argentina, Costa Rica, Cuba and Peru.
Strong Chinese demand for food, energy, metals and minerals has benefitted the countries that export these products, improving their terms of trade and spurring their growth.
In recent years, Asia-Pacific has evolved towards a more advanced stage of integration, one of the components of which is necessarily an institutional framework.
ASEAN has become the hub of this process though a series of initiatives to free trade with other Asian countries.
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean should examine the growing integration of production in Asia, centred on China, and strive to join the value chains being formed there.
To this end, they should encourage Asian investment in the Latin American and Caribbean region and outward investment in the other direction, as well as partnerships between local and Asian actors aimed at seizing trade and investment opportunities.
It would also be useful for Latin America and the Caribbean to emulate the Asian experience with production integration revolving around regional or subregional value chains.
Asia-Pacific offers multiple possibilities for export and investment agreements in mining, energy, agriculture, infrastructure and science and technology.
To make the most of such opportunities, and to do so on a significant scale, will take a concerted partnership-building effort.
This will require the Latin American and Caribbean countries to work in a coordinated manner to leverage convergent, transparent, stable policies in order to secure long-term commitments between the two regions.
To this end, integration mechanisms in the region should be strengthened with a view to developing a regional focal point for biregional dialogue with China and Asia-Pacific,11 in order to explore mutually beneficial, longer-range initiatives than those that might emerge from isolated national efforts.12 Now is the time to forge strategic linkages with China.
The time is ripe for the Latin American and Caribbean region to identify priorities in its relations with China and to propose a mutually beneficial strategic partnership.
This coefficient is higher than that of the North American Free Trade Agreement and is quickly approaching the figure for the European Union.
Currently, close to 60% of trade in machinery and transport equipment and in parts and components in Asia-Pacific is intraregional.
With China as its hub, Asia-Pacific has become a “global factory” of machinery and transportation equipment.
The Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative, created in 2007 and consisting of the 11 countries bordering the Pacific Ocean, was formed with this intention. 12 Although several such regional focal points exist today, none has yet acquired the status of acknowledged voice for the regional agenda.
Progress in creating such a reference would facilitate dialogue between the region and ASEAN and China. 13 The paper refers to several guiding principles: mutual respect for territorial integrity and sovereignty, non-aggression, noninterference in each other’s internal affairs, equality and mutual benefit and peaceful coexistence.
The two documents could then be reviewed at a summit of the Heads of State of China and the Latin American and Caribbean countries.
In preparation for such a summit, a regional programme of trade and investment initiatives to help strengthen the region’s economic and commercial ties with China should be drafted.
Regarding investment, although Latin America and the Caribbean as a region is one of the leading recipients of Chinese foreign investment, most of this investment is concentrated in tax havens.14 Some —but still too few— Chinese companies are now operating in Latin America, especially in the petroleum, transportation and telecommunications sectors (see table III.6).
Therefore, the region should actively seek to attract Chinese investment and, at the same time, venture to invest in China.
Admittedly, certain questions have been raised about Chinese FDI in other developing regions, especially in Africa.
Increased Chinese investment in Latin America and the Caribbean should be based on mutual benefit and efforts should be made to prevent it from reinforcing the pattern of exports to China —natural resources with little processing— that has hitherto prevailed .
The reactivation of existing projects in Latin America and the Caribbean (IIRSA and the Meso-America Project) would help to identify specific short-term initiatives, the related requirements and the benefits for the region.
There are also possibilities for cooperation in some areas of natural-resource industries, such as mining and energy, in which massive investments are needed to bring projects on stream.
China’s investment potential is underscored by the fact that in 2008 the country held 28.7% of global international reserves.
The outlook for Chinese investment in the region was recently enhanced when the country joined the InterAmerican Development Bank.
The China Development Bank, the most highly capitalized financial entity in the world, is also exploring the possibility of a strategic rapprochement with Latin America and the Caribbean.
The Bank has offices in 15 countries in the region and is involved in projects in several of them, and runs joint operations with the Andean Development Corporation, the Latin American Export Bank and the Central American Bank for Economic Integration.
The work of the China Development Bank could be strengthened by working meetings with regional institutions to discuss investment priorities and the strategic emphasis of the Latin American and Caribbean governments as regards infrastructure, logistics, trade facilitation, technological innovation and human resource development.
Regarding the services sector, nearly all of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, with very few exceptions, have a tourism industry that is full of potential but underdeveloped.
One immediate task would be to develop joint initiatives with China to promote tourism from that country, for example, by taking steps to facilitate travel by Chinese to and within the region, including visa issuance.
Other areas suggested by the Chinese authorities are banking, telecommunications, transportation, education and medical services.15 China possesses vast industrial and technological capacities that could support the development of telecoms infrastructure and thus improve connectivity in the region’s most isolated areas.
One noteworthy example is the 70 billion yuan (US$ 10.2 billion) currency swap agreement struck between Argentina and China in March 2009, allowing the Argentine government to pay for Chinese imports in yuan.
This arrangement is intended to ensure the smooth flow of payments for trade transactions in the event of an international liquidity squeeze.
In late 2006, Chinese non-financial enterprises held US$ 75 billion in foreign investments, of which US$ 17 billion was invested in 2006.
The region received US$ 8.5 billion, or 48% of all Chinese foreign investment that year.
Various initiatives are under way in this area, both at the multilateral level and within some of the world’s largest economies (see chapter I).
How these processes play out will have many key implications for the region —for example, the ease of its products’ access to industrialized country markets.
Although the Latin American and Caribbean region accounts for a modest proportion of all greenhouse gas emissions (11.8% in 2000), its share will probably increase in coming decades owing to economic and demographic growth (ECLAC, 2009b, chapter VI).
Clearly, the region must prepare itself for the challenges of a new, low-carbon global economy.
The best way to reduce the risks associated with possible unilateral measures by the industrialized countries is to reach a suitable multilateral agreement.
The negotiations under way are complex, among other reasons because of the need to tie the more demanding commitments that must be undertaken by developing countries to the provision of associated financial assistance and technology transfer by the developed countries.
The governments of the region need to quickly unify their stance on these topics and, ideally, on the environmental goods and services talks taking place in the framework of the Doha Round of WTO as well.
They should also strive to apply the principles upheld in international forums at the national and regional level.
There is also great scope for developing regional cooperation in this area.
For example, the business community is keenly interested in establishing common technical standards on environmental matters and on the “carbon footprint “.
If each country in the region addresses these issues in isolation, the synergies from collaboration and economies of scale will be lost.
Funding the proposals Several of the proposals mentioned would require the creation of regional or subregional funds to finance cooperation in the areas identified as priorities —infrastructure, aid for trade, innovation and others.
The establishment of such funds would be a real signal of the political will of the governments of the region to work jointly and to commit sufficient resources to fundamental areas for regional cohesion and competitiveness.
The proposal to create various regional funds is not by any means to negate the valuable role played today by regional financial institutions in funding both national and multinational projects, many of which pertain to the fields identified in this chapter .
On the contrary: these institutions must play a key role in creating these funds, by providing not only resources —alongside the governments of the region, international financial institutions, governments from beyond the region (in areas such as aid for trade) and, ideally, the private sector— but also their technical know-how in various areas.
With the governments of the region facing difficult fiscal conditions, today there is clearly limited scope for providing provide fresh resources for funds such as those referred to here.
But the horizon of these initiatives corresponds to the medium to long term.
So, more than the size of their start-up capital, what is important initially is to get them up and running, then they can gradually be enlarged as the region’s economic recovery permits.
The key here is the range of projects and forms of interaction among governments that could arise once these funds have an institutional framework.
Such initiatives thus offer a way to gradually build cooperation while the bottlenecks that have slowed the region’s growth and competitiveness are being resolved.
The role to be played by regional financial institutions, working closely with development banks, is crucial.
These institutions have gained ground in financing regional development, which has led to their being viewed as a legitimate complement to, rather than as a substitute for, their international counterparts.
Indeed, the fact that they are governed at the regional level gives a sense of ownership of resources and of a stake in their future that works to the countries’ advantage.
Given their closer knowledge of the economies of the region, they find it easier to establish contacts with local authorities.
This allows them to intervene in a more timely manner, which confers legitimacy over that which could be gained by international financial institutions.
Regional financial institutions have in fact shown comparative advantages over their international counterparts in terms of integration into global financial markets, the development of domestic capital markets and the achievement of conditions for financing and issuing bonds in local currency.
They have also made significant contributions to countercyclical financing and they are beginning to work on macroeconomic coordination and the regulation and prudential supervision of the regional financial system.
They have thus raised their profile as providers of resources in comparison with the contributions made by the World Bank and IDB.
Closer ties between regional institutions and development banks would help to extend the uses of countercyclical resources to include production, infrastructure and logistics activities such as those proposed in this chapter.
Conclusions In a globalized economy, the competitiveness of the region overall has a strong bearing on that of its individual countries.
An auspicious regional context favours national efforts to promote competitiveness, leverages benefits and allows countries to aim for more ambitious goals.
Conversely, a less stimulating environment undermines any domestic policy to promote competitiveness, no matter how large the country.
Beyond certain minor nuances, the current global crisis has made it clear that the broad trends in the global economy show little differentiation between individual countries.
The countries of the region tend to show increasingly similar trends in country risk, terms of trade, FDI attraction and even ranges of economic growth.
The overall patterns even appear somewhat insensitive to individual efforts in various areas of public policy, especially in the case of the smaller countries.
As well as strengthening investment and trade facilitation links with China and the AsiaPaciﬁc region, this would generate externalities for the integration process itself.
The regionʼs trade with China suffers from the same constraint that limits all of its international trade activity, namely the high proportion of commodities and semi-processed goods in its export basket.
The Latin American and Caribbean region must make every effort to increase the degree of processing of its natural-resource-based exports and seek new Chinese markets for differentiated, higher value-added products.
The current product mix, which is highly dependent on the business cycles of importing countries, does little to stabilize export earnings.
Tariffs have tended to decline in importance as barriers to trade, but new measures such as technical, sanitary and phytosanitary standards and rules on transport and logistical security are now having a growing impact and are starting to have a decisive impact on systemic competitiveness.
In addition to low prices, systemic competitiveness is determined by such factors as adequate infrastructure, efﬁcient transport systems, and streamlined customs procedures.
Economic agents that are able to meet these new standards are in a position to secure competitive advantages.
Steps therefore need to be taken to strengthen the institutions involved in trade logistics, harmonize standards and regulations at the regional and multilateral levels, and improve capacity-building, especially for small and medium-sized exporters.
The current status of the global economy and the outlook for the region The upturn in the global economy that began in the second half of 2003 continued to strengthen during most of 2004, when its growth rate reached a 30-year high.
Although this boom took in many of the worldʼs regions, it was most pronounced in developing Asia.
This group of countriesʼ performance was strongly inﬂuenced by the exceptional performance of a few of its members, such as China (9.5% GDP growth in 2004) and India (7%).
Even if Asia is factored out of the calculations, however, the developing regions still posted an impressive 5% growth rate in 2004.
What is more, it was probably the ﬁrst time in the last 30 years that the developing countries entered a growth phase ahead of the developed nations.
Thanks to the global upturn, in 2004 merchandise trade expanded faster than it had for a quarter of a century, rising at a nominal rate of 21%.
This surge reﬂected sharp increases in the dollar-denominated prices of many products, as well as the large volumes traded.
South Americaʼs real goods trade picked up especially strongly, outpacing the other world regions.
The increases in the prices of petroleum and other commodities and the Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 16 upturn in trade in electronics and telecommunications equipment helped the developing countries to achieve a truly extraordinary 31% share of global merchandise trade, which was the largest proportion recorded since 1950.
Net ﬁnancial ﬂows to Asian and emerging European economies jumped by 40% in 2004.
This was mirrored in Latin America and the Caribbean, whose inward FDI ﬂows climbed by a robust 44% in 2004.
At the global level, private capital ﬂows declined as both direct and portfolio investment slipped.
The decrease was counterbalanced by ofﬁcial ﬂows, as State authorities in the Asian countries, particularly China, bought United States treasury bonds.
This is, in effect, the ﬁnancial manifestation of a shift in the structure of global demand, with large trade surpluses in the Asian economies helping to ﬁnance the United Statesʼ current account deﬁcit, which was equivalent to 6.3% of GDP at the end of 2004.
Since the upturn in world growth is closely tied to United States consumption levels and, to an extent, investment, the situation calls for increased savings rates on the part of other countries and the expansion of exports to that market in order to satisfy a demand that is outstripping supply.
The recent revaluation of the yuan must be analysed in the light of these factors.
The United Statesʼ large external imbalance can only be dealt with by limiting absorption and adjusting relative prices.
To achieve the former, the United States must tighten its ﬁscal and monetary policies to gradually rein in the expansion of expenditure and bring it into line with potential GDP.
The latter takes the form of a devaluation of the United States dollar relative to the currencies of economies that are beneﬁting the most from trade with the United States, namely the Chinese and Asian economies.
Given the United Statesʼ signiﬁcance in the world economy, a slowdown there, coupled with a marginal downturn in the developing Asian economies, will have to be accompanied by a higher level of activity in Europe and Japan if the global economy is to avoid a hard landing.
These two elements, which are essential in order to dismantle current global ﬁnancial imbalances, have yet to be factored into growth projections, however.
Most such projections point to a slackening of growth in world output in 2005 and 2006, with rates of between 3.0% and 4.3%.
The main factors involved here are: (i) the dampening effect on global demand of higher oil and commodity prices; (ii) exchange-rate adjustments among the main international currencies; (iii) the uncertainty generated by steeper interest-rate hikes; (iv) difﬁcult ﬁscal situations in many countries, and (iv) the threat of global neo-protectionism associated, in particular, with reactions to the increase in Chinese exports.
The current state of the world petroleum market suggests that prices will remain high.
According to the conventional calculations, a US$ 10-per-barrel increase causes world output to fall by half a percentage point and Latin American output to dip by 0.2 points.
With a tighter ﬁscal policy and the recent increases in its benchmark interest rate, the United States is expected to post a lower growth rate, of between 3% and 3.6%, in 2005 and a similar rate in 2006.
Meanwhile, the European Union is also expected to slow its rate of expansion as a result of more restrictive ﬁscal policies.
In Japan, higher interest rates will curb investment, the ﬁscal stimulus will weaken and the economyʼs external surplus will decrease.
Thanks to Chinaʼs present efforts to cool its economy, economic activity is expected to expand at a rate of between 8.5% and 9.0% in 2005 and by between 8.0% and 9.2% in 2006.
Even this somewhat lower growth rate in China will still be high enough to keep GDP growth in the developing countries above the world average, however.
The slower growth rates expected for world output will help to weaken international demand and reduce the volume of international trade, which will expand by only 7.2%-7.4% in 2005, or some two percentage points below the 2004 rate.
Global export volumes are expected to be slightly higher in 2006 than in 2005, but the rate of price increases for certain commodities is likely to slacken.
Negotiations in the multilateral trading system: WTO and regional expectations The negotiating and working agendas established at the Fourth Ministerial Conference of WTO, held in Doha in 2001 (the Doha Round), cover market access issues, the reﬁnement of trade rules and topics that deal explicitly with the concerns of developing countries.
However, the debates that arose in the wake of that conference and, in particular, after the following conference, held in Cancún, Mexico, in September Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 17 2003, have pushed back the conclusion of this round beyond its original deadline.
The main stumbling blocks to progress in these talks were encountered in the work on agricultural reform and the debates on the development dimension (including special and differential treatment and implementationrelated issues).
The Fifth Ministerial Conference inherited this climate of discord, which was exacerbated by the controversy over the so-called “Singapore issues”, which the developing countries have staunchly resisted.
The disagreements that had arisen in the aftermath of Cancún were broadly resolved by a decision taken on 1 August 2004, known as the “July package”.
Although no new date has been set for the completion of the Doha Round, it is tentatively expected to conclude in 2006.
The recent meeting of the General Council of WTO, held on 29 July 2005, which was expected to be a landmark event in this process, failed to give any sign of a convergence of the countriesʼ positions.
It remains very difﬁcult to specify modalities for the three pillars of agricultural reform, since there are major differences in the countriesʼ underlying structures, be they tariff- or subsidy-based.
In addition, exporting countries are not in favour of the proposals that have been tabled for increasing the ﬂexibility and diversiﬁcation of instruments or for establishing differentiated deadlines for developing countries (which is also an aspect of modality deﬁnition), and wish to see a limit on such concessions.
Lastly, the possibility of agreeing to a standstill commitment until the round is completed is another key issue.
Although some progress has been made this year, a consensus does not yet exist regarding even a preliminary approach to the establishment of modalities in this connection.
Up to July 2005, the work on market access for non-agricultural goods had focused on modalities and technical questions such as conversion to ad valorem equivalents, the treatment of unbound tariffs and sectoral liberalization.
Issues of particular concern to developing countries include the proposed degree of tariff binding Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 18 and a cap on unbound tariffs.
Along with agricultural issues, much of the work has centered on deﬁning a tariff reduction formula and determining what ﬂexibilities are to be extended to developing countries.
These are all issues about which developed and developing countries have strongly disagreed.
The pace of negotiations on services has picked up in recent months, but progress on the requests-and-offers process and in the discussions on rules and cross-cutting issues has been so slow that he talks on these matters may be reaching a crisis point.
Trade facilitation is an important topic that has been brought into the negotiations on trade rules, but little progress has been made towards speciﬁc guidelines on antidumping and subsidies.
Deadlines for the Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects on Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs) have been reviewed, but the proposals made by developing countries regarding the distribution of beneﬁts do not appear to have been taken up.
These issues clearly have an impact on competitiveness, and although the developing countries are in need of such regulations, they are reluctant to move forward in these areas because of the costs involved.
With regard to cross-cutting institutional matters, some headway has been achieved on development issues with the incorporation of the cotton initiative, but less progress has been seen in other areas of work in terms of the constraints affecting developing countries (particularly in regard to implementation-related issues, which is one of the areas in which talks are the furthest behind schedule).
More speciﬁc guidelines or signals are expected in relation to the Dispute Settlement Body, which is not part of the single undertaking, although in fact the system operates very well and could help to carry the negotiations forward (see section 5).
The work on regional trade agreements has made headway with the issue of transparency and as its pace picks up further, it may help to spur the talks on other topics.
At Cancún, the configuration of the various groupings and clusters, which included the G-20, attested to the conditions and active participation of the developing countries.
After that conference, however, new alliances have formed that cut across the preexisting ones.
One such cluster involves a handful of WTO members, most of which are large economies from the developed and developing worlds, that have differing positions on a given issue.
These groups, which take the form of “mini-ministerial meetings” and sessions held within the framework of conferences convened by other international bodies, are helping to coordinate different partiesʼ interests and help to move the negotiating process forward.
In the formation of country groupings based on common negotiating stances, the Latin American and Caribbean region has come to play an important and, to some extent, leadership role among the developing countries.
Structural and policy-based differences exist, however, make it difﬁcult to arrive at a consensus position on all the issues under consideration.
Given the countriesʼ differing economic sizes, production and commercial structures, trade policies and development strategies, uniﬁed action in all the areas under negotiation is a highly complex undertaking.
This hinders efforts to formulate a “regional” proposal for the Doha Round negotiations, on the one hand, and, on the other, encourages the formation of shifting alliances among countries of the region.
The challenge here is to build upon those areas where the countriesʼ views do converge while providing scope for subtly differing stances on the rest without undercutting the cohesiveness of the countriesʼ positions on the main issues, especially agriculture and the development dimension.
Under these circumstances, it is all the more important to devise strategies for positioning the countries within the development process.
Intraregional trade in Latin America and the Caribbean remains low (17%) by comparison with Asia (34%) and the European Union (62%).
The low density of trade within subregional integration groups is attributable to various factors, such as slow economic growth, the small size of subregional markets, and the presence of similar export structures that tend to be concentrated in natural resources and that consequently cater primarily to industrialized markets.
Furthermore, the infrastructure for trade within such groups is generally displays greater shortcomings than the infrastructure used for world trade.
In addition, trade ﬂows within subregional groups are increasingly made up of manufactures, which are highly sensitive to the business cycle.
The negotiations between MERCOSUR and the European Union were not completed in 2004 as scheduled and will probably have to wait for the close of the Doha Round in order to rebuild their own political momentum.
Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 19 (CARICOM), Mexico and Morocco in 2005, as well as in reaching partial-scope agreements with India and the Southern African Customs Union (SACU).
The Andean Community and MERCOSUR concluded their free trade negotiations and, except in the case of Peru, the resulting agreement has already entered into force.
At the beginning of July 2005, the MERCOSUR countries became associate members of the Andean Community, while Chile is expected to follow suit within the next few months.
The Andean Community itself is in negotiations with El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras, and three members of its members (Colombia, Ecuador and Peru) are negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States.
CARICOM, meanwhile, is engaging in trade negotiations with Canada and the European Union.
There is a crowded agenda for international negotiations, in addition to the regionʼs involvement in the multilateral talks being pursued in the Doha Round.
At times, the sheer scale of the agenda can distract the countriesʼ attention from the necessary effort to update subregional integration schemes and make them more efﬁcient, particularly inasmuch as the problems these schemes encounter will not be solved by accumulating extra-community agreements.
Within the existing framework of multi-tiered negotiations, integration mechanisms have shown no signs of remedying some of their traditional failings, such as the weakness of the relevant institutions and particularly of dispute resolution mechanisms; the failure to enforce community rules once they are adopted; lack of macroeconomic coordination and insufﬁcient attention given to asymmetries within the integration groups.
The dilemma lies in how to preserve the core objectives of integration by rapidly realigning these schemes to prevent them from being overtaken by the course of events or corporate decisions.
This is a formidable challenge, as the agenda must now be configured to cope with the asymmetries that are reﬂected in more demanding commitments with Northern partners and less rigorous ones with subregional groups.
These negotiations with the North will result in a notable erosion of intraregional tariff preferences within the four customs unions (see ﬁgure 4), and the present situation thus calls for an effort to review and update subregional integration agreements.
Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 20 The regionʼs economic actors tend to see trade agreements with industrialized economies as more binding, with more reliable dispute settlement mechanisms and, as a result, greater legal certainty for investment and foreign trade decisions.
In addition, trade agreements with the United States or the European Union include potential investment or service commitments that would entail granting most-favoured nation status, and this means that the regionʼs integration schemes have to abide by decisions in which they have taken no part.
The “energy ring” initiative in the Southern Cone —a bold step that calls for a high level of policy coordination and consistency among the countries involved— is an excellent example worthy of emulation.
The creation of this energy ring constitutes a formidable challenge, yet, the priority thus far assigned to this effort by the participating governments and the interest shown in it by foreign investors and multilateral lending institutions provide grounds for cautious optimism regarding this initiativeʼs chances of success.
The scale of the project is such that it could mark a turning point in regional integration by facilitating the adoption of additional measures to reinforce economic and trade complementarity among South American economies.
The importance of the gradual harmonization of the various rules and disciplines employed by subregional integration schemes as a contributing factor in the regionʼs competitiveness has been somewhat underestimated.
Efforts should be made to regionalize the rules of origin on a plurilateral basis encompassing all the countries involved.
This would provide a powerful boost to intraregional trade and investment decisions.
In the same vein, countries that have trade agreements with the United States and with each other could work towards recasting their rules of origin within a plurilateral framework.
The regionalization of rules of origin, together with the mutual recognition and harmonization of technical, sanitary and phytosanitary standards, would send a clear signal of commitment to the idea of a uniﬁed market.
Similar efforts could be made in the area of dispute settlement with a view to establishing a single system encompassing all subregional agreements, together with the economic complementarity and bilateral trade agreements existing among all the countries belonging to any of the subregional schemes (plus Chile and Mexico, which do not belong to any of them).
Making progress towards a single dispute settlement mechanism and making its decisions binding would be another strong signal of concrete rather than merely rhetorical commitment to integration.
Resurgence of protectionism One factor that may curb the growth of the regionʼs export sectors is adoption of protectionist measures by industrialized economies, particularly those of the United States and the European Union.
Although the number of cases brought before the WTO Dispute Settlement Body dropped from 38 per year between 1995 and 2002 to a mere 18 in the two and one-half years between January 2003 and June 2005, the proportion of complaints lodged against developed countries in relation to dumping and export subsidies actually increased (see ﬁgure 5).
With just a few months to go before the decisive Sixth WTO Ministerial Conference, the debate in the United States over its worsening current account imbalance is being increasingly linked to concern over the rise in Chinese exports to that countryʼs market.
Senior authorities within the United States Government and Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 21 Congress have deployed a battery of mechanisms to put pressure on the Chinese authorities to revalue the yuan.
In simpliﬁed terms, the aim of this would be to facilitate the correction of the external imbalance in the United States economy.
The tone in the United States Congress has been set by fairly aggressive unilateral proposals which, although none has yet come to fruition, are contributing to considerable uneasiness about trade between China and the United States and about the prospect of the United States playing a leadership role in the Doha Round.
A = Antidumping: B = Subsidies; C = Sanitary and phytosanitary regulations; and D = Other (which covers issues such as import licences, taxes, agriculture, intellectual property, technical barriers, trade in services, textiles, etc.). up of its main trading partnersʼ currencies.
Although the revaluation of the yuan was initially modest (2.1%), it nonetheless paves the way for international parities to be adjusted to achieve more balanced growth among various parts of the world, particularly if other Asian economies follow suit.
Had the yuan and other Asian currencies remained pegged to the dollar, the extent of the resulting devaluation of the United States currency would have brought about revaluations of the euro and Latin American currencies.
This would have reduced export buoyancy and growth capacity while increasing the external debt burden as a result of successive rises in international interest rates.
With this major debate providing the backdrop, the end of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing and the consequent elimination of quotas that impede access to the main markets in question have led to a signiﬁcant increase in Chinese textile and clothing exports to the United States and the European Union.
The production sectors of these countries are now up in arms, and politicians and trade authorities have reacted publicly to the situation.
In the ﬁrst four months of 2005, world exports of Chinese textiles climbed by 18.4%.
Although Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 22 this was lower than the growth rate recorded in the ﬁrst four months of 2004, exports to the United States were up by 71% and those to the European Union by 48%.
Both trading partners have reacted by initiating protectionist measures in the textile sector, while continuing to insist on the need for a revaluation of the Chinese currency.
In response, the Chinese authorities decided to apply fairly hefty tariffs on exports of 74 categories of textile products, although this decision was later revoked as a result of continued pressure to revalue the yuan.
The debates concerning the Central American FreeTrade Agreement (CAFTA) in the United States Congress have highlighted the power of the sugar lobby within that body, and the pressure exerted by that lobby has been reinforced by protectionist voices in the textile sector.
This has focused concern on two sectors of major interest to the Central American economies and the Dominican Republic.
The agricultural sector is both the icon of industrialized economiesʼ protectionism and the focus of recent victories won by developing countries protesting these distortions.
One such example is provided by the favourable rulings won by Brazil from multilateral bodies in the cases it has brought against European sugar subsidies and United States cotton subsidies.
Given that these are sensitive sectors in the respondent economies, WTO credibility will be called into question as long as these policies remain unchanged.
This reopens the debate on reforming the WTO Dispute Settlement Body itself with a view to guaranteeing the effectiveness of its rulings, since shortcomings in its current procedures allow losing governments to “buy” their way out of the obligation to change a protectionist rule by offering compensation or simply by weathering the retaliatory measures.
This often occurs when the case is lost by a developed country that has the economic capacity to offer compensation or neutralize the negative effects of retaliatory measures.
The challenge to the credibility and effectiveness of WTO rulings is particularly serious when the parties involved are major players in the world economy and are denouncing practices in breach of multilateral WTO agreements.
The most recent example is the Boeing/Airbus dispute, with the worldʼs two largest civil aircraft manufacturers confronting each other in what is set to become the more extensive and complex case ever handled by WTO.
China in the new geography of trade and world production China has come to represent 4% of world GDP and is the sixth largest economy (or the second, measured by purchasing power) in the world.
It has thus become a major player in world markets following its accession to WTO and the opening of its economy.
From less than 2% of total exports in 2000, China came to account for almost 6.5% in 2004, ranking as the worldʼs third largest exporter.
It also ranks third in the world in imports, which expanded by 36% in 2004.
Chinaʼs exceptional contribution to this global recovery has been in the making for a number of years.
Its strong economic growth has had a major impact on the rest of the world, since it has become a large consumer of raw materials, minerals, energy and, to some extent, foodstuffs and industrial products.
China is the worldʼs top consumer of coal, tin, zinc, copper and cereals and is one of the leading consumers of fertilizers; iron and steel; bananas; oilseeds and oils; plastics; electronic equipment; optical, photographic and medical equipment; and nuclear reactors and machinery.
China accounts for at least 20% of world consumption of 8 out of 16 selected products (see table 1).
In addition, it represents much of net world demand for 8 of these products and is one of the three top world consumers of 15 of them.
This has brought pressure to bear on international markets and has triggered steep increases in the prices of many of these products.
This is Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 23 the case of soybeans, nickel and petroleum, whose price increases have outstripped those of manufactured goods, posting a 32% rise in 2004 relative to 2000.
China is now a key trading partner for many of the regionʼs countries, and the Latin American and Caribbean region is Chinaʼs main supplier of a number of very important mining and food products.
Since Chinaʼs manufacturing exports are less expensive, it has clearly been inﬂuential in the decline seen in the prices of steel, zinc, tin, toys, textiles and clothes, and electronics.
This has added up to a net improvement in the terms of trade for Latin America, in general, and for South America, in particular.
Latin American exporters are actively competing in Chinese markets with exporters from other regions, and particularly with those from the economies of the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN).
It is therefore in the Latin American and Caribbean countriesʼ interests to strengthen linkages with businesses in Asia, building partnerships and promoting different modalities of cooperation, in order to maintain the buoyancy of their exports of raw materials and semi-processed goods to the Chinese and Asian markets.
Both China and the Latin American and Caribbean countries would beneﬁt from cooperation to position the regionʼs ﬁrms in Chinese value chains.
Of course, FDI ﬂows would have to increase substantially in both directions in order for this to happen.
One question to be asked regarding trade relations between the two parties is whether China poses a threat to Latin America.
The answer to this question is not open and shut, but instead will depend to a great extent on how the two regions cultivate their trade-investment links, as well as the speciﬁc policies they adopt to promote joint ventures and partnerships in investment and technology.
As a result, certain disciplines and the means or degree of Chinaʼs compliance with its commitments have taken on greater importance for the region, as has Chinaʼs stance in the current WTO negotiations, both as a single country and as member of groups with shared proposals and agendas.
It has been three and a half years since China acceded to WTO.
Although this is not very long, it is enough to provide grounds for one key observation: China has made considerable progress in implementing its WTO commitments and is continuing to do so.
Nevertheless, Chinaʼs legal regimes continue to form a labyrinth that many countries have difficulty in negotiating.
The associated lack of transparency is still one of the main hurdles to the full realization of the potential advantages of Chinaʼs accession to WTO and to access to fairer competition for its enormous market.
Many State ﬁrms continue to apply tariff quotas, especially in the agricultural sector, where intellectual property rights are still not fully enforced.
China also continues to deploy sanitary and phytosanitary measures as non-tariff barriers to agricultural goods.
The areas giving most cause for concern are copyrights, intellectual property, non-tariff measures and access to services markets.
Importantly, however, an examination of the complaints taken to the Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) indicates that, thus far at least, China is not considered to be in breach of its WTO commitments,.
On the contrary, China is making use of the DSB to defend itself from trade measures invoked against its products.
From the start of 2002 until mid-2005, China has been named as a respondent in four cases and has brought six cases as a complainant.
Furthermore, in the interests of resolving trade disputes with China, some countries, including the United States, are forming working groups with the Chinese Government.
China is hoping to obtain recognition of that status from the United States, the European Union and Japan.
As of July 2005, over 30 countries had granted China market-economy status, including 10 from the region, Argentina, Brazil, and Chile among them.
The Chinese authorities have been unﬂagging in their efforts to win China a reclassiﬁcation from a transition economy to market-economy status.
China has been engaging in very active diplomacy in a wide variety of forums, including negotiations on bilateral free trade agreements, to ensure recognition of market-economy status.
A case in point is the accord recently signed with New Zealand.
Australia also granted China market economy status prior to embarking on free trade negotiations and stated that antidumping complaints henceforth will be based on costs incurred in China rather than on third-country costs or prices.
In addition, all 10 ASEAN countries granted China market-economy status before the China-ASEAN free trade agreement was signed at the end of 2004, on the understanding that this was an essential requirement for the trade pactʼs conclusion.
Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 25 WTO rules allow member countries to approach the issue of market-economy status in a variety ways.
For example, the United States authorities usually reject the price and cost information supplied by China and use information derived from substitute markets.
The European Union uses a more hybrid approach for cases involving China and other countries whose economies are classiﬁed as being in transition or otherwise not subject to market-economy treatment.
Imports from China may thus be considered, in a very limited number of cases, as coming from a market economy, providing that market conditions can be demonstrated to prevail in the industry concerned.
In this regard, Chinaʼs removal from the list of countries having non-market economies should not act as a serious constraint on the use of trade defence mechanisms against sharp increases in imports form China, since WTO instruments will still be available.
In any case, continuing to treat China in an apparently discriminatory manner would clearly interfere with bilateral relations rather than contributing to the development of strategic, mutually beneﬁcial ties.
In 2004, Chinese government authorities embarked on a particularly busy itinerary of South American visits.
During all of these tours, important commitments were made to strengthen economic and trade relations.
The Presidents of Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia, Chile and Peru have also recently paid visits to Beijing, and many more ministerial and business visits have been paid by these and other countries to China in 2004-2005.
These overtures have resulted in almost a hundred public agreements and commitments, which are the outward manifestation of this interesting juncture in economic relations between China and South America and of their mutual interest in moving forward towards a strategic relationship.
China has used a variety of formulas —sometimes in combination— to seek closer relations with the Latin American countries: different sorts of trade agreements, direct investment, especially in infrastructure and energy, joint ventures with State enterprises, and special agreements on science and technology.
The negotiation of a free trade agreement with Chile opens up a new avenue for establishing more permanent trade and investment links.
Trade, security and transport The events of 11 September 2001 in New York and the attacks of 11 March 2004 in Madrid, as well as other incidents of a similar nature, have prompted countries to adopt a series of measures to defend themselves against threats to food security and merchandise transport.
The United States, for example, has passed the Bioterrorism Act, which came into effect in mid-December 2003 and is intended to protect the security of the countryʼs food supply.
In order to access these countriesʼ markets, food shipments must comply with new legislation requiring them to provide a full account of the relevant production chain.
The life history of a foodstuff is referred to as its “traceability” or “trackability” and provides certain assurances of food security, improves quality management and risk evaluation, boosts consumer conﬁdence and permits the implementation of corrective measures in the event of quality or safety shortfalls.
Firms that do not provide proper and timely information to a destination-market country seeking to track a productʼs entire production chain in the event of any suspicion of tampering may ﬁnd the product barred from that market, impounded, returned or destroyed.
Although these rules have been created in response to a justiﬁable demand for security, the exporting country faces the challenge of ensuring that they do not turn into market-entry barriers, especially for SMEs that may not have the capacity to meet the new requirements quickly.
The recent cycle of trade expansion has brought with it signiﬁcant increases in maritime cargo and therefore in the total value of shipments, which began to rise all over the world in 2003.
The rise in shipping costs has been further compounded by a steady increase in the price of fuel for cargo vessels.
The downturn in shipping rates seen in the second quarter of 2005 may reﬂect either seasonal factors or the recent slowdown in economic growth in the United States and in growth projections for other OECD countries.
There is an economy-of-scale problem in international transport which translates into an inverse Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 26 ratio between the number of shipments and the freight volumes, as described earlier.
This limits, particularly, small and medium-sized producersʼ possibilities of securing long-term transport service contracts at reasonable rates and forces them to pay much more than a ﬁrm that ships, say, 50 containers per month.
In the case of highly perishable goods, such as fresh berries, the scale of production determines a ﬁrmʼs ability to secure space on cargo ﬂights and thus to engage in direct export operations.
These events, and the repercussions they have on infrastructure and transport security, have not only led to the adoption of more stringent international regulations (International Ship and Port Facility Security Code (ISPS), Bioterrorism Act, traceability, technical standards, sanitary and phytosanitary measures), but have also pushed up the costs of international trade.
Some security measures adopted in the face of terrorist threats have received the support of the international community, while the legitimacy of others has been questioned in view of their unilateral nature.
An ongoing dialogue among all parties concerned is called for, and ﬁnancing mechanisms for implementing the measures need to be expanded and improved.
This would help reduce the high costs of purchasing advanced equipment and technology to enable countries, especially those in Latin America and the Caribbean, to comply with the new security standards.
It is also vital to improve the physical infrastructure and to invest in human resources via training programmes.
All the parties involved should discuss the new security measures and implement them within a multilateral framework in much the same way as the ISPS has been implemented under the guidance of the International Maritime Organization (IMO), thus ensuring the full participation and support of the international community.
The performance of the world economy in 20042005 has beneﬁted Latin America and the Caribbean, as it has underpinned high international prices for the regionʼs exports, better terms of trade, low interest rates and, consequently, low inﬂation and positive ﬁscal results.
Oil prices are a crucial factor for the region as a net exporter.
However, a number of small and mediumsized countries in the region are net importers of oil, and prices of around US$ 60 per barrel therefore translate into high costs for these countries in terms of their ﬁscal accounts and balance of payments.
Net exporters, Pane_Cap_0b_Eng.indd 27 meanwhile, face a considerable ﬁscal challenge as they seek to take advantage of these boom times to save or pay off debts while achieving a more sustainable form of growth.
Increased competition from China and Asia in general should be taken into consideration as a fundamental component of the regionʼs trade, production and technological strategy.
The most striking feature of the present global economic cycle is the new geography of the worldʼs economy and its trade ﬂows, which is increasingly centred around Asia and China.
Latin American and Caribbean authorities should redouble their efforts to identify and capitalize upon the potential complementarities of greater integration with Asia and with China in particular.
Introduction Two new developments that have been taking shape in the international economy over the past few years have been particularly signiﬁcant in 2004-2005.
First, a new geography of international trade and ﬁnancial ﬂows has begun to emerge as China takes on greater economic and ﬁnancial prominence on the world scene.
The second is a cyclical phenomenon associated with the strong recovery of the United States economy in 2004, which has generated a world economic growth pattern that is more dependent on that country.
This situation is so closely connected with the structural change taking place in the world economy that the recovery in the United States can best be understood in the light of this new international ﬁnancial and production structure.
The form that the adjustment of these substantial imbalances in the world economy ultimately takes will be of decisive importance and will, in particular, have Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 29 a strong impact on the future growth prospects of Latin America and the Caribbean.
The convergence of these two phenomena will thus have direct and indirect implications for Latin American and Caribbean economies, given the importance of the United States and China in the regionʼs trade.
On the one hand, the interaction between these two countriesʼ economies and the specific type of growth they experience, how they establish commercial and ﬁnancial relations, and the impact on the price of oil will all affect the region.
On the other hand, the characteristics of Latin American and Caribbean countries —the composition of their foreign trade, trends in their main import and export markets, and their ﬁnancing needs and level of external debt— will have their own inﬂuence.
This chapter will address some aspects of these structural changes, especially those seen in the geography of trade and finance and the tremendous impact of the current economic boom in the United States on this process.
The current strength of Chinaʼs economy will then be analysed, along with its role as an international price maker in various sectors and its importance as a new engine of worldwide growth.
Next, the difficult issues associated with the worldʼs major currencies will be examined, in particular the debate on the revaluation of the Chinese yuan.
Against that backdrop, the imbalances of the United States economy and possible adjustment scenarios will be reviewed, and their principal implications for the economies of the region will be discussed.
The chapter will end with a brief summary of the prospects for growth and trade relations in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The most dynamic components of aggregate demand were investment in hardware and software and in housing.
Government spending continued its upward trend because of greater defence outlays, though spending was cut in other categories.
Long-term interest rates have not echoed the rising trend in the short-term federal funds rate since mid-2004.
Real shortterm interest rates are still low, however, and is therefore spurring on the money supply.
In addition, the long-term rate is moving downward owing to the excess liquidity in the economy, the low level of inﬂation and expectations of declining activity due, in part, to the high price of oil.
In 2004, the European Union reported a moderate expansion (2%), which fell short of expectations.
Germanyʼs growth was below that average and Italy actually entered a recession, but Spain and France posted higher rates.
The main impetus for expansion in this bloc of countries was external demand, although the appreciation of the euro dampened exports and boosted imports beginning in the second half of the year.
The Japanese economy grew by 2.6% in 2004, but in the second quarter GDP fell, and the level of activity has been weakening.
This situation is attributable to a reduction in private consumption and public investment, given the countryʼs large ﬁscal deﬁcit and the high level of public-sector indebtedness.
The external sectorʼs net positive impact on growth was considerable, thanks to the buoyancy of its exports to China.
In spite of Chinese ofﬁcialsʼ attempts to curb what has been considered an excessive expansion, the Chinese economyʼs growth rate in 2004 (9.5%) was even higher than in 2003 (9.3%).
The greatest boost in 2004 came from the notable surge in exports (35%) and fixed investment (26%), which more than offset the decline in private consumption and, during the second half of the year, in manufacturing output as well.
The inﬂation rate slid from 5.5% to 2.4% in the second semester.
The step taken to limit demand and contain inﬂation included the sterilization of the money supply, an increase in banksʼ reserve ratios, a cutback in real estate loans and a freeze on investment for some products.
In addition, interest rates were nudged upward in late October (Ramos and The United States managed to maintain its share of global GDP (30%), in contrast to the euro zone and Japan, whose shares both shrank somewhat (see ﬁgure I.1.a).
Consequently, the relative weight of the most advanced In this chapter, calculations of growth rates are based on market prices and do not take into account purchasing power parity (PPP).
This is particularly true of China, which doubled its share to 4.2% of global GDP.
Latin America and the Caribbean were less dynamic than developing countries as a whole, but they did manage to hold on to their 6% share.3 Merchandise trade reached a 25-year high in 2004, jumping by 21% in nominal terms.
This robust performance was made possible by sharp increases in the dollar prices of many products and by the large volume of goods traded.
In real terms, merchandise trade was up sharply in South America in 2004, surpassing other regions of the world.
Thanks to surging prices for oil and other commodities, especially electronics and telecommunications equipment, developing countriesʼ share in global merchandise trade soared to 31% —the highest level recorded since 1950 The value of trade in services, on the other hand, was up by just 16% in 2004, following a sharper increase in 2003.
This upswing came in response to a steep rise in transport and travel.
The notable expansion in merchandise trade brought to light shortcomings in port and transport facilities, which combined with higher oil prices to drive up the costs of these services.
The value of tradable services (three fourths of which is in the hands of industrialized countries) rose to 25% of the value of trade in goods.
In 2004 net private ﬁnancial ﬂows to developing countries jumped by 34%, although there was a decline at the world level.
This development is partly accounted for by the high level of liquidity worldwide and by the low long-term interest rates prevailing in the United States.
The region also benefited from larger flows of FDI, which climbed by 44% in 2004 (the ﬁrst increase since 1999).
This trend is reﬂected in the steep gain in the “other ﬂows” category in ﬁgure I.1.h.
The main sources of these ofﬁcial ﬂows are Asian governments (particularly China, Japan, Republic of Korea and Taiwan Province of China), as will be discussed further in a later section.
To a great extent, this ﬁnancial phenomenon is the counterpart of the enhanced competitiveness of Asian exports —Chinaʼs in particular— on the United States market.
Noteworthy developments on the international scene, in addition to the key role played by the economies of China and other developing countries in the recovery made by global GDP in 2004, included the countercyclical ﬁscal and monetary measures applied in the United States to deal with the 2001 recession.
Thanks to these steps, the recession was shorter and more shallow than previous ones, which in turn kept global GDP growth from declining further.
Given the fact that the recession was so slight, it is remarkable that the economic upturn has been so weak and sluggish in the United States and other developed countries.
Part of this situation can be blamed on the lethargic expansion of manufacturing output in industrialized nations (see ﬁgure I.1.f).
The slowness of the recovery has been accompanied by persistently high unemployment in developed countries, which has prompted concern about “jobless” growth.
This trend is associated with the relocation of production to countries with cheaper labour, particularly China and the emerging nations of Asia, as well as some emerging European countries.
For example, in some Asian countries, electronics and telecommunications equipment amounted to over 50% of total exports of goods in 2004, which had a major impact on the expansion of trade ﬂows.
Since this country is the main driving force of the world economy, its recession triggered other recessions or severe downturns in most countries of the world.
For a discussion of the general concept of recession, see Ryd (2003).
Recovery and dynamic growth in the United States The recovery of the United States economy between the ﬁrst quarter of 2003 and the ﬁrst quarter of 2004 was a fundamental factor in the expansion of the world economy, especially for China and other Asian countries, as well as the European Union.
The strength of private consumption has been a signiﬁcant factor in this recovery.
In fact, nearly three quarters of the increase in GDP between the onset of the recovery and the third quarter of 2004 corresponds to this sector, while gross ﬁxed investment, which has been slow to pick up speed, has accounted for the other fourth.
Two sectors, housing and computer hardware and software, were the main focus of this expansion.
The surge in investment, primarily in the housing market, is associated more with durable goods consumption than with the expansion of production.
Net exports siphoned off growth, despite the depreciation of the dollar beginning in 2002, and made a negative contribution to GDP, thereby widening the trade and current account deﬁcits.
In contrast to the trends in investment and wages, which have fallen in real terms, the growth rate of earnings began to climb sharply in 2002, although, measured in terms of GDP, they failed to regain the peak level attained in 1997.
Employment has not increased much, while the unemployment rate has remained relatively stagnant.
Saving is down, and the level of indebtedness is therefore rising quickly.
This is especially the case with household debt, but public-sector and business debt indicators are also high, although businesses have begun to pay off creditors and improve their ﬁnancial balances.
All in all, total debt is approaching 290% of the countryʼs GDP.
This trend can be attributed to a number of ﬁscal and monetary stimulus measures, such as tax cuts and tax incentives for corporate investment.
In addition, the federal funds rate was lowered to 1% in mid-2003.
This historically low rate has boosted consumption, especially of durable goods but also of other items as consumers obtain additional liquidity through mortgage reﬁnancing.
In short, the real estate market has been a counterbalance to the loss of wealth on the sagging stock market and has bolstered consumption.
As a result of these measures, the budget surplus that greeted the current Administration when it took ofﬁce has turned into a hefty deﬁcit (nearly 5% of GDP), as defence and security spending mount.
Nearly one ﬁfth of GDP growth during the recovery can Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 33 be attributed to higher ﬁscal spending, much of which has gone to defence.
These countercyclical policies are similar to those applied in previous recessions, but in this case have been unusually intensive.
In the second quarter of 2004, the United States economyʼs growth began to slow, and this trend has carried over into 2005.
Monetary policy began to change in July 2004, with eight successive rate hikes bringing interest rates up to 3% by the second quarter of 2005.
These adjustments come primarily in response to the Federal Reserveʼs concerns about the inﬂationary pressures exerted by oil prices.
Excluding energy and food, this indicator rose from 1% to 2.5% during the same period.
At the same time, ﬁscal spending surged, especially in the area of defence, though some of the ﬁscal stimuli have ceased to be a factor.
The investment incentives lasted only through the end of 2004, which explains the smaller contribution of investment to growth in the ﬁrst quarter of 2005.
Gross ﬁxed investment accounts for more of that growth, thanks to a sharp rise in inventories.
In addition, the part attributable to consumption has dipped slightly since 2004, but even so, it is responsible for nearly 80% of GDP growth, and over half of that percentage is represented by services.
The external sector also appears to be trending downward; in the ﬁrst quarter of 2005, exports and imports both grew more slowly than they had in 2004.
In any case, imports were more dynamic than exports, so the net contribution to GDP growth attributable to the external sector was even less than it had been in 2004.
Thus, the trade and current account deﬁcits continue to widen, despite the real depreciation of the dollar since early 2002.
The current account deﬁcit, which amounted to 6.3% of GDP at the end of 2004, has been ﬁnanced by an increasing ﬂow of capital from abroad.
The composition of this ﬂow has changed, however, with purchases of bonds rising while FDI and equities have fallen sharply from their pre-recession highs.
In fact, government bond purchases ﬁnanced 43.2% of the deﬁcit in 2004 (see ﬁgure I.2).
Most of these assets are held by public authorities in Asian countries, particularly China.
In fact, this group of countries accounts for nearly 73% of the total, up 3% from the previous year.
China, whose expansion is primarily due to the strong growth of exports and increased investment, especially FDI, has built up a hefty trade surplus with the United States.
Although the net total trade balance amounts to just 2% of its GDP, Chinaʼs trade surplus with the United States accounted for one fourth of the latterʼs total deﬁcit for 2004 according to ofﬁcial statistics compiled by the United States.
Nonetheless, Chinese Government records indicate that its surplus amounted to only one half of that deﬁcit.
In sum, this recovery of world growth, being closely tied to consumption and, to a certain extent, to United States investment demand, requires saving by other countries and the expansion of exports to that market in order to satisfy a demand that is outstrips supply.
In other words, the United States is playing the role of consumer of last resort, and the effect of this compounds the impact of higher defence spending.
These factors account for the major imbalances that the country is experiencing, which include the largest current account and budget deﬁcits in its history.
Thus, the expansion of the volume of world trade was more than twice as high as average annual GDP growth for the 1990s, and grew even more rapidly in the case of developing nations.
In fact, in most countries, though not in the United States, exports, along with the investments that go hand in hand with those ﬂows, appear to be engine of growth.
In fact, the volume of world trade was slightly more than 10% greater in 2004 than it had been in 2001, when all the countries were experiencing a slump.
The developing countries —and particularly the transition economies and China— actually exceeded that average, with exports and imports rising by about 15% in the transition economies and by 30% in the case of China.
Changes in the relative share of different groups or countries are reﬂected not only in world GDP but also in trade and in the trade mix.
As shown in ﬁgure I.3, which depicts export trends by major categories of country, it is developing countries and economies in transition that are primarily responsible for the recovery and vitality of exports in the wake of the 2001 crisis.
In the developed countries, in contrast, export growth has stalled and they have therefore failed to regain the rates of expansion they enjoyed before the crisis (see ﬁgure I.1.e).
The dynamism of developing countriesʼ trade ﬂows can also be seen in South-South trade relations, as the relative weight of these nations in worldwide exports rose from 9.4% in 1990 to 12.5% in 2002.
Most of this expansion can be attributed to the brisk intraregional activity of Asian countries, whose share of world exports doubled during that period (Kuwayama, 2005).
This dynamic expansion reﬂects the shift in intraAsian competitive advantages and in production locations as assembly activity in China moves to the forefront.
The Asian economies are functionally linked to Chinaʼs export growth, and behind every Chinese export there may therefore be a great many indirect exports from other Asian economies in the form of parts, components, equipment and services.
Indeed, what the world is seeing is an integration of trade arising out of the integration of production chains.
Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 35 China as an international price maker The burgeoning Chinese economy, driven by exports and imports, has had major global repercussions.
China has become a major consumer of raw materials, minerals, energy, and also, to a certain extent, foodstuffs and manufactures.
It is between ﬁrst and third place worldwide in terms of the consumption of copper, fertilizers, iron and steel, oilseeds and oils, plastics, electronics, and optical, photographic and medical devices, as well as nuclear reactors and machinery.
International markets have therefore felt the pressure as the prices of many of these goods have been driven upward.
Cases in point include copper, soybeans, nickel and petroleum, whose prices have outpaced those of manufactured goods.
These high prices have, however, been partially offset by the depreciation of the dollar against various international currencies, as illustrated in table I.1 with respect to the The growth of Chinaʼs industrial exports has been concentrated in labour-intensive merchandise requiring large-scale inputs of intermediate goods.
The international prices for such products —especially automotive and electronic goods, textiles and apparel— have plunged.
This trend has been fuelled by Chinaʼs entry into the World Trade Organization (WTO) and, in the case of textiles, by the expiration of the Multiﬁbre Arrangement (MFA) wand its attendant restrictions in January 2005.
This situation has had a major impact on many Latin American and Caribbean countries that export these goods, especially the maquila industry in Mexico and Central America.
In the first four months of 2005, Chinese textile exports jumped by 18.4%.
Although this increase was lower than the corresponding ﬁgure for the same period in 2004, exports to the United States and the European Union climbed by 71% and 48%, respectively.
In response, both of these trading partners have introduced protectionist measures in this sector, as well as urging China to revalue its currency.
China has become the worldʼs leading producer of this product, and in the second half of 2004 it became a net exporter of some steel products, which it sells at prices 30% below the international average.
If this trend continues, it will have adverse consequences for several countries in the region, including the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil and Mexico.
Chinaʼs industrialization process is highly energy-intensive, and the countryʼs entry into WTO has exacerbated this situation, since the environmental restrictions instituted by that organization require the substitution of oil for dirtier fuels.
In both 2003 and 2004, the annual growth of demand in China was not only the highest in the world, but also quadrupled the rate of increase in global demand for petroleum (IEA, 2005).
In other words, China has become an international price maker both for many manufactured goods and for some commodities.
According to the commodity price index compiled by ECLAC, prices for this group of products climbed by 32% between 2000 and 2004.
Such is the case with minerals and metals (48%), oils, ﬂour and oilseeds (45%) and energy (31%).
In contrast, the rise was clearly below average for other products, such as foodstuffs (10%) and forestry and agricultural products (7%).
Beverages actually declined The World Bank estimates that the rise in commodity prices since 2001, despite the mitigating effect of the dollarʼs depreciation, has boosted revenues for developing countries by an additional 1.1% of their GDP.
This positive effect was primarily felt in oil-exporting countries, to the detriment of importers.
As a result, several developing countries became major net exporters of capital.
This was also the case for Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole, since in 2004 the region recorded a net transfer of capital equivalent to 4% of GDP (ECLAC, 2004).
Net oil exporters accounted for most of these transfers, given the steep increase in oil prices seen since 2002.
China as a new engine of world growth Chinaʼs exceptional role in this cycle of world recovery has been taking shape for several years.
In fact, this country enjoyed phenomenal growth between 1980 and 2004, with an average annual rate of 9.5%, albeit with periods of upturns and downturns during that time.
For example, during the Asian crisis and the subsequent recession in the United States, the Chinese economy cooled off slightly, with average growth rates of just 7.6% between 1998 and 2002.
One additional characteristic of Chinaʼs current boom is the large contribution made by its external sector, which has seen net exports regain momentum after being hampered by the Asian crisis prior to 2002.
This has stimulated growth and shored up the current account surplus created by capital inﬂows, which have consisted primarily of FDI and, since 2004, the ﬁnancial capital attracted by expectations of a revaluation of the yuan (Ramos and Ryd, 2005).
Thus, China now represents 4% of global GDP and has become the sixth-largest economy in the world (second, if measured by purchasing power parity).
Furthermore, by opening up its economy and being allowed to join WTO, China has also become a key player in world markets, moving from less than 2% of total exports in 2000 to nearly 6.5% in 2004.
In this past year, it has boasted a 35% jump in such transactions and now ranks as the worldʼs third-largest exporter, displacing Japan.
It also ranks third in imports, with a 36% rise in that category in 2004.
Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 37 This remarkable export-led trend in China, which, as mentioned earlier, has also been spurred by an intensive investment effort (amounting to more than 40% of GDP), also entails a process of industrialization, urbanization and infrastructure development.
It is signiﬁcant that domestic saving represents such a large share of GDP (42% in 2004) (CRS, 2005).
What is more, this country has become a key supplier of manufactured goods to world markets, displacing other Asian economies, as well as several industrialized economies and some developing ones.
As noted previously, this situation is directly related to the concentration of FDI.
Indeed, the bulk of FDI went to developed countries in 2000 (80%), with the United States being the primary recipient.
By 2003, these ﬂows had shrunk dramatically (60%), with only two thirds of FDI going to this group of nations.
Although ﬂows to developing countries have also declined (albeit by relatively less), China continues to be an increasingly favoured recipient.
These two sums combined account for 16% of global FDI, which means that they were bested only by the United States.10 In fact, this country garnered 20% of total world FDI, having posted a huge upswing as an FDI destination that year.
Remarkably, ﬂows to Latin America and the Caribbean are expanding even faster than those to China, but the regionʼs relative share remains small, having edged upward from 7% to 9% between 2003 and 2004 to a total of US$ 54.4 billion (UNCTAD, 2005).
Chinaʼs economic opening and expansion has helped strengthen Asiaʼs trade and ﬁnancial integration.
According to the latest available data, nearly 60% of FDI in China comes from its Asian neighbours, with one third of this sum coming from the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China, followed by Japan, the Chinese province of Taiwan, Republic of Korea and Singapore.
These Asian economies are all among the top 10 sources of FDI in China.11 The United States comes in third, with one tenth of the total, ahead of Japan in terms of its relative share but behind the Virgin Islands (a tax haven), which accounts for a slightly larger share of FDI than the United States.
One innovative feature of the current recovery is Chinaʼs presence as a foreign investor in the natural-resource sectors of several developing countries.
Chinaʼs trade with Asian nations accounted for nearly half its exports and close to two thirds of its imports in 2004.
The scale of these trade ﬂows demonstrates the strong production linkages existing between other Asian countries and China.
The resulting integration of production in that region is a manifestation of the channelling, as mentioned earlier, of indirect exports through China.
Of Chinaʼs 10 largest export markets, the United States is still in ﬁrst place (21%), followed by the European Union (18%).
Japan was the largest supplier of imports to China (16.8%), followed by the European Union (12%), while the United States, with which China has a hefty surplus, ranked only sixth in that category.
Trade with Latin America and the Caribbean, though growing at a clearly above-average pace for China, represented only 4% of total exports and 3% of total imports in 2004.
It should be pointed out that Chinaʼs obviously robust trade with this region is due to the activity of just a few nations, principally Chile, the MERCOSUR countries and Mexico.
The rise in investment in China has concentrated on a relatively small number of sectors.
Examples are the automotive and steel industries, which are already beginning to show signs of overproduction, and, to a lesser extent, cement and aluminium.
The expansion of the automotive sector has been fuelled not only by domestic demand, which expanded at an extraordinarily rapid pace in 2003, but also by the fact that major transnational corporations have decided to set up motor vehicle plants in China with a view to supplying the international market.
In other words, overproduction, which could generate a high level of investment in this country, could also saturate the domestic market and thereby exert downward pressure on international vehicle prices (Ramos and Ryd, 2005).
The growth trend in Chinaʼs foreign trade and its balance-of-payments surpluses in 2003 and 2004 translated into a considerable accumulation of foreign reserves.
By the end of the ﬁrst half of 2005, China held US$ 610 billion in reserves, equivalent to nearly 40% of its GDP, compared to just 10% a decade ago.
The In fact, China is surpassed only by Luxembourg, and that is because the latter country is a tax haven.
The expanding ﬂow of FDI towards the United States in 2004 is due to the increase in intra-company loans, as American subsidiaries abroad transfer ever-larger sums to their home ofﬁces, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis (2005).
Therefore, this movement, facilitated by the depreciation of the dollar, is attributable more to ﬁnancial considerations than to productive investment.
Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 38 reserves have been used primarily to buy United States Treasury bonds in an attempt to keep the currencyʼs dollar parity stable.
First China and then, to a lesser degree, Japan pegged their currencies to the dollar as a means of defending the competitiveness of their exports.
These interventions forced other Asian countries to shore up their own currencies, given the ﬁnancial and commercial integration of this geographic area.
The upshot has been trade imbalances and costs incurred by countries with ﬂoating currencies, especially in the euro zone, and there has been concern about the exchange rates of various currencies against the dollar.
For this reason, the measures have been heavily criticized, and Chinese authorities have come under mounting pressure to abandon their currency policy.
In particular, initiatives have been sponsored in the United States Congress in support of demands by the private sector, European Union authorities and the Group of Seven (G-7), as well as the World Bank and IMF, that not only China but also Japan and the Republic of Korea adopt a more ﬂexible exchange rate.
China’s revaluation dilemma The revaluation of the Chinese yuan against the dollar should be viewed in the context of the broader debate about how to resolve ﬁnancial imbalances in the global economy and, in particular, the United Statesʼ huge current account deﬁcit.
As with any of such imbalances, the deﬁcit should be tackled with the help of policies designed to absorb liquidity and the adjustment of relative prices.
Correction through absorption requires a gradual slowing of spending growth in the United States, which in turn calls for tighter ﬁscal and monetary policies.
Relative price adjustments, meanwhile, will entail the devaluation of the dollar, which, in order to be effective, should also be accompanied by a revaluation of the currencies of countries beneﬁting the most from trade with the United States (i.e., China and other Asian countries).
Because it is the largest economy in the world, a slowdown in the United States and a marginal deceleration of Asian economies ought to be coupled with an upswing in activity in Europe and Japan in order to avoid pushing the world economy into a hard landing.
As mentioned earlier, an enabling feature of this new international division of labour is the fact that, while the United States is the main consumer, China is the supplier par excellence, both of goods and of ﬁnancing.
The fact that the yuan was pegged to the dollar has contributed to this situation.
This asymmetrical relationship may be viewed as part of a new monetary system (dubbed “Bretton Woods II”), in which the United States is at the centre and Asian nations form the periphery.
The latter, by keeping their currencies ﬁxed against the dollar, are also keeping their own currencies artiﬁcially low.
This stimulates investment on the periphery and drives exports towards the centre, resulting in a build-up of the current account deﬁcit in the centre.
The corollary of that deﬁcit is the accumulation of reserves in China and some other Asian nations.
These reserves are then converted into credit and channelled to the United States via purchases of United States Treasury bonds.
These purchases are partially responsible for the expansion of the global supply of dollars (the money supply in the United States plus reserves in foreign hands), which swelled by 25% in 2004, the largest jump in 30 years.
When these dollars return to the United States, they depress bond yields and thus help to hold down interest rates in that country and the rest of the world.
Available estimates indicate that Asian bond purchases have driven down yields by between 0.5 and 1.0 percentage points, which means that long-term interest rates will remain relatively low in the United States, with the consequent repercussions for the rest of the world.
This asymmetry has caused major imbalances not only in trade, but also in current accounts, international financial flows and the value of many countriesʼ currencies.
In mid-2005, the United States and the European Union began to step up the pressure on China to revalue It should be noted that the appreciation of the euro to some degree counteracted the negative impact of higher prices for European imports.
Two factors come into play here: the actual role that the revaluation will play in correcting such imbalances, and the domestic factors that may have motivated it.
In the ﬁrst case, the United Statesʼ current account deficit is the largest in the world economy and stems in part from the continuing gap between the Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 40 above-potential growth of the United States and the below-potential growth of Japan and the European Union.
The United States is expanding beyond its long-term potential, with an extremely low level of private saving and a hefty public deﬁcit, both ﬁnanced by funds derived from saving in the rest of the world.
It is clear that, given the magnitudes and interactions involved, the emphasis being placed on the revaluation of the yuan is excessive.
It is inappropriate for a number of reasons, the ﬁrst being that China is not responsible for most of the United States trade deﬁcit.
In fact, it accounts for only 10% of that deﬁcit, so a 10% revaluation of the yuan would bring the trade-weighted value of the dollar down by just 1%.
If the rest of Asia followed Chinaʼs lead and revalued its currencies, the dollar would decline by a mere 4%.
Secondly, there is the fact that the dollar needs to be devalued substantially.
The ﬁgures cited here fall far short of the required depreciation, since the dollar needs to fall to a level 15% below where it was in mid-2005 in order to bring the external deﬁcit to sustainable levels of between 2% and 3% of GDP.
This means that a revaluation of the Chinese currency would have no more than a limited effect.
For example, the value added of Chinese cellular telephones exported to the United States is 15%, so a revaluation of 15% would raise the price of those products in the United States by just 1.5% (The Economist, 2005a).
Aside from these concerns, there is a reasonable doubt as to the actual impact of a revaluation on ﬂows between China and the United States.
In general, exchange-rate adjustments yield results if the elasticities of the products being traded move in the right direction, assuming a constant level of earnings.
In Chinaʼs case, however, a revaluation would deter foreign investment, thereby dampening the level of economic activity and the growth rate of imports (McKinnon, 2005).
One of many recent studies done on this subject states that a 5% revaluation of the Chinese currency would reduce the United States current account deﬁcit by a mere 0.03% of GDP by 2007 and that a 20% revaluation would bring it down by just 0.13% by that same year (Asia Monitor, 2005).
At the international level, an intense debate has arisen as to the wisdom of revaluing the yuan and its implications for the rest of the world.13 In late July 2005, the Chinese authorities announced the end of the yuanʼs 10-year peg to the dollar and the beginning of a transition to a managed ﬂoat based on a basket of currencies.
They indicated that, under this plan (with no word yet on what currencies would be involved or what the weightings would be), the yuanʼs value against the dollar would be announced on a daily basis.
After that decision, heading off speculation about an additional revaluation, Chinese ofﬁcials insisted that any measure affecting the exchange rate must be very gradual and should take into consideration not only the effect on the balance of payments but also its impact on the solidity of the ﬁnancial system.
The announcement of the yuanʼs revaluation reﬂects Chinaʼs sensitivity to the debate going on in the United States and the European Union regarding their respective trade deﬁcits with China and the sustainability of its foreign-exchange policy.
It also reveals a fuller understanding of the global role China is beginning to play in deﬁning the world economyʼs main parameters.
And ﬁnally, it demonstrates that the Chinese authorities will take a gradual approach to this issue in view of its implications for the management of capital accounts and the soundness of the ﬁnancial system.
Instead, this policy has more to do with the use of the dollar in international pricing, since only one ﬁfth of Asiaʼs exports go to that country.
In this regard, East Asia is a dollarized zone, and even though Japan is the second most important industrialized country in the world For a more comprehensive review of this debate, see Ramos and Ryd (2005).
For an example of such reasoning, see McKinnon and Schnabl, 2003 and 2004; CEPII, 2003 and 2004; and Dooley, Folkerts-Landau and There are domestic reasons for a moderate revaluation of Chinaʼs currency, but each should be examined in its own context, without expecting Chinaʼs currency policy to shoulder the full burden of correcting the imbalances of the world economy.
Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 41 economy, it uses the dollar more than the yen in trade with its neighbours.
For example, half of Japanʼs exports to Asian countries and three quarters of its imports from them are priced in dollars.
Thus, the revaluation of the yuan, although initially modest, helps to set the stage for an adjustment of international parities that will permit more balanced growth among the different geographic areas, especially if other Asian currencies follow suit.
Indeed, in the absence of such an adjustment in Asian currencies, the necessary devaluation of the dollar would have brought with it revaluations of the euro and of Latin American currencies, which would sap their export strength and their growth capacity.
Short-run prospects for the world economy Most projections point towards slower world GDP growth in 2005 and 2006, with rates between 3.0% and 4.3%.
In other words, at most, the growth rate would be one percentage point below the rate for 2004.17 In fact, according to a very recent estimate, projected world growth for 2005 will be down by three tenths of a point, bringing it to 2.9% in 2005 and a similar rate (3.0%) in 2006 (United Nations, 2005b).
Firstly, global demand is likely to be dampened by the rise in oil and other commodity prices.
Secondly, relative shifts in the major currenciesʼ exchange rates will also have an impact.
It is assumed, however, that, barring any new geopolitical conﬂicts, the risks for the world economy may ease, as they did in 2004, when global imbalances and the depreciation of the dollar did not have any major repercussions.
The current imbalances are far from negligible and bear close monitoring, since, depending on the direction they move in, they could hurt the world economyʼs growth prospects.
Also of concern is the uncertainty arising out of the larger hikes in interest rates, the very difﬁcult ﬁscal situations that many countries are contending with and the structural weaknesses that restrict growth in vital economic areas because they heighten vulnerability to external impacts.
To cite just one example, a highly sensitive investment climate exists in many Latin American and Caribbean countries alongside a high rate of foreign borrowing.
In addition, rising oil prices, the terrorist threat and the strong protectionist signals being sent by the major industrialized economies further cloud the medium-term scenario in the world economy.
The temporary nature of ﬁscal measures in the United States, along with recent upticks in the prime rate and unprecedented imbalances, all suggest that growth will slacken in that country.
This trend has been corroborated by the growth rate recorded for the ﬁrst quarter of 2005.
Moreover, the investment cycle has reached its turning point, higher interest rates will act as a deterrent to investment, and the ﬁscal stimulus will be weakened.
In short, the United States is expected to expand at a lower rate in 2005, probably by between 3% and 3.6%, and this pace will likely be maintained in 2006.
The European Union is also expected to expand more slowly due to tighter ﬁscal policies and its shrinking external surplus.
As for Japan, it should be noted that steeper interest rates will hinder investment, the ﬁscal stimulus will be weaker and the foreign surplus will become smaller.
Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 42 will enable developing countries to continue to achieve GDP growth above the world average.
For the rest of the decade, it is anticipated that two thirds of world consumption will be generated by the United States and the Asia-Paciﬁc region.
The somewhat slower pace of global GDP growth will help to weaken international demand and therefore reduce the volume of world trade, which will rise at a rate of only 7.2%-7.4% in 2005, according to the main projections.
This would be tantamount to a decline of about two percentage points from 2004.
The world volume of exports in 2006 should be slightly higher than in 2005, while commodity prices should rise more slowly than in the past.
In sum, although the global economy and international trade will be somewhat less dynamic in 2005 than in 2004, with smaller increases in commodity prices, higher oil prices and escalating interest rates, 2005 will still be a good year for world GDP and trade, and developing countries —particularly those in Latin America and the Caribbean— will post a robust performance.
The current oil crisis The oil supply is characterized by high ﬁxed production and transport costs, but also by low variable costs and large economies of scale.
This normally leads to major lags between an increase in demand, a rise in prices and the expansion of production capacity.
Inversely, once that capacity is generated, a decline in prices does not immediately result in production cuts; on the contrary, oil companies tend to augment production to take advantage of economies of scale.
Demand, on the other hand, has a very low price elasticity and a relatively high income elasticity.
In other words, demand for oil is closely linked to the level of global economic activity, while production responds slowly to price movements.
The result of this combination of factors is a markedly procyclical price trend (Kaufmann, 2000).
The currently high level of oil prices and their impact on the world economy are a cause of increasing concern.
Indeed, nearly every recession in the United States economy in the post-war period has been preceded by a rise in oil prices.
In fact, it has actually been demonstrated that there is a lag of three quarters between an oil price hike and the beginning of a recession in the United States (Birol and Kaufmann, 2000).
By way of illustration, it may be noted that several studies have measured the impact of the price hikes of the 1973-1974 and 1979-1980 crises, and each shows a deterioration in the terms of trade in the member countries of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) equivalent to 2% of GDP.
Furthermore, it is estimated that the ﬁrst of these crises led to a decline in GDP of 4.7% in the United States, 2.5% in Europe and 7% in Japan.
According to ofﬁcials in the United States, the rise in the price of petroleum in 1979 alone was responsible for a drop of 3% in world GDP (IIE, 2000).
In practically all the crises mentioned, the price hike coincided with Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 43 a world economy that was expanding rapidly, limited oil production capacity and declining investment in petroleum and natural gas prospecting.
Nonetheless, it is estimated that the impact of the current price rises will be smaller than on previous occasions, primarily because the increase in the price of petroleum is comparatively less in real terms.
Another reason for the smaller impact is that developed economies are less dependent on oil.
Not only have efforts been stepped up to substitute other energy sources, but changes have also taken place in production structures that have reduced energy use and boosted efﬁciency.
For example, in the United States the intensity of oil use per unit of production has been cut in half since the 1970s.
Thus, the number of dollars generated for each barrel of petroleum is now a little more than US$ 1,000 of real GDP.
In other developed nations, such as Germany, France, the United Kingdom and Japan, this indicator is more than US$ 1,600.
The situation is quite different in developing countries, particularly in the Chinese economy.
In fact, the rise in income in those nations entails more intensive use of petroleum because of the larger number of motor vehicles and the replacement of other sources of energy such as ﬁrewood and coal.
As a result, per capita oil consumption has more than doubled since 1970 in Asia.
This increase can be explained, ﬁrst of all, by demand in China, followed by India.
These two countries combined accounted for 35% of the rise in global consumption between 1990 and 2003, but they produced only 15% of world GDP during those same years.
Moreover, China has become the second-largest consumer of oil in the world, exceeded only by the United States (IMF, 2005).
It should also be emphasized that developing countries make considerably more intensive use of petroleum than industrialized nations.
In fact, many of them generate only US$ 600 of real GDP per barrel of oil; this is especially true of oil importers.
In any case, the effects on this group of countries are quite differentiated.
The World Bank reports that developing nations that are oil exporters felt an impact on their terms of trade equivalent to 5.6% of GDP, while oil importers in that group reported an impact of -0.3%.
For the poorest oil importing countries, it is estimated that the additional burden caused by the rise in oil prices has absorbed 75% of the ﬁnancing they received from the World Bank for all of their development programmes in 2004.
In view of this situation, the wealthier nations will need to increase that ﬁnancing substantially if the high prices persist.
Current conditions on the world oil market suggest that prices will remain high.
The International Monetary Fund, for example, bases its growth projections on an average price of US$ 46.50 per barrel in 2005 and US$ 43.75 per barrel in 2006, but it indicates that futures contracts place the price slightly above US$ 50 per barrel in 2005.
This level would not endanger world growth, but if the price remains between US$ 60 and US$ 69 per barrel, IMF forecasts for world growth will be reduced by three fourths of a percentage point (Wall Street Journal, 2005).
According to conventional calculations, an increase of US$ 10 in the per-barrel price should result in a halfpoint reduction in the global GDP growth rate and a 0.2-point reduction in that of Latin America (IEA, 2005).
In any event, if oil prices remain high for several years, there will be changes in householdsʼ and businessesʼ consumption patterns that will encourage energy efﬁciency.
In fact, there has been a persistent effort in OECD to make adjustments in energy consumption.
Thus, whereas energy imports in the late 1970s amounted to 13% of all commodity imports, by the end of the 1990s that ﬁgure was just 4% (The Economist, 2005).
Moreover, the current cycle of the world economy, unlike that of the 1970s, is characterized by low inﬂation, an absence of price or wage indexing, and central banks with enhanced credibility and more expertise in controlling inﬂation.
Therefore, today it is less likely that a hike in oil prices will trigger spiralling inﬂation and interest rates.
According to IMF, the price in 2004 (in 2003 dollars) was US$ 36 per barrel, which compares favourably with previous increases, particularly the maximum price of US$ 79 per barrel recorded in 1980, also in 2003 dollars (see ﬁgure I.6).
Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 44 sources, the real price in 2004 was close to that seen in 1983, which was still high in comparison with subsequent trends (IEA, 2004).
These differences seem to be related to the method used to calculate deﬂation and the base year chosen.
According to IMF (2005), the more advanced countries will account for only one fourth of the rise in worldwide demand for petroleum in the next 25 years, and most of the increase will come from developing countries, driven primarily by the expansion of the number of motor vehicles in China and other emerging nations of Asia.
In short, by 2030, the demand for oil will have at least doubled in developing countries.
This heightened demand is expected to boost the real price of that commodity to a level much greater than the average for the last 20 years.
Risks and uncertainties In addition to the risks associated with oil price trends, it is important to note, ﬁrst of all, the magnitude of the trade and budget deﬁcits in the United States, which have reached increasingly unsustainable levels.
For this reason, one possible —though unlikely— scenario is that additional hikes in the benchmark rate will have a greater recessionary impact than has been seen previously in that country, given the high level of average household debt.
This would also affect the rest of the world, since such increases would raise the risk premiums in countries with limited resources.
The World Bank estimates that a jump of 200 basis points in the interest rate would reduce world growth by half a percentage point per year in the short and medium terms.
The problem will become much more serious if the United States does not cut its deﬁcits in the long term, a circumstance that might even lead to a new period of stagﬂation like the one seen in the 1970s and 1980s (World Bank, 2004, chapter I).
Secondly, there is a risk that the currency composition of international reserves may shift away from the dollar, which could precipitate an uncontrolled depreciation of that currency.
Indeed, a change has been observed in Asian banksʼ preference for dollars.
The share of dollars in their international deposits dropped from 81% in September 2001 to 67% in September 2004, according to the Bank for International Settlements (BIS, 2005).
If the continuing trend in dollar preferences translates into even higher interest rates, world growth will be eroded further.
This would have serious implications for developing countries, which would see their debt service rise and, at the same time, would feel downward pressure on their currencies.
Brazil, the Philippines, Indonesia, Poland and Turkey are among the countries that would suffer this plight.
Thirdly, the downturn in the growth of the Chinese economy may be steeper than predicted, which would have serious implications for global growth and trade in primary goods and certain manufactures, given that nationʼs current preponderance in the world economy.
This possibility would amplify the international repercussions of the problems in the United States economy, given the increasing interdependency of production, trade and ﬁnance between the two countries.
Fourthly, there is a looming danger that protectionist measures will be taken in order to rein in imports in industrialized countries, especially the United States and the European Union.
The loss of jobs in these countries has sparked a heated debate in which high unemployment levels and domestic productsʼ lack of competitiveness are linked to the relocation of businesses overseas.
In addition, the United States and Europe have both exerted pressure on nations that are shoring up their currenciesʼ value against the dollar in an effort to reduce the competitive edge that United Statesʼ and European products enjoy in their markets.
Europe, above all, has suffered the consequences of the dollarʼs decline, as the value of the euro has mounted and exports, the most dynamic element in the European economy, have sagged.18 In view of the escalating current account deﬁcit in the United States, authorities in that country pushed for the revaluation of the yuan.
Consequently, protectionist measures have been announced or already applied, with an especially adverse impact on imports from China.
The number The rejection of the European Constitution by France and the Netherlands caused a short-term dip in the exchange rate of the euro, exacerbated by conﬂicting statements by European leaders.
The importance of this effect becomes clear in the calculations of the European Central Bank (ECB), which predict that if a 5% decline in the value of the euro against the currencies of its principal trading partners lasts for 12 months, European growth could gain 0.5 to 0.9 percentage points.
To be sure, the longer these adjustments are postponed, the worse the consequences will be, both for that country and for the international economy.
Different scenarios can be envisioned depending on what measures are adopted and how the current imbalances play out.
It is conceivable that the current imbalance will persist, or that it will become progressively worse.
If so, capital ﬂows into the United States will continue or even intensify to offset the lack of domestic saving.
If that occurs, the dollar will stay at practically the same level, while Asian nations will continue their policy of intervening on currency markets.
This would put off the necessary adjustment, but the magnitude of the subsequent fall in the dollarʼs value would increase.
The resultant appreciation of the euro would cause more and more problems for European economies, where, as in Japan, growth has been based principally on exports, but at the cost of smaller proﬁt margins.
A similar situation would ensue in the Latin American and Caribbean countries, which would be forced to revalue their currencies as the dollar depreciated, thus limiting their exports and their growth.
The Federal Reserveʼs current policy is designed to ensure that the funds rate has a neutral effect on the economy, that is, neither expansionary nor restrictive.
This neutral rate may prove to be between 3.5% and 4%, and may be reached sometime in 2005.
If the imbalances are not corrected and they prompt steeper interest rate hikes in order to attract the capital necessary to ﬁnance those deﬁcits while containing inﬂation, the United States can expect a more signiﬁcant downturn than usual, considering the high level of household debt and the fact that consumption has been sustained by debt reﬁnancing.
There is also the possibility of a slight decline in consumption in the United States, which might be brought about, for example, by an increase in domestic saving and a slight depreciation of the dollar to make up for the decline in domestic demand.
This would Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 46 an important risk factor on the short-term horizon.
All of these potential protectionist threats form a cloud of uncertainty over prospects for the Doha Round. raise the question as to what to do with the surplus that would result from production exceeding consumption in that country in order to shrink the current account deﬁcit.
This situation would necessarily force the rest of the world to make an adjustment, resulting in a loss of competitiveness, and everyone would be obliged to absorb the surplus.
Both Europe and Japan, in view of their weak domestic demand, would face serious difﬁculties under these circumstances.
In other words, although this scenario would beneﬁt the United States, it would have a mildly recessionary impact on the rest of the world.
In any case, a depreciation of the dollar, no matter how large, would not be enough to cut the current account deﬁcit, though it would improve the balance of trade.
What would be needed is a change in saving habits or tighter monetary and ﬁscal policies.
It is worth recalling that the cumulative current account deﬁcit for 2004 was twice as high as the deﬁcits recorded in the 1980s, and the dollar has only depreciated by half as much compared to then.
Furthermore, a hefty depreciation of the dollar would expose countries with large dollar holdings to negative wealth effects, which would dampen growth and further complicate the absorption problem.
In other words, there is reason to believe that the risks of slower growth are greater now than in the second half of the 1980s, when both Europe and Japan were growing faster than they are now.
Finally, we cannot rule out a more drastic adjustment and a steep drop in the dollar if central banks stop counteracting the pressure to revalue their currencies and begin liquidating their dollar reserves.
If this were to happen, equities would decrease in value all over the world, international capital movements would ensue, and the dollar would grow extremely weak; in other words, investment and consumption would fall in the United States, undermining that countryʼs role as an engine of international growth.
The result would be a more pronounced adjustment in the rest of the world and a widespread recession.
All things considered, as of mid2005 this scenario appears to be very unlikely, however.
The year 2005 will continue to be a good one for global GDP growth and trade.
However, if the price of oil climbs too high, the entire world will feel inﬂationary pressures.
In that case, there would be upward pressure on interest rates, and lending terms would be less promising than in 2004, especially for developing countries.
Although there are grounds for a certain optimism regarding short-term prospects, there is no doubt that if the imbalances persist, there is a greater danger of an undesirable turn of events in the longer term.
For this reason, it is necessary for the main actors in the world economy —namely, China, the United States, Japan and the euro area— to adopt coordinated measures to overcome these weaknesses.
In addition, protectionist pressures will continue as long as oil prices stay high and the imbalances in world demand are not corrected.
Consequences for Latin America and the Caribbean Latin American and Caribbean exports have shown a marked tendency to increase since the early 1980s, and especially since the 1990s.
In the past decade, exports have doubled, although that growth was substantially overshadowed by the tripling of imports.
Consequently, towards the end of the last decade the trade balance and the current account began to register ever-larger deﬁcits, amounting to US$ 13 billion and US$ 46 billion, respectively.
In 2004, however, for the second year in a row GDP growth was accompanied by a current account surplus, thanks mainly to propitious external conditions that favoured a large volume of exports and, above all, improved the terms of trade for the region.
This trend is expected to continue throughout 2005, though to a lesser extent.
The regionʼs share of world commodity trade expanded from 7.1% to 9.8% between 1985 and 2000 thanks, in part, to improved production technologies.
The reverse is true of low-technology, natural-resourcebased manufactures, where its share fell from 5% to 4.6% during the same period (ECLAC, 2002).
A signiﬁcant proportion of these exports are subject to widely ﬂuctuating prices, deteriorating terms of trade and tariff barriers that block access to developed-country markets, especially in the case of agricultural products.
Other basic goods, including steel and sheet metal, must, increasingly, contend with non-tariff restrictions such as safeguards, countervailing duties or anti-dumping provisions in those markets (ECLAC, 2003).
IMF (2005) has noted that developing countries, especially those with hefty current account deﬁcits or limited access to external ﬁnancing, will be the hardest hit by soaring oil prices, which may translate into a deterioration in their trade balances amounting to between 0.5 and 1 percentage points of GDP.
The report makes special mention of the cases of the Dominican Republic, Honduras and Nicaragua.
Although the region as a whole saw an improvement of over 5% in its terms of trade in 2004, this increase was 12% for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia, and most of it was attributable to escalating oil prices.
The ﬁrst calculation assumes that the average price that prevailed in the ﬁrst quarter, US$ 49 per barrel, holds for the rest of the year.
The second one is based on a price of US$ 40 per barrel, in the light of projections of slower global growth.
In the ﬁrst scenario, the merchandise trade balance would improve by US$ 13.5 billion for the region as a whole.
This improvement would come at a price for several countries, however; Chile, in particular, would see its merchandise trade surplus decline by nearly US$ 1 billion.
In the second case, the merchandise trade balance would improve by just US$ 3.5 billion, primarily because Mexico would take in less revenue and its trade deﬁcit would increase by nearly US$ 4 billion.
In the third scenario, LAIA would post a surplus of US$ 28 billion, or 44% more than in 2004, with the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela accounting for 37% of that upsurge.
Chile would suffer the most damage, with its trade balance moving from a surplus to a deﬁcit position 2004 and 2005.
Of course, the price of oil not only affects revenues in countries where the State is a major oil producer, but also inﬂuences other countries through its effect on tax revenues.
Although oil tax revenues have slipped, they are still a signiﬁcant source of revenues in many nations of the region.
In addition, the price of this commodity is reﬂected, directly or indirectly, in the consumer price index.
This impact has been greater in countries that have deregulated prices on the domestic market, including Brazil, Chile, Peru and, to a lesser extent, Mexico.
In these cases, rising oil prices have been passed on entirely to consumers (Campodónico, 2001).
The consequences of slower world economic growth for Latin America and the Caribbean will vary depending on how large or small each countryʼs share of international trade is and on the vulnerability of its current account and ﬁnancial situation.
International interest rate hikes will weigh on countries with large debts, while the scarcity of ﬁnancial resources may hurt investment potential and opportunities for productive development.
Nevertheless, as long as the Federal Reserveʼs policy does not translate into more pronounced or more frequent rate increases and excess liquidity continues to limit the impact on long-term interest rates, debt service costs will remain moderate.
The implications of such a policy would Pane_Cap_I_Eng.indd 48 have to be evaluated in light of the debt structure of each country, since the higher the concentration of short-term debt, the greater the repercussions.
In summary, the international economic situation in 2004-2005 has been favourable for the region, since it has included good international prices for exports, improved terms of trade, low interest rates and, consequently, low inﬂation and positive ﬁscal outcomes.
The recent revaluation of Chinaʼs currency will allow the depreciation of the dollar to remain moderate, fending off the possibility of a drastic escalation of interest rates in the United States.
The gradual reduction of the budget deﬁcit in the United States is moving in the same direction.
The price of petroleum is still a critical variable in the regionʼs economic performance.
The Latin American and Caribbean region is a net oil exporter, and therefore high prices are good for the region; but several small and medium-sized countries are net importers of oil, and current prices of around US$ 60 per barrel place a heavy burden on their budgets and balance of payments.
Net exporters, for their part, face a considerable ﬁscal challenge, in that they must find a way of taking advantage of the windfall to bolster savings or to pay down the public sectorʼs debt.
The nations of the region should take Chinaʼs new stance as a stronger competitive force into consideration.
The effect of this increased competition on the part of China has already become apparent in the textile market, both in the short term (e.g., foreign-exchange policy) and in terms of industrial strategies and longterm trade alliances.
This competition may also take on more signiﬁcance in the case of goods in which China is generating surplus supply, such as those mentioned previously.
Even if Chinaʼs economy slows down a little, its exportable surpluses of these products will probably increase.
It is clear that the new geography of trade, with an increasingly autonomous Asian centre revolving around the Chinese economy, is the most noteworthy feature of this new global business cycle.
Within the context of both international negotiations and the design of trade strategies, Latin American and Caribbean authorities will need to redouble their efforts to discover and take advantage of the complementarities that may arise out of greater integration with Asia, in general, and with China, in particular.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development) (2005), “World FDI flows grew an estimated 6% in 2004, ending downturn” (UNCTAD/ PRESS/PR/2005/002), press release, January.
Wall Street Journal (2005), “A new take on oil and recession”, 5 March.
Latin America and the Caribbean in the multilateral framework Since 2001, the member countries of the World Trade Organization (WTO), which currently number 148, have been working on a new multilateral round of trade negotiations which are expected to be concluded by the end of 2006.
The current trade system has come a long way since the origins of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) (1947), including the work done on the Uruguay Round, which has been in force since 1995.
The coordinates of the current effort – within the framework of the Doha Round – arise out of an agreement signed in August 2004 that helped breathe life back into the ﬂagging multilateral system.
In the initial months of 2005, little progress was made; it was not until the beginning of May, when critical issues in the area of agriculture were resolved, that an optimistic outlook could be justiﬁed, though the goals that were set are far from being reached.
This task focuses in particular on ﬁve fundamental spheres in the negotiating process: modalities in agriculture and access to markets for non-farm products, critical mass of offers to open up service markets, progress on rules and trade facilitation, and adequate treatment of the development aspect (WTO, 2005j).
That process is reviewed in this chapter, beginning with a brief look at the situation leading up to August 2004, the legacy of the Uruguay Round and the orientation of the current Doha Round.
The main issues under negotiation are then examined, including their Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 51 content, the visions of some key players – including the countries in this region – and the major sticking points.
The final section provides an overview of the negotiations and the role of Latin American and Caribbean countries.
WTO and the legacy of the Uruguay Round The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have incorporated trade liberalization as a central theme of their development strategies and are involved in trade negotiations at various levels.1 For this reason, strengthening multilateral institutions for international trade is a key aspect of these strategies.
That round also resulted in the establishment of liberalization instruments and regulatory frameworks for trade in services, and standards were deﬁned for intellectual property.2 At the same time, new negotiations were launched in agriculture and services, areas in which the Uruguay Round had just begun the liberalization process.
Finally, in that same period some negotiations were concluded for the liberalization of sectors of interest to developed countries, such as the Information Technology Agreement and the corresponding accords on ﬁnancial services and telecommunications.
Given a number of factors relating to the methodologies, assumptions and scope of available evaluations, the impact of liberalization measures on the volume of agricultural trade can be described as mixed.
The above-mentioned authors estimate that a 40% reduction in tariffs and export subsidies for farm products after the Uruguay Round —in 2005— has increased global income by nearly US$ 60 billion per year.
This ﬁgure rises by another US$ 10 billion if domestic support is cut by 40% as well.
Moreover, with a 40% decrease in tariffs on manufactured goods, the volume of global trade would jump by more than US$ 380 billion, equivalent to about 5% of projected trade in merchandise and nonfactor services in 2005.
What is more, the gains almost double if liberalization measures are applied to all kinds of goods, and developing countries would beneﬁt the most, although with an uneven distribution among them.
The year 2005 marks the end of the implementation period The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean are classiﬁed as developing countries in WTO; only Haiti is in the category of least developed countries.
In the Uruguay Round a broad set of regulations governing trade relations was also devised, disciplining traditional trade policy instruments (anti-dumping, safeguards) and instruments intrinsic to development policies (subsidies, investments).
In addition, the transition periods were deﬁned for applying and revising some relevant agreements with respect to the year 2000.
The reduction of export subsidies, in contrast, reportedly resulted in deteriorating terms of trade for developing countries that are net food importers (Laird, Cernat and Turrini, 2003).
The ﬁgure mentioned for Latin America and the Caribbean contrasts with the ﬁgure given for China (7.5%) and South Asia (12%).
All things considered, that export percentage is still one of the lowest in the world, especially in the case of South America.
In the latter sector, a profound change is taking place in the regulatory sphere in these countries, while in the area of agriculture they still face major barriers to entry in the principal markets and distortions in international markets.
One reason for this is the level and complexity of tariffs and other border protection mechanisms, such as licenses, quotas and standards; another reason is the level of subsidies that developed countries are providing in this sector.
These distortions also tend to be concentrated in some products that are of special interest to developing countries.
Indeed, some analysts believe that the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture “is probably one of the worst” because it lacks transparency and allows the levels of protection to rise (Nogués, 2004, p. 9, see also section B.2.a).
Therefore, demands have been made in the negotiations for more liberalization, and caution has been called for regarding the effects on the importing countries of the region.
Hence the active participation by these countries in negotiations in the sector (see table II.1).
The African Union/African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc States/Least-Developed Countries (AU/ACP/LDC) are made up of 61 members, of which 15 are in this region.
With the implementation of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing and the consequent dismantling of the Multiﬁbre Agreement,7 the textile and apparel sectors became fully incorporated into the GATT multilateral framework of trade in goods.
This change is disturbing to countries in the region that produce signiﬁcant amounts of these goods.
Mexico, the Central American nations and the Dominican Republic, in particular, face major challenges in the United States because of competition from China.
Some of these issues stem from the Uruguay Round agreements, while others have emerged in the course of the application of those agreements or relate to proposed approaches to new conditions and circumstances affecting international trade.
As can be seen in table II.2, in the Doha Round there are some matters for which a mandate for negotiations already exists (column 1), while others are to be developed in programmes or working groups de Córdoba, Laird and Vanzetti, 2005b; and Fernández and Vanzetti, 2005).
Some of the problems regarding agricultural market access are also present in industrial sectors (tariff peaks and escalation) and especially in the textiles and apparel sector.
For the reasons outlined, many developing countries – some in Latin America – have resisted including new issues proposed by the developed countries on the agenda regarding such matters as investment or competition policies.
In light of all of this, it can be concluded that a noteworthy feature of the Doha Round is that it raises expectations for more signiﬁcant concessions by the countries of the North, especially in agriculture, and on sensitive aspects of their policies regarding this sector.
For that very reason, such concessions will be all the more difﬁcult to achieve in terms of a balanced result. (column 2).
The precise content of each of these issues is discussed in the following section.
The negotiating process in the Doha Round was supposed to conclude in 2005, with a midterm review and the adoption of a number of resolutions to take place at the Fifth Ministerial Conference, held in Cancún in September 2003.
The progress and conclusion of the negotiations, with the exception of the work on dispute settlement, were to be approached in accordance with the principle of the “single undertaking”.
However, the debates that followed Doha, particularly at the Fifth Conference, have pushed back the target date, although a draft, the “Derbez text”, did emerge from this That agreement regulated trade in textiles and clothing from the 1970s onward by means of quotas set by importing countries.
Most of these issues are being negotiated, and the corresponding agreements are the ones that have been challenged most often in the WTO dispute settlement system (Davey, 2005).
Another goal is to strengthen technical assistance and capacity-building, as well as support for the least developed countries. conference.
The Derbez text has been an important input for subsequent deliberations and reﬂects the concern expressed by the least developed countries regarding cotton (see WTO, 2003b, and ECLAC, 2004a, chapter V).
Among the greatest obstacles to progress since Doha have been the work on agricultural reform, the debate on special and differential treatment, and aspects related to the problems encountered by developing countries in implementing the WTO agreements.
In fact, practically none of the deadlines had been met upon arriving in Cancún.
The Fifth Conference inherited this climate of discord, aggravated by the debates on the Singapore issues, which were strongly resisted by developing countries.10 After Cancún, the process was characterized by disagreements which were then generally resolved by means of a decision adopted on 1 August 2004.
Although no date has been set for the conclusion of this round, 2006 has been tentatively targeted.
The results of the next WTO Ministerial Conference, to be held in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China in December 2005, will determine whether or not this target can be met.
New stage in the Doha Round: topics of negotiation, interests and prospects On 1 August 2004, thanks to a package of framework agreements (the “July package”), the WTO General Council managed to move beyond the obstacles and differences that were apparent in the negotiations at Cancún (WTO, 2004a).
These difﬁculties primarily revolved around four issues: subsidies for agricultural exports, technical issues and matters related to special and differential treatment in access to markets for non-farm products, the Singapore issues and a cotton initiative.11 In December 2003 it was agreed to evaluate these issues separately and explore modalities for two of them: trade facilitation and transparency in Government procurement.
In this regard, developing countries did not agree to establish a two-track multilateral system, as proposed by the European Union.
The evaluation of December 2003, subsequent to Cancún, made it possible to clear the air and resume negotiations beginning in 2004.
The Derbez text was to be a reference, but did not yet have the support of the developing countries.
With regard to the process, see the Doha Programme for development in the WTO and the periodic reports of the Institute for Agriculture and Trade Policy (IATP) and the International Centre for Trade and Sustainable Development (ICTSD), among others.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 55 In the months following Cancún, a number of noteworthy initiatives were advanced by developed countries.12 In January 2004, the United States set out what it views as the principal coordinates and central themes of the negotiating process and the marketaccess process.
In November 2003, the European Union had reaffirmed an appeal for greater ﬂexibility, and in May 2004 it advanced some key proposals for agricultural negotiations, such as the elimination of export subsidies.
In turn, some groups of developing countries (such as G-20) undertook a coordination effort after the Fifth Conference ended, which also fuelled the process.
In short, the work was intensive, especially with respect to the agricultural negotiations (WTO, 2004b).
In parallel with the work performed within WTO, these negotiations received a considerable boost from many high-level intergovernmental meetings.
This framework refers to commitments made in the Doha Round and gives some direction to the negotiations on a variety of matters, in some cases with more detailed recommendations and general guidelines.
In addition, the timeline for the work that was established at Doha is extended, with no ﬁxed ending date, and the next Ministerial Conference is conﬁrmed for 13-18 December 2005 in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China.
In June 2004, APEC proposed an ambitious and ﬂexible focus to market access in agriculture, with signiﬁcant reductions in domestic support and the elimination of export subsidies as of a speciﬁc date.
Few critical dates are specified in the decision with respect to the agricultural negotiations and market access for non-agricultural products, and only general guidelines are given for services.
Market access With the resumption of negotiations on agriculture and services in 2000, as provided for in the Uruguay Round, the plan was to accord due attention to developing-country needs and capacity-building.
In the case of agriculture, the task also involved the treatment of subsidies granted by developed countries as an important barrier to market access in those countries.15 A critical phase in the Doha Round has been the conclusion of an agreement on liberalization “modalities”.16 Operational targets should be established for the negotiations on these modalities.
For the liberalization of trade in goods, this entails a formula for determining tariff reductions, parameters, the implementation base (time of reference), deadlines, ﬂexibility for developing countries, treatment of unbound tariffs and other barriers.
The Uruguay Round only marked the start the reform process based on the three pillars of market access, domestic support and export competition.17 In addition to these three pillars, which were reafﬁrmed at Doha, attention is given to the non-trade concerns related to the sector.
As indicated previously, agriculture faces more distortions than other sectors with respect to the level and complexity of the tariffs and other border barriers – licences, tariff peaks, standards, and quotas – as well as the level of subsidies that developed countries extend to the sector (see FAO, 2005 and Contreras, 2005).
In contrast to the situation with regard to manufactures, however, in this sector there are no prohibited subsidies, just a commitment to reduce some of them.
The distortions Small economies; trade, debt and ﬁnance, and trade and technology transfer.
Two years after that deadline, the task has still not been completed.
In WTO, agriculture is considered to include primary and processed goods (basically chapters 1 through 24 of the Harmonized System, without encompassing ﬁshing products but including non-food raw materials of agricultural origin).
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 57 noted tend to be concentrated in some products of special interest to developing countries, such as dairy products, sugar, meat and grains.
For this reason, these countries propose to advance on the three pillars of reform, with some specificity regarding greater opportunities for access and ﬂexibility in relation to their development process (WTO, 2004d).
Regarding market access and tariff reductions, in addition to an average tariff that is considerably higher than the average for manufactured goods, there are many instruments for this sector: speciﬁc tariffs, seasonal tariffs, tariff peaks, escalation, quotas and others.
Although the average tariff applied to the regionʼs products in the principal markets (the United States and the European Union) is relatively low (some with preferential treatment), maximum rates applied by these areas can be as high as 350% (applied by the United States to tobacco) and 52% in the European Union.
The average tariff in Asia is higher, and there are tariff peaks in China and Japan for various Latin American and Caribbean products.
Moreover, the sector faces other non-tariff barriers, which are being discussed outside the scope of the agricultural agreement.
These include antidumping measures, licences, standards (and traceability), geographical indications and others.18 With respect to subsidies, in the Uruguay Round basically two categories of aid are deﬁned for this sector: export subsidies and production subsidies.19 The latter represent nearly 90% of spending.
Called the producer support estimate (PSE),22 this indicator accounted for nearly 30% of the value of farm production in 2004, and has declined and changed in structure in most countries (OECD, 2005b).
It corresponds basically to the WTO amber box, or the Total Aggregate Measurement of Support (AMS), with a few differences that make it a more precise indicator of domestic support.
On average, approximately one third of the speciﬁc subsidies go to the category of “other products”, and the remainder is distributed more or less equally among grains, milk and meat, as shown in ﬁgure II.1.
These products absorb most of the speciﬁc aid, and some countries in the region are net exporters of them, even though they must compete with similar products that are heavily subsidized.
Several of these products also represent another type of protection in the form of other subsidies, high tariffs, standards and other nontariff barriers.
Given the high degree of protectionism prevailing in agriculture in the major developed countries, signs of moves towards liberalization and ﬂexibility on their part have a great impact on negotiations in this sector.
The United States Trade Representative, Ambassador Robert Zoellick, in a letter written in January 2004, proposed a signiﬁcant reduction of various barriers, but the elimination of export subsidies by a certain date was considered to be of key importance.
The European Union It should be noted that several disputes over anti-dumping measures, safeguards and technical barriers, among other matters, involve products and instruments in this sector (Davey, 2005).
Production subsidies – domestic support – and export subsidies should be reduced.
Among the former, only those that have the greatest impact on trade (amber box) need to be reduced, and disciplines are imposed only on the support that causes the least distortion (blue and green boxes).
The amber box is for domestic support measures that are felt to distort production and trade, and it encompasses price supports and subsidies directly tied to the volume of production.
The reduction commitments are expressed in terms of a “Total Aggregate Measurement of Support” (AMS).
The blue box is an amber box “with conditions” intended to limit distortion, which requires farmers to restrict production.
The green box covers subsidies that are not expected to distort trade, or at worst have a minimal impact on it; the subsidies must be ﬁnanced with public funds (without charging higher prices to consumers) and should not amount to price supports.
The green box tends to encompass programmes that do not focus on speciﬁc products, and it includes direct aid to farmers that is “decoupled” from production levels or current prices.
Greenbox subsidies are allowed without limitations, provided that they meet the criteria related to speciﬁc policies (WTO, undated).
At present, the degree of distortion produced by various instruments is the subject of an intense conceptual debate (see also FAO, 2005).
Considering the 1995-1997 average, the products in that bloc with the highest rates of export subsidies, above 100%, were pork, sugar, rice and lard and butter oil (Nogués, 2004, p. 18, table III.4).
Canada and the United States also rank high if spending per farmer is the criterion.
The PSE measures the annual value of gross transfers from consumers and taxpayers to support agricultural and livestock producers.
The PSE does not include other spending in the agricultural sector as a whole (that is, no individual payments to farmers), such as spending on agriculture research or infrastructure.
This view is also advocated by other countries in the Group of 10 (G-10), including Japan, the Republic of Korea and other developed countries.
The Cairns Group, which is made up of agricultural exporters, has taken the opposite position.
Since the Uruguay Round, it has been an enthusiastic supporter of reform in the sector with a view to merging these disciplines with those applying to manufactured goods.
Over the last two years, developing countries in general, and the Group of 20 (G-20) in particular, have been demanded two conditions: (i) greater market access for their products;25 and (ii) ﬂexibility in the form of different rates of implementation and levels of commitment from developed and developing countries, while retaining instruments such as agricultural safeguards for the latter only.
These groups consider the demand for liberalization in agriculture to be a top priority, but with certain nuances.
The Cairns Group, consisting of both developed and developing countries, has staked out stronger positions insofar as it represents agricultural exporters, whereas the G-20, made up of developing countries, includes net agricultural importers, which attenuates its desire for market opening.
The active participation of several Latin American and Caribbean countries in this coordination effort reﬂects the importance of agriculture to the region (see table II.1).26 The countries of the Caribbean are part of a broad group of developing nations (African Union/ African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc States/Least Developed Countries) as well as the Group of 33.
The latter, made up of agricultural importers, including China and other countries in the region, is promoting speciﬁc instruments For Zoellick, an ambitious outcome in this sector should precede the negotiations and is the key to their success, with due consideration for the three pillars and, more controversially, non-trade issues.
Parallelism refers to all forms of export subsidies or measures with an equivalent effect, such as credit subsidies for exporters, food aid and the exports of State trading enterprises, areas in which the United States and other developed countries are quite active.
They propose to reduce or eliminate subsidies, apply disciplines to speciﬁc products rather than using averages, establish a lower level of progressivity, simplify structures and applied rates, and reduce other barriers.
Agriculture accounts for just over 20% of the regionʼs exports (more than 50% in some economies), and several countries are internationally competitive.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 59 to address the sensitivities of developing countries in the sector.
Two developing countries, Brazil and India, are part of a new partnership in the negotiations, referred to as “the Non-Group 5” (NG-5) or “the Five Interested Parties” (FIP), with the other members being the United States, the European Union and Australia.
This group was instrumental in the ﬁnal stages of the negotiations in reaching the decision that gave rise to the July package.
The high level of tension and expectations in connection with agricultural issues can also be seen in the disputes brought before WTO, inasmuch as several cases regarding the implementation of anti-dumping, safeguard and sanitary and phytosanitary measures, among others, have involved products and instruments in this sector (Davey, 2005).
This outline sets forth general and speciﬁc criteria for the three pillars of the reform effort.
Special and differential treatment: Export competition: • Export subsidies to be eliminated by a credible deadline, in addition to including and disciplining equivalent measures (“parallelism”): export This is integrated into the provisions and modalities through various measures favouring developing countries, including: Transition periods and lesser reduction commitments with different coefﬁcients in the various formulas.
Exemptions from support commitments or from de minimis reductions for certain purposes.
Special market access instruments: “Special” products to meet the needs of food security or rural development, and a Special Safeguard Mechanism.
Exemptions for least developed countries, attention to the problem of preference erosion and the treatment of cotton, bearing in mind trade and development considerations.
The case ﬁled by Brazil is the ﬁrst one without a peace clause.
It concerns the losses sustained by its producers as a result of the decline in international prices for the product caused by the United Statesʼ support programmes.
The panel determined that several instruments in these programmes did not qualify as permitted support (green box) and were not part of the United Statesʼ multilateral commitments.
Including negotiations on cotton, which must be addressed ambitiously, expeditiously and speciﬁcally.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 60 defined.30 In the discussions that followed the decision, a working procedure was established that would focus on technical aspects, with the understanding that in 2005, the main objective would be to forge an agreement on the modalities.
It is essential that this agreement, especially in the area of market access, be achieved at the conference to be held in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China in late 2005 so that the round can be concluded the following year.
The conversion of speciﬁc tariffs into ad valorem equivalents was one of the most critical technical aspects, since it is necessary in order to negotiate and apply the tariff reduction formula.
This matter became a stumbling block towards the end of April 2005 due to differences between exporting and importing countries, as the European Union and the G-10 countries are the primary users of speciﬁc tariffs.
At the WTO “miniministerial” meeting of 4 May 2005, an adjunct to an OECD meeting in Paris, 30 countries reached an agreement on this issue.
The NG-5 agreed to it only provisionally, however, and the other WTO member States still have to conﬁrm it.
The technical debates on converting speciﬁc tariffs to ad valorem equivalents covered such issues as the method of calculation, data requirements and the calculation veriﬁcation process (WTO, 2004d and WTO, 2004e; ICTSD, 2005).
Under these terms, the agreement was more advantageous for the latter countries; however, there are other related matters, such as the sequence of the calculation, that would suggest a result that balances the competing interests better.
The progressive nature of market access, which is to be achieved with a non-linear formula that guarantees reductions larger than the highest tariffs, is also a complex issue.
The developed countries are advocating a mixed market access formula with ﬂexibility for the sensitivities of developing countries, but at the same time they want these countries to open up their own markets to a greater extent.
Although the non-linear formula would help reduce escalation and peaks, which is of interest to developing countries, the latter have expressed apprehension about the larger reductions that would come about as a result of their higher tariffs.
Some countries consider that the results of the debate on the formula will be linked to the use of sensitive products, since these would be subject to a smaller tariff reduction.
The developing countries have also called attention to the erosion of preferences that results from the overall lowering of tariffs for countries beneﬁting from preferential access to certain markets (through the Generalized System of Preferences or other arrangements).
In this regard, they propose a comprehensive approach involving increased market access for products that are of vital importance to beneﬁciary countries, effective use of existing preferences and additional support for dealing with supply constraints, promoting diversiﬁcation and easing the adjustment.
With the new instrument and product categories incorporated into the agricultural sector, there are many combinations that reﬂect the ﬂexibility demanded by developing countries, but there are also significant margins for developed countries to provide special treatment.
Thus, the real increase in market access for products of interest to developing countries will also depend to a great extent on the agreements that are reached with respect to sensitive products, the quotas used and the way they are administered.
Further complexity arises out of the different viewpoints on issues of interest that have not been agreed upon, such as the sectoral initiatives, the differentiated export tax and geographical indications.
The former are derived from the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database (COMTRADE), with ﬁgures carried out to six digits; the import prices are contained in the WTO Integrated Database, with more detailed data.
International prices are different from (national) import prices because of the presence of quotas or preferences.
At this meeting, the G-20 was accompanied by other groups of developing countries.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 61 As far as subsidies are concerned, there are several issues for discussion; some cut across the categories of domestic support and export competition, while others are more speciﬁc.
Among the general questions, one of the developing countriesʼ concerns is that the reduction will be made to bound subsidies that are considered to be much higher than they actually are (known as “water”), so the true effect of the reductions in the principal markets would not be very signiﬁcant.
Furthermore, despite the WTO notiﬁcation commitments, there is a serious lack of information about these instruments, which makes it difﬁcult to fully understand the situation.
Finally, as a result of the recent controversies over certain agricultural products. such as sugar and cotton, the policies of the main users of these instruments, the United States and the European Union, have been called into question.
With regard to domestic support, practically all of the instruments are controversial, especially because of the possibility of transferring support between different compartments or “boxes”.
From the standpoint of developing-country exporters, the most important thing is to guarantee substantial reductions in domestic support by adjusting the point of departure (ideally the levels actually being applied), since the negotiating effort would not make as much sense if it is limited to reducing the “water” in subsidies only.
As for the amber box, there is debate about whether the bands should be determined according to the volume of support, which would affect the European Union, Japan and the United States more, or according to the relative impact of the support measures on a countryʼs agricultural sector, which would have a greater effect on the EFTA countries.
The developing countries are probably most apprehensive about the blue box, and the support that can be incorporated and the ﬂexibility that would persist are being debated.
This category —what some are calling the “new blue box”— is being expanded through the inclusion of support measures that do not require any limitation of production.34 It is also expected that greater discipline will be introduced into the green box, which covers non-distorting support, to address non-trade concerns and orient it towards the needs of developing countries.
This proposal, put forward in March 2005 by the G-20, comes in addition to the need to maintain the de minimis levels for these countries, in light of the practically marginal support granted by these countries to the agricultural sector.
As for export competition – about which clearer signals were sent by the decision taken in August 2004 – there are still some concerns.
In global terms, the difficulty of specifying modalities for the three agricultural reform pillars when major differences exist in the base structure, either for tariffs or for subsidies, is a signiﬁcant issue.
Moreover, the guidelines provided by the July package have expanded the spectrum of instruments that can be used in the sector (taking into account different sensitivities), which complicates their negotiation and makes it difﬁcult to evaluate the real gains that can be made in terms of opening up markets and improving operating conditions for a countryʼs own markets.
In addition, there is the fact that ﬂexibility and differential time frames for developing countries (also part of the deﬁnition of modalities) are elements that are not welcomed by exporting countries, which are therefore asking that such concessions be curtailed.
What is more, the large economies, from which the greatest concessions are expected, have been reluctant to send signals of convergence during the most recent stages of the work.
The debate on manufacturing sectors basically involves border barriers, whereas in the services sector liberalization is closely tied to regulations and other domestic measures.
Although it is not clear that this support is less distorting than the amber box measures, it requires stricter disciplines focused on certain products to prevent distortion and jumping from one box to another, or from one product to another.
In addition, capping the support at 5% of production can be quite a high ceiling in the large economies.
This debate is taking place in the context of the restoration of wheat export subsidies in the European Union, although it is within the agreedupon limits.
See an overview of the agreements for the liberalization of goods and services in the Uruguay Round, GATT 1994 and General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) in WTO, 2003a.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 62 (i) Market access for non-agricultural products The protection of the manufacturing sector has been a traditional instrument of industrial policy, and the liberalization of this sector is therefore still a concern for developing countries, especially since other policy avenues have been narrowed during the course of the multilateral negotiations.
In addition, exports incorporating an increasing content of manufactured goods from these countries are also facing barriers, both in other developing countries (South-South trade) and in developed-country markets in sectors of interest to them because of their labour-intensive nature or the large amount of value added they entail.
The negotiation of market access for non-agricultural products was proposed chieﬂy by developed countries and Asian nations after the preparations for Seattle.
In the framework of the Doha Round, the United States asserted that market access for manufactures should aim for the total elimination of tariffs, after which the issue of non-tariff barriers and sectoral negotiations could be tackled (Zoellick, 2004).
The United States is a fervent advocate of the latter, and it proposes that negotiations begin once there is a sufﬁcient number of interested countries that have trade in a given sector (the “critical mass” approach).
The European Union, on the other hand, has conﬁrmed its support for the principle that reciprocity should not be total, provided that it is operationalized in accordance with the role played by developing countries in world trade.
The developing countries have become increasingly interested in these negotiations, given that manufactured goods represent a growing share of their exports.
In general terms, this mandate leaves a wide range of decisions without clarification, because although the tariff elimination formula will supposedly deﬁne the pace of liberalization, the overall result should combine, among other things, sectoral elimination, exceptions for sensitive products, special and differential treatment and the level of bound commitments.
Indeed, there is uncertainty about what can be accomplished with the presence of tariff peaks in sectors of interest to developing countries.
Until July 2005, the work focused on modalities and technical matters such as the conversion of tariffs to ad valorem equivalents, the treatment of unbound tariffs and sectoral liberalization.
One area of particular concern to developing countries is coverage of the suggested level of bound commitments and limits on the level of unbound tariffs.
Both would have a In WTO this negotiation refers to products not included in agriculture, and therefore includes forestry and ﬁshing products as well.
It proposes a treatment for unbound tariffs, with parameters to be deﬁned, and possibilities for non-tariff barriers.
The decision excludes least developed countries from the formula and from the sectoral initiatives but requires that they increase their level of binding commitments and recommends that the remaining countries give them more free access within a year.
Some developing countries are also calling for more South-South liberalization in terms of tariff rates, bound commitments and the gap between bound and applied tariffs in those very countries, given the promising potential for trade between, for example, Asia and Latin America.
The deﬁnition of a tariff reduction formula and ﬂexibilities for developing countries, just as in agriculture, The bound tariff, according to the WTO deﬁnition, is a commitment by WTO members not to raise a customs levy above an agreed-upon level.
Once a country has bound a duty, it cannot increase it without compensating the countries affected.
The problem being debated, which involves primarily developing countries, is how to narrow the wide gap between the bound tariff and the tariff actually applied, with a view to lending greater certainty to market access conditions.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 64 are a major focus of the work, and considerable differences still exist between developed and developing countries.42 The non-linear formula – the “Swiss” one, in particular, as proposed by developed countries – would involve larger reductions by developing countries because they have a higher tariff level.
The debate seems to be aiming for a balance among different parameters of liberalization, such as the level of bound commitments and tariff reduction, implementation periods and exceptions.
The developed countries propose differential coefﬁcients for developing and developed countries, but these would mainly pertain to just some of the parameters mentioned.
This idea of limited ﬂexibility subject to conditions is not well received among developing countries, which also link progress in these negotiations to developments in the agricultural sector.
One of these proposals, made by Chile, Colombia and Mexico, considers a number of parameters in offering options to developing countries designed to address their sensitivities with a combination of measures that offset ﬂexibilities in one component with a greater commitment in one or more other components.
Another proposal, submitted by Argentina, Brazil and India, advances the idea that harmonization does not work among countries with different economic and industrial structures and diverse needs.
The proposals tabled thus far have come from developed countries in sectors of interest to them, but some developing countries may also propose export sectors of signiﬁcance to them, as they have done in the case of agriculture.
The frame of reference to date has been the Agreement on Information Technologies of 1997, from which several developing countries have distanced themselves, although it covers nearly 100% of trade.
Recently there has also been some debate among developing countries on proposals concerning the erosion of preferences in market access for non-agricultural products and vulnerability.
In its simplest expression, the linear formula is T1 = a x T0, where (1-a) is the amount of reduction.
The elements considered in the proposal advanced by Chile, Colombia and Mexico are the percentage of bound tariffs, a coefﬁcient or extent of tariff reductions measured with a non-linear formula, the exclusion of some products from the formula and the period of implementation.
In the declaration, APEC proposes to bind all tariffs and consider them in the tariff elimination formula, as well as adopting the critical mass approach for sectoral initiatives, which would be voluntary.
The ﬁnal trade creation and diversion effect resulting from preference erosion and real restrictions on preferences depends on the rules of origin that are required, the supply capacity of beneﬁciary countries and the conditions imposed by the countries granting the preferences (Laird, Fernández de Córdoba and Venzetti, 2004).
The tariff revenues for many countries in the region amount to between 3% and 10% of ﬁscal revenues.
In Central America and the Caribbean, the percentages are even higher (32% on average, some more than 50%); nevertheless, MERCOSUR has seen greater reductions – from 15% to 51% – according to different hypotheses, without considering other liberalization mechanisms (Fernández de Córdoba, Laird and Vanzetti, 2005b: table 11 and table A.5).
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 65 groups as they have in the negotiations on agricultural trade.
Because reforms in this sector are still in their initial stages, as in agriculture, negotiations were expected to resume around 2000 in order to carry the liberalization process forward.
On the other hand, the principal achievements on tasks undertaken after the Uruguay Round have been in sectors where developed countries have striven to make advances, such as ﬁnancial services and telecommunications.
This contrasts with the meagre progress made on further liberalizing the movement of persons (mode 4), which has been the principal demand of developing countries.
These countries recognize the role of this sector in determining the competitiveness of their economies and are seeking to increase their integration in these markets, garner due consideration for their development status (by building ﬂexibility into the architecture of the agreement and providing scope for national policies) and ensure the autonomy of their liberalization processes.
They also clearly understand, however, that this effort must be accompanied by domestic regulation and, judging by the offers made so far, they also stand in need of a great deal of technical assistance.
These same countries emphasize the fundamental contribution this sector makes to growth and development, which is why they are calling for an open attitude towards the interests of developing countries and an awareness of the support they may need for preparing their market access offers and requests.
Among them, it stated that the revised offers were to be presented by May 2005.
Although there are some offers from developed countries, no commitments have been made – except by the European Union – for further liberalization.
According to some developing countries, these offers have been tied to trade commitments in relation to FDI (mode 3), that is, the movement of persons only in the form of transfers within transnational corporations (ICTSD IISD, 2004).
Cross-cutting themes have included the evaluation of trade in services, disciplines for domestic regulation and credit for autonomous liberalization.
With contributions from OECD and UNCTAD, the evaluation of trade in The Latin American perspective on this process is presented in ECLAC, 2003, chapter VII.
Among the technical and political difﬁculties are the technical aspects of the formulation of requests and offers, the need for national coordination to deal with this process, the overwhelming number of requests, the deterrent effect of missed deadlines and the results of Cancún.
The developing countries felt that date was merely a suggestion (WTO, 2004c).
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 66 services has been considered, focusing in particular on obstacles, economic impacts and the relationship with the FDI process.
However, there is still the problem of the statistical data needed in order to prepare global evaluations.
In addition, although an agreement was forged in 2003 to recognize autonomous liberalization (as a product of unilateral liberalization processes), it does not appear to have had any inﬂuence on the offers, and in no case does it represent an automatic right to recognition.
Some developing countries advocate stepping up the work on rules and domestic regulation because these issues should be accompanied by or precede the consideration of market access in order to deﬁne the scenario in which liberalization will take place.
The discussion of standards – safeguards, government procurement and subsidies —is relevant because it is related to the policy sphere that is of interest to these countries.
Moreover, developing countries believe that the debate is changing from one of acknowledged ﬂexibility —a characteristic of the General Agreement on Trade in Services, which includes the positive-list approach— to a more demanding, benchmark-based approach which is being endorsed by developed countries (Strickner, 2005).
In fact, at the most recent sectoral meetings of WTO and the mini-ministerial meeting of May 2005 (OECD, 2005a), apart from the emphasis on the deadline for submitting revised offers, the participating ministers stressed the need to achieve a critical mass of signiﬁcant offers.
But it also makes some demands on their institutional capacities and can lead to the erection of less transparent barriers to market access (Short, 2001).
Furthermore, it should be taken into account that bilateral or regional agreements are also increasing the commitments being made in this regard.
Not only that, but some developing countries have asked to operationalize the consideration of special and differential treatment in the implementation of several of these instruments, which is more difﬁcult in this area than in that of market access, and even more so with respect to anti-dumping measures, as provided for in the agreements.
The July package conﬁrms only in general terms the objective of continuing the work being done in this area, and the negotiations on trade facilitation are added to that.
In this regard, the most recent cases on anti-dumping and on subsidies in key sectors —the Byrd Amendment and BoeingAirbus— have involved major players.
Developing countries and particularly those in this region have been heavily targeted by anti-dumping measures, especially in respect of commodities.
That is why they consider these negotiations very important in ensuring market access.
Nevertheless, some of these nations have also been habitual users of this trade defence instrument.
Several of them have advanced proposals to provide stricter disciplines to regulate research and implementation in order to prevent the protectionist use of anti-dumping duties.
The “Friends of Anti-dumping This task is complemented by some aspects of the functioning of the rules that were to be revised in the negotiations on implementation.
It should not be forgotten that liberalization of trade in services also has an important rules component.
This group covers the anti-dumping, subsidies and countervailing measures agreements as well as regional agreements.
This country has been at the centre of several controversial cases, such as the aforementioned Byrd Amendment (Davey, 2005).
The report and evaluation presented in early 2005 by the group indicates that the negotiating situation has not improved.
That, together with the failure to carry out the resolutions on dispute settlement, leaves a large volume of exports at risk (see Davey, 2005).
For this reason, the group has issued policy directives that should be considered in the negotiation.
These tasks are being carried out in conjunction with those being performed by WTO in the area of trade and the environment.
The Friends of Fish countries and the advocates of this item on the agenda propose, in contrast, a “broad approach”, with a negative list for these subsidies, which means that initially all such subsidies are banned, and each exception has to be negotiated (see, for example, WTO, 2004g).
In addition, there is a broad range of work on the implementation of the agreement and its relationship to the Convention on Biological Diversity, the protection of traditional knowledge and technology transfer.
The latter issue is of major interest to developing countries and is being addressed by a new group created speciﬁcally for that purpose at Doha.
The perception of developing countries is that the TRIPs Agreement has been one of the most difﬁcult of the Uruguay Round accords to implement (Finger and Schuler, 1999), and many of their demands are concentrated on making it more ﬂexible.
One proposal in this regard, which was approved at Doha, has to do with public health.
In this connection, Brazilʼs participation, along with that of India and other countries, has been most noteworthy.
The group, made up of approximately 20 countries, also includes nations such as the Republic of Korea, Canada and ﬁve Latin American countries (see table II.1).
Beginning in 2000, as established in the Uruguay Round, all non-agricultural subsidies became actionable, with the same happening for agricultural subsidies in 2003 as the “peace clause” expired.
In Doha an agreement was reached to extend the implementation of certain export subsidies in countries subject to speciﬁed criteria.
The Friends of Fish group is made up of about 10 countries, both developed and developing, including the United States and New Zealand, as well as four Latin American nations (see table II.1).
The clause in question is paragraph 6 of the Declaration, according to a decision by the General Council on 30 August 2003 (WTO, 2003c).
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 68 had been slated for June 2004, should be completed by the end of March 2005.
The negotiations on the establishment of a multilateral system of notiﬁcation and registration of geographical indications for wines and spirits have focused on evaluating the legal effects of registration and participation in the system.
Another question being considered is whether the proposals would alter the balance of rights and obligations in TRIPs.
In this regard, the developing countries are looking at making registration voluntary, and they are expressing concern about the costs of participating in the multilateral system, as has been the case with other TRIPs instruments.
The work on extending the protection of geographical indications to other products, which is of particular importance to the European Union, has been incorporated into the implementation tasks in accordance with the July package (see section B.4).
This matter, resisted by developing countries, is also included on a provisional basis in the work on agriculture. (c) Trade facilitation The aim of trade facilitation proposals is to streamline movement, customs procedures and the circulation of goods.
This area, along with other regulatory aspects included in the Singapore issues, had been left as a matter for potential negotiation within the Doha mandates.
The Singapore issues were proposed by developed countries, (chieﬂy the European Union), and the preparatory work dates back to 1997, when the ad hoc groups were created by mandate of the conference held in that country (see Izam, 2001).
Trade facilitation negotiations have been driven in recent years by the Colorado Group, which proposes clear, binding disciplines in this area.60 APEC has also played a key role in promoting trade facilitation efforts, has shared relevant experiences and places special emphasis on their importance for the competitiveness of SMEs.
Trade facilitation was the only one of the Singapore issues that developing countries were willing to incorporate into the negotiations, although they did attempt to exclude it from the single undertaking and from the dispute settlement system.
The matter has sparked interest in these countries because they recognize its potential for contributing to their competitiveness,61 but at the same time they are concerned about the commitments it may entail and the need for resources and technical assistance to implement them.
The July package expresses many of the concerns of developing countries and conﬁrms the Doha guidelines for making sure that negotiations aim at clarifying and improving aspects related to the circulation of goods.
This can be seen in annex D of the decision,62 which recommends that the following articles of the 1994 GATT be examined: V: freedom of transit; VIII: fees and formalities connected with imports and exports; and X: publication and enforcement of trade regulations.
The decision indicates that negotiations should establish provisions for effective cooperation among the relevant authorities.
This group debated the objectives of the agreement, the provisions for special and differential treatment, the role to be played by international organizations, cooperation among customs agencies, the cost of implementation for developing countries, technical cooperation requirements and consideration of landlocked countries, which countries such as Bolivia and Paraguay consider to be a very important matter.
As the negotiations have proceeded, the contrast between developed and developing countriesʼ views regarding the binding nature of trade facilitation commitments and the treatment and conditionality of available resources has become ever more apparent.
Estimates of the costs of border procedures range from 2% to 15% of the value of goods traded (OECD, 2003).
A note states that the ﬁnal format has not yet been determined, but may be non-binding (UNCTAD, 2004b, p. 22).
New approaches to cooperation emerge here, with cooperation being viewed as an integral part of the agreements and one that is linked to countriesʼ development strategies.
The Hemispheric Cooperation Programme (HCP) of the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) serves as a frame of reference in this regard.
More limited agreements, such as the Economic Association Agreements of the European Union and Asian countries, also address cooperation in this manner (Aoki, 2004).
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 69 Cross-cutting and institutional aspects The topics addressed in this section form part of the negotiating agenda of the Doha Round and have a bearing on the range of agreements forged in the framework of WTO.
They also reﬂect longer-term challenges facing the multilateral system, such as the applicability of the most favoured nation principle, the incorporation of the development dimension, and the governance of the system (Sutherland et al, 2004).
Concerns over asymmetries in the development levels of the multilateral systemʼs members led to two negotiation tasks being established at Doha: the implementation of the Uruguay Round agreements and special and differential treatment.
The work on development issues has progressed very little since Cancún, since the agenda has focused instead on agriculture, non-agricultural market access, the Singapore issues and cotton.
The July package consolidated the different lines of work on development issues and set out a number of principles and parameters for the process.
These provisions are intended mainly to: increase opportunities for trade, safeguard the interests of developing countries and ensure the ﬂexibility and time horizons allowed to these countries for meeting commitments (see ECLAC, 2004a, chapter V).
By means of a decision adopted at Doha on implementation questions and concerns, almost 40 tasks were established on 12 topics from different agreements, mostly relating to the speciﬁc traits of developing countries (WTO, 2001b, ECLAC, 2003, chapter VII).
A group of 22 countries (mainly from the Latin American and Caribbean countries) recently put forward a proposal in the context of the work on small economies, based on an approach that is contrary to the formation of new categories of members.
The proponents hope that speciﬁc decisions will be taken on their propositions, as well as on the treatment of certain implementation issues and special and differential treatment, at the Sixth Ministerial Conference (WTO, 2005h).
The Committee on Trade and Development has put forward some proposals for expediting the discussions (WTO, 2005i).
Only 25% of these come to be examined by WTO panels, which attests to the importance of the prior steps for arriving at mutually agreed solutions.
The Latin American and Caribbean countries have also made intensive use of the system, especially the larger and more diversiﬁed exporters (Brazil and Mexico), and have made proposals on the negotiations now underway (see ECLAC, 2003, chapter VIII).
Thus far, the region ﬁgures in 83 of the 357 complaints, mainly in cases on anti-dumping and subsidies, licences and safeguards, 31 of which have been intraregional.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 70 The Understanding sets out the procedures for a multilateral and orderly approach to dispute settlement.
There are four phases to dispute settlement: consultations, the panel process, the appeal and the surveillance of implementation.
The Uruguay Round agreements provided for the Understanding to be reviewed by 1999 in order to improve its operation and many proposals have been submitted thus far.
These include a review of the stages in order to expedite procedures, consideration of special and differential treatment in the process, the reconﬁgurations of groups and special panels, the sequencing of procedures when rulings are not complied with and external transparency or public access to proceedings (WTO, 2003b).
The dispute settlement negotiations were the only part of the Doha agenda to be left outside the single undertaking, with a view to arriving at decisions in advance of the rest of the negotiations, originally by May 2003.
The negotiations have been delayed over the last two years, however, despite recent cases which have had a large impact on certain products and countries.
This has heightened the interest of all the countries, particularly the developing nations, since, in addition to the costs involved in becoming party to a complaint, they have been adversely affected by delays in the implementation of decisions.
The system has operated relatively well, but there are problem areas with certain agreements and delays in settling cases and implementing rulings, especially on the part of the developed countries (Davey, 2005).69 The agreements generating most problems include subsidies, sanitary standards and anti-dumping, with several such disputes arising in the agricultural sector.
Another issue is that rulings on disputes over safeguards have sometimes been implemented only at the ﬁnal stages of the process, which enables them to fulﬁl their purpose of protectionism before they are eliminated.
Some of the more recent decisions affecting emblematic developed country policies (such as agricultural subsidies on sugar in the European Union and on cotton in the United States) have rekindled interest in negotiating.
These rules are intended to ensure that regional agreements promote trade among the contracting parties while minimizing discrimination against third countries.
Hence, such agreements must encompass the “essential points” of trade —an idea that is not well deﬁned and therefore open to debate.
The multilateral system also promotes the transparent operation of agreements and has established an oversight mechanism (the Committee on Regional Trade Agreements), which has, however, encountered certain difﬁculties in its work.
The importance of this topic, given the proliferation of regional agreements in the last few years, is evident from the broad range of recent literature devoted to the subject (see ﬁgure II.2).70 The report prepared for WTO examines the implications of agreements as exceptions to the most-favoured nation principle (Sutherland et al, 2004, chapter II).
Similarly to the points made in relation to dispute settlement, regional agreements appear to be a response to institutional difﬁculties in the multilateral system —such as slow and cumbersome decision-making— which could, ultimately, lead to the fragmentation of the system.
For developing countries, the conclusion of regional agreements has often been a way to deal with the asymmetries of the multilateral system and, thus, a means of acting on their development concerns.
The Doha Round encompasses negotiations aimed at clarifying and improving disciplines and procedures applying to regional trade agreements, taking into account the developmental aspects of such agreements.
This task was part of the mandate of the Negotiating Group on Rules and was conﬁrmed in the framework of the July package.
The process is particularly complex, because of the mounting number of agreements signed or being negotiated and the breadth of the topics involved.
The rules incorporated into these agreements, especially in relation to behind-the-border policies, make it more difﬁcult to evaluate the effects on third parties.
Particular challenges arise in connection with Almost 41% of the cases analysed in Davey (2005) had been delayed by over four months; of these, half are still in process.
These procedures have lasted 32 months, which is eight months longer than the expected average.
The negotiations take place under a two-pronged approach: procedural and transparency issues and systemic issues or substantive disciplines.
Up to this point, many proposals have been submitted on less contentious issues, aimed at increasing transparency, refining reporting requirements and revitalizing the operation of the Regional Trade Agreements Committee.71 These elements also reﬂect a greater interest in the surveillance of regional agreements.
Systemic issues and the coverage of regional agreements, as well as the developmental dimension, have been addressed only as secondary matters.72 (d) Trade and the environment At the end of the Uruguay Round, WTO began formal work on the links between trade and the environment, establishing an ad hoc body known as the Committee on Trade and Environment.
This Committee embarked on a wide-ranging debate which was, in some ways, divided along North-South lines.
The developing countries were reluctant to incorporate the issue into the negotiations, since they feared that a protectionist intent underlay the developed countriesʼ proposals (albeit with a variety of priorities) linking the environmental dimension to trade.
It was not until Doha that a mandate to negotiate was reached, and this was aimed basically at improving coordination between WTO and the bodies associated with environmental agreements and among their respective rules, as well as the liberalization of environmental goods and services.
There was also a commitment to continue working on the environmental dimension of market access and intellectual property, as well as eco-labelling for environmental purposes.
The work on ecological goods and services has moved ahead in a satisfactory manner and has certainly made these concepts more tangible, even though lists of environmental goods are still being reviewed and ways to identify these goods continue to be debated.
There is also support for the idea of starting similar negotiations on how environmental goods could be treated in the framework of non-agricultural market access, and on how environmental services would relate to the General Agreement on Trade in Services.
The proposals refer to WTO notiﬁcation procedures, the capacity of developing countries to meet reporting requirements and the review of south-south agreements, among other issues.
Hence the need to deﬁne what is meant by “substantially all the trade” (coverage of the agreement) and deadlines for tariff reduction, and to evaluate the restrictive and discriminatory component of certain policies, such as safeguards, anti-dumping, and so forth.
As discussed in the ﬁrst part of this chapter, the Doha Round has raised expectations that the industrialized countries will make certain concessions, particularly in agriculture.
This poses certain difﬁculties for the global negotiation process, although the direction taken by recent trade dispute cases may constitute a reform impetus.
The slow progress of the talks can encourage litigation of this sort, although different parties have clearly expressed a preference for negotiations.
Although the issues now being negotiated (including subsidies) are core topics, a broader perspective is needed to evaluate the potential outcomes of the process.
This is because, ﬁrst, the issues being negotiated are interdependent (as progress on agriculture is linked to non-agricultural market access, for example) and, second, some general instruments, such as trade contingency measures and other rules, also contribute to market distortions in the agricultural sector.
The July 2004 package confirmed the agenda established at Doha, arriving at conclusions that had been expected in Cancún in 2003.
The package made a valuable contribution in the sphere of agriculture, in particular, and it re-established the negotiating climate and process interrupted in Cancún, thus safeguarding the credibility of WTO. • It gives less guidance on development issues, however.
Questions also remain over a number of programmes of work, particularly the Singapore issues that will not be negotiated, and a number of questions of concern for developing countries.
This was demonstrated by the conversion of speciﬁc to ad valorem tariffs.
As well, instruments that have been provided to give both developed and developing countries more ﬂexibility also have the effect of making the negotiations more complex. • Trade facilitation is a topic that has been brought into the negotiations on trade rules, but little progress has been made towards speciﬁc rules on anti-dumping and subsidies.
More speciﬁc guidelines or signals are expected in relation to the Dispute Settlement Body, which is not part of the single undertaking, although in fact the system operates very well and could help to carry the negotiations forward.
Although no further guidelines have been reached for the work on regional trade agreements, as the pace of this work picks up further, it may help to spur the talks on other topics.
The urgency of the talks was pushed home at all these meetings, especially at the end of April, when the Director-General of WTO weighed the risk of the talks reaching a crisis point.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 73 however, continued to sow doubt over the larger actorsʼ lack of signals on, precisely, the pivotal issue of the negotiating process, namely agriculture, which dictates the pace of progress on other topics.
Around the time of Cancún the conﬁguration of the various groupings tended to reﬂect the positions of the developing countries, with the G-20 prominent among them.74 After that conference, however, new alliances have formed that cut across the pre-existing ones.
Such clusters involve a handful of WTO members, most of which are large economies from the developed and developing worlds that have differing positions on a given issue (such as agriculture).75 This process has also been played out in other forums of discussion and cooperation that have areas in common with WTO.
Such a shift would increase the possibilities of concluding the Doha Round in 2006.
Thus far in 2005, the forums mentioned have also made important contributions to unfettering the talks and furthering key questions relating to agriculture and non-agricultural market access.
Since world economic growth has been slower and signs of protectionism have appeared in the large economies (as witnessed by a number of recent disputes) conditions have become more complex for the accomplishment of the tasks still outstanding before the Sixth Ministerial Conference.
Those conditions also Up until Doha, the groups revolved around shared thematic interests –the Cairns Group, the Friends of Anti-dumping, the G-10, among others– which appeared to blur the north-south categorization.
These groups coexist with new organizations and their role varies in importance according to the context (see table II.1 and GAO, 2005, Appendix IV.
The Non-Group of Five (NG-5) could be described as such a conﬁguration, along with the developing countries which are making proposals on non-agricultural market access.
At UNCTAD XI, the developing countries relaunched the Global System of Trade Preferences in order to deepen their trade, beginning a third round of negotiation in the context of expanding south-south trade.
The inﬂuence of APEC comes from having large economies and from the fact that its work has systematically concentrated on issues that are essential to the multilateral debate.
The Doha Round was an important working axis for the June 2005 meeting of APEC.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 74 hinge on the leadership and cooperation exercised by such economies, particularly the European Union and the United States, whose main trade authorities have changed since the July package was agreed (GAO, 2005).
Since Cancún, in parallel with their activities in the multilateral system, the European Union, Japan and the United States have stepped up their negotiations and agreements with groups or countries from several regions, including Latin America.
In addition, the developed countries use such agreements to deepen disciplines that evolve more slowly in the multilateral framework (such as the Singapore issues and intellectual property), and whose contribution to development objectives is not so clear-cut for the developing countries.
The clearest trend within the groups that form around negotiating interests is the growing involvement of the developing countries, which represent more than 100 of the existing 148 members of WTO, and the more intense coordination of their visions and proposals.
They played a signiﬁcant role at Cancún and their proposals were reﬂected in the outcomes, especially in the course taken by the Singapore issues and the mounting attention given to the systemʼs operation and representation of interests.
This stood in contrast to the participation of the developing countries at the Uruguay Round, where they had tended to merely react to the proposals of the developed countries.
Clearly, the developing countries, and particularly the Latin American and Caribbean region, have built up negotiating experience in the last decade and their more active role reﬂects their desire to seize the opportunities that arise while minimizing the adjustment costs involved.
Structural and policy-based differences exist, however, which make it difﬁcult to arrive at a consensus position on all the issues under consideration.
This hinders efforts to formulate a “regional” proposal for Doha, on the one hand, and, on the other, encourages the formation of shifting alliances among countries of the region.
The challenge here is to build upon those areas where the countriesʼ views do converge while providing scope for subtly differing stances on the rest without undercutting the cohesiveness of the countriesʼ positions on the main issues, especially agriculture and special and differential treatment.
In addition, the outcomes of recent high-proﬁle disputes, in which these countries have played a major role, are further conﬁrmation of their inﬂuence on the evolution of the multilateral system.
Lastly, under these circumstances, it is all the more important to devise strategies for positioning the countries within the development process.
In this connection, the countries of the region are increasingly aware of the need to complement trade agreements with domestic policies (forming what has come to be known as the “domestic agenda”) in such areas as competitiveness, infrastructure, technological innovation and the modernization of small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
The region played an important role in the debate on TRIPs and public health, for example.
The groups in which those countries participate, particularly the G-20 and the G-33, have also fostered a debate among themselves and with other developing countries –in what has become known as the bottom-up approach– seeking to make the process more inclusive and transparent, as advocated in the G-20ʼs March declaration.
Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 75 Bibliography Abraham, Gloria (2005), “Evolución de las negociaciones sobre agricultura en la OMC: de la Agenda de Doha hasta el acuerdo de 31 de julio de 2004”, document presented at the Regional Meeting on Relevant Issues for Latin America and the Caribbean in Trade.
Global trade talks back on track, but considerable work needed to fulfill ambitious objectives”, Report to the Chairman, Committee on Finance, U.S.
Kutas (2004), “Agricultural liberalization in multilateral and regional negotiations”, Agricultural Trade Liberalization.
Khor, Martín (2004), “Países en desarrollo pierden terreno en “paquete de julio”, Revista del Sur, No. 157-158, November-December.
Lamy, Pascal (2004), “The emergence of collective preferences in international trade: implications for regulating globalization”, unpublished.
Highlights. (2003), “Trade facilitation: the beneﬁt of simpler more transparent border procedures”, Policy Brief.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development) (2004b), “Multilateralism and regionalism: the new interface.
Elements of the obligation to disclose evidence of beneﬁt-sharing under the relevant national regime” (IP/C/W/442), 18 March. (2005b), “Negotiating group on market access.
Squaring the circle of ambition plus ﬂexibility: providing options for developing countries.
Communication from Chile, Colombia and Mexico” (TN/MA/W/50), 24 February. (2005c), “Market access for non-agricultural products.
Treatment of non-reciprocal preferences for Africa” (TN/ MA/W/49), 21 February. (2005e), “Market access for non-agricultural products.
An approach to framing responses to the trade-related problems of small economies” (WT/COMTD/SE/W/13. (2005i), “Committee on Trade and Development.
Calculation of ad valorem equivalents (AVEs): data Pane_Cap_II_Eng.indd 78 requirements and availability.
Cancun briefing notes”, Cancun, 9 September. (2003c), “Implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and public health.
A critical biennium for regional integration Regional integration is at a crossroads.
The Doha Round is experiencing serious difﬁculties, and more and more bilateral trade agreements are being negotiated at the same time with partners both inside and outside the region, making it necessary to reinforce consistency among trade policies at different levels: multilateral, hemispheric, subregional, bilateral and unilateral.
The multiplicity of levels at which negotiations are taking place and the large number of decisions that must be adopted at those different levels require a clear internal consensus regarding not only the priorities for establishing an international presence, but also the consistency that must be maintained among the various public policies that come into play in the international sphere.
These challenges exist, albeit with different shades and variations, in the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR), the Andean Community, the Central American Common Market Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 79 (CACM) and the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), although greater institutional progress has been made in the latter two.
MERCOSUR-European Union talks could not be completed in 2004 as planned, and apparently the political momentum will not be regained until after the Doha Round.
MERCOSUR has expressed interest in launching free trade talks in 2005 with CARICOM, Mexico and Morocco, respectively, as well as partial trade agreements with India and with the Southern African Customs Union (SACU).
In addition, free trade negotiations between the Andean Community and MERCOSUR have concluded, and the agreement is already in effect.
In early July 2005, the MERCOSUR countries became associate members of the Andean Community, and Chile should gain that status within the next few months.
Furthermore, CARICOM has launched trade negotiations with Canada and with the European Union, and as indicated, CARICOM expects to begin talks with MERCOSUR.
It is clear, then, that there is a broad agenda for international negotiations (see table III.1) that also calls for the region to participate actively in the multilateral scenario of the Doha Round.
Such a demanding agenda can sometimes distract attention from the efforts necessary to update and streamline the subregionʼs own integration schemes, since the problems seen there cannot be overcome by signing on to additional agreements outside the community.
The agreements between the United States and Central America and the Dominican Republic, on the one hand, and between it and Andean Community-3, on the other hand, pose an additional challenge to the respective integration schemes.
Indeed, on several important issues, commitments of greater scope and impact than those included in the integration schemes are under consideration for these accords.
This is a major opportunity and challenge for these schemes, since the approach to this asymmetry of commitments (more demanding schemes with northern partners and less demanding ones within the subregion) is dictated by the agenda.
This “pulling” opens up the possibility for a rapid adjustment of integration regulations to avoid the risk of being overtaken by events.
In a number of areas, this can become quite complex, and a great deal of pragmatism is required to adjust to the new reality, making the appropriate changes in integration regulations and institutions.
In this connection, it is important to preserve the central idea of an expanded market with free movement of goods and factors, serious progress towards macroeconomic coordination, effectively binding dispute resolution mechanisms, adequate handling of asymmetries, management of structural funds so as to yield balanced beneﬁts, and bold initiatives in energy and infrastructure.
From this perspective, integration processes are still clearly a better option than free trade agreements.
It is a matter of persuading the economic and political players to see it this way, and that will not happen without a decisive political impetus, which in turn requires taking risks and ﬁghting domestic interests that advocate protectionism.
To be sure, it is even more imperative that this type of internal consensus be built —and leadership is even more critical— in the larger economies of the region.
If this does not happen, it will be quite difﬁcult for subregional integration to adapt quickly to current and future challenges.
The “energy ring” initiative in the Southern Cone is a clear example of the path that must be taken, making bold moves that involve a high degree of coordination and consistency among the policies of the Member States.
The challenge is considerable, and the priority that Governments have thus far given to the matter, plus the interest shown by foreign investors and multilateral ﬁnancing organizations, allow some cautious optimism about the initiativeʼs future.
If it becomes a reality, given its scope, it will become a turning point for regional integration and will pave the way for new measures to be adopted to reinforce economic and commercial complementarity in South American economies.
Legal security does not mean that there are no disputes, merely that there are institutions in place where they can be litigated.
The experience of countries in the region that have made accusations of dumping or safeguards in the United States or the European Union shows that the agreements make available a privileged bilateral forum for addressing such differences, and they allow for successful defences, as seen in the recent case of the Chilean salmon safeguards in the European Union.
Intraregional exports rose at higher rates than total exports, although they still fell short of the historic record attained in 1997 (see ﬁgure III.1 and table III.2).
This trend was seen in all subregions, with more vigorous growth seen in the countries of Andean Community and MERCOSUR (58.5% and 36.2%, respectively) than in those of CACM and CARICOM.
While in Latin America and the Caribbean (LAC) this ﬁgure amounts to 17% of exports, in Asia it is just over a third of them, and it is nearly two-thirds in the European Union.
There is a slowly rising trend in Asia, but in our region this trade is lower than it was a decade ago, which shows that intraregional trade has not Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 82 managed to become an engine of growth.
The CARICOM and CACM ﬁgures are much higher than the averages recorded in MERCOSUR and the Andean Community.
The latter is the furthest behind in terms of the weight of its intraregional trade, as only 10% of its exports go to the Community market; Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela report even lower amounts (see tables III.2 and III.6).
Trade with the United States is more significant than intra-group trade in every case, and the same is true with respect to the European Union in every case except CACM.
One prominent feature of this trade is the greater propensity to export manufactured goods within the subregions (see table III.4).
This is particularly important in view of the fact that regional integration offers an attractive possibility to expand markets, scales of production, and the growth of higher quality, higher value-added exports, especially of knowledge-intensive goods (Kuwayama and Durán, 2003).
These markets can also provide an excellent opportunity to learn and gain experience in trade, as well as a launching pad to reach extraregional markets.
Such export diversiﬁcation, which makes it possible to export goods with a higher value added to the subregions, is especially important for the Andean Community and CARICOM.
Given the low coefﬁcients of intraregional trade, however, it is evident that this potential is far from being realized.
In the past, CACM was always the subregional area engaging in the most trade within its integration scheme.
Recently CARICOM has assumed that position, although that is explained primarily by Trinidad and Tobagoʼs trade.
If that trade were excluded for purposes of calculation, the subregional trade volume would fall dramatically.
Since 2000 intraregional trade has been recovering in CACM, but it is still below the levels reported in the early 1980s and 1990s.
In the Andean Community, intra-group trade stayed below 5% of the total in the 1980s, grew steadily to nearly 15% of the total in 1998, and then fell to about 10%.
In MERCOSUR, the debt crisis drove the intra-group trade ﬁgure down to 5% of the total, and then it gradually rose to 25% in 1998.
It fell again to 10% in 2002, and after that year a modest recovery began, but that merely leaves the intra-group trade coefﬁcient at about the same level it had attained 25 years ago (see ﬁgures III.2 and III.3).
Moreover, both the high percentage of intra-bloc trade in the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the marked vigour seen in the last 10 years are noteworthy.
In the case of the Central American Common Market (CACM), the total trade data include maquila and free-zone trade. a Annual average.
Preliminary ﬁgures. b Refers to the coefﬁcient of manufactured goods exports within total exports to different areas. c Does not include exports from the maquila and free zone sector.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 85 (c) Intensity of intraregional trade lower in South America (b) Economies also less open With the exception of a brief period in the mid-1980s, LAC has been and continues to be the least open of the developing regions of the world.
For a decade and a half (1980-1995), the openness of the regionʼs economies remained practically stagnant at 15% of GDP.
Only in the current decade has the region opened up trade to 20%, and more recently, 25% of GDP.
Asia took off in the late 1990s with respect to LAC, from a similar level of openness to the current 35% of GDP, and trade continues to become increasingly open in that region.
Africa had been the most open of all the developing regions, but since the middle of this decade Asia has surpassed them all (see ﬁgures III.4 and III.5).
Within the region, MERCOSUR is the integration scheme with the lowest openness coefﬁcient, although that indicator has been rising since the late 1990s.
The Andean Community is the subregional scheme with the most openness, reporting a level similar to that of CACM.
The current openness coefﬁcients of the Andean Community, CARICOM and CACM are less than they were in the early 1980s.
An examination of intraregional trade matrices reveals that CACM has consistently more intensive intra-bloc trade than any other subregional integration scheme, and that El Salvador is more committed than any other country to this trade, with 55% of its exports oriented towards the subregion.
At ﬁrst, it seems reasonable to expect relatively smaller economies to be the most oriented towards intra-bloc trade within each integration scheme.
That is not so clear, however, since the next ﬁve countries with the most trade of this sort after El Salvador are Barbados, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Paraguay and Uruguay, which are not necessarily the smallest economies in the region.
If we extend the list to the 10 top economies with these characteristics, we see Argentina and Colombia, which orient nearly 20% of their exports to the subregional scheme, very close to Boliviaʼs 23%.
In other words, the size of the economy should be just one of the variables examined when looking at intra-bloc trade relations.
Indeed, the larger scale of big economies such as Brazil in MERCOSUR, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela in the Andean Community, and Trinidad and Tobago in CARICOM, as well as the greater specialization in natural resources of the members of the subregional schemes, make the intraregional trade coefﬁcient lower.
In contrast, in other regions such as the European Union, intraregional trade coefﬁcients are higher because of greater homogeneity, economic size, and a greater incidence of intra-industrial trade in patterns of production.
The weight of trade within the subregion is slight, as less than 10% of exports are oriented towards MERCOSUR, but these exports still account for half of the groupʼs exports.
At the other extreme are Paraguay and Uruguay, where between one-fourth and one-third of exports are sent to MERCOSUR, and together they represent less than 10% of that blocʼs exports (see table III.5).
In the Andean Community, the intra-group trade coefﬁcient within total exports is 10%, after two years of consecutive reductions.
The largest increase in this indicator was seen in Colombia, which in turn appears to be the country with the greatest export penetration in the subregion.
Indeed, 41% of exports within the Andean Community correspond to Colombia, while that country sends only one-ﬁfth of its total exports to that market.
Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela are not very dependent on the the Andean Community market, whereas Bolivia sends nearly one-fourth of its exports there (see table III.6).
With the exception of Costa Rica, it receives between 20% and 56% of its member countriesʼ exports.
This stands in contrast to the Andean Community, for example, where three out of five members send less than 12% of their exports to the subregional market (see table III.7).
In CARICOM, Trinidad and Tobago continues to dominate exports in the subregion (see table III.8), further spurred by the rise in petroleum prices.
Setting aside Trinidad and Tobago, it is apparent that intraregional trade has lost importance over the last two decades.
Nor are there signs of an upsurge in intraregional trade in services, despite the evident expansion of ﬁnancial and insurance services in Trinidad.
A number of different factors hinder the expansion of intraregional trade, particularly in the areas of energy and transport.
For example, in March 2005 the industrial cost of a kWh was US$ 0.0001 in Trinidad and Tobago, while on the smaller islands, especially Saint Vincent, the cost was US$ 0.0036, and accounted for as much as 8% of total sales in the sector.
The Trade and Investment Development Corporation (TIDCO) of Trinidad and Tobago estimates that the cost of transporting a 20- to 40-foot container between Trinidad and Barbados is higher than the cost to transport it between Trinidad and London.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 89 reinforcing the argument advanced by the economies of the Caribbean that they need special treatment that takes into account these unique characteristics.
Among the countries of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), imports to the subregion are especially signiﬁcant for Canada and Mexico, whose exports are highly concentrated on the United States.
The latter country, in turn, also sends a major share of its exports to Canada and Mexico, which are its main trading partners (see table III.9).
The obvious increase in the weight of trade has translated into a mutual interest among the three countries in exploring the possibility of moving towards a single market (see section C in this chapter).
Among the most decisive factors are probably the weakness of the institutional framework within which integration efforts are taking place, including dispute resolution mechanisms, and the absence of mechanisms for macroeconomic coordination that would help prevent major macroeconomic shocks.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 90 In this regard, the lack of macroeconomic coordination adds a new element of vulnerability to intraregional trade, making it markedly pro-cyclical.
This means not only that trade shrinks when economic activity ﬂags, but also that production becomes more sensitive.
The reason for the latter is that these macroeconomic crises, when accompanied by devaluations, can cause drastic changes in competitiveness vis-à-vis partners within the community, and such changes are more signiﬁcant than the size of the tariffs that have been negotiated or the gains in competitiveness derived from any reasonable increase in productivity.
Therefore, these crises activate potential conflicts between partners just when the domestic market is depressed.
If these cycles are also recurrent, it is foreseeable that integration efforts will lose credibility in the eyes of economic actors, and therefore it will be increasingly difﬁcult to expect major investment initiatives involving integration schemes.
The principal issue to address in subregional integration schemes is legal security for the decisions of exporters, importers and investors.
This means that steady progress must be made on incorporating community decisions into domestic legislation and on the enforcement of these determinations.
Moreover, from now on only realistic community decisions should be approved, that is, ones that can actually be incorporated into domestic legislation.
In addition, dispute resolution mechanisms the form of lists of exceptions, special trade regimes including partial or total tariff exemptions, specific duties, and trade defence practices) and outside schemes (through special regimes such as capital goods, or though preferential trade agreements with third countries).
All of this makes it very difﬁcult for economic actors to know the real level of protection that is in place.
Furthermore, the application of sometimes excessive trade defence practices (safeguards, antidumping and compensatory duties) for exports within the communities poses serious obstacles to free circulation within blocs.
Considering the centrality of the issue, this chapter includes a special study on some of them and on the way these trade differences are dealt with in each integration scheme (see section E: Dispute resolution and incorporation of common regulations).
Harmonizing disciplines Once compliance with the agreed-upon regulations has been achieved, the natural next step is to expand the universe of partners committed to compliance.
In that regard, one underestimated factor in regional competitiveness is the gradual harmonization of the various rules and disciplines contemplated in the various subregional integration schemes.
It is well known that the multiplicity of rules of origin and their extreme complexity can hinder Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 91 must be increasingly binding, which demands a serious political commitment on the part of member countries —Governments and legislatures alike— in order to abide by the rulings of the bodies that mediate trade disputes between community partners.
Thus, macroeconomic coordination and the institutional framework of integration are highly complementary, since advances in each of these areas have a favourable impact on the other, prompting virtuous circles of behaviour among agents that enhance their practical commitment to integration.
In contrast, weak institutions and a lack of macroeconomic coordination guarantee that integration will continue to move at a snailʼs pace, failing to meet the competitiveness and innovation challenges posed by todayʼs world.
Strengthening institutions The region urgently needs to address the shortcomings of its integration institutions.
The ﬁrst priority is to enforce agreements that were signed years ago.
This means that customs unions must function as such; that agreed-upon preferences must be honoured; that progress must be made towards drafting common regulations; and fundamentally, that dispute resolution mechanisms must be strengthened.
There is no doubt that greater legal security must be provided for all decisions made by economic agents involved in the subregional integration schemes.
Customs unions are not yet fully operating —especially in the cases of MERCOSUR, the Andean Community and CARICOM, and to a lesser extent in CACM— so in practice these are really “imperfect” customs unions.
There are still “perforations” in the common external tariff (CET), both within schemes (in the business sector by adding administrative and transaction costs that distort economic decisions.
In our opinion, this is a good idea that should be expanded to as many goods as possible and to the greatest possible number of agreements.
Similarly, if MERCOSUR and the Andean Community are already joined by a trade agreement, and each Member State has an agreement with Chile, then a great effort should be made to regionalize the rules of origin, making them multilateral for all of the countries involved; and this would give a considerable boost to intraregional trade and investment decisions.
Moreover, the countries in the region that have trade agreements with the United States and that also have agreements among themselves could also move towards making their rules of origin multilateral.
Such a move clearly creates more trade and pushes towards the building blocks of liberalization, reinforcing the compatibility of free trade agreements with multilateral regulations.
The regionalization of rules of origin and the mutual recognition of technical, sanitary and phytosanitary regulations would send a strong signal of substantial progress towards the formation of a uniﬁed market, not only stimulating domestic investment but also enhancing the attractiveness of the region for foreign investment.
It would also create special opportunities for local producers, encourage businesses in the subregions to form associations and, above all, contribute to the development of border areas.
These processes would facilitate the learning that businesses must undergo, forging strategic alliances to maintain and reinforce competitiveness.
For example, Central American companies should not be content with just certifying full compliance with the norms and standards required by the market in the United States.
They should go further, forming production, trade and technology alliances that will allow them to improve their competitive presence even more on that market, and in Mexico and Canada as well.
In that process, it is reasonable to expect that the competitive advantages thus developed will allow them to explore other markets too.
Along with this gradual competitive maturation, CACM itself should in turn continue to adjust, modernize and make its new regulations multilateral.
Macroeconomic coordination It is not difficult to find a few recent examples to illustrate the adverse consequences that a lack of macroeconomic coordination can have for the prospects of integration processes.
Brazilʼs abandonment of its Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 92 If the principal economic actors believe that one of the main weaknesses of integration schemes is legal uncertainty surrounding the decisions made by exporters, importers and investors, it is likely that, in this regard, the most proﬁtable investment is an investment in credibility.
Hence the attraction of efforts to unify dispute resolution systems in all of the subregional schemes as a whole —the Andean Community, MERCOSUR, CACM and CARICOM— and all of the economic complementarity agreements and bilateral trade accords between all the countries that make up any of these schemes plus Chile and Mexico, which belong to none.
Moving towards a single dispute resolution system, making it more binding and learning from the best practices of each subregional entity, would send another powerful signal that would jump start the engines of growth as well as strengthening investment and trade.
If the South American Community of Nations were to give priority to these issues —harmonization of rules of origin and of sanitary, phytosanitary and technical regulations, along with the unification of dispute resolution systems— they would ﬁll a critical need and make a substantial contribution to the creation of growth opportunities.
If progress were made in developing a regional dispute resolution system, it would be appropriate to reproduce as effectively as possible the regulations and procedures of the World Trade Organization (WTO) in a kind of regional decentralization of that multilateral body.
This, in turn, would save all the foreign exchange outlays that are now being made to pursue subsequent disputes in the WTO or to defend trade in the United States and the European Union.
Macroeconomic imbalances of this magnitude can fracture subregional commitments, even against the political will of Governments, since they unleash processes that accentuate latent asymmetries in integration or that cause abrupt movements in the ﬂows of trade, aggravating the vulnerability to competition of sectors that may be very sensitive politically.
One of the principal challenges, then, is coordination —and later convergence— in deﬁning and carrying out currency, monetary and ﬁscal policies.
A major convergence of these policies would result in increased ﬂows of trade at the subregional level, reducing volatility and bilateral imbalances and thereby boosting demand and spurring an interest in improving the coordination and consolidation of associated institutions.2 The essence of the discussion lies in whether macroeconomic coordination is necessary as a complement to trade integration.
The answer is not entirely obvious during the current phases of subregional integration, although in the medium and long terms it is unequivocally in the afﬁrmative.
The idea is to coordinate both ﬁscal and monetary policies by strengthening national ﬁscal, monetary and regulatory institutions.
In addition, quantiﬁable goals are proposed with respect to ﬁscal balances, inﬂation, current account deﬁcit, public debt and other indicators, as well as mechanisms to offset the effects of abrupt changes in trade ﬂows due to external disturbances.
All of this would be accompanied by a system of incentives (Machinea, 2004; Agosín, 2005) to encourage compliance with the agreed-upon coordination with a view to stimulating demand through coordination.
The closest and most successful experience of this sort can be seen in the European process, which encompassed nearly 50 years of uninterrupted consolidation.
This third pillar represents an irreplaceable core of pragmatism and political will for advancing the process.
That was the basis for the Maastricht criteria in 1992, when the convergence targets for the European Monetary Union were consolidated, covering 12 of the Member States by January 2002.
The absence of these three factors in particular, especially the tremendous variability of exchange rates and the great volatility of ﬁnancial ﬂows, has made true convergence impossible in our integration schemes (with respect to MERCOSUR, see Fanelli, 2004).
The lack of macroeconomic coordination in the region should be understood as the result of the absence of incentives for complementarity and interdependence among the members of a subregional entity and for macroeconomic coordination itself.
Lacking a similar incentive in our region, it is reasonable to postulate that multilateral organizations such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB), or subregional This is not a minor issue, as negative trade balances promote protectionist behaviours in the search for alternative trade defence mechanisms, a less likely scenario in balanced trade environments.
As a counterpart, countries would voluntarily agree to meet certain macroeconomic and ﬁscal targets.
At present, the countries of MERCOSUR have achieved convergence with respect to the growth cycle, currency ﬂotation schemes, ﬁscal results, the application of anti-inﬂation policies, and a signiﬁcant reduction of debt as a percentage of GDP, especially in Brazil and Uruguay (see table III.10).
In the Central American Common Market and the Andean Community, the extreme cases of Nicaragua and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have raised the averages.4 Nevertheless, the most recent ﬁgures reﬂect a noteworthy period in the regionʼs macroeconomic accounts, with signiﬁcant progress in controlling inﬂation and budget deﬁcits.
The favourable external cycle in 2004-2005 explains much of this success, but ofﬁcials have failed to take advantage of the positive circumstances to move forward on macroeconomic coordination schemes that would cushion the impact of future external shocks or prevent the subregions themselves from generating macroeconomic turbulence.
The preliminary results for 2003 and 2004 indicate that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, with an inﬂation rate of 19.2%, still cannot meet the target of 10%, while Bolivia still has a public deﬁcit higher than the target of 4% of GDP.
Its debt level of nearly 80% also exceeds the established threshold (50%).
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 94 Improving infrastructure The challenge of infrastructure is a constant in any integration effort and in building competitiveness.
In the case of IIRSA, 32 priority projects have already been selected, but ﬁnancing (amounting to US$ 4.2 billion) is still pending.
In the case of PPP, somewhat more progress has been made, as ﬁnancing for more than 60% of the required investment of US$ 4.321 billion has already been assured.
In the Caribbean, the work has concentrated on cooperation in training and data gathering programmes with a view to achieving transparency of competition in port operations of shipping companies and transportation in general.
With regard to infrastructure, one innovative development of note —because of the intensity of political support as of the middle of 2005— is energy integration in the Southern Cone, which will be examined below and will be referred to as an “energy ring”.
Energy integration in South America Since the twenty-eighth MERCOSUR Summit in Asunción in June 2005, energy integration has emerged as a vitally important link in the transformation of production and the promotion of competitiveness in the subregion.
It is also perceived, and with reason, as the principal challenge in regional integration, an opportunity to lay the foundations for a comprehensive integration —following the example of coal and steel in Europe— that will base complementarity on production.
In the last few years, Argentina, Brazil and Chile have faced energy crises of different magnitudes.
The prospect of high growth rates in the next 10 years points to a very strong demand for energy, which will require policies to stimulate investment in this sector.
There is a complex dynamic that must incorporate various dimensions: resources (both energy and ﬁnancial), physical connection and transmission grids, and rules of play expressed in supranational agreements, with harmonized regulatory frameworks, ﬂexible contracts and effective, binding dispute resolution mechanisms.
National policies, in turn, should reinforce the regional vision and the coordination of policies.
These are the over-arching themes, but so far the main problems have stemmed not so much from the shortage of resources or the lack of grids as from the difﬁculty of devising rules and policies that are consistent with stimulating investment and energy interdependence in the region.
Here is an analysis of recent developments in three energy integration processes in which the four South American countries with the largest reserves are involved: • Argentina/Chile.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 95 trillion cubic feet (Tcf); and it has the most developed gas industry, with this fuel accounting for 45% of primary energy consumption.
In 2004, after abandoning convertibility and experiencing a sharp devaluation, the Government imposed ceilings on energy rates, stimulating a drastic increase in domestic demand which exceeded supply.
To balance the market, exports were cut by 50% and gas was imported from Bolivia.
The crisis highlighted the domestic transmission gridʼs inability to cope with signiﬁcant increases in demand and the consequent need to promote new investments, both in the transmission system and in production.
For Chile, the reduction in supply caused difﬁculties, especially in the northern region.
The countryʼs energy strategy, which was heavily dependent on natural gas, therefore had to be redeﬁned.
In this case, a domestic policy decision and the resultant failure to adhere to a supranational agreement shone the spotlight on the vulnerability of the integration process, as it became an adjustment variable for solving the problems of one of the Member States.
In the absence of major investments in the coming years, Argentina could face severe electricity shortages by the end of the decade, and the supply of gas to Chile will certainly be affected.
In Chile, in turn, the problem has been addressed by installing a regasiﬁcation plant that will allow it to purchase liqueﬁed natural gas in other regions of the world, regasify it at a port in the central part of the country and incorporate it into the central electricity grid.
This is a decision of great importance that alters the energy matrix of the industrial apparatus.
It would not have been necessary if a “regional energy ring” like the one being proposed had been in place.
In that same country, it is estimated that to maintain the growth rate the installed electricity capacity will have to be doubled between 2006 and 2020.
As that investment plan materializes, Chile may become a marginal electricity exporter by the beginning of the next decade.
Even though the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has the largest gas reserves in the region (148 Tcf), its gas industry is not well developed.
The main use of natural gas is to reinject it into low-pressure oil wells, since the transmission grid is not yet able to connect the eastern (producing) areas with the western (consuming) parts of the country.
A US$ 120 million investment is being contemplated to build a 120-kilometre pipeline between Colombia and the state of Zulia to alleviate part of the gas shortage for the generation of electricity.
The assumption is that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela will import gas until it can develop its own reserves, and then will be able to reverse the ﬂow of gas and possibly export the fuel to Ecuador and Central America.
There is also a proposal to build a multipurpose pipeline that will carry Venezuelan hydrocarbons to the Paciﬁc and eventually to the Chinese market.
In the latter case, the option of running the pipeline through Colombia or Panama is being discussed. • Bolivia/Peru/Mexico.
Thanks to major gas reserve discoveries in recent years, Bolivia has become a potential supplier for many markets, in addition to its traditional customers in Argentina and Brazil.
The lack of consensus within the country, however, has prevented it from seizing two important opportunities.
The ﬁrst, to export gas to the east coast of the United States through Mexico, was missed because a decision could not be made on which Paciﬁc port the gas would be exported from.
The second opportunity, to export gas to Mexico for that countryʼs electricity generation, was forfeited because Bolivia could not agree on a joint strategy with Peru to supplement the exportable supply.
The issue is currently the centrepiece of the debate, after the Governments of Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Uruguay proposed to Peru in June 2005 a plan to build an “energy ring” that would guarantee the supply of gas to their countries through a large regional pipeline stretching approximately 1,750 kilometres.
The gas would come from Camisea, a natural gas ﬁeld in Peruʼs Amazon region, 600 kilometres from Lima.
Tractebel will also form a partnership with TGP S.A. for the transportation project.
In addition to supplying gas to Lima and Callao, the companies plan to export gas to the Paciﬁc coast of Mexico.
The proposal to form an “energy ring” opens up the possibility of exporting gas from Camisea to the south, beginning with the project to build a gas pipeline from Pisco (Peru) through Ilo and Tacna to Tocopilla (Chile), where shipments could amount to 35 million cubic metres a day.
This project would make it possible to meet the demand for gas in southern Peru, the power plants of the Norte Grande Interconnected System (SING) and those of the Central Interconnected System (SIC) of Chile, all in an initial stage.
Later, with the participation of Bolivia, the provision of gas would expand to Argentina through the NorAndino Gas Pipeline, as a branch to Uruguaiana would be built, and from there to Porto Alegre and Buenos Aires.
Thus, the project would meet expected demand not only in Chile, but also in Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay.
The energy ring plan has been the subject of a feasibility study by the Franco-Belgian ﬁrm Suez Energy International, and the countries involved have agreed to a second study with IDB.
In addition, work is under way to develop a legal framework, which is expected to be completed by the end of 2005 (El comercio y gestión, Lima, 7 July 2005).
It should cover issues related to investment guarantees, most favoured nation (MFN) status, contingency management and dispute resolution.
The project has been taking shape, to the extent that at the last meeting of MERCOSUR leaders, the Presidents of the four member countries plus Bolivia and the other Andean Community countries reafﬁrmed their commitment to implementing a project for the creation of the energy ring.
The strong political impetus given to the project has encouraged multilateral ﬁnancing organizations to participate.
Indeed, IDB has already announced its support for the initiative, which has an estimated price tag of US$ 2.5 billion.
The plan, which would have private backing, calls for investments of US$ 300 million.
However, Pluspetrol informed the energy ministers of MERCOSUR and of Chile and Peru that they amount to 57 million cubic metres per day for 20 years.
Of that amount, 12 million would go to Peru, 17 million to Mexico and 28 million to the Southern Cone.
This third alternative, which is considered the most ambitious and most viable, would enjoy the backing of the multinational Panamerican Energy.
In this context, the only explanation for the recent energy crises experienced by several different countries is the absence of mechanisms to stimulate the interconnectivity of energy sources or to provide sufﬁcient legal security for the investments that are needed.
This is a tremendous challenge, and naturally there are major difﬁculties that must be dealt with gradually, to Iberoamerican meeting in Seville, 21-22 April 2005.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 98 the extent that there is a decisive political will to advance in that direction.
Consequently, a consensus must be reached on some key principles associated with economic efﬁciency and the necessary institutional framework.
Economic efﬁciency must rest on a foundation of broad, uniﬁed, competitive and transparent markets that allow for timely supplies at the lowest possible cost, with ample coverage, security, and quality of service as well as ﬂexibility in the face of turbulence.
For this to happen, it is essential that prices reﬂect relative scarcity and that public policies clearly differentiate the business function from other functions that may be assigned to companies in this sector.
The associated institutions must include regulatory mechanisms that are compatible with market criteria and with non-discriminatory treatment of investors, and that offer legal security and deﬁnite stability in the rules of play with respect to prices, investments and taxes.
This will enable them to stimulate investments for the replenishment and expansion of capacity and for interconnectivity of different energy sources.
The so-called “energy ring” aims not only to join together all of the efforts that are being made with regard to the use of natural gas, but also to favour the interconnectivity of different energy sources (mainly petroleum, natural gas, coal and hydroelectricity).
Promoting energy swaps is a unique technological challenge in the areas of production, law and ﬁnance; and another challenge will be to ensure that the “ring” is compatible with national investment efforts.
Clearly, the more legal security this subregional initiative can display, the stronger the ties of complementarity between it and national efforts.
Among the many challenges posed by the implementation of the South American “energy ring”, the most noteworthy are the following: • Ensuring the level of supplies: including Bolivia is key, because Peruʼs gas reserves (8.8 Tcf) amounts to less than half of Argentinaʼs proven reserves (21.5 Tcf) and less than one-third of Boliviaʼs (29 Tcf) (Regional Energy Integration Commission, 2005).
Fortunately, the respective Bolivian delegations have attended the technical and ministerial meetings that have taken place since the MERCOSUR Summit in Asunción. • Harmonizing the market and pricing policy structures: the gap in this area is considerable because of the different price formation schemes that exist in each country.
Prices can be as much as 11 to 13 times higher in one country than another (Kozulj, 2004).
The former are more rigid insofar as there are laws, decrees and contracts with provisions governing rates, contractual models, access and dispatch systems, as well as other aspects.
General frameworks, in contrast, have little regulation and operators develop their businesses in accordance with contracts negotiated with their customers.
A solution to this problem could be the creation of a supranational regulatory body.
It is possible that during this initial phase of energy complementarity, a flexible plan will be the most viable option. • Establishing guarantee mechanisms: considering both the scale and the time span of energy investments, it should be clear that appropriate legal frameworks must be devised to support those investments.
In this type of initiative, it is important to note the plurality of parties involved on both the supply and demand sides, hopefully with a web of increasingly crosslinked interests and multinational investments.
Given Chinaʼs growing interest in investing in energy sources in the subregion (see chapter V), this possibility should also be taken into account in the design of the South American “energy ring”.
After the true level of reserves at Camisea is determined, a legal framework will need to be in place right away to provide regulatory and legal security for investors and purchasers of gas.
On this basis, investments in the construction of the pipelines can begin once talks get under way between buyers and sellers of gas and volumes, prices and investment yields are deﬁned.
The huge scope of this initiative demands security and appropriate treatment of issues related to taxes, exchange-rate risks and currency transfers, as well as compatibility of technical and economic regulations among all the countries that participate in the project.
All of this suggests that we are facing the most serious integration initiative ever to emerge in the subregion.
As it takes shape, it will no doubt pave the way for even bolder initiatives.
Regional integration in Latin America and the Caribbean: principal debates and challenges (a) MERCOSURʼs political prominence increasing MERCOSUR has been expanding its role as a means for political synchronization and coordination in South America, among the Member States, with associated countries and with Mexico, which has expressed an interest in associating itself with this subregional integration scheme.
The trade agreement between MERCOSUR and the Andean Community and the negotiation of one with the South American Community of Nations are manifestations of this trend.
In this regard, MERCOSUR is seeing the convergence of an expansive economic cycle, a major currency and monetary alignment, positive ﬁscal balances and less currency and ﬁnancial volatility.
The positive macroeconomic results that Brazil is achieving and the successful renegotiation of Argentinaʼs debt provide further cause for optimism.
Thus, MERCOSUR is in a good position to take advantage of the notable political convergence of the current Presidents of its member countries and their emphasis on strengthening the subregional organization.
Another signiﬁcant asset is the Presidentsʼ high levels of popularity, in particular Brazilʼs enhanced political prestige and the prominent international role that President Lula has played in events such as the formation of the G-20 and the International Alliance Against Hunger.
In short, the international political and economic climate is propitious for bold initiatives for economic integration and cooperation.
The recent association with Colombia, Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, prior agreements to associate with Peru, Bolivia and Chile, and Mexicoʼs interest in associating with MERCOSUR, all reveal an unprecedented constellation of convergences between MERCOSUR, Chile, the Andean countries and Mexico.
In this new situation, with the addition of Mexico, MERCOSUR will have six associate members and four full members.
After Mexico joins, the associate countriesʼ GDPs will be 40% higher than those of full members and will account for 58% of the expanded GDP, while their total exports will be 2.2 times those of the full members.
MERCOSURʼs growing importance as a political forum Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 100 does not, therefore, assure it of corresponding economic and commercial influence.
In fact, MERCOSURʼs greater political relevance has been accompanied by an unprecedented amount of criticism —at the highest level— of its performance as a customs union.
In addition to considering the high relative proﬁle of associate members, which are by deﬁnition outside the customs union, we should also note the diversity of approaches to trade policy.
In a few months, the associates may include ﬁve countries (Colombia, Chile, Ecuador, Mexico and Peru), and possibly six if Bolivia makes the move, that have signed bilateral accords with the United States.
The differences in coverage and scope of the respective agreements —between those with the United States and those with MERCOSUR— pose a particular challenge for the integration mechanisms.
It is obvious that MERCOSUR represents more than customs and trade issues, particularly when its main weaknesses in this area are examined.
By the same token, it would be too narrow an interpretation to say that Mexico is moving closer to South America solely on the grounds of trade.
There are geopolitical factors that should be examined here, but without a doubt, understanding this rapprochement as something driven by economics or commerce alone would not only be erroneous but would also limit the possibilities of this association.
To be sure, a market scenario with a stronger commitment to free trade, with ﬂuidity of investments and legal security for exporters, importers and investors alike, would create the conditions to strengthen the political and economic aspects of Mexicoʼs association with South America.
Nonetheless, this scenario does not exist yet, and it should not be taken for granted. (b) MERCOSUR facing a credibility test This subregional entity is currently facing a test of its credibility and objectives.
Its founding protocol, signed in Ouro Preto in 1994, deﬁnes it as a customs union, which assumes free trade within the zone, a common external tariff and a common external trade policy.
Eleven years later, that objective is far from being attained, and the prospects for the future are complex.
There are still too many tariff exceptions: with respect to both the intra-zone zero tariff and the common external tariff, advances in technical and tariff harmonization have been smaller than expected.
Moreover, since the late 1990s new exceptional treatment plans have been introduced —sometimes by consensus, sometimes unilaterally —that undermine these principles (Kosacoff, 2005).
Trade preferences that were negotiated have been undermined by unilteral decisions using measures not always consistent with the standards agreed upon by the Member States.
In turn, regulations approved by the members have not been translated into domestic legislation, which widens the gap between trade community standards and public policies actually adopted by the nations within the community, further complicating the future convergence of public policies.
Inconsistencies cause delays in strategic decision-making, and eventually hinder domestic consensus-building, thereby creating additional difﬁculties for convergence in integration processes, which paves the way for future non-compliance with community standards.
This is why the deﬁnition of differences in MERCOSUR today is so critical for the future of the community.
In 2004 and the ﬁrst quarter of 2005, trade disputes between Argentina and Brazil at the ministerial level and between the respective business groups made the headlines.
Many different sectors of production are involved: Argentina has complained about the damage caused by Brazilʼs exports of textiles, footwear, televisions, household appliances, batteries, wooden furniture, cotton, yarn, denim and rugs, while Brazil alleges that Argentine products are hurting its chicken, dairy, wheat, rice and sugar industries.
Argentine authorities point to the imbalance in accounts that is suddenly favouring Brazil, claiming that it is due to the failure to honour commitments made under the Asunción Treaty aimed at coordinating macroeconomic policies and establishing integrated investment policies to create intraregional production chains, thereby making MERCOSUR more competitive in other markets.
Because these commitments have not resulted in integrated investment policies, Argentine authorities have proposed unilaterally employing provisional compensation mechanisms while waiting for macroeconomic harmonization to take place or for the sectors beneﬁting from these protective measures to make investments to improve their competitiveness.
Among the mechanisms involved are quotas negotiated directly between private parties, safeguards or different types of import licences.
In a later discussion, safeguards were rejected and the Brazilian representatives relaxed their stance, expressing a willingness to ﬁnance Argentine exports to Brazil as soon as Argentina reinstates the Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 101 common external tariff (CET) of 14% for machinery and tools, which limits Argentinaʼs market for these exports.
In early July, Brazilʼs representatives formally agreed to discuss a competitive adaptation clause in MERCOSUR “similar to safeguards” (La Nación, 9 July 2005), although the precise terms have not yet been deﬁned (under what circumstances it would be imposed, what procedures would be followed to implement it, how long it would last, and so on).
On the other hand, Brazil insisted that the possibility of a private agreement should be given a chance before turning to this mechanism.
One persistent difﬁculty is that this potential clause is associated with “major macroeconomic alterations”, a situation that does not now exist.
Therefore, it could not be applied to the numerous controversies currently going on.
Argentinaʼs response is that incentive mechanisms to encourage productive investment should also be discussed to ensure that they do not harm trade.
The idea, according to Argentine authorities, is not to eliminate the incentives, but to guarantee equal treatment (Infobae, 8 July 2005).
Although the precise methodology has not been revealed, the impression is that an attempt would be made to quantify the effect of these incentives on prices, and then to adjust the trade preferences that are granted in order to prevent spurious competition that might result from them.
The debate within MERCOSUR also highlights the weakness of the dispute resolution mechanism, and therefore the absence of complete legal security for investment and foreign trade decisions involving that integration organization.
Without legal security or a strong record of honouring commitment deadlines, there is also a disincentive for compliance, and on the contrary, there is an incentive for individual sectors to demand additional exceptions or delays in fulﬁlling their obligations.
In short, the signas are not encouraging for investments in subregional integration.
This attitude deters the most entrepreneurial business leaders and leads them to explore other options —including, to be sure, measures aimed at improving the customs union, but also the possiblity of creating a free trade zone.
The relatively smaller countries have renewed their complaints that they do not have effective access to the larger markets, which makes it hard for them to attract investments that would come with access to a broader market.
There are also allegations of non-compliance with a common investment policy promoting the coordination of production in MERCOSUR and creating competitive advantages for exports to other markets.
Another complaint is that larger countries are still subsidizing investment, making it even more difﬁcult for smaller economies to attract investment.
And ﬁnally, the failure to make any progress on macroeconomic coordination also costs these economies dearly, as they have absorbed without any compensation the effects of the larger economiesʼ macroeconomic crises.
In other words, not only are the size asymmetries among the MERCOSUR partners not being addressed adequately, but they are also being aggravated by the lack of macroeconomic coordination between the larger economies and by the persistence of tax incentives for investment and export promotion in these economies, which distorts relative competitiveness.
The current crisis is reviving the principal dilemmas facing the entity: (i) the dilemma of customs union versus free trade zone; (ii) the ambiguity between community institutions and inter-Government agreements; (iii) economic asymmetries; and (iv) sectoral asymmetries (Onuki, 2004).
In addition to the well-known difﬁculties suffered by MERCOSUR, there is a growing gap between the diplomatic importance this body has for Brazil and its importance in the realm of trade (Markwald, 2005).
The result is a dynamic inconsistency between the positions of its Member States.
On the one hand, the expectations that Brazil would serve as an engine for the growth of exports from Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay have not been fulﬁlled, nor have these exports become more diversiﬁed.
On the other hand, as Brazil becomes more competitive, the subregional area loses its value for the development of Brazilʼs export sector.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 102 As Brazil embarks on this new wave of trade negotiations with partners outside the southern region, it perceives more risks than opportunities, especially the long transition periods that will be required for eliminating tariff barriers; and investment, services and public procurement are not on the agenda (Da Motta Veiga, 2005).
Given this attitude, it is wasting an opportunity to set a new standard for tackling such controversial issues in the international arena.
Brazil needs its MERCOSUR partners to stand by its side in achieving its overall objectives, but it is not in a position domestically to meet the demands of its local partners.
There is growing uncertainty about MERCOSUR in the Brazilian business sector right now.
That uncertainty is based on two elements: (i) the development of trade disputes with Argentina; and (ii) the belief that jointly negotiating the external agenda —for example, in FTAA talks and those with the European Union— would limit Brazilʼs trade possibilities (CNI, 2004).
For example, the tariff preferences that seven member countries of LAIA (Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Mexico, Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela) have granted to Brazil are eroding as these countries reach trade agreements with partners outside the region.
This attrition will be exacerbated if more far-reaching preferences are granted in areas where third countries are more competitive than Brazil.
Considering both the number of conditions required of the hemispheric agreement (a reasonable number, incidentally) and the prevailing attitude on free trade in the United States Congress, all indications are that, from Brazilʼs perspective, the ﬁrst option is the more viable and the one that can be seen taking shape after the trade pact is signed with the Andean Community.
In Brazilʼs case, the loss of the subregional marketʼs importance cannot be examined without considering the notable increase in its exports since 2003.
In other words, the real limitation on exports to Brazil from its MERCOSUR partners lies in the small economic size of their markets.
Some analysts add that even if all intrazone barriers to trade were removed entirely, it would still be difﬁcult for MERCOSURʼs share in Brazilian exports to exceed the record of 17% in the 1997-1998 biennium.
Indeed, Brazil would have to increase its imports from MERCOSUR countries to 60% of the market share, which is unlikely (Markwald, 2005).
In short, the spectacular increase in Brazilian exports means that MERCOSUR is of declining economic importance to Brazil.
All of the above requires clear negotiations between Argentina and Brazil, ﬁrst to address the issue of the sensitivity of certain products, and secondly to define a modus operandi regarding the different approaches to MERCOSURʼs strategic options.
This appears to be a complex matter, but it is heartening to realize that none of the principal actors in MERCOSUR has come up with an alternative to the community body (Peña, 2005).
An effectively open regionalism, with a lower CET and a declining trend in tariffs, will make it possible to resist unilateral protectionist temptations, reinforcing the commitment to free trade and also making more room for trade negotiations between MERCOSUR and external partners such as the European Union.
A special issue for this community organization is the fact that three of its members (Colombia, Ecuador and Peru) are engaged in free trade talks with the United States.
These negotiations should conclude by the end of 2005, and all indications are that they will result in commitments that are considerably broader and deeper than those the Member States have with each other.
In other words, in the coming years, barring decisive action to update the Andean Community regulations governing goods, services, investments and trade disciplines, integration may take place on two levels, with the community level being the less intense.
Needless to say, if this duality grows, the business climate will gradually turn towards the schemes with more far-reaching provisions and more binding dispute resolution mechanisms.
The need to deal with border trade facilitation, including customs, transportation, infrastructure and trade security, must be viewed against this backdrop.
Indeed, the gradual convergence of administrative practices and policies among the three NAFTA partners will tend to reduce the discretion that each can exercise in implementing them, eroding the inﬂuence of domestic trade policy bodies.
The debate on rising imports from China has also been taking place in Mexico, particularly with regard to their impact on the textile sector, and more generally in the maquila industry.
This concern was expressed in the working groups that reported to the Presidents at the meeting in Canada.
They examined ways to stimulate competitiveness throughout the subregion in the face of the threat of Chinese exports, including business and technology alliances to facilitate coordination in the areas of e-commerce, investment and development, and in general, business initiatives that Governments could promote and support as necessary by providing information and other assistance.
For Mexico it is a strategic matter, because the advantage of preferential access to the United States market will tend to depreciate gradually over time as the latter country continues its ﬁrm policy of bilateral agreements for free trade with countries inside and outside the region.
Free Trade Agreement between Central America, the Dominican Republic and the United States (DR-CAFTA): a noteworthy accord Trade with the United States is the most important for the Central American subregion, and since 2000 it has been governed by the Caribbean Basin-United that the annotated working plan calls for.
This plan is certainly the minimum necessary to move in the right direction, and the pace will have to quicken if this effort is to keep up with the new commitments.12 On 1 January 2005, the the Andean CommunityMERCOSUR and Peru-MERCOSUR free trade agreements took effect, immediately freeing up 80% of the trade between the two blocs.
The remaining 20%, including sensitive products, will be freed over the next 14 years.
The negotiations for a free trade agreement began in January 2003 as part of a regional objective of For example, in the Free Trade Agreement with the United States, the three above-mentioned Andean nations will have to grant national treatment to investments and services from the United States, and will have to do the same in public procurement.
Such treatment is clearly superior to that accorded the the Andean Community members in the same areas.
The plan, called the Security and Prosperity Partnership of North America, is based on a series of speciﬁc initiatives, some of which are detailed below: • Promotion of e-commerce.
In June 2005, an understanding was signed setting forth common principles for guaranteeing transparency and security in the use of communication and information technologies (CIT) by eliminating barriers to e-commerce in cross-border transactions. • Liberalization of rules of origin.
Thus far, the countries have enhanced the ﬂexibility of several rules of origin for goods such as household appliances, machinery and parts, and precious metals.
On 1 May 2006, the list of goods subject to the new rules will expand.
The objective of this measure is to facilitate imports of intermediate inputs for the subregion, since the resultant lowering of administrative costs makes the production of tradable goods with subregional content more competitive. • Sectoral cooperation to improve the region’s competitive edge.
Based on business development and advances made by the private sector, the Governments established a plan for sectoral initiatives in the steel and automotive industries.
The competitiveness of both industries is expected to be enhanced, and the world leadership of the subregion’s businesses will be maintained.
In this realm, which includes the exchange of information on cooperative activities in health and food safety, most of the progress has been made beween the United States and Canada.
These two countries signed a memorandum of understanding, and Mexico is now negotiating a similar instrument.
The countries expect to sign an agreement to standardize symbols on the labels of these products in July Temporary entry of professionals.
The countries have exchanged procedures that will be applied to modify the professions appendix of the treaty in order to allow an increase in the labour mobility of professionals.
The countries agreed to harmonize the treatment of bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in order to safeguard human and animal health in the subregion.
By 2007, the countries expect to reduce the redundant testing and certiﬁcation requirements in phytosanitary regulations. • Creation of a sustainable energy economy in North America.
Commitment to create the political conditions to promote the sustainable use and supply of energy, as well as joint cooperation in areas such as regulation and energy efﬁciency; natural gas, including liqueﬁed natural gas; science and technology; oil sands production; nuclear energy; hydrocarbons and energy information, statistics and projections. • Customs facilitation, infrastructure and trade security.
Effort to coordinate these three areas for the purpose of guaranteeing the security of citizens, achieving the full potential of reciprocal exchanges in all modes of transportation (highway, maritime, river and lake, as well as air), and reducing waiting time.
During that time, there were nine rounds of talks in six groups: market access, services and investment, public sector procurement and intellectual property, environment and labour issues, dispute resolution, and institutional matters.
At the end of June it was ratiﬁed by the United States Congress, despite the controversy over three main issues: the sugar industry, opening up the textile sector and the matter of Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 105 labour (that is, the possible loss of jobs in the United States and the labour rights situation in Central America and the Dominican Republic).
The United States House of Representatives voted to ratify the treaty by a slim two-vote margin (217 to 215).
They also agreed to establish a Secretariat for Environmental Affairs, which will help implement the environmental provisions of the treaty signed by the parties (United States Department of Commerce, 2005).
Studies show that advances in customs cooperation among CACM countries have yielded an average gain of at least 0.5% of GDP (Machinea, 2004; ECLAC/ SICA, 2004).
The treaty with the United States and the Dominican Republic (DR-CAFTA) opens up the possibility of expanding the range of tariff preferences for Central American businesses by about 60% of overall trade, and it could boost subregional GDP by 0.8% to 2.3%, with an increase in total exports of 1.6% to 5.2% (Hinojosa-Ojeda, 2003).
Nevertheless, the two principal effects of this type of agreement must be taken into consideration: (i) regulatory consequences and (ii) the possible diversion of intraregional trade due to competition between subregional products and those coming from the United States.
The commitments made under DR-CAFTA differ in coverage and content from those of CACM (see table III.11), and as a result the latter will be superseded in several key areas, as detailed in box III.2.
In general, North-South bilateral agreements allow access to a broader and more stable market and lead to an increase in worldwide trade ﬂows.
In addition, a strong signal is sent to investors and business executives, since the agreements tend to be seen as irreversible processes with a major component of transparency and greater legal security.
This results in positive externalities for the design of the signatory countryʼs economic policy (Schiff and Winters, 2004; Rosales, 2005).
There may also be incidents of trade diversion within regional integration accords.
In addition, these countries will soon begin negotiating a free trade treaty with MERCOSUR.
It is evident that, given the growing importance of this type of trade pact, most commerce is subject to different, not common, tariff conditions.
The true dimension of the preference margins for subregional trade has not yet been evaluated, nor has the effect that such agreements could have on production structures and productivity.
Another unknown is how much competitiveness subregional exports have gained when they are also sent to different countries within the same subregion (INTAL, The free trade agreement signed with the United States (which the Dominican Republic also joined) generally maintained the beneﬁts that the subregion already enjoyed and the free entry of Central American goods into that country.
The accord covers nearly 99.7% of industrial goods and takes effect immediately; more than 80% of industrial products made in the United States can be freely imported to Central America, 85% after ﬁve years and 100% as of the tenth year.
Once the treaty takes effect, 89% of Central America’s farm products will be able to enter the United States freely, whereas 50% of the latter’s products will enjoy the same conditions in Central America, with the rest being allowed progressively over the next 15 years.
Safeguards may be adopted for a period of four years, the duration of the transition to total liberalization.
The same is true of the chapter on intellectual property, which speciﬁes that second-use patents are not allowed.
In 2005, before DR-CAFTA takes full effect, the countries may adopt a programme to make current CACM standards compatible with those of the new treaty, along with the rest of the bilateral agreements in place in the subregion.
In addition to those already mentioned, one particularly sensitive area is rules of origin, which overlap and vary among the different agreements.
This could raise transaction costs for exports from the subregion, making them less competitive and even detracting from the possible benefits that might be enjoyed under previous agreements.
In any case, if the compatibility effort succeeds, DR-CAFTA will have the effect of enhancing Central American integration.
Rodas, El Estado actual y las perspectivas del proceso de integración económica centroamericana, modelo de desarrollo territorial, Guatemala, 2004 and Central American Integration System and Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (SICA/ECLAC), La integración centroamericana: beneﬁcios y costos.
Monge, Loria and Gonzáles (2003) determined that NAFTA did not divert intra-subregional trade for Central America, basically because the countries continued to enjoy the unilateral preferences granted under the Caribbean Basin Initiative launched by the United States Government.
After DR-CAFTA is signed, the main tangible beneﬁts will be both the consolidation of those preferences, which will become permanent instead of temporary, and the elimination of tariff escalations, which facilitates the diversiﬁcation of exports.
Diversion of trade in CACM would basically affect chemicals, agroindustrial products, the paper industry, food and fertilizer and the plastics industry (Hornbeck, 2003; ECLAC, 2003a and 2003b), which will pose a challenge for non-competitive sectors to restructure their industrial complexes, especially some SMEs.
This should be viewed in the context of the expected increase in investment as the market expands and rules become more stable (Cordero, 2005).
Results of a Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model that includes static effects. b Results of a CGE model that includes dynamic effects and complete mobility of labour (migration).
The main features of the treaty are the free movement of goods and services, capital and labour; the harmonization of laws and regulations affecting trade, including customs procedures; intellectual property, competition policy, taxes, dumping legislation and subsidies.
For example, Belize has been increasing its participation in coordination mechanisms in Central America, and is also negotiating a free trade agreement with Guatemala.
Suriname and Guyana have shown an interest in participating in the South American Community of Nations and have strengthened their ties with Brazil.
In any case, the most important integration effort in the Caribbean today is the CARICOM Single Market and Economy, which will initially comprise three countries.
When fully formed, CSME would encompass a market of 6.4 million inhabitants with an estimated GDP of US$ 39 billion and a labour force of nearly 3 million people.
This small regional market includes economies with major asymmetries, four of them with external sales principally of goods.
In the case of Trinidad and in Guatemala and Nicaragua (under 0.5% of total tax revenues).
As for GDP, Honduras will again suffer the greatest losses (between 0.82% and 1.59% of GDP) (Paunovic, 2004; Barreix, Villela and Roca, 2004, respectively).
Tobago, the sales are of natural gas and petroleum, in that order, along with products of the related petrochemicals industry.
Guyana and Suriname export mining products (bauxite and gold) and agricultural goods.
The fourth one, Belize, has already expressed a considerable interest in tourism.
The other CSME economies depend more on foreign exchange earnings from services than from goods.
In the latter case, as in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, the growing emphasis on services stems from the erosion of preferential access to the European banana markets.
The regional market is not a major destination for exports of goods or services from CSME countries.
The importance of regional integration lies, therefore, in increased productivity and efﬁciency more than in a signiﬁcant expansion of exports.
This is much more relevant for the small economies of the region (see box III.3).
Despite signiﬁcant progress in the execution of the CSME protocols, the integration scheme is only that of an imperfect customs union.
The ﬁnal phase of the common external tariff has not yet been implemented uniformly in all countries.
There are also still major disparities in the average tariffs (either simple or weighted) that have actually been imposed, primarily due to the magnitude of tariff exemptions for imports.
In some cases, especially in the smallest economies, these amount to 5% or 6% of GDP.
In addition to exemptions, non-tariff duties are still common, even for products traded within the region.
Nontariff levies include excise taxes, customs surcharges, taxes on foreign currency transactions, environmental fees and special taxes.
Haitiʼs participation has been suspended since the political change in early 2004, which some members of the organization interpret as the result of unacceptable foreign interference.
Bahamas does not want to join the CSME; Montserrat, which has a unique membership status in the Community because it is not an independent nation, requires authorization from the United Kingdom to ratify the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas, and that is still pending.
For now, Barbados, Jamaica and Trinidad and Tobago are committed to putting it into effect immediately.
The participation of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) will depend on the outcome of negotiations on the CSME development fund for small economies.
This objective was reﬂected in the 2001 amendment of the Treaty of Chaguaramas (1973) that created CARICOM.
A higher degree of regional integration, accompanied by the appropriate regulatory framework, would increase the efﬁciency and productivity of CARICOM economies.
Not only does CSME provide an opportunity to reposition the region’s production potential and develop its competitiveness, it also presents signiﬁcant challenges for the smaller Member States of CARICOM.
CARICOM’s current integration scheme is an imperfect customs union with some elements of a common market, such as mobility of capital and labour for some categories of skilled workers.
The customs union, whose origins date back to the 1970s but was not put into practice by the Member States of CARICOM until 1992, when it was done by consensus, has not succeeded in spurring intraregional trade.
In fact, the share of intraregional trade in the total has stagnated or fallen in most countries.
In the 1990s, OECS lost half of its share of intraregional trade and saw its trade deﬁcit with the other countries rise to nearly 7% of The customs union has not contributed to the diversiﬁcation of trade.
At the country level, it is a regional integration scheme polarized around Trinidad and Tobago, which accounts for more than 50% of total intraregional trade.
This is due to structural factors, to the growing signiﬁcance of visible external restrictions in the loss of market share outside the region, and to the distortions caused by the common external tariff.
It is possible to reverse this trend, however, to the extent that larger-scale development of the incipient trade in services (which is of vital importance to OECS), the current promotion of industrial restructuring, and learning-bydoing processes can all be stimulated.
The Governments of CARICOM countries have placed particular emphasis on intraregional labour mobility, which now includes only six categories of skilled workers.
Because they also have a large number of unskilled labourers, however, with considerable social and economic ramiﬁcations, OECS countries have asked that the labour mobility envisioned in CSME include that of unskilled labourers so that they can encourage them to move to the larger economies and thus reduce unemployment in the OECS economies.
Some of the most important commercial banks in the region provide more ﬁnancing for government debt than for the investment initiatives of the private sector.
One key element for effective participation by smaller countries in CARICOM is the enforcement of chapter VII of the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas (2001), which deﬁnes a special regime for “disadvantaged countries, regions and sectors” and for “the less developed countries of CARICOM”.
The lack of precision in the treaty’s terminology and area of application is an obstacle to its implementation.
For example, there is no distinction between compensatory measures, which are short-term, and structural measures that have a longer timeframe.
At the most recent meeting of CARICOM Heads of State (Saint Lucia, 4-6 July 2005), OECS representatives advocated revising some of the chapter’s clauses to make it better reﬂect the reality and the needs of the smallest CARICOM countries.
The Caribbean countries are also facing an external situation characterized by the gradual elimination of preferences and even special and differentiated treatment, as evidenced by the Cotonou Agreement and even paragraph 43 of the Ministerial Declaration of Doha.
In fact, the Caribbean countries see CSME as the establishment of a common front to respond jointly to the liberalization of trade in the external context.
The most important issues in intraregional talks are: (i) the Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ), (ii) the Regional Development Fund and (iii) labour mobility.
The CCJ is a trial court that functions as an international court and is charged with the interpretation and application of the CARICOM Treaty.
Its day-to-day operations are ﬁnanced by a trust fund equivalent to US$ 100 million.
The estimated cost of ﬁnancing it is US$ 5 million per year.15 The Development Fund is provided for in chapter VII of the Treaty of Chaguaramas (revised version), and it focuses on disadvantaged countries, sectors and regions.
Chapter VII establishes regulations for alleviating the adverse effects that may arise from the establishment of CSME.
They include: • technical and ﬁnancial assistance to address economic dislocation arising from the operation of CSME; The Court will consist of a chief justice and at least nine associate justices.
The chief justice is appointed by a three-quarters majority of the contracting parties.
The Development Fund (article 158) provides ﬁnancial and technical assistance for disadvantaged sectors, countries and regions.
The CARICOM Council for Finance and Planning (COFAP) is responsible for determining the status, composition and functions of the Development Fund and setting Member Statesʼ contributions.
To date, the fund has not yet begun its operations and merely consists of a “letter of intent” signed by the CARICOM member countries.
In view of the important role this instrument can play in the conﬁguration of CSME, at their penultimate meeting (Port-of-Spain, Trinidad and Tobago, 8-9 November 2004) the CARICOM Heads of State issued a mandate to the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB) to draw up a plan for the operation of the fund.
Among them is the absence of a deﬁnition of what constitutes a sector or a region.
Nor does the Treaty deﬁne what is meant by less favoured sector, country or region.
Further, it does not set a time period for granting temporary preferences or concessions.
More importantly, the chapter envisions only disadvantages that may occur as a consequence of the treaty, but makes no mention of the asymmetry in initial conditions and the hysteresis that may result from that factor.
Indeed, initial conditions can determine the ﬁnal outcome of CSME implementation (ECLAC, 2005).
Against this backdrop, it is easy to see why ECLAC (2005) recommends that chapter VII be amended ﬁrst to make it more relevant for the formation of CSME.
Finally, labour mobility is seen in CSME as a fundamental element in the regional integration process.
At present, the CARICOM countries do allow labour mobility, but only for skilled workers (university graduates, communications specialists, athletes, musicians, artists, administrators, supervisors and other service providers).
The decision to grant free mobility only to skilled individuals is an important dividing line between big and small countries.
The larger countries —which are not poor, highly indebted countries— such as Trinidad and Tobago and Barbados, are also those with the most skilled workforce in the region.
The smaller countries, on the other hand, which in some cases are also those with the highest unemployment rates, have a smaller proportion of skilled labour.
That is why the OECS Member States are insisting that labour mobility should include both skilled and unskilled workers.
The countriesʼ authorities have announced that CSME should be functioning fully by 2008, which coincides with the elimination of extra-regional trade preferences.
The CARICOM Heads of State have also decided that the improvement of intraregional trade in goods and services and of the customs union should be the ﬁrst step in forming CSME.
The basic difference of opinion lies in the number of products to be covered by the agreement.
Europe advocates 90% coverage, while the CARIFORUM countries want a much smaller percentage.
Phase II, which is to conclude in September 2005, has two objectives: (i) the deﬁnition of the CARIFORUM economic sphere to be governed by the association agreement; and (ii) the identiﬁcation of the CARIFORUM regional integration priorities that Europe could support.
CARICOM has emphasized that its priority is CSME and not integration among CARIFORUM countries (that is, between CARICOM and the Dominican Republic).
CARIFORUM and the European Union are working on an understanding to regulate the functioning of a joint regional preparatory task force, which would undertake a series of technical studies on the state of integration in the Caribbean region.
The initial programme involves drawing up an inventory of technical studies and policy documents on regional integration processes, and an additional inventory of trade assistance and integration programmes currently in operation in the Caribbean.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 110 Along other lines, in January 2005 the European Union announced that it would apply a new tariff regime for banana imports from producing countries, setting tariffs at 230 euro per metric ton.
In fact, these countries plan to take a uniﬁed stand to request a tariff no higher than 75 euro per metric ton.
The new regime signals the abandonment of a special quota system and a deﬁnite transition towards an import programme based only on tariffs.
CARICOM hopes to conclude talks with Canada for a free trade agreement with the idea of establishing a more permanent form of the preferences granted by CARIBCAN, the trade pact between Canada and CARICOM countries.
In the negotiations, which began in the ﬁrst half of 2005, the Caribbean Community is trying to attain an asymmetrical treaty.
Considering the migratory ﬂow from CARICOM countries to Canada, the accord would also promote the liberalization of services, in accordance with Mode 4 of the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
Finally, CARICOM is also considering the possibility of negotiating a free trade agreement with the United States, a decision that is certainly not without difﬁculties and costs.
Both the stagnation of FTAA talks and the progress of other bilateral negotiations with the United States are inﬂuencing the decision, as is the fact that the latter country (along with Europe) is the primary source of tourism and investment ﬂows in CARICOM.
Dispute resolution and incorporation of common regulations Despite major efforts to coordinate the implementation and enforcement of common legislation, there is still a high level of non-compliance with common regulations, most critically in MERCOSUR and the Andean Community.
These two groups are making progress on improving their Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) The key development during this period was the Olivos Protocol, which came into force after having been signed in 2002.
The Common Market Council (CMC) appointed the jurists who will serve on the MERCOSUR Permanent Court of Review (TPR), making it possible for that body to begin its work and putting in place a new dispute resolution system (INTAL, 2004a - No. 96).
A large number of regulations have been issued by the various institutional bodies of MERCOSUR, but only dispute resolution systems, and if successful, they will have taken a signiﬁcant step forward.
There are various reasons for it: ﬁrst, numerous standards have not been deﬁned precisely; and second, the national body charged with incorporating the regulation is not the one that negotiated it, which raises delicate issues of coordination within Governments.
In order to help countries come together and resolve their differences before an actual dispute arises, MERCOSUR created a three-stage system: (i) ﬁle a This situation could become critical in some sectors, as in the case of decisions regarding the administration of justice, about 80% of which have not yet been incorporated (MERCOSUR Secretariat, 2004).
Although disputes, in the strictest sense of the term, only arise in the second and third stages, consultations with the CCM are a true reﬂection of the topics and principal areas where the most signiﬁcant differences arise.
Between 1995 and 2004 there were 500 consultations (see ﬁgure III.8), the main ones being those related to: standards and technical rules (21.8%), discrimination and tax measures (which includes tax discrimination) (21.62%), export duties, ﬁnancing of imports, export subsidies and speciﬁc duties.
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 112 (14%), licences and prohibition of imports (11%) and items grouped together as measures for trade facilitation (9%), among others (see ﬁgure III.8).
The sector most severely affected is the food industry (36%), followed by other manufacturing (31%), especially metalworking, chemicals and the textile industry (MERCOSUR Secretariat, 2004b; Maldonado and Durán, 2005).
In the case of Argentina, the number of complaints has grown between 2004 and 2005, especially in the industrial sectors.
The trigger for this upsurge, in the opinion of Argentine authorities, has been Argentinaʼs huge trade deﬁcit with Brazil, as well as the erosion of the competitiveness of many industrial products, particularly household appliances.
The principal conclusion to be drawn from this analysis is that non-tariff barriers predominate, a clear threat to the establishment of a free trade zone.
Countries must move towards the harmonization of their rules, especially regulations and standards, and must also limit the application of sectoral exceptions.
One allegation made by Argentine producers is that Brazilʼs mechanisms to boost production and support exporters exacerbate the size asymmetry, making it less likely that other MERCOSUR partners will be able to attract investment for exports to the Brazilian market.
The complaint may be The process of ratifying the treaty creating the Court was completed four years later, so it took effect in May 1983 and the Court began activities on 2 January 1984.
It is headquartered in Quito (Ecuador), and consists of ﬁve justices, one for each member State.
Their terms are six years, and they can be reappointed just once.
The Andean Community legal system, unlike its MERCOSUR counterpart, is based on the principle of supranationality, which means that its regulations apply in all member countries and supersede national laws in case of any conﬂict.
Thus, once a standard has been adopted, it is presumed to be immediately incorporated into the laws of every country unless its text expressly stipulates that it must be incorporated into domestic legislation.
Nevertheless, in the opinion of the SGCAN, “non-compliance by Member States is still of concern” complaints were ﬁled alleging non-compliance, of which 135 (81.3%) had been remedied and 31 (18.7%) remained unresolved as of mid-March 2005.
The countries against which the most complaints are ﬁled are the Boliviarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador, and they are also the two countries with the largest number of unresolved cases (13 and 9, respectively) (see table III.15).
Between 2000 and 2004, 279 opinions were issued, of which approximately 25% were on cases ﬁled by the SGCAN on its own initiative.21 22 Colombia and Peru made the most use of this mechanism, whereas Bolivia ﬁled the smallest number of complaints (see table III.16).
After the General Secretariat itself, Colombia, Ecuador and Peru are the countries with the most complaints ﬁled against them.
An analysis of the judgements issued between January and December 2004 reveals that the three countries most likely to use the consultation mechanism were Colombia (18), Peru (13) and Ecuador (10), which together account for 68.3% of all those ﬁled during the period.
Ecuador had the most complaints ﬁled against it, with 15% of the total (9 complaints), followed by Colombia with 13% (8 complaints).
Peru and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had far fewer, each with 5% (3 complaints).
Un balance para los países andinos, May, 2004; “Solución de controversias derivadas de incumplimientos en la Comunidad Andina”, 2004 and “Informe de la Secretaría General sobre cumplimiento de los compromisos y mecanismos de solución de controversias”, 15 March 2005.
According to Decision 425, the SGCAN shall, on its own initiative or at the request of a country, conduct investigations to determine whether a violation took place and shall issue an opinion explaining its reasoning; notice of any representations made shall be given to the member State alleged to be in violation.
As in MERCOSUR, where pre-judicial consultations were reviewed, in the Andean Community opinions issued as a result of that process between 2000 and 2004 were reviewed.
Many of these decisions were prompted by the interests of private parties or businesses in the respective countries.
The reasons for the remaining consultations were requests for extensions, for authorization, or for information on the application of certain corrective measures, or measures intended to protect the domestic market of each country.
As for the agreements or regulations alleged to have been violated, during the 2003-2004 biennium safeguards appear to be the most common allegation, with 15 complaints (25% of the total).
That category is followed by opinions issued on violations of the common external tariff (CET), with 11 cases (18%); measures violating Andean Community regulations, with 7 cases (12%); and the use of phytosanitary measures that restrict trade, with 6 complaints (10%).
These four types of measures combined account for 65% of all opinions issued by SGCAN in 2004.
Looking at a longer period, the main reasons for requests for pre-judicial opinions were the CET (14%), with 38 opinions; licences and price controls (14%), with 39 opinions; and matters related to safeguards, antidumping and rules of origin, with more or less the same number each (see ﬁgure III.9).
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 115 The economic sectors with the most complaints in 2003-2004 are primarily agriculture (meat, potatoes, fruits, oilseeds, cotton, rice and others), with 30 complaints representing 50% of the total, and manufacturing, with 43.3%, 26 complaints.
The measures most often alleged in the area of agroindustrial products (reﬁned oils, canned goods, vegetable fats and oils, and others) are the application of safeguards, phytosanitary Central American Common Market (CACM) In the Central American Common Market, the trend towards fewer violations of free trade standards continues.
That case is still open.24 Caribbean Community (CARICOM) With regard to dispute resolution, the countries are making headway in establishing the Caribbean Court of Justice (CCJ), which will have its headquarters in Port-of-Spain, Trinidad and Tobago.25 In July 2004, the Heads of Government approved the appointment of the ﬁrst chief justice, proposed by the Regional Judicial and Legal Services Commission.
In October, however, it was decided to postpone the inauguration until the ﬁrst quarter of 2005.
Consequently, Jamaicaʼs ratiﬁcation, necessary for the establishment of the Court of Justice, was suspended.
The Court of Justice therefore cannot replace the Privy Council, whose functions date back to the colonial period in the Caribbean, when the subjection of these countriesʼ legal systems to that of the mother country was the norm.
The remaining dispute, according to a report published by SIECA on 5 January 2005, involves inspection fees charged by Honduran authorities to Costa Rican truckers hauling goods in international transit from Mexico to Costa Rica.
In July 2003, at the twenty-fourth ordinary meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government, the Protocol of Privileges and Immunities of the CCJ and of the Regional Judicial and Legal Services Commission, the protocol for the establishment of the CCJ and the agreement establishing the Financial Fund for the CCJ were signed (SGC, 2004-2005).
Pane_Cap_IIIb_Engl.indd 116 solidarity with Jamaica, also postponed the deposit of their ratiﬁcation instruments while waiting for Jamaica to decide what to do.
After the CCJ is inaugurated, it will have to resolve some conﬂicts that may arise in connection with tariff barriers.
Examples include the general tax levied by Belize; the tax on beer, pasta and carbonated beverages imposed by Saint Kitts and Nevis; as well as the lumber tax adopted by Suriname and the environmental fees set by several countries (SGC, 2005c).
Recently, Jamaica applied a waiver of the 25% CET to its rice imports from Guyana and Suriname on the grounds that the two countries are not in compliance.
They, in turn, claim they are willing to fulﬁll their commitments as suppliers, and they complain of pressure exerted on them by Jamaican business owners to lower prices in the short term.
This dispute will probably be the ﬁrst one the CCJ will have to resolve (EIU, 2005).
Trinidad and Tobago has made the most progress in adopting legislation applicable to the common market, as it already has laws governing consumer protection, antidumping regulations and compensatory measures.
A draft is being written to implement legislation on harmonized customs models and regulations, while the competition law and the legal systems for the establishment of services and capital remain to be implemented by the countries.
In most of the areas requiring legislative harmonization, the first drafts for discussion are still being written (consumer law, antidumping and compensatory measures, banking and insurance legislation, law on companies, intellectual property rights, technical rules and standards, medicine and food labelling, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, subsidies, commercial arbitration and others).
In conclusion, little headway has been made, and in practice heterogeneity is the rule (SGC, 2005c).
Bouzas, R. (2004), “La dinámica institucional y formativa: un balance”, Evaluación del desempeño y aportes para un rediseño del Mercosur.
Delgado, R. (2004), “Asimetrías y competencia: aportes para un rediseño de los instrumentos comerciales”, Evaluación del desempeño y aportes para un rediseño del Mercosur.
European Commission (2002) “Latin America: The European Commission adopts a strategy for regional cooperation Fanelli, J.M. (2004), “Coordinación macroeconómica, competitividad y crecimiento”, Evaluación del desempeño y aportes para un rediseño del Mercosur.
Lafer, C. (2000), “Brasil: dilemas e desaﬁos da política externa”, Revista de estudios avançãdos, vol. 14, No. 38.
Markwald, Ricardo (2005), “Política externa comercial: o caso do MERCOSUR”, Revista brasileira de comércio exterior, No. 83.
OLADE (Latin American Energy Organization) (2004), “Sistema de información económica energética de la organización latinoamericana de energía”, Quito.
Peña, Félix (2004) “Algunos desafíos políticos e institucionales que plantea la globalización de la Integración: el caso de los países socios del Mercosur”, document prepared for the seminar La globalización de la integración en América Latina, Barcelona, Fundación CIDOB, March.
Introduction With the decisive Sixth Ministerial Meeting of the World Trade Organization —to be held in Hong Kong, Special Administrative Region of China, from 13 to 18 December 2005— just a few months away, the global economy is exhibiting an alarming increase in protectionist leanings, particularly in the most highly industrialized economies.
The controversy in the United States concerning that countryʼs deepening current account deﬁcit, for example, is increasingly being tied in with concern about soaring Chinese exports to that market.
Senior authorities in the Administration and in Congress have deployed a battery of tactics for putting pressure on China to revalue its currency, since they argue (based on this simpliﬁed version of the issue) that this will pave the way for a correction of the present external imbalance in the worldʼs largest economy.
Although, as noted in chapter I, the actual ﬁgures do not back up this idea, quite drastic unilateral proposals are being put forward in this connection in the United States Congress.
These proposals have not been acted upon, but they nonetheless contribute to a certain uneasiness about trade between China and the United States, as well as casting doubt upon the willingness of major political actors in the United States to assume a leadership position in promoting free trade.
In so doing they also hamper a process which, while perhaps generating transitional adjustment costs, has the potential to beneﬁt all the parties concerned.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 121 As in the case of textiles, within the context of the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA-DR), the quarrel about sugar imports was a symbolic test of the Bush Administrationʼs ability to make good on the promise it made to developing countries to liberalize trade in agricultural goods in the Doha Round.
If protectionism and special national interests had prevailed and the treaty had not been ratiﬁed, it would have been even harder to reach agreement on this point in the WTO negotiations.
The Doha Round negotiations, as well as the trade disputes that have arisen in various areas and the rulings issued in those cases (e.g., the complaint regarding cotton subsidies ﬁled by Brazil and the reform of the European Unionʼs sugar subsidization programme), are forcing industrialized countries to limit their “amber box” subsidies.
The path that events are taking within WTO makes it more difﬁcult for countries with high trade barriers in the agricultural sector to maintain productionlinked subsidy programmes.
In this sense, the Doha agenda represents a unique opportunity to address the protectionism practised by WTO members in sectors of importance to Latin American and Caribbean countries, particularly agriculture (including sugar, cotton and bananas) and textiles and clothing.
With this situation as a backdrop, the expiration of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing and the consequent elimination of quotas on imports to major markets have been followed by sizeable increases in Chinese exports to the United States and the European Union.
In both cases, this sparked wide-ranging protests in production sectors as well as public reactions from political ﬁgures and trade authorities.
Meanwhile, the debate regarding CAFTA-DR in the United States Congress has focused attention on the power of the sugar lobby, which has been buttressed by protectionist voices in the textiles industry (i.e., the two subsectors of greatest interest to the economies of Central America and the Dominican Republic).
The agricultural sector is the focal point of protectionism in the industrialized economies, but it is also the arena in which developing countries have won a number of victories over proponents of this sort of trade distortion.
Examples include the Dispute Settlement Bodyʼs favourable rulings regarding the complaints lodged by Brazil concerning the European Unionʼs sugar subsidies and the United Statesʼ subsidization of local cotton producers (WTO, 2002a, 2002b, 2002c and 2003a).
These major achievements have implications in a number of areas, above and beyond their impact in terms of employment and growth in developing countries.
First of all, the WTO rulings have bolstered the developing countriesʼ arguments concerning agricultural subsidies and domestic supports in developed nations.
This raises the ante in the negotiations, since certain aspects of these issues could have been addressed during these talks had the WTO not already ruled them incompatible with its rules and therefore in need of adjustment.
This reopens the debate on reforming the WTO Dispute Settlement Body (DSB) itself with a view to guaranteeing the effectiveness of its rulings, since shortcomings in its current procedures allow losing governments to “buy” their way out of the obligation to change a protectionist rule by offering compensation or simply by weathering the retaliatory measures.
This is especially the case when the loser is a developed country that has the economic capacity to do The inherent challenge to the credibility and effectiveness of WTO rulings is particularly serious when the parties involved are major players in the world economy and are denouncing practices on each otherʼs part that are in breach of multilateral WTO agreements.
The United States and the European Union have, for example, been involved in protracted trade disputes concerning hormone-treated beef and steel production example is the Boeing/Airbus dispute, with the worldʼs two largest civil aircraft manufacturers confronting each other in what is set to become the most extensive and complex case ever handled by WTO.
For example, the Byrd amendment, the 1916 Anti-Dumping Act and Section 211 of the 1998 Omnibus Appropriations Act have all been found to be incompatible with WTO rules but have yet to be modiﬁed by the United States.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 122 In the final analysis, then, protectionist pressures have not eased, nor are they confined to traditional industries such as sugar, cotton and textiles.
They are also present in sectors of the “new economy”, such as civil aeronautics and services.
An example of the latter is the current debate in the United States about outsourcing services to India; another is Antigua and Barbudaʼs recent victory in the case brought against the United States regarding the application of protectionist measures to games of chance and gambling.
Imports of Chinese textile and apparel products into the United States exhibited a striking year-on-year increase of more than 60% in the ﬁrst half of 2005.
Imports of some “sensitive” goods (such as underwear, cotton trousers, and cotton knit shirts) that had previously been governed by the system for setting quotas on a country-by-country basis have trebled or even quadrupled in volume.
This is taking place against the backdrop of tense bilateral trade relations at a time when the United Statesʼ trade deﬁcit with China reached a record US$ 162 billion in 2004, making it the largest trade imbalance ever recorded by the United States with any one trading partner.
This upswing in Chinese exports has come at the cost of dwindling shares in United States imports of textiles and clothing for Latin American economies such as those of Mexico and a number of Central American countries.
Upon receipt of this request, on 27 May 2005, China has been obliged to hold its shipments to a level no greater than 7.5% above the preceding yearʼs.
Since no mutually satisfactory solution was reached within the 90-day consultation period, in accordance with the ﬁndings of CITA and the terms of China's WTO accession agreement, the United States was allowed to apply limits on imports of brassieres and speciﬁed synthetic ﬁbres from.
Strictly speaking, the new United States quotas do not violate the WTO rules, since, earlier on, China accepted the imposition of safeguards through 2008 as one of the conditions set for its entry into WTO in 2001.
European ofﬁcials also considered some form of trade restriction to stem the ﬂood of Chinese textile and apparel imports into the European Union.
Based on import statistics for the ﬁrst quarter of 2005, the European Commission launched investigations into 10 categories of Chinese textile exports to the European Union.
In all of these categories, it was found that import volumes for Chinese textiles had risen above the “alert levels” deﬁned by the Commission.4 A special task force was In the ﬁrst ﬁve months of 2005, Chinaʼs trade with the United States swelled by 24.6% to US$ 77.7 billion.
Its trade with the European Union jumped by 24.2% to US$ 81.8 billion, and its trade ﬂows with Japan totalled US$ 70.2 billion.
Chinese garment exports during the same period amounted to US$ 24.4 billion, up by 17.2% on year (The Wall Street Journal, 2005).
There are reportedly about 665,000 textile and apparel manufacturing jobs in the United States, and some quarters fear that those jobs may vanish within a few years.
According to the National Council of Textile Organizations, 17,000 jobs were lost in 2005 in the United States following the closure of 11 textile and apparel plants (The New York Times, 2005).
Chinese textile exports to the European Union increased by 18% during the ﬁrst four months of 2005 as compared to the same period of 2004 (El Mercurio, 2005). set up to conduct a full and rapid investigation into the matter.
After arduous negotiations, in a bid to defuse a trade row, on 10 June the two sides agreed that between 11 June 2005 and the end of 2007, the growth of Chinese textile exports to the European Union would be limited to an annual increase of from 8% to 12.5% over an agreed base quantity.
In return, the European Union has agreed to halt its investigation into Chinese exports of 10 textile products to the European Union, including cotton cloth, T-shirts, ﬂax yarn, bed sheets, tablecloths and trousers.
Chinaʼs ofﬁcial media has hailed this agreement as an important step forward, stating that the 25-nation blocʼs positive approach contrasted sharply with the attitude of the United States and that the European Union will safeguard the Chinese textile industryʼs interests and provide a stable trading environment for Chinese companies.
Other Chinese circles expressed dissatisfaction with the accord, however, and accused the government of giving into foreign pressure.
On 5 September, China and the European Union signed a new agreement under which the latter broadened its concessions and was to provide clearance for numerous import shipments from China that had been held up at their ports of entry.
Some of the other countries affected by Chinese textile export surge are to be found in Latin America.
Alarmed by a 58% year-on-year increase in Chinese footwear, textiles, cellular phones and furniture in the ﬁrst quarter of 2005, the Brazilian Government is also considering applying safeguards to protect domestic industries.
Of the 11 investigations under way as of May 2005, two involve China.
China is also the object of the largest number of antidumping and safeguard measures being applied by Brazil (11 out of the 44 measures in effect as of May 2005) (Ministry of Development, Industry and Commerce, 2005).
Imports from China have increased dramatically since the government recognized China as a market economy, a status which increases the difﬁculty of ﬁling an anti-dumping complaint.
Argentina, which, like Brazil, has recognized China as a market economy, has started applying safeguard measures in its textile sector.
The Brazilian Government may opt for issuing two different rules, one applying to Chinese textiles and another for all other Chinese products.
The re-imposition of quotas is also contagious: Turkey has decided to impose textile quotas to protect its large domestic industry against an onslaught of Chinese textile and apparel imports.
In addition to safeguards, there is increasing interest among manufacturers in pursuing anti-dumping cases.
Anti-dumping complaints Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 124 are usually a source of greater concern than safeguards, since the latter can be applied only for shorter periods, whereas anti-dumping duties can be maintained for up to ﬁve years or more.
The procedure involved in lodging an anti-dumping complaint is complex, and in order to ﬁle such a case, domestic manufacturers or workers must account for at least 25% of the domestic industryʼs output.
Thus far, the only countries regarded as having beneﬁted from the elimination of quotas are China and India, and this has been at the expense of middle-income countries, rather than low-income countries such as Bangladesh, Cambodia, the Lao Peopleʼs Democratic Republic, Mongolia, Nepal, Sri Lanka or Viet Nam.
This is partly because many buyers are reluctant to shift too much sourcing to China due to fears that the United States and the European Union might re-impose quotas.
The tax, seems to have had only a marginal impact, however, and the government has therefore been obliged to consider more drastic restraints, such as the establishment of minimum prices for its exports.
In an attempt to ease trade tensions, on 20 May the Chinese authorities announced that they were raising export tariffs on 74 types of textile and apparel products to ¥ 1 (US$ 0.12) per item of clothing (a threefold increase from the previous level of ¥ 0.3 per unit).
These restrictions were not to apply to categories subject to import restrictions abroad, however.
VERs were frequently used in the past, until the countries agreed to eliminate them during the ﬁnal stage of the Uruguay Round.
Chinaʼs decision —after coming under pressure from the European Union and the United States— to levy taxes on its textile exports as a way of avoiding safeguards can be regarded as a variation on such “voluntary” restraints.
A coalition of 15 of the worldʼs poorest developing countries is now lobbying the United States Congress to pass a new scheme that would give them trade preferences to offset the advantages gained by China and India with the lifting of quotas on textiles and apparel.
These countries are at a considerable disadvantage in selling to the United States market, not only vis-à-vis such large exporters as China and India, but also relative to smaller African and Latin American countries that enjoy duty-free access for many garment exports.
A number of political hurdles will have to be overcome, however, in order to win passage of the new trade preferences bill, which enjoys some bipartisan support in both houses of Congress, as well as backing from various transnational companies.
Chinaʼs competitive advantage over Latin America and the Caribbean is one of the reasons why the Bush Administration has tried to level the playing field in order to support the countriesʼ domestic textile and apparel industries.
The White House sought to use these measures to gain the industryʼs support for CAFTA-DR, which Congress ratified in late July, although by a very thin margin (for a more detailed discussion of this issue, see section C).
And in fact, United States textile companies that have moved much of their production to Central America tend be CAFTA-DR supporters.
The ratification of this agreement locked in duty-free access to the United States for this sector, which employs close to 400,000 people (Financial Times, 2005a).
It has also been seen as sending a clear signal to the world that the United States is willing to make the tough choices needed to advance trade liberalization on a global scale, especially since a failure to win ratification would have undermined the United Statesʼ leadership in the Doha Round.
If Congress were to refuse to ratify a trade agreement of this sort, other countries engaged in negotiations with the United States might well ask themselves why they should make any concessions whatsoever regarding politically sensitive products.
Negotiations between the United States and China regarding its currency regime The implications of the trade dispute between the United States and China concerning textiles and apparel has spilled over into another contentious area: Chinaʼs currency regime.
Some scholars and Congressmen in the United States are of the opinion that it should threaten to levy a hefty surcharge on imports from China.
In April, the Senate voted 67 to 33 against killing an amendment that would have attached a provision calling for a 27.5% surcharge to a spending bill.5 The Democratic Senator from New York, Mr.
Schumer, withdrew the amendment, but Senate Republican leaders brought the bill up for a second vote in late July, but it was defeated.
The point of this proposal was not to impose duties but rather to persuade China to revalue its currency, the yuan, by 25% or more.
The advocates of a change in Chinaʼs currency regime argue that todayʼs unsustainable pattern of global trade based on expanding United States deﬁcits and Asian surpluses siphons off jobs and production from the United States and poor countries in Africa and in Latin America and the Caribbean.
A higher yuan would allow other Asian countries to revalue their currencies and the United States to reduce it trade imbalance.
To date, by investing the surplus dollars earned from exports in United States Treasury bonds and other dollar-denominated securities, China and other Asian countries are, in effect, recycling the United Statesʼ twin deﬁcits.
This has held down United States interest rates, encouraged households in that country to borrow and kept Asian currencies from rising.
A large-scale revaluation of the yuan and other Asian currencies ought to alter this process, but might also create turbulence in the international ﬁnancial system.
This would also eventually affect the interest rates paid by many Latin America and the Caribbean countries on their foreign debts.
For nearly two years now, the United States Treasury Secretary has been engaging in ﬁnancial diplomacy in an attempt to convince Chinese leaders that it would be in their own interest to ﬂoat their exchange rate and thus allow it to respond to global ﬁnancial markets.
The impact of a revaluation of the yuan cannot be predicted with any certainty, however, and it would be unlikely to be enough to bring the United States trade imbalance into a sustainable range.
Graham (Republican Senator from South Carolina) stunned administration ofﬁcials in April by winning bipartisan Senate support for a measure that would threaten China with tariffs up to 27.5% if the Asian country failed to change its currency regime.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 125 As noted in the Report to Congress on International Economic and Exchange Rate Policies, published on 17 May 2005, the Secretary of the Treasury found no major trading partner of the United States met the technical requirements to be considered as manipulating the exchange rate.6 Secretary John W.
Nevertheless, in his view, the risks associated with a delay in reforming the currency regime were very substantial, not only for the world economy but also for China itself.
An independent monetary policy should allow China to more effectively pursue price stability, stabilize growth and respond to economic shocks.
Although the United States Administration has argued that it is in Chinaʼs interest to revalue the yuan, the issue poses a difﬁcult problem for it as well.
Paul Krugman has contended that low interest rates have been a crucial factor in the United States housing boom and that this boom, in turn, has buoyed consumer spending as homeowners convert their rising house values into cash by reﬁnancing their mortgages (Krugman, 2005).
A reversal of Chinaʼs exchange-rate policy could drive up United States interest rates and perhaps burst the housing bubble, which might well trigger bankruptcies, a downturn in employment in the construction industry and a drop in consumer spending.
Krugman has therefore warned that the United States Government is not paying due attention to what effects it might have if China actually does accede to the United Statesʼ demands and allows the yuan to rise.
On 21 July, the Peopleʼs Bank of China announced a 2.1% revaluation, permitting the yuan to move within an adjusted 0.3% band, counting from the close of business on the preceding day, based on a basket of its main trading partnersʼ currencies.
This scale of this revaluation was as had been expected but, at least in theory, this scheme could permit the currency to build up a cumulative increase of as much as 6% per month (if it rose by the maximum amount permitted —0.3%— on each and every working day), which would certainly constitute a signiﬁcant revaluation.
This exchange-rate policy carries forward the administered ﬂotation policy that China has maintained since 1994 and is not expected to have any signiﬁcant impact in the short run on trade ﬂows between China and its principal markets.
The possibility does exist, however, that investors may speculate on the yuan and start to invest heavily in China, which might generate inﬂationary pressures and create asset price bubbles.
Meanwhile, this revaluation could beneﬁt Latin America and the Caribbean in the medium term by making the regionʼs products more competitive, not only in the Chinese market but also vis-à-vis Chinese products that they compete with in other markets.
As noted in chapter I, if the dollar parity of the yuan and other Asian currencies had remained unchanged, the inevitable devaluation of the dollar would have been reﬂected in revaluations of the euro and Latin American currencies, thereby dampening the momentum of these countriesʼ export sectors and growth capacity.
It would also have added to the external debt burden as international interest rates rose.
In the view of the United States Treasury Department, China has clearly stated that it intends to move towards a market-based, ﬂexible exchange rate and has undertaken the necessary preparations to that end.
However, some segments of Congress and the private sector do not share this view and would like to continue pressuring China to apply immediate self-restraints.
This is because Chinaʼs ﬁnancial system is quite shallow, and the lifting of all controls on capital movements, thereby providing Chinese residents with the choice of maintaining savings abroad, could result in an exodus of domestic capital.
The Commission therefore advocates the idea that, in the short run, China should raise its currency peg substantially and reinstate capital controls.
As part of the revaluation, China could use a basket of currencies as a peg for the yuan rather than just the United States dollar (United States-China Economic and Security Review Commission, 2005).
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 126 The protectionist tone adopted by the United States manufacturing sector has spread to other industries.
With their bonds now being downgraded to “junk” status, General Motors and Ford have stepped up their lobbying efforts in conjunction with other industrial and agricultural associations belonging to the Coalition for a Sound Dollar, which represents over 90% of United States exporters.
The Coalition, whose complaints had until recently focused primarily on China, is now broadening its campaign to include Japan and the Republic of Korea as countries that are manipulating their exchange rates.
In these companiesʼ view, the main cause of their loss of competitiveness is the high cost health care.
This constitutes a major problem that Washington has little interest in tackling at present.9 Most foreign motor vehicle plants in the country are located in Southern states, and a majority of their congressional representatives are Republican.
Increased sales of foreign motor vehicles produced in the United States create jobs in these states, making the Republican majority in Congress less sympathetic to job losses in the Midwestern states.
The United States Congress, which ﬁnally voted in favour of the pact on 27 July 2005, was not entirely convinced of this, however, while organized labour, sugar producers and many textile companies in the United States opposed it, warning that it would harm workers and destroy industries.
Workers and industrialists in several CAFTA countries were also concerned about the agreementʼs possible adverse effects and tried to slow down its ratiﬁcation process.
The major advocates of the pact are the United States industries for which it will open up new export opportunities.
More than 50 groups from the poultry, dairy, fruit and other industries, together with certain manufacturers and service providers, have supported CAFTA-DR.10 Their support stems from the fact that, under this agreement, more than 80% of United States manufactures and more than half of its agricultural exports will immediately be granted duty-free entry to the Central American countries.
In addition, the liberalization of the services sector works to the beneﬁt of United States high-technology service providers in areas such as banking, telecommunications, energy, insurance and entertainment. (Ofﬁce of the United States Trade Representative, 2004).
In addition to these economic factors, there are geographic, social and political reasons for favouring CAFTA-DR.
First, Central America shares a border with Mexico, which is already a member of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and CAFTADR can thus be seen as a natural extension of that agreement.
A second factor is the existence of so many Latin American emigrants living in the United States.
Yet another is that this pact is aligned with United States foreign policy towards a region that has suffered from civil conﬂicts, insurgencies and human rights abuses.
Today, this subregion is an important trading partner (the second largest Latin American market for its exports after Mexico), having imported close to US$ 15 billion of United States products in 2003.11 This places Central The “Big Three” make 74% of the motor vehicles manufactured in the United States, employing 400,000 workers at 74 plants in 34 states.
Of all the autoparts made in the country, the Big Three purchase close to 80%.
These companies provide health insurance beneﬁts for more than 2 million people at an average cost of US$ 1,275 per vehicle, while foreign producers operating in the United States employ 290,000 workers and spend US$ 425 per vehicle on health care.
Reciprocal merchandise trade between the United States and the ﬁve CAFTA countries and the Dominican Republic reached US$ 31.9 billion in 2003, making these countries the thirteenth-largest market for United States products and placing them ahead of Brazil, Singapore and Australia.
This means that the Central American market is four times as large as Chileʼs, which signed a free trade agreement with the United States in 2003.
Meanwhile, the Central American subregion is the ﬁfteenth largest buyer of United States imports, with such purchases totalling US$ 16.8 billion in 2003 (United States Census Bureau, n/d).
One very controversial issue that could have blocked passage of CAFTA-DR by the United States Congress revolved around the sugar industry.
This sector put up a great deal of opposition to its ratiﬁcation, claiming that it would be the clearest loser under the agreement.
The pact does, in fact, open up the tightly regulated United States market to imports from the Central American countries and the Dominican Republic.
While organized labour and textile manufacturers also opposed the agreement, sugar growers waged by far the strongest battle to defeat it.
To this end, they capitalized on the breadth of the industryʼs political geography, which ranges from caneproducing states such as Louisiana and Florida to sugarbeet producers such as Idaho, Wyoming and Montana.
Farmers lobbied their congressional representatives to signal their disapproval of the agreement.
Sugar has long been one of the most sheltered industries in the United Statesʼ highly protected agricultural sector.
Since the mid-1800s, the United States Government has taken steps to prop up the price of sugar and protect domestic growers, and the existing programme of price supports is practically untouchable.
Since the Republican-led Congress began opposing farm supports in the mid-1990s, sugar has been one of the few commodities to survive unscathed.
As in the case of textiles and clothing in the context of CAFTA, the dispute over sugar imports is a symbolically important test of the Bush Administrationʼs ability to deliver on a broader promise to developing countries to liberalize agricultural trade as part of the Doha Round.
If CAFTA-DR had been defeated in Congress by protectionist voices and special interests, it would have made it difﬁcult for the United States to secure a global accord at WTO.
Although several Republican members of the Senate Finance Committee (the chamberʼs starting point on trade and a barometer of congressional sentiment) voiced deep concerns about the agreementʼs implications for the sugar industry, the committee voted in favour of a bill containing enabling legislation (11 votes in favour, 9 against) on 14 June 2005, with opinions being divided along party lines.
The CAFTA-DR countries cleared another hurdle in the United States Congress on the following day when they won a clear majority (25 to 16) in the Ways and Means Committee of the House of Representatives.
After the two relevant committees voted in favour of the agreement, the Bush Administration submitted the bill to Congress.
The real battle was waged on the ﬂoor of the House of Representatives.
The Houseʼs passage of the bill by 217 to 215 in the dawn of 25 July surely elicited a sigh of relief from the Bush Administration and other supporters of the agreement.
In the end, 25 Republicans broke with their party to vote against the agreement, while a scant 15 of the legislatureʼs 202 Democrats voted for it.
The passage of the accord provided a small beacon of hope for advocates of trade liberalization and to some extent helped to counter the idea that protectionist political forces were dominating the United States Congress.
Ratiﬁcation of the agreement by the legislatures of Costa Rica and Nicaragua was still pending at the time of this writing.
During the campaign, the Bush Administration worked unstintingly to retain the treatyʼs provisions concerning the sugar industry, since their modiﬁcation would have eroded support in the Central American countries, where many felt that this issue would make or break the agreement.
In return, however, the Bush Administration agreed to expose United States sugar producers to greater foreign competition.
Under CAFTA-DR, six countries will obtain a small amount of additional access to the United States sugar market.
These countries can now export 311,700 metric tons of sugar each year to the United States under existing tariff-rate quotas.
In the ﬁrst year that CAFTA-DR is in effect, they will be able to export an additional 109,000 metric tons and, by its ﬁfteenth year, the countries may export up to an additional 153,140 metric tons.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 128 balance of the existing price-support programme, which is designed to prop up sugar prices by controlling the amount of sugar put on the market.
CAFTA-DR critics say that even a small increase in imports will cut into the production allotments of United States farmers, thus reducing their income.
As a result, neither the supply nor the price of sugar should change very much.
It should be pointed out that, as an effect of the existing sugar programme, United States sugar prices are from two to three times higher than the world price.
Sugar users dislike marketing allotments, but the United States sugar lobby resolutely supports the system.
The sugar lobby, which contributed US$ 3.2 million to political campaigns in 2004,15 put strong pressure on Congress to veto CAFTA-DR.
These financial contributions helped the sector to see to it that import quotas were maintained over the past three decades, resulting in a 75% reduction in sugar imports.
As pointed out earlier, the United States imports only about 10% of the sugar its population consumes, and the price paid by United States consumers is practically twice as much as the international price.
With CAFTA-DR, sugar imports will rise by only some 1.2%, while the beneﬁts to this sector in Central America in terms of income for small and medium-sized farmers and increased employment will be signiﬁcant (Ofﬁce of the United States Trade Representative, n/d).
USITC has stressed that sugar price supports and marketing allotments are not part of free trade agreements (FTAs).
USITC has pointed out that none of the provisions contained in CAFTA affects the price-support loan rate for sugar or any other part of the domestic sugar programme.
FTAs refer solely to market access, i.e., tariffs, quotas and other non-tariff trade barriers.
If the United States had insisted on leaving sugar out of CAFTA-DR, the Central American countries would have responded by excluding corn, beans, pork, poultry, dairy products and other goods that they regard as “sensitive.” Moreover, Congress cannot alter the terms of an executive agreement such as CAFTA-DR.
Under Trade Promotion Authority (TPA) procedures, Congress may only ratify or reject trade pacts (since otherwise, the signatory nations would not be approving the same agreement).
The sugar lobbyʼs efforts were accompanied by similarly intense lobbying by the textile sector, which also pressured Congress to keep it protected from foreign competition.
The ﬁrst studyʼs ﬁndings give a price decline of 0.25%, based on a 2.54% decrease in the industryʼs revenues.
The second projects an initial price decline of 0.8%, with a 1.2% price decrease after 15 years.
The Senate Committee on Agriculture has therefore sought to guarantee that CAFTA will not result in such a price drop (Inside U.S.
This will lessen the competitiveness of Central American producers, which face strong competition from China and India.
Many Republican members of the House who represent textile-producing districts remained undecided for quite some time or said they would oppose CAFTADR.
As a result, the Administration found itself debating whether to concentrate its efforts on a compromise with House members from sugar-producing districts or from textile-producing districts.
Meanwhile, the United States Government modiﬁed some of the CAFTA provisions on pocketing and lining referring to the applicable rules of origin in order to require that, in order to be eligible for duty-free access, any non-visible pocketing and lining of garments must be sourced from the United States or the Central American region (Inside US Trade, 2005).
The corresponding side agreements have yet to be debated by the six countries in an ofﬁcial forum.
In addition, the United States Government has agreed to address some of the speciﬁc complaints of its CAFTA-DR partners.17 However, opponents of the pact have argued that this change is unlikely to be passed into law because the authority to change rules of origin for textiles ultimately rests with Congress, not the Administration.
Several members of Congress have linked their support to the approval of a provision would allow the United States to impose countervailing duties on Chinese textile and apparel goods.
From this perspective, although it introduces improved market access provisions, CAFTA-DR is not a totally balanced free trade agreement.
Its limitations are concentrated in those sectors that have been protected for years and in which the Central American countries have strong comparative advantages.
With respect to sugar, the pact maintains onerous quotas and prohibitive tariffs of more than 100% on imports in excess of the quota.
This is one of the highest tariff rates in the United Statesʼ entire tariff schedule. (CAFTADR, 2004).
This position undoubtedly reﬂects the political inﬂuence of the United States sugar industry (USTR, 2004b).
As an example, the Bush Administration has reached an agreement with Nicaragua which will subsequently have to be approved by all members countries of CAFTA-DR.
Under this agreement, Nicaragua will be able to use the equivalent of another 300 million square metres of fabric from third countries in garments eligible for duty-free entry to the United States.
In return, Nicaragua will agree to use this tariff preference in a way that will minimize any economic damage to United States companies that ship fabric to CAFTA-DR countries for use in making trousers (Inside US Trade, 2005a).
The compensation scheme provides cash payments or other forms of trade relief to Central American producers if they cannot ship all the negotiated 109,000 tons of sugar into the United States market.
In any year, the United States may, at its option, apply a mechanism that results in compensation to a Partyʼs exporters of sugar goods in lieu of according duty-free treatment to some or all of the duty-free quantity of sugar Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 130 E.
WTO Appellate Body ruling on the European Union sugar regime The decision by the WTO Appellate Body giving the European Union up to 15 months to bring its sugar subsidy regime into compliance with global trade rules constitutes yet another victory for Brazil, after the United States lost a similar appeal over its cotton subsidies.
In this dispute, Australia, Brazil and Thailand challenged two types of European Union sugar exports as being subsidized in ways that contravene the WTO Agreement on Agriculture (WTO, 2002a, 2002b and 2003a).
The ﬁrst claim related to the export of “C-sugar” (over-quota sugar production that must be exported without subsidy).
The price guarantee applies only to speciﬁc quantities (quotas) of sugar per European Union member States.
Sugar produced outside the quota does not receive support and cannot be freely marketed within the European Union.
This sugar, declassiﬁed and considered as C-sugar, must be exported without refunds being made to the sugar industry or beet producers.
The second complaint related to export refunds on 1.6 million tons of sugar, which are equivalent to preferential European Union imports from African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc (ACP) countries and India.
The WTO panel found that the European Union is dumping more than three times the level of subsidized sugar exports that is allowed under WTO rules. (In the Uruguay Round, the European Union committed to reduce its subsidized sugar exports to a maximum of 1.3 million tons per year.
The panel also found that in 2004/2005, around 2.1 million tons of what the European Union claims to be unsubsidized sugar (i.e., C-sugar) was effectively cross-subsidized by the Union.
They also found that the European Union is contravening its WTO commitments by subsidizing re-exports of an amount equivalent to imports of sugar from the African, Caribbean and Paciﬁc (ACP) countries and India (1.6 million tons).
These subsidized exports are not included in the European Unionʼs reduction commitments and further exceed the European Unionʼs permitted level of subsidized sugar exports.
Thus, these quotas were established at the country level and referred only to the maximum quantity of sugar eligible for price supports (intervention purchases).
Member States were free to produce more, but the surplus had to be sold outside the European Union.
The Appellate Body considered that the panel erred in not addressing the claims under the WTO Subsidies Agreement, but the Appellate Body was not in a position to rule on these issues.
The Appellate Body gave the European Union up to 15 months to do so, instead of the original 90-day deadline called for by Australia, Brazil and Thailand.
The Commission had already committed itself to a reform of the European Unionʼs sugar market regime, but this WTO decision will undoubtedly put further political pressure on the Commission to do so, as the initial proposals published in the summer of 2004 would not have gone far enough in reducing the European Unionʼs sugar exports.
The European Union expects to see signiﬁcant job losses in this sector, in what would constitute a continuation of the trend observed in recent years)24 as a result of the reforms, as well as a decline in its competitiveness, and these projections have been put forward as justiﬁcation for the postponement of these modiﬁcations for a number of years.
However, these negative trends are likely to represent short-term consequences and to be offset by long-term beneﬁts.
These beneﬁts would include the restructuring of an obsolete sugar system based primarily on unfair trade practices, which would in turn allow the European Union to return to truly sustainable levels of competitiveness, production and employment, rather than relying, as it does now, on a public support regime.
This artiﬁcial regime is what has maintained the European Union in its place as the worldʼs largest sugar producer for so many years and as the third largest exporter, after South and Central America (ECLAC, 2000).
The reform will lower internal prices and quotas, reduce exports and export refunds, and do away with intervention, while providing tailored assistance to the ACP sugar-exporting countries affected by the reduction in European Union prices.
Any changes that need to be made in the way the European Union sugar market is organized in order to comply with this ruling were to be included in the Commissionʼs reform proposals, which were to be published on 22 June, and the reform process was scheduled to start in July 2005.
In their view, the Appellate Body rulings have systemic implications for the three pillars of the Agreement on Agriculture (market access, domestic support and export subsidies) and have created an element of uncertainty that now needs to be addressed in the Doha Round.
According to ﬁgures compiled by the European Communities, there are more than 230,000 farms growing sugar beets in the 15 countries that belonged to the European Union prior to its most recent enlargement (the “EU-15”).
A majority of these growers are located in Germany (21%), Italy (20%) and France (14%).
There are reportedly 135 processing plants and 6 reﬁneries in these 15 countries, while the Unionʼs recent enlargement added another 100 sugar processing plants (around 70 in Poland and 30 in the other six new sugar-producing member States).
In the 15 pre-enlargement members of the European Union, the number of jobs fell from and a further 15,000 jobs are expected to be lost by 2012 (a reduction of more than 75%).
The 25 member States of the newly enlarged Union (the “EU-25”) account for 14% of world sugar output, 13% of world sugar consumption, 12% of world exports of sugar and 5% of total imports of this commodity.
The European Union is a key player on world sugar markets, but continues to lag behind Brazil.
Brazil occupies a dominant position in exports and does not provide domestic price supports for this product, whose domestic price is higher than world market prices.
This could, in turn, harm “Over the last decade the sector has shed around 17,000 industry-related jobs.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 132 the interests of poorer developing countries, particularly those in Africa and the Caribbean, where sugar exports play a pivotal role in the economy at large.27 This might also prompt these countries to apply trade measures aimed at boosting their sugar production, such as subsidies and other kinds of public support.
The WTO ruling on the cotton case brought by Brazil On 8 September 2004, the WTO panel released its report on the cotton case brought by Brazil.
Its ﬁndings were then conﬁrmed by the Appellate Body in March 2005 (DSB, 2002c).
The panel found that many United States cotton support programmes provide export subsidies that are above the limit permitted under WTO rules.
It also ruled that the United Statesʼ credit guarantee programmes constitute export subsidies.
The report asks the United States to withdraw the prohibited subsidies on a wide range of products, including cotton, soybeans, corn and oilseeds.
The rulings, if upheld on appeal, may put agricultural exporting countries in a position where they can exert more pressure in the Doha trade talks.
Since agricultural prices are expected to rise following the dismantlement of these programmes, the effect on Latin American and Caribbean countries will depend on whether they are net exporters or importers.
Although the deadline for withdrawal of the prohibited subsidies was July 2005, immediate changes in the United States cotton programme are very unlikely, as noted by the National Cotton Council of America.30 In Central Americaʼs share of international sugar exports amounted to 16.8% in 1998-1999, which put it in third place, after South America (28.6%) and Europe (18.8%).
In terms of production, in 1998-1999 the Caribbean and Mexico, taken together, were in third place (also behind South America and Europe) (ECLAC, 2000).
The “peace clause” was article 13 of the Agreement on Agriculture, which dealt with “due restraint”.
This clause shielded countries using subsidies that comply with the agreement from challenges under other WTO agreements.
The peace clause expired on 31 December 2003 The Step 2 programme provides funding to United States companies that export or mill cotton (i.e., process it into fabric or yarn) so that they will buy cotton grown in the United States (Environmental Working Group, n/d).
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 133 this case, the parties may agree to a 15-month transition period (ending in June 2006) for adapting to the relevant WTO rules.
This is a long-run process which will require coordinated efforts on the part of the United States Trade Representative, the United States Department of Agriculture, other public agencies and the private sector.
It is likely that the United States will need more time to comply with the Appellate Bodyʼs ruling, since it will have to make changes not only in the cotton sector but throughout the entire agricultural sector.
On 20 April 2005, the United States informed the DSB of its intention to comply with the recommendations set forth in its ruling and reported that it had already begun to look into possible ways of doing so.
Meanwhile, developing countries await the announcement of the commitments on agricultural subsidies that the United States may make within the framework of the “single-undertaking” approach, which is crucial to the success of the Doha Round.
This cotton case was the first formal challenge made to the massive agricultural subsidies handed out by developed nations to their farmers, which reduce the competitiveness of agricultural exports from developing countries.
Just a month later, the DSB found other agricultural subsidies —i.e., European subsidies on sugar exports— to be illegal.
It is no coincidence that the parties ruled against in these two cases were the European Union and United States.
These are the economies that apply the most subsidies, not only in terms of different kinds of mechanisms, but also as measured by the amounts involved, and they are therefore the object of the most complaints in WTO.
These two cases are essential precedents for any other cases brought before the DSB involving agricultural subsidies employed by developed countries.
Complaints regarding such subsidies have also tended to increase in number since the expiration of the “peace clause”, a mechanism inserted into the Agreement on Agriculture in 1995 that gave countries temporary immunity from legal challenges in such cases.
Under these circumstances, developed countries have two options: they can either accede to free competition in the international market, or they can create other mechanisms of protection.
As non-tariff barriers will tend to increase in order to make up for the reduction of tariffs in recent years, it is more likely that policymakers will redouble their efforts to create new types of agricultural trade barriers.
Questioning of the European Union’s banana import regime Bananas have been one of the most sensitive agricultural products ever since the European Community was founded, and as of 1990 it was the only exception to the rule calling for the free circulation of goods among its member countries.
The ﬁrst “We do not envision any immediate changes to the U.S. cotton program.
It will take some time to evaluate what, if any, changes should be made.
Once that determination is made, it will not be a simple process to make a substantive change in U.S. farm policy” (National Cotton Council of America, 2005).
In that case, the Special Panel found that the preferential treatment accorded to the ACP countries contravened GATT articles I and XI.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 134 of these cases was ﬁled during the ﬁrst year that WTO Measured in terms of the gross value of output, bananas are the fourth-largest food crop in the world, after rice, wheat and maize.
Latin America dominates the world banana market, exporting 2.7 million tons to Europe.
Approximately 700,000 tons of these bananas come from Ecuador, the worldʼs number one exporter of this product (IUF, 2005).
Most Latin American banana exports to Europe are subject to a tariff of € 75 (US$ 98) per ton if they are within-quota and € 680 (US$ 880) —an increase of roughly 800%— if they are not.33 The ACP countries do not pay duty on within-quota exports of bananas.
Preferential treatment for these countries will come to an end on 31 December 2007.
In accordance with the WTO ministerial decision of 14 November 2001 on the ACP-EC Partnership Agreement, a new tariff-only regime is to enter into effect for the European Communities on 1 January 2006 (WTO, 2001a).
Accordingly, the European Union has proposed that a ﬂat duty of € 230 (US$ 300) per ton be applied to its imports of Latin American bananas starting on that date.
According to the Union, this will help protect banana producers in the Canary Islands and the ACP countries, whose banana exports are duty-free.34 From Latin Americaʼs standpoint, this tariff would cause it to lose market share and would make it necessary to lay off millions of workers.
The WTO arbiters agreed that a tariff of € 230 would prevent Latin American producers from maintaining market access.
The European Union then proposed a tariff of € 187 per ton.
This proposal met with the displeasure of the Caribbean countries (particularly the Dominican Republic), in which the social and economic effects of low levels of banana exports are quite severe.
The European Union has been given a certain period in which to submit a new proposal.
If the parties do not reach agreement, WTO will issue a ruling.
Although no ﬁnal decision has yet been taken regarding this instance of European protectionism, the Latin American countriesʼ actions in this case demonstrate their ability to join forces and to work as a bloc in negotiating a fair duty on their exports of a product that constitutes an important source of revenue and employment for them.
Offshore outsourcing Offshore outsourcing is increasingly perceived as a political issue in the United States, with both the Democrats and the Republicans campaigning to “save American jobs”.
While offshore outsourcing used to be mainly related to low-skill factory jobs, it is now being used increasingly for non-manufacturing positions in the technology and service industries.
As the 2004 presidential election campaign in the United States took place within the context of rather bleak job creation rates, a great deal of attention was paid to the issue of offshore outsourcing.
In fact, ever since the start of the economic recession in 2000, a charged political debate about the effects of offshore outsourcing on the United States economy has prompted numerous studies on the costs and beneﬁts of this business strategy.
Paragraph 3, article 36 and annex V of the ACP-EC Partnership Agreement calls for the concession of preferential treatment for exports of products from the ACP countries.
For the last 15 years, China and other Asian countries, Mexico, Brazil and some countries in Eastern Europe have become hubs for the production of television sets, motor vehicles and other manufactures that are then sold on the United States, European and Japanese markets.
Outsourcing is a cost-driven phenomenon that gives companies the ability to work around the clock and access to cheaper labour markets.
The main destination of offshore outsourcing in the service sector is India, where well-educated, English-speaking, technically skilled people are willing to work for lower salaries.
As a result, India is the clear leader, by a wide margin, of the offshore software industry.
While offshore outsourcing allows companies to increase their productivity and their shareholdersʼ proﬁts, it has a direct negative impact on the workers whose jobs are moved overseas, especially in service industries, which are where this practice is most common.
According to The CIA World Factbook, 72.5% of the United Statesʼ US$ 10 trillion-plus GDP is generated in the services sector, which includes call-centre workers, software developers and other information technology (IT) professionals, many of whose jobs are moving overseas.
There is an ongoing debate about how many jobs are lost as a direct consequence of offshore outsourcing, especially in the sectors where this practice is the most common.36 Clearly, the effects of offshore outsourcing are difﬁcult to determine, since estimates are often based upon inconclusive data and inferences.
Some would argue that it is the “jobless recovery,” or slow job growth, combined with economic expansion in the form of increased productivity, that has made offshore outsourcing such an issue.
The early 1990s were also marked by a jobless recovery, but however, the associated structural transformation of the economy was what made the boom years of the late 1990s possible (Drezner, 2004).
Protecting industries from outsourcing only hurts the domestic economy by retarding the inevitable adjustments that need to be made in order for skilled workers to be competitive.
Furthermore, the same changes in production technology that take away jobs by allowing them to be relocated offshore also create new ones.
Those who advocate outsourcing, or at least criticize a protectionist response to this phenomenon, argue that the main driving force for growth is technological change, which invariably renders unskilled or low-skilled jobs obsolete and creates opportunities for new jobs and specializations.
New products and processes are, in fact, being created that require on-hand maintenance, which cannot be done offshore.
Even now, in the midst of the offshore outsourcing debate, 90% of all United States jobs require geographic proximity The year 2004 saw a wave of legislative activity in the United States aimed at banning overseas outsourcing of government contracts.
The latest measure of this sort, known as the Thomas-Voinovich amendment, was attached to the US$ 328 billion Omnibus Appropriations Bill for ﬁscal 2003 passed by the United States Senate.
This measure prohibits private ﬁrms from outsourcing federal government contracts overseas.37 Democrats also introduced a “Jobs for America Act” in the Senate that would have required corporations to warn their employees and communities before moving jobs overseas.
Under this legislation, companies would have had to report on any jobs that they export to other countries (saying how many jobs, where the jobs are going and why), and this information could be used to The Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania estimates that 440,000 United States white-collar jobs were lost to outsourcing in 2000-2004.
Forrester Research Inc. puts the number of jobs lost at 300,000 and estimates that 3.3 million jobs will be relocated overseas by 2015.
International Data Corporation projects that 23% of all white-collar technology jobs will be ﬁlled offshore by 2007, up 5% from 2003, and still other reports predict that job losses will rise to 600,000 per year by 2010 (Economy.com, Inc., n/d).
Meanwhile, a research paper published by Colombia University in April 2004 estimates that the number of service jobs moving offshore could reach as high as 3.3 million by 2015 (Columbia University, 2004).
The Omnibus Appropriations Bill of 2003 contained a provision (introduced by the Thomas-Voinovich amendment) forbade certain government bodies from outsourcing government work to foreign companies.
The new federal rules stipulated that any work outsourced by a federal agency “may not be performed by the contractor at a location outside the United States” unless the same work had been previously performed by federal workers outside the country.
The outsourcing restrictions were valid only through ﬁscal year 2004, which ended on 30 September, and applied to a limited number of federal agencies, including the Department of the Treasury and the Department of Transportation.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 136 bar United States companies from receiving ﬁnancial aid from the government if they did not protect local jobs to the same extent that they protected jobs they provide outside the United States This bill, in other words, was intended to punish companies that create jobs outside the United States.
The case of Motorola serves to illustrate the scale of the problem that this would have created.
Motorola, which is reducing its United States-based workforce to only 56% of its total workforce, receives almost US$ 500 million in direct loans and loan subsidies from the Export-Import Bank of the United States (Computer World, 2004).
Some of the “Jobs of America Act” critics argued that it would not address the “laundering” of United States jobs through third-party offshore outsourcing contracts, nor would it have any effect on new jobs created outside of the United States by United States-based companies.
The failure to pass this bill, despite the public outcry over the loss of information and communication technology (ITC) jobs, clearly demonstrates how much support United States corporations enjoy in Congress.
IT industry lobbies voiced their opposition to the Omnibus Appropriations Bill and observed that it would have little practical impact, since offshore outsourcing was unusual at the federal level anyway.
United States IT companies are more worried about the adoption of legislation that would restrict this practice at the state level, where governments facing budget problems tend to be more willing to engage in offshore outsourcing.
A number of states are considering other ways of restricting private-sector outsourcing.38 Such laws could nevertheless have unexpected negative impacts on United States technology ﬁrms if countries decide to retaliate.
Indiaʼs Minister for Disinvestment, Communications and Information Technology has stated that he views the new United States legislation as protectionist and feels “this would worsen prospects of multilateral negotiations in trade”.
The Indian National Association of Software and Service Companies (NASSCOM) has issued a statement in which it says that, even though the impact of such bills may be minimal, they run counter to the increasing globalization of trade, which beneﬁts all countries, and to the spirit of free trade promoted by WTO (Kumara, n/d).
Despite the public rhetoric of Republicans and Democrats, important sections of both parties are supporters of offshoring, as it increases the proﬁts of major corporations.
The Bush Administration, in its annual economic report, praised overseas outsourcing as beneﬁting the United States economy.
It should also be remembered that, despite the loss of many IT jobs in the United States following the technology sectorʼs 2000 crash, Congress increased the annual allocation of H1-B visas for the temporary importation of skilled foreign workers.
In the midst of these social tensions, the problem has not only been the difﬁculty involved in coming up with a bill that can address both the interests of national workers seeking to maintain their jobs and the interests of companies in cutting their labour expenses.
There are also doubts as to whether any law can reconcile these two major needs satisfactorily.
As long as the Legislature does not reach a consensus on this point, there is likely to be an increase in protests on the part of trade unions and in lawsuits based on a federal law (the Trade Adjustment Assistance Programme) that provides aid to workers who have lost their jobs because of the globalization of trade.
The debate has also become more heated because this programme does not apply to the services sector, which is the most severely affected by offshore outsourcing.39 As the United States becomes more and more of a services-based economy, Congress will come under mounting pressure to ﬁnd a solution acceptable to both sides.
At the individual state level, bills have been passed that make it more difﬁcult to engage in offshore outsourcing.
Sixteen states have ratiﬁed “right-to-know” statutes that require call centres to disclose their location to clients before conducting any business, thereby potentially damaging companiesʼ corporate images and public relations strategies if they are outsourcing such services.
Most groups that are opposed to offshore outsourcing target health-care and ﬁnancial-service companies, demanding that the government restrict companiesʼ transmission of data on their customers to offshore locations.
California and Arizona have both passed bills making it illegal for health-care providers to send patientsʼ records overseas for transcription, and California has also imposed restrictions on the offshore transmission of individualsʼ ﬁnancial data.
This programme was set up in 1962 to provide job training, tuition assistance, health insurance tax credits, job search and relocation reimbursements and extended unemployment beneﬁts to workers who have lost their jobs because of the globalization of trade.
It remains limited to manufacturing and agricultural workers, as the government has maintained its position that workers in the software industry are not eligible.
The ruling concerning the Byrd amendment On 31 August 2004, a WTO ruling was issued which found that eight WTO members were entitled to adopt retaliatory measures against the United States representing a value of up to US$ 150 million for its failure to comply with its international trade obligations.
In January 2003, WTO ruled that the Byrd Amendment was illegal (WTO, 2001a and 2001b) and gave the United States until December 2003 to comply with its ruling; the United States missed this deadline, however.
The United Statesʼ failure to bring its measure into conformity with WTO rules prompted eight WTO members —Brazil, Canada, Chile, the European Union, India, Japan, Mexico and the Republic of Korea— to request authorization from WTO to impose additional import duties on United States products or to suspend fulﬁlment of other obligations to the United States.
This is when WTO authorized the eight countries to retaliate by imposing up to US$ 150 million in import duties on United States products.40 The Byrd amendment refers to the Continued Dumping and Subsidy Offset Act of 28 October 2000.
Under this law, the United States Government distributes the anti-dumping and countervailing duties collected by the Customs Service to the United States companies that brought the corresponding anti-dumping charges against foreign companies (European Union, 2003).
In other words, by excluding those companies that do not support the petitions from the distribution of compensation, the law encourages them to change their positions simply to maintain their eligibility for such payments.
In its decision, WTO calculated the level of the additional import duty or other countermeasures based on the amount of offset payments disbursed to United States ﬁrms in the latest annual distribution.
Speciﬁcally, the authorized level of retaliation was based on the trade effects of the most recent payments distributed from anti-dumping or countervailing duties collected on the products originating from each member.
The WTO arbitrator ruled that the plaintiff countries could retaliate against the United States with measures equivalent to up to 72% of the annual level of United States anti-dumping and countervailing duties collected on their respective exports and disbursed under the Byrd amendment.
These calculations were based on an economic model developed by the WTO arbitrator to measure the trade effect of this law on United States trading partners.
On 31 August 2004, the WTO arbitrator ruled that theses countries were authorized to retaliate against the United States.
Canada notiﬁed the DSB that, as of 1 May 2005, it was suspending the application of concessions and obligations on imports of certain products.
During the ﬁrst year, it plans to levy an additional ad valorem duty of 15% on products originating in the United States that are listed in the annex to its notiﬁcation.
This suspension is equivalent to a total value of trade not exceeding the US$ 11.16 million authorized by the arbitrator.
Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 138 As mentioned earlier, by excluding from compensation those companies or unions not supporting the petitions, opponents maintain that the law encourages companies that might otherwise decline to support petitions to do so simply to maintain eligibility for compensation.
Certainly, the possibility of receiving payments for supporting a petition has the potential to bias the process.
More requests for anti-dumping measures seem to have been presented by United States producers against foreign competitors (Center for Trade Policy Studies, 2004).
Moreover, since the anti-dumping funds that are collected are then distributed among the complainants that have been affected by dumping measures, foreign ﬁrms end up subsidizing their United States competitors, to the detriment of their own productsʼ competitiveness (Center for Trade Policy Studies, 2004).
This situation is exacerbated by the fact that the United States Congress is ﬁrmly opposed to repealing the Byrd amendment and shows no inclination to yield on this point anytime soon.
Though a clear victory for the countries suffering the consequences of the United Statesʼ adoption of a protectionist law, this WTO resolution also points up some of the organizationʼs ﬂaws, such as the doubtful efﬁcacy of its dispute settlement system and the very real consequences of the political inﬂuence wielded by some of its members.
So far, for example, the retaliatory measures authorized by WTO have failed to achieve their objective.
The United States has not amended the law, and exporters in that country appear to be in a position to endure the retaliatory tariffs.
While it is within the rights of any WTO member to ignore dispute settlement recommendations and simply put up with retaliatory trade measures if it so chooses, the multilateral system thus appears to be “binding” only for some countries, while others seem to be able to remain out of its reach.
Moreover, this case, which adds to a growing list of victories against the United States within the framework of WTO, may help to erode the United States Governmentʼs and Congressʼ support for the organization, to say nothing of the possible consequences for the future of the world trading system.
The only certainty is that this state of affairs deﬁnitely represents an obstacle for the achievement of the kind of fair and balanced global market that is the subject of such intense debate in the Doha Round.
The dispute concerning the cross-border supply of gambling and betting services This dispute brought the small twin-island State of Antigua and Barbuda intro confrontation with the worldʼs economic giant —the United States— and was the ﬁrst e-commerce dispute to come before WTO (WTO, 2004c, 2003b).
The Appellate Body upheld the panelʼs earlier decision that found against the United States, rejecting that countryʼs claim that its ban on cross-border Internet gambling and betting does not violate its WTO obligations because the ban was necessary to protect public morals.
This dispute is important because it could have a wider impact on the Doha nogotiations by imposing a standard approach on countries when making services concessions.
More broadly, the ultimate effect of the case could be that the United States (and all WTO members) would no longer be free to rely on their own deﬁnitions of what constitutes market opening in certain sectors (Inside US Trade, 2004).
In its appeal, the United States stated that when it signed the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS), it intended for online gambling to be excluded as a form of service in international trade (United States Trade Representative, 2004).
Antigua and Barbuda brought this case against the United States under WTO procedures because it was Pane_Cap_IVb_Eng.indd 139 refusing to allow ﬁrms in Antigua and Barbuda to provide online gambling services to United States customers.
The ruling found that the GATS schedule of the United States permitted the cross-border supply of gambling services and that the United States could therefore not deny access.
The United States strongly opposed this decision, arguing that it was using a modiﬁed classiﬁcation system that excluded any commitments on gambling services.
The report of the WTO interim panel, made public on 10 November 2004, rejected this argument on the grounds that member countries do not have the authority to make such alterations in the classiﬁcation systems.
In January 2005, the United States announced that it would appeal the WTO decision based on the fact that United States law forbids trade in gambling services between states.
In addition, the United States argued that gambling falls within the GATS sporting.
Although its ruling was mixed, the Appellate Body did uphold the panelʼs ﬁndings regarding two basic issues: (i) that the United States provided for cross-border gambling and betting services in its GATS commitments; and (ii) that the current United States laws regulating cross-border gambling and betting are not necessary to protect public morals.
With respect to the ﬁrst of these questions, the Appellate Body agreed with the panelʼs conclusion that the United States market access commitments attached to GATS covering “other recreational services” included gambling services.
The Appellate Body also upheld the panelʼs ﬁnding that restrictions under three United States federal laws on various means of supplying gambling services prevented the country from offering services and services suppliers from Antigua and Barbuda treatment “no less favourable” than that set under its GATS commitment schedule.
However, the Appellate Body disagreed with the panelʼs ﬁnding that some eight state-level laws were also inconsistent with the GATS commitments of the United States.
The other area of disagreement in the rulings of the panel and the Appellate Body —i.e., the issue of public morals—42 has to do with the question of whether or not the United States can claim an exception to its GATS obligations on moral grounds when gambling, including Internet gambling, is so prevalent in the country.
Another question at issue was the idea that, since it is difﬁcult to prohibit cross-border gambling, the United States and other countries should seek to regulate it instead of prohibiting it.
WTO had never ruled on the requirements for use of the public morals exception.
Although the United States argued that the panel did not need to consider the question of public morals, it provided sufﬁcient evidence that a ban on cross-border gambling protects public morals and should, therefore, be exempt from WTO obligations.
In disagreeing with the ﬁnding of the panel, the Appellate Body concluded that the only inconsistency with the United States defence under the GATS public morals clause stemmed from the fact that the United States had not demonstrated that the prohibition embodied in the measures at issue applied to both foreign and domestic suppliers of remote gambling services.
The Appellate Body based its argument on a federal law —the Interstate Horse Racing Act— that appears to permit domestic services providers to supply remote betting services.
The immediate effect of the ruling is that the United States may have to change its gambling and betting laws.
Since the Interstate Horse Racing Act permits domestic suppliers to provide remote betting services, the Appellate Body found that there was discrimination against foreign suppliers of gambling services.
More importantly, because the Appellate Body found that, by not speciﬁcally excluding them, the United States had in fact made a commitment to permit gambling services, all regulations governing gambling activities such as those conducted in casinos, State lotteries, racetracks and slot machines fall under GATS.
This means that, in effect, any local regulatory bans or restrictions would be discriminating against foreign suppliers.
The United States announced its intention to bring the laws in question into conformity, but failed to reach an agreement with Antigua and Barbuda regarding what would be a “reasonable period of time” for doing so.
Boeing and Airbus: two giants lock horns In October 2004, following an exchange of threats, the United States and the European Union both requested WTO consultations, which means, in effect, that they requested arbitration within that multilateral forum of a protracted bilateral disagreement.
In the view of the Appellate Body, “engaging in consultations with Antigua, with a view to arriving at a negotiated settlement… was not an appropriate alternative for the Panel to consider because consultations are by deﬁnition a process, the results of which are uncertain and therefore not capable of comparison with the measures at issue in this case”.
The United States maintains that each time Airbus launches a new aircraft, a number of European countries are ﬁnancing as much as 33% of its development costs.
It further contends that, without this government “launch aid”, the ﬁrm would have been unable to deploy the range of aircraft it currently has on the market, which undercuts the competitiveness of Boeingʼs new models.
This locking of horns by the two sides casts doubt upon these companiesʼ ability to compete in the world market without generous government assistance.
The other members of WTO are keep a careful eye on this case, which involves huge sums of money and a vast number of jobs.
Brazil and Canada, which have set a precedent in this area,45 are watching it with particular attention.
Both the United States and the European Union have requested the establishment of a panel.
WTO is thus readying itself to undertake one of the biggest challenges it has yet to face and has sent two commissions to investigate the illegal subsidies that the two economies are allegedly paying to these aircraft producers.
Given the complexity of the case and its potential political and economic repercussions, it is expected to be one of the most drawn-out disputes in WTO history.
Be this as it may, WTO can be expected to capitalize upon this opportunity to devise more effective sanctions.
Whatever the ultimate ruling may be, its efﬁcacy will hinge on its implementation or, failing that, the subsequent retaliatory measuresʼ effectiveness in deterring these countries from continuing to employ these unfair trade practices.
Trade subsidization policies applied by the United States and the European Union have already been ruled against in a number of key sectors (sugar, cotton, steel and others).
This has yet to result in the amendment of the policies questioned by WTO, however.
The use of retaliatory measures would not appear to be feasible in the cases of Boeing and Airbus, since the sum involved would be so great that they would probably trigger a trade war of unprecedented proportions, which all parties concerned would be keen to avoid.
This case thus poses a unique challenge to the effectiveness and credibility of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body.
The Airbus companies to which the case refers are Airbus SAS, its predecessor Airbus GIE and afﬁliates and related ﬁrms, such as parent companies, sister companies and subsidiaries (including Airbus Deutschland GmbH, Airbus España S.L., etc.).
Subsidies granted since 1992 in relation to the development of technology and military security were estimated at US$ 23 billion.
Measures affecting the crossborder supply of gambling and betting services (Brought by Antigua and Barbuda)” (DS285), Geneva, Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), 27 March. (2002a), “European Communities.
Deﬁnitive safeguard measures on imports of certain steel products (Brought by EC)” (DS248), Geneva, Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), 13 March. (2002e), “European Communities.
Measures concerning meat and meat products (hormones) (Brought by US)” (DS26), Geneva, Dispute Settlement Body (DSB), 31 January. (1996b), “Brazil.
China in the world economy In recent years, Chinaʼs importance in the world economy has increased exponentially, particularly with regard to production, international trade and foreign direct investment (FDI).
If it continues to grow at rates of over 8%, in two more years it may be the fourth-largest.
What is more, if GDP is measured in terms of purchasing power parity (PPP), then China is already the second-largest economy in the world, after the United States.
Chinaʼs trade statistics indicate that both its exports and imports are growing faster than the world average, while its share of world trade ﬂows swelled from 0.6% in 1977 to nearly 6.5% in 2004.
Before the country embarked on free-market economic reforms in 1978, there were 30 countries with a larger share of world trade than it had.
Twenty-six years later, China has the third-largest share, with only the United States and Germany ahead of it.
Furthermore, this increase has quickened its pace between 2000 and 2004, with China growing nearly 2.7 times faster than the world average and adding approximately US$ 373 billion to its current exports.
Vb_Eng.indd 145 highly inﬂuential role of its market as a buyer of exports from the rest of the world has also helped to spur the growth of world trade.
By 2004, China had become the leading world consumer of copper, tin, zinc, platinum, steel and iron ore; the second-largest buyer of aluminium, petroleum, lead and soya; the third-largest purchaser of nickel; and the fourth-largest of gold.
For most of these products, its share of total world consumption is now slightly over 20%, after having more than doubled between 1990 and 2004 (see ﬁgure V.1).
In the case of some commodities, such as iron ore, gold, petroleum and soya, the force generated by its surging imports has altered international price trends.
The continued expansion of manufactures, which represent 55% of total output, has been the main trigger for this process ( NBSC, 2004).
On the other hand, in cases where local production exceeds domestic consumption (e.g., zinc, tin, toys, textiles, clothing and even electronics), the avalanche of Chinese exports is driving down international prices.
Given these circumstances, China has emerged as a key player in the determination of global macroeconomic balances and as a major point of reference in the production strategies of the worldʼs major transnational corporations.
At present, 400 of the Fortune 500 companies have set up operations in China.
This is not only because of Chinaʼs attractive market of 1.3 billion consumers.
It is also because economic reforms and the Chinese authoritiesʼ commitment to turn the country into a market economy are coupled with ambitious medium- and long-term goals designed to transform it into an industrial power by 2010 and a technological power by 2015.
As part of their strategy for attracting FDI, the authorities are channelling investments into the sectors that have the strongest impact on economic growth, particularly export industries and ones that add value locally.
The results of this strategy are evidenced by transnational corporationsʼ share in Chinaʼs total exports, which currently stands at around 50% (UNCTAD, 2005).
A particularly noteworthy aspect of this process is that, between 1990 and 2004, high-technology exports grew faster than those of other sectors in the economy, while commodity exports fell steeply (see ﬁgure V.2).
Chinaʼs principal trading partners are its neighbours in Asia and the Paciﬁc, especially Japan and the nations belonging to the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
These countries supply 56% of Chinaʼs imports and buy 45% of its total exports.
Manufactures represent an extremely high percentage (95%) of these trade ﬂows (see ﬁgure V.3 and table V.1).
China runs a deﬁcit in its trade with these nations (especially the Republic of Korea and Japan) because they are its main suppliers of capital goods and of intermediate inputs for its manufacturing industries.
It then exports these products to its other trading partners, especially the United States and the European Union, with which it consistently runs its largest surpluses for trade in lowand high-technology manufactures and, to a lesser extent, for mid-range technologies.
These developing nations are thus its main suppliers of copper, iron ore, soya, petroleum, ﬁshmeal, sugar and a range of other products, as will be discussed in greater depth in the third section of this chapter.
Between 30% and 35% of these investments are channelled through joint ventures established either as new ﬁrms or partnership contracts (United States-China Business Council, 2005) or take the form of the reinvestment of Chinese capital that has been re-routed through Hong Kong SAR or other tax havens, such as the Virgin Islands.
In 2004, FDI ﬂows into China amounted to US$ 60.6 billion, which was equivalent to 26% of the total FDI received by developing countries, 11% of worldwide FDI ﬂows and more than the sum received by the United States (Ministry of Commerce of China, 2005b).
Approximately 71% of the countryʼs stock of FDI, which totalled US$ 570 billion, is composed of investment in manufacturing,1 while another 21% is in the services sector (UNCTAD, While China has been a major recipient of FDI over the past two decades, lately it has been investing abroad itself.
In fact, among the developing countries, it is now the sixth-largest source of FDI, and the Chinese authorities are trying to encourage the countryʼs ﬁrms and citizens to make strategic investments elsewhere in the world.
This view of the situation is shared by investment promotion agencies around the world, which see China as a promising source of FDI in 2004-2007.
Success in the creation of export capacity, combined with the expansion of domestic output, the increasing development of manufacturing-related sectors and the countryʼs succession of trade surpluses, enable Chinese ﬁrms to make direct investments abroad in strategic sectors, especially technology —and knowledge— based industries.
Following in the footsteps of Korean Investment is particularly strong in electronics and telecommunications hardware.
Japan, the United Kingdom, Singapore, Sweden and other countries have already set up promotional agencies to attract Chinese funds.
Vb_Eng.indd 148 companies, Chinese ﬁrms are investing via mergers and acquisitions in well-positioned technology-intensive enterprises that possess the necessary know-how and have good reputations backed up by established brand names.
They are also making greenﬁeld investments in strategically located research and development (R&D) centres.
These factors have permitted some ﬁrms to enhance their credibility and penetrate more deeply into new markets.3 The remarkable expansion achieved by Huawei and ZTE Corporation in the mobile telephone and telecommunications industry is one example.
In these cases, the Chinese ﬁrms gain a stronger reputation by association with such widely recognized brands as IBM and as Thomson in Europe and RCA in the United States (see table V.2).
Some Chinese ﬁrms are spending more than 5% (a threshold ﬁgure considered to be the international standard for such allocations) of their budgets on R&D (Hooverʼs, 2005).
Vb_Eng.indd 149 Another strategy that complements Chinaʼs policy of opening up its economy to external trade involves investments directed at the placement of local output in new markets, especially in the case of industries (such as machinery and electronics) in which Chinese demand is already covered and excess production capacity exists.
The Chinese authorities are also directing FDI to locations that will guarantee them access to the natural resources and raw materials (such as petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold and copper) they need to carry forward their production and development strategy (see table V.3).
Chinaʼs largest petroleum companies —Sinopec, Petrochina and China National Offshore Oil Corporation (CNOOC)— have made investments in approximately 14 countries,4 and the pace of their investment activity has been picking up in recent years.
CNOOC bid US$ 18.5 billion to acquire the United States oil company Unocal, thereby besting Chevronʼs offer (US$ 16.6 billion) —which the board of directors of Unocal had been on the point of accepting— by a wide margin (The New York Times, 2005a and 2005b; Tkacik, 2005).
Its chief aim in making the bid was to broaden the range of its hydrocarbon energy sources, since Unocal, which is the United Statesʼ ninth-largest company, controls oil reserves and possesses assets in Thailand, Indonesia, Myanmar, Viet Nam and Azerbaijan.
The ﬁrm also owns 10 platforms in Canada and is engaged in exploration activities in Mexico.
The issue aroused considerable misgivings, in particular because the acquisition would give China a large share of control over sizeable reserves of natural gas and petroleum in Central Asia and the Caspian Sea (Unocal is currently drilling some 159 billion barrels of petroleum and extracting 1.5 billion cubic feet of natural gas per day).
On 10 August 2005, the board of Unocal decided to accept Chevronʼs original offer, after CNOOC withdrew its bid.
In the coming months, CNOOC is expected to expand or seek partnerships with other petroleum and gas companies that have proven reserves.
First, however, China will have to analyse and resolve possible political problems and address the delicate issues inherent in this sector (Financial Times, 2005).
In mid-2004, Chinaʼs Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of Foreign Affairs jointly published a catalogue listing recommended branches of industry in 67 countries and regions for Chinese foreign investors.
According to ofﬁcial reports, around 7,000 Chinese ﬁrms have already placed investments in over 160 countries and regions.
The national authoritiesʼ interest in encouraging this outward ﬂow of local capital is supported by the efforts of a number of provincial governments, such as those of Guangdong and Shanghai, which have approved tax incentives to promote the exportation of capital.
The impact of these policies has been reinforced by the announcement that low-interest loans will be extended to production enterprises with large-scale foreign investments and that facilities will be created to give priority to imports of these ﬁrmsʼ products.
The Chinese economy grew by 9.5% in 2004 and will continue to grow rapidly, with the Asian Development Bank (ADB, 2005) projecting its 2005 growth rate at 8.5%.
Its high consumption levels will therefore continue to have a tremendous inﬂuence on the world economy.
This set of conditions is also favourable for Latin America and the Caribbean, and for the South American countries in particular, with which China has a greater degree of production complementarity.
This question will be discussed further in the fourth section of this chapter.
In other words, Chinaʼs role in the trade ﬂows between these two regions is of growing importance and dynamism.
Japan was the regionʼs most important customer until recently, but has now been displaced by China (see table V.4) as the leading Asian buyer of Latin American products.
Chinaʼs imports from Latin America and the Caribbean have expanded at an impressive rate in recent years: between 1990, when they stood at US$ 1.5 billion, and 1995 they nearly doubled, rising to US$ 2.966 billion.
After a period of ﬂat growth that lasted until 1999, Chinese imports from Latin America and the Caribbean began to soar, jumping to almost US$ 5.4 billion in 2000 and to US$ 21.668 billion in 2004 (see ﬁgure V.4).
This represented an annual growth rate of 42% between 2000 and 2004, which far outstripped the growth rates of Chinaʼs imports from the world as a Today China is an extremely important trading partner for many of the regionʼs countries (see table V.5).
China absorbs just over 10% of Chileʼs exports, for example, compared with less than 1% a mere 15 years ago.
China is now Brazilʼs third-largest trading partner, after the United States and Argentina, and vies with Japan for second place in the list Pane_Cap.
Chinaʼs trade with Mexico, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Costa Rica, though still quite limited, has also increased signiﬁcantly in recent years.
According to ofﬁcial data from China, the above seven countries (Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, Mexico and Peru) supplied almost 95% of the goods and services it imported from Latin America and the Caribbean in 2004.
Vb_Eng.indd 153 up of mid-and high-technology manufactured goods, especially in the cases of exports from Mexico, Costa Rica and Brazil (see ﬁgure V.4).6 A number of Latin American countries are emerging as possible suppliers for Chinese imports of automotive and spare parts, electrical accessories and electronics.
These shifts could open up opportunities for the introduction of higher value-added products into the regionʼs export basket.
Latin American specialization in Chinese markets With regard to both commodities and manufactures, the Latin American and Caribbean region differs substantially from the ASEAN countries —the regionʼs most direct competitors— in terms of its market specialization in China.
Chinese imports of high-technology goods from Latin America and the Caribbean jumped by 485% in 2000 and increased by around 50% to 55% per year thereafter.
Imports of mid-range-technology goods have also gathered momentum, expanding by over 120% in 2003 with respect to the 2002 ﬁgure.
Chinaʼs 20 main imports from Latin America and the Caribbean include a series of manufactured goods corresponding to the electrical and automotive parts sectors, among others.
Today, the high-technology segment represents almost half of ASEAN exports to China, which stands in stark contrast to Latin America, where almost 70% of exports to China are commodities and natural-resource-based manufactures.
Even so, there are still 30% of ASEAN exports to China that fall into categories in which the Latin American and Caribbean region enjoys comparative advantages.
The basket of Chinese exports to the Latin American countries is quite different, since it is concentrated in low-technology products, although it does include some mid-range and high-technology goods as well.
It is precisely in these sectors (e.g., textiles and clothing, footwear and toys) that Latin American and Caribbean producers perceive a threat from Chinese manufacturers and where trade contingency measures thus tend to be applied (see section 2 of this chapter).
Because of their low costs these Chinese industries represents stiff competition both in the regionʼs local markets and in other major markets such as the United States and the European Union.
Despite some success in penetrating certain manufacturing segments in Chinese markets, commodities and natural-resource-based manufactures continue to drive Chinese-Latin American trade, representing approximately 46% and 30%, respectively, of the regionʼs total exports to China in 2003.
Within these sectors, the Latin American and Caribbean region is the foremost supplier of a number of products that are quite important to China.
The region provided 65% of the soybean seeds and 74% of the ﬁshmeal imported by China in 2003, for example.
China is highly dependent on Latin America for its supply of other goods too, such as sugar, grapes, copper and other minerals and metals (see table V.6).
Brazil is one of Chinaʼs main suppliers of iron ore agglomerates, and Argentina provides 66% of its imports of soybean oil.
Vb_Eng.indd 155 Despite the regionʼs great importance as a supplier of certain agricultural and mining products, Latin American exports face strong competition from other regions.
A case in point is the regionʼs exports of soybean seeds, which must compete with exports from Chinaʼs largest supplier of this product, the United States.
This is also true in the case of iron ore, where Australia and India have been Chinaʼs main suppliers.
Thus, the countries of the region are going to have to strengthen their links with the Chinese business community if they are to maintain the momentum of their exports of commodities and semi-manufactured goods and secure new niches in the Chinese market.
To do so, they need to forge alliances and promote various types of cooperation within the business community, which will, in turn, entail acquiring a deeper knowledge of Chinese markets.
Chinaʼs rapidly growing demand for basic inputs, including minerals and foodstuffs, has tipped its trade balance with Latin America and the Caribbean into the red, although this deficit is concentrated in the less processed types of products (see figure V.6).
Chinaʼs exports to Latin America and the Caribbean in other sectors, such as low- or mid-level-technology goods, yield surpluses, but they are not large enough to offset its mounting deficit in the natural-resource segment.
In short, inter-industry ﬂows predominate in trade between China and Latin America and the Caribbean.
China exports manufactured goods, while the Latin American and Caribbean region exports mainly raw materials; this represents a departure from the regionʼs overall pattern, since manufactures are, on the whole, accounting for an increasingly large share of total Latin American exports.
The share of total exports to China made up of foodstuffs, minerals and metals has been increasing, which is indicative of the regionʼs comparative advantages and the potential of the Chinese markets.
China and the Latin American and Caribbean region should cooperate in positioning Latin American and Caribbean ﬁrms in Chinese value chains, which would, of course, require a substantial increase in reciprocal FDI ﬂows.
A key question to be answered in terms of the trade relations between these markets is whether or not China poses a threat to Latin America.
The answer to this question will largely depend on how trade and investment ﬂows between the two regions evolve (see box V.1).
Lall and Weiss (2004) and Moreira (2004) see China as representing a threat to Latin America’s development into an exporter of higher-technology and higher value-added products.
Their research suggests that the level of development and the increasing sophistication of the export sector in China and in other South-East Asian countries will eventually crowd out more sophisticated exports from Latin America.
Lora (2004) provides a table on checks and balances between the two and suggests that institutional reforms in both China and Latin America would create a more conducive environment for FDI and private enterprise.
López-Córdova (2004) reaches similar conclusions with respect to Mexico and indicates that the main institutional actors (trade unions, industrial employers’ associations, political parties and the different branches of government) must strive to implement institutional reforms that will allow them to deal with the challenge posed by China.
Chantasasawat et al. conclude that the key decision-making factor for transnational corporations is that Asia has a production network that Latin America lacks.
Investment decisions in Latin America and the Caribbean therefore appear to be based on such factors as market size, economic growth and entry barriers (tariffs), which, though matters of concern for the countries of the region, are not relevant to investments in China.
Lastly, Lin (2004) ﬁnds that China is a positive factor in terms of both investment and trade, since economic growth creates an even larger market for Asian and Latin American exports alike, thereby acting as an engine of growth for all of these economies.
Chinese FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean In contrast to its status as a recipient of FDI from the rest of the world, China is just beginning to invest abroad: in 2003, Chinaʼs outward FDI accounted for only 0.45% of the worldʼs total FDI ﬂows and 0.48% of its FDI stock.
Although it accounts for a relatively small share of the total, China is emerging as one of the main developing-country investors and is more or less on a par, in terms of levels of investment, with the Republic of Korea.
Nevertheless, Latin America has been an important destination for Chinese investment in recent years.
According to ofﬁcial ﬁgures from the Ministry of Commerce of the Peopleʼs Republic of China, almost US$ 1.04 billion was invested in the region in 2003, which represents 36.5% of the total invested in the rest of the world.
As of the end of 2004, Chinaʼs FDI stock in the region was estimated at almost US$ 4.62 billion, or 14% of Chinaʼs outward FDI (Peopleʼs Daily Online, 2004a).
As mentioned earlier, Chinaʼs trade deﬁcit with the region leans heavily towards commodities and naturalresource-based manufactures.
Chinaʼs strong demand for these products makes it interested in investing in mineral production and in developing the regionʼs transport infrastructure in order to ensure a supply of the products it needs and lower costs.
An UNCTAD report indicates that many national investment promotion agencies ranked China as one of the leading foreign direct investors for 2004-2007.8 This may be attributed in part to expectations that the Chinese ﬁrms that are investing in the region today will attract more investment.
One reason for the low level of Asian (including Chinese) FDI in Latin America and the Caribbean is the lack of intrasectoral businesses complementarity in the East Asian economies owing to their “flying geese” pattern of development, i.e. the sequencing of the industrialization process from one economy to another.
Vb_Eng.indd 157 industrial development in different countries over time does accurately represent the interaction between trade and FDI as a process by which production is shifted across national boundaries, thereby generating complementary trade ﬂows.
Latin American ﬁrms need to ﬁnd ways to position themselves in Asian manufacturing sectors in order to promote reciprocal FDI between China and Latin America and the Caribbean.
Chinaʼs sheer size and, more recently, its surging economy have made it an important actor within Asia.
As recently as the late 1990s and early years of this century, Chinaʼs trade policy did not provide for any regional integration schemes or bilateral trade agreements, but its position in this respect had changed radically since then.
The country has now achieved a level of development that allows it to open itself up to international competition and integration into the regional and global economy with a view to longterm gains (Wang Jisi, 2004, p. 6).
The following table shows the current status of Chinaʼs negotiations with regard to granting and obtaining tariff preferences in the Asian region and beyond (see table V.7).
The establishment of an Asian free-trade area that includes China, the Republic of Korea and Japan (and perhaps even India) represents a challenge for Latin America because Asian integration has a more intraregional slant, as well as a greater emphasis on intraregional exports in terms of tariff preferences.
As discussed previously, commodities and natural resources account for the bulk of Chinaʼs imports from Latin America and the Caribbean (although high-technology goods have indeed increased as a proportion of total exports over this period), whereas its imports from ASEAN countries fall mainly into high-technology categories, including ICTs, whose tariffs have come down considerably in the last few years.
High tariffs are still applied to oilseed products, leather, paper and paper products and some electronic goods.
A reduction in these tariffs under the agreement between China and ASEAN would thus benefit the ASEAN countries at the expense of Latin America and the Caribbean.
As of 13 May 2005, the Information Technology Agreement had 38 participants (covering 63 Members and States or separate customs territories in the process of acceding to WTO) representing approximately 97% of world trade in information technology products.
El Salvador has indicated that implementation will begin after the completion of domestic legal procedural requirements, while Panama has not yet submitted the formal documentation (WTO, 2005a).
Vb_Eng.indd 158 As part of the commitments set out in the agreement between China and the ASEAN countries, starting in July 2005, tariffs will be lowered by up to 5% on almost 7,000 types of industrial goods by 2015.
The tariffs applicable to the six most advanced countries of the group (Brunei Darussalam, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand) will be phased out by 2010, while those applied to the other four countries (Cambodia, Lao Peopleʼs Democratic Republic, Myanmar and Viet Nam) will be eliminated by 2015.
Tariffs on sensitive products (such as rice, cement and motor vehicles) may remain in place until 2018 and those on highly sensitive products will be lowered by a maximum of 50%.
This round of tariff reduction was preceded by an “early harvest” scheme for the agricultural sector, which has been in place since the start of 2004 (see box V.2).
These measures are expected to increase the ASEAN countriesʼ natural-resource exports to China and their imports of manufactured goods from it.
ASEAN and China recently expanded the scope of the FTA by signing an Agreement on Trade in Goods, which provides for speciﬁc tariff savings on traded goods.
The tariff preferences will apply to China’s imports from ASEAN and vice versa (10% and 15%, respectively).
Covers selected agricultural products that fall under chapters 1-8 of the Harmonized System. 3.
Recent expansion to industrial and consumer products Tariffs and non-tariff barriers will be reduced on trade in products that fall under chapters 9-97 of the Harmonized System.
Firms must qualify in order to take advantage of these new measures.
Rules of origin The aim here is for manufacturing processes in China or ASEAN to account for at least 40% of the value added to the products in question.
An analysis of the relevant production chains or business models is required in order to obtain this certiﬁcation, which gives access to tariff reductions.
Deadline Implementation must be completed by Scope In addition to goods, the agreement covers trade in services and investments, albeit to a relatively limited degree.
Building partnerships Latin America and the Caribbean have yet to tap into the full potential of China as an export market, and the recent experiences of some countries in the region clearly suggest that there are ample opportunities for increasing the regionʼs natural-resource-based exports.
Yet the regionʼs trade with China suffers from the same limitation that affects all its international trade ﬂows, namely the concentration of its exports in commodities and semiprocessed goods.
The Latin American and Caribbean region must work to increase the degree of processing of its resource-based exports and seek new markets in China for differentiated, higher-value-added goods.
The existing product mix, which is highly dependent on the business cycles of importing countries, does nothing to help stabilize import earnings either.
An analysis of the strategies used by countries such as Chile or Peru can be Pane_Cap.
Vb_Eng.indd 159 helpful in identifying opportunities for expanding trade with China and reciprocal investment in the future.
Promising opportunities are emerging for expanding interregional trade and reciprocal investment in natural resources.
When dealing with these kinds of products it is also important, however, to form strategic partnerships that will increase the value added throughout the production chain and broaden market access.
Given the effects of trade liberalization and mounting competition for export markets, government and business leaders need to devise policies and speciﬁc measures for the diversiﬁcation of markets and products that will allow them to take advantage of Chinaʼs economic growth.
Economic policy-makers in Latin America have tended to overlook the opportunities that natural resources provide for creating linkages, technical innovation and other externalities.
Natural-resource-based activities rival manufacturing in their potential to generate strong gains in productivity, technological spillovers and forward and backward linkages, as the experiences of Australia, Canada, Finland, Sweden and the United States clearly demonstrate.
The boom in Chileʼs extraregional exports has been driven by natural-resource-based products.
Latin America can create (and, in fact, is creating) new comparative advantages by means of policies that promote “new endowments” in such areas as human capital, knowledge, solid institutions and sound physical infrastructure.
A great deal of the literature indicates that trade links among Asian economies consist increasingly of intrasectoral trade ﬂows.
The Latin American and Caribbean region has also seen a large volume of this type of trade, especially within MERCOSUR.
But between the Latin American and Caribbean region and China, intrasectoral trade occurs mainly in products that are of minor signiﬁcance.
Given the divergent models of international specialization in China and in Latin America and the Caribbean, the strong growth of aggregate demand in the Chinese economy offers the region new production and export opportunities.
There are fears, however, that non-Asian countries will be hard put to take full advantage of the potential beneﬁts of Chinaʼs powerful economic growth because of the highly integrated nature —based mainly on intraregional and intrasectoral trade— of the Asian regionʼs production system.
Generally speaking, the two regions have very different trade and investment patterns and economic integration models.
Efforts are needed to ensure a role for the Latin American and Caribbean region in the de facto integration of Asiaʼs production system, in which China plays an increasingly important role.
Increased intrasectoral trade between China and Latin America and the Caribbean would give the region new routes into the Chinese market, encourage the incorporation of new technologies and improve workerʼs skills and corporate management methods, as a follow-on from production activities and the technical assistance that goes with them.
Future collaboration with China in connection with FDI would help Latin America and the Caribbean to improve the systemic competitiveness both of individual countries and of the region as a whole.
China’s accession to WTO Introduction The complexity of the negotiations leading up to Chinaʼs accession to WTO, which took 15 years to conclude, reﬂects how much work was involved in bringing a developing country into the multilateral trading system at a time when it is making a transition from a planned economy to a market economy.
Chinaʼs entry into WTO points to major changes in trade policy and increased opportunities in the world economy as a whole, and it has certainly fostered predictability and transparency10 in the countryʼs business dealings.
In addition, as a new member of WTO (since 11 December 2001), China has had to adjust its legal system to the new commercial order based on a “free” and competitive market by making fundamental changes in its trade regulations.
The accession has also required China to adapt its trade policy to more than 20 existing multilateral WTO agreements that regulate sensitive issues for this country, such as intellectual property, subsidies, tariffs, services, textiles, agriculture and antidumping.
The following section examines Chinaʼs implementation of measures stemming from its entry into WTO in a number of major economic sectors which are still a cause of concern for its trading partners.
It then goes on to explore the challenges that China will face in the future.
Aside from contributing to the transparency and predictability of the multilateral system, Chinaʼs accession to WTO and its commitments regarding regulatory changes have implications for Latin America and the Caribbean in at least three different areas: access for the regionʼs exports to the Chinese market; competition Transparency in trade is one of the main objectives of WTO.
In order for China to achieve such transparency, it agreed to publish laws and regulations in ofﬁcial journals on a regular basis, along with relevant information on those statutes.
The object of this procedure is to create inquiry points so that companies can obtain information about these laws and regulations and to give them a reasonable amount of time for comment, prior to the statutesʼ implementation.
Vb_Eng.indd 160 between the region and China economy in other markets (especially in the United States); and competition from Chinese products in the Latin American and Caribbean countriesʼ domestic markets.
In view of the different subregionsʼ trade specializations and market orientations, a distinction should be drawn between the potential effects for at least two areas, namely South America and Meso-America.
Thus, from 2005 on, the world expects China to live up to its WTO commitments.16 Apart from the considerable structural adjustments associated with its rapid integration into the multilateral trading system, China has also been making major changes in its domestic trade policy since its WTO accession.
It still has a long way to go, however, before it will have ﬁnished shaping its international trading rules (see table V.8).
Tariffs and non-tariff barriers: China continues to increase access to its markets for all WTO members by progressively reducing its tariff rates and is on track to have lowered its tariffs on goods from the average 1997 rate of 25% to 7% over a ﬁve-year period beginning on 1 January 2002.
These rates compare favourably with those of some other developing countries, such as Brazil, India and Indonesia, which have rates of over 25% (Wolff, 2005, p. 7).
Although nearly all of the reductions for industrial goods were completed by 1 January 2005,17 reductions for a few industrial products will continue to be phased in until 2010.
The country also has signed the Information Technology Agreement (ITA), which calls for the elimination of tariffs on information technology (IT) products. 18 China and Latin America and the Caribbean have found common ground, in particular, on coordination within G-20, on proposals on agriculture and as part of the group known as “Friends of Anti-Dumping Negotiations”.
Of particular importance in this regard are sanitary measures, administration of agricultural quotas and other non-tariff barriers, which have proven to be greater obstacles than tariffs to market access for exports of fruit or processed foods (ECLAC, 2004, chapter IV).
Intensive deployment of antidumping rules and systems of licences and certiﬁcation are also contentious issues (Wolff, 2005).
The most obvious example of this is the textiles and clothing sector, after the full implementation of the Agreement on Textiles and Clothing, but research has also been conducted into the risks for the electronic products segment (ECLAC, 2004).
Local government subsidies and special treatment for FDI could affect the competitiveness of some of these products in domestic and third markets alike (Lora, 2005).
IDB (2004) ﬁnds that Mexico will be the most affected by competition from China, since its export proﬁle, like the sectoral distribution of its FDI, is very similar to Chinaʼs.
Meanwhile, China has agreed with WTO to create a special multilateral mechanism, known as the Transitional Review Mechanism, to review its compliance on an annual basis for a period of 10 years following its accession.
Participation in ITA means that a country must have eliminated tariffs and all other duties and charges on speciﬁed IT imports from WTO members by 1 January 2000 (developing-country participants have been granted extended periods for some products) (See the website of the WTO).
Trade-related investment obligations • China has passed legislation to eliminate “tradebalancing requirements” for foreign investment, in accordance with the WTO agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures (TRIMS).
These restrictions included export-performance, local-content, foreign-exchange balancing and technology-transfer requirements. • Foreign investors have concerns about the encouragement of technology transfer. • There are strict limits on investments in content-based areas of the print media and access to broadcasting licenses.
Production of motor vehicles by ﬁrms in which foreigners hold a majority stake is conﬁned to special economic zones and to exports.
Services • Greater market access to a number of its services industries.
National treatment • Repeal of the discriminatory VAT rebates policy for Chinese-produced semiconductors. • The authorities had created a series of incentives designed by the provinces to replace the discriminatory VAT rebate system.
In July 2004 it issued a revised foreign trade law that clariﬁes its trade remedy regulations. • Chinese contingency measures in force: -Antidumping (June 2004): 56 -Countervailing duties (June 2004): 0 - Safeguards (October 2004): 0 (China has conducted only one safeguard proceeding since its accession; that proceeding was terminated in 2003.
In addition, despite some initial implementation delays, China has eliminated all of the trade-distorting non-tariff measures speciﬁed in its Protocol of Accession, including import quotas and licensing and tendering requirements, in accordance with the scheduled deadline under its WTO accession agreement of 1 January 2004 Pane_Cap.
Vb_Eng.indd 163 Textiles: Quotas on textiles were eliminated on 31 December 2004, but a safeguard mechanism will be in place until the end of 2008 to permit WTO members to take action to curb their imports if Chinese textile exports lead to market disruptions (WTO, 2005b).
Agriculture: Chinaʼs principal commitment in this area is to refrain from maintaining or introducing any export subsidies on agricultural products.
It has agreed to limit its subsidies for agricultural production to 8.5% of the value of farm output under article 6.4 of the Agreement on Agriculture and to apply the same limit to subsidies covered by article 6.2 of the Agreement (rural development programmes in developing countries).
Chinaʼs reduction in tariff bindings has proceeded according to its WTO accession schedule, with average tariff rates on agricultural goods decreasing from 31% some doubts, however, concerning the sanitary and phytosanitary procedures adopted by China.
These sorts of restrictions have recently blocked market access for major crops and other agricultural goods such as beef, chicken and related products.
Moreover, concerns have been expressed regarding its elimination of export subsidies in some cases.
As discussed elsewhere in this chapter, Chinaʼs large population, whose food needs are constantly on the rise, represents an enormous potential for trade in agricultural products for many Latin American exporting countries.
It is important to bear in mind that agricultural exports from Latin America to China have increased substantially in recent years, climbing from US$ 495 million in 1999 to US$ 2.751 billion in 2003.19 Services: Telecommunications, banking and insurance are sectors in which the liberalization process has made steady progress.
Upon Chinaʼs accession, foreign service providers were permitted to establish joint ventures in the telecommunications sector, without quantitative restrictions and to furnish services in several cities.
Foreign investment in joint ventures was initially limited to 25%, but this percentage was then gradually raised to 49% by December 2004.
Within ﬁve years of accession (December 2006), there are to be no geographic restrictions whatsoever.
In the banking sector, upon accession, foreign ﬁnancial institutions were permitted to provide services in China, with no restrictions on the nature of their clients, for transactions in foreign currencies.
In the case of local-currency operations, as of December 2003 foreign ﬁnancial institutions were permitted to provide services to Chinese enterprises, and from December 2006 on, will be allowed to furnish services to all Chinese clients.
Companies in the insurance sector are treated differently depending on the business segment concerned.
Initially, foreign non-life insurers were allowed to establish a branch or a joint venture with up to 51% foreign ownership, while foreign life insurers were permitted to enter into a joint venture with the partner of their choice subject to a limitation of 50% foreign ownership.
Since December 2003, foreign non-life insurers have been allowed to establish wholly-owned subsidiaries.
For large-scale commercial risks, reinsurance and international marine, aviation and transport insurance and reinsurance, joint ventures with foreign equity of no more than 50% were permitted upon accession.
In December 2004, the percentage were increased to 51%, and in December 2006, wholly foreign-owned subsidiaries will be permitted.
On the other hand, China has made less progress in opening up its services sector, and some countries have complained about a lack of transparency and predictability (USTR, 2004).
There are some sectors in which Chinaʼs licensing and operating requirements continue to be complex and difﬁcult to comply with.
Problems of this nature have been encountered by major developed-country services sectors such as the insurance and telecommunications industries. 20 The availability of trading rights also continues to be limited by existing corporate eligibility requirements dealing with minimum registered capital, import levels, export levels and prior experience.
Foreign enterprises continue to face some restrictions in terms of their distribution of products in China as well.21 In the area of distribution, China has yet to fully comply with its commitments to eliminate national-treatment requirements and market-access restrictions on foreign enterprises.
For example, licensing is still slow, and it is not available at all for direct–sale enterprises, even though China made a commitment to remove restrictions on these ﬁrms by December 2004.22 Subsidies: China is behind schedule in its fulﬁlment of transparency requirements under the Subsidies Agreement relating to the notiﬁcation of its subsidy programmes to WTO on an annual basis.
China has yet to submit a subsidy notiﬁcation as required by article 25 of the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
Antidumping: Since 1995, China has become the primary object of antidumping complaints worldwide.23 According to the United States Trade Representative, Chinese regulatory authorities continue to impede access for foreign providers of insurance, telecommunications and other services, particularly through the use of excessively high capital requirements (USTR, 2004, p. 6).
While the Ministry of Commerce issued a regulation in 2004 to remove restrictions on joint venturesʼ ability to provide distribution services in China, the agencyʼs delay in issuing implementing procedures has limited foreign businessesʼ involvement in domestic distribution in China About half of all United States antidumping cases have been directed at China (Hufbauer and Wong, 2004, p. 16).
Vb_Eng.indd 164 The country has, however, made substantial progress in bringing its antidumping legislation into conformance with the provisions and requirements of the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (often referred to as the “Antidumping Agreement”).
The Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation established many of the rules that now apply to antidumping issues (investigation, disclosure, questionnaires, etc).
WTO members are still authorized to use a “non-market economy methodology” in antidumping determinations against China until the end of 2016 (WTO, 2001).
This issue will be discussed in greater detail in the following section.
Another commitment made by China is to eliminate dual pricing practices as well as differences in treatment accorded to goods produced for sale in China in comparison to those produced for export.
This represents a commitment to refrain from dumping, which has been one of the main international points of contention regarding the low prices of Chinese products.
Intellectual property rights: Intellectual property is one of the most problematic areas for China.
In order to comply with the standards set forth in the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (the “TRIPS Agreement”), it has been making an effort to improve the enforcement of intellectual property rights (IPRs).
China has introduced changes in its almost non-existent intellectual property legislation and has mounted educational campaigns to strengthen the protection accorded to intellectual property.
It has also revised its patent, trademark and copyright laws to align them with the WTO Intellectual Property Agreement.
A Market Order Rectiﬁcation Ofﬁce has been established to strengthen inter-agency IPR enforcement efforts, and Chinese courts issued ﬁndings that may lead to an increase in the use of criminal penalties for IPR violations.
China has stated that it will ratify and implement the WIPO Internet treaties as soon as possible.
According to the United States Department of Commerce, Chinaʼs piracy rate remains one of the highest in the world (over 90%), and piracy costs United States companies over US$ 1 billion in legitimate business each year (USTR, 2005, p. 16).
On average, 20% of all consumer products in the Chinese market are counterfeit.
After issuing the “Opinions on Increasing Work Contacts Between Administrative Law Enforcement Organs and Public Security Organs and Peopleʼs Procuratorates”, a mechanism involving the coordination of administrative law enforcement and criminal law enforcement was established in order to create a joint authority for dealing with IPR infringements.
In Latin American, countries at the top of the software piracy list are said to be Colombia (53%), Puerto Rico (46%) and Brazil (63%) Pane_Cap.
The United States Trade Representativeʼs 2005 “Special 301” annual review on the adequacy and effectiveness of IPR protection in 90 countries ﬁnds that Chinese criminal enforcement of IPR violations has not yet had a signiﬁcant deterrent effect on infringers, as China has pursued criminal prosecutions in only a few infringement cases.
The review also states that the United States will elevate China onto the Priority Watch List “on the basis of serious concerns about Chinaʼs compliance with its WTO TRIPS obligations and commitments” (USTR, 2005, p. 15).
Trade-related investments: China has made a commitment to eliminate “trade-balancing requirements” (export performance, local content, foreign-exchange balancing and technology transfer) for foreign investment in accordance with the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures (the “TRIMS Agreement”).
However, various sectors continue to be subject to investment limitations (e.g., the media and the automotive industry)(WTO, 2003).
Moreover, there is concern regarding Chinaʼs continued “encouragement” of technology transfer despite regulations that formally prohibit the practice.
This situation was noted by the United States at the 2004 WTO transitional review of Chinaʼs compliance with the TRIMS Agreement (WTO, 2003).
China formally implemented its WTO trading rights commitments in July 2004, six months ahead of schedule (USTR, 2004, pp. 12-14).
Considering the extremely restrictive trading system that existed before its accession to WTO (in most cases, enterprises in which foreign investors held equity were allowed to import only what they needed for manufacturing processes in China and to export only what they produced in China), today China has advanced considerably in the liberalization of trading rights and distribution services.
Moreover, the National Peopleʼs Congress of China issued a revised foreign trade law in April 2004 to allow domestic ﬁrms, joint ventures and foreign entities to automatically enjoy trading rights following proper registration with the Ministry of Commerce.
Prior to its WTO accession, China generally did not permit foreign enterprises to distribute products in China.
In its accession agreement, China committed to eliminate national-treatment and market-access restrictions on foreign enterprises.
More recently, a government procurement policy has mandated purchases of Chinese-produced software.
Vb_Eng.indd 166 Improvements made by China after the transitional period: a long way still to go The three and one-half years that have passed since China joined WTO are not a long enough period to permit a fair judgement concerning the degree of Chinaʼs compliance with its multilateral obligations.
Nevertheless, several observations can be made based on the events that have occurred since the critical transitional period.
Perfect compliance is unlikely to be attained by a country that was a closed economy such a short time ago.
Yet China has made considerable progress in the implementation of its WTO commitments, and the Ministry of Foreign Trade and Cooperation and its successor, the Ministry of Commerce, as well as other agencies, have worked to address the need for “fair and equitable trade”.
On the other hand, Chinaʼs regulatory regimes continue to seem like a labyrinth to many countries, and the lack of transparency is one of the major challenges to be met in realizing the potential beneﬁts of Chinaʼs WTO accession and in opening this huge market up to fair competition.
Many tariff-rate quotas (TRQs) continue to be employed by State-owned trading companies, particularly in agriculture, while enforcement of IPRs is still ineffective in some cases.
China continues to use sanitary and phytosanitary measures as non-tariff trade barriers for agricultural commodities (United StatesChina Business Council, 2004).
The areas of principal concern are distribution rights, intellectual property, trading rights, non-tariff measures and service market access.
However, it is important to note that China has not been found to have violated any of its obligations under the WTO dispute settlement system and is taking advantage of this mechanism to challenge some of the trade measures used against Chinese products.
For example, at the April 2004 meeting of the Joint Commission on Commerce and Trade (JCTT), China agreed to implement its trading rights commitments, to improve IPR protection and to work towards eliminating discriminatory industrial policies and, in general, opening up its market more fully to United States exporters.
In return, as concessions to China, the Bush Administration has promised to establish a process to help China qualify for market-economy status under United States trade law.
Without this status, China will remain subject to an increasing number of antidumping cases that could result in higher duties on its exports to the United States (USTR, 2004).
This is likely to be considered a positive development for the international market as a whole, since it will decrease the price gap between Chinese and other countriesʼ products.
As an illustration, it may be noted that Chinaʼs participation in the world economy has soared since it joined WTO in December 2001. (It is now the third-largest trading nation in the world, behind only the United States and Germany (WTO, 2004b)).
Chinaʼs accession to WTO is also helping it to attract more foreign investors, who now ﬁnd that they are on an equal footing in terms of certain speciﬁc problem areas and feel more This programme sets out a framework for the European Unionʼs cooperation with China in 2002-2006.
See “Comunicado Conjunto de Prensa sobre Seis Coincidencias en la Cooperación Económica y Comercial entre Chile y China” (joint press release on six areas of convergence in economic and commercial cooperation between Chile and China) (DIRECON, 2004) concerning the establishment of a working group by these countries.
Brazil and China have also formed a mixed economic and trade commission to help improve their economic relations and have signed a memorandum of understanding to facilitate cooperation in trade and investment.
As just one example, bilateral trade between China and the United States increased by 84% to roughly US$ 219 billion in 2004.
This statistic is not solely a result of United States imports, either.
United States exports of goods to China jumped by 83% as well.
By comparison, The concept of market-economy status (mes) and its application The non-market economy (NME) clause has its origin in subparagraph (b) of article VI.1 of GATT (1994), which allows WTO member countries to recognize that NMEs 36 may need to be treated differently than market economies in antidumping cases.
This provision, which dates back to the 1954-1955 GATT review session, originated with the consideration of issues related to the Working Party on the Accession of Poland and has been subsumed under article 2.7 of the current Antidumping Agreement.
Under this provision, the WTO Antidumping Agreement allows members to use prices in “surrogate” markets to arrive at what is referred to as the “normal value” of goods or services in an NME.
In Chinaʼs case, the surrogate markets used to arrive at the normal value are often India, Turkey and Mexico (Lyengar, 2004).
MES would not only change how antidumping actions against Chinese ﬁrms are judged, but would also affect how Chinese authorities position the economy in the worldʼs trading system, as well as assuaging their fears concerning Western protectionism.
WTO does not classify countries according to whether or not they qualify for MES.
That task is left to individual countries, and Chinese trade ofﬁcials therefore have to lobby individual governments.
In its WTO Protocol of Accession, however, China agreed that investigating authorities in other WTO members may apply nonmarket methodologies in antidumping and countervailing duty investigations.
It is noteworthy that the applicable provisions of the Protocol are not intended to serve as a carte blanche to apply NME methodologies in all cases.
Recourse to these alternative methodologies, such as the use of surrogate pricing information, is somewhat circumscribed by the fact that Chinese exporters are expected to be given the opportunity in advance to show that market-economy conditions prevail in the industry under investigation.
This allows Chinese exporters to put together a case in order to show the investigating authorities that their prices and cost information are not distorted as they would be in an NME.
The provisions allowing recourse to non-market methodologies expire in 2016, 15 years after Chinaʼs accession to WTO.
The language of the Protocol thus allows WTO members to deal with the issue surrounding Chinaʼs MES on a differentiated basis.
For example, United States authorities usually decline to accept information on prices and costs provided in China, preferring instead to use information derived from surrogate markets.
In contrast, the European Union applies a hybrid approach in antidumping cases involving China and other countries that might be considered to be NMEs.
This makes it possible, in limited cases, to treat Chinese imports as coming from a market economy, if it can be shown that market-economy conditions prevail in limited, industryspecific cases.
In such instances, the corresponding investigation can thus be treated as one involving a market economy (see box V.3).37 Since 1999 the Republic of Korea has taken a similar approach in dealings with China to determine whether market-economy conditions might apply in the case of speciﬁc branches of industry (Stoler, 2003; Hufbauer and Wong, 2004).
The Russian Federation was granted an MES rating in 2000, but Viet Namʼs request for MES status has been considered and rejected.
In late 1998, the European Union adapted its trade defence rules to allow individual companies to claim MES if they could prove that their prices and costs were not inﬂuenced by the State.
Ofﬁcial European Union sources indicate that, out of the 111 individual requests received from 1999 to the end of June 2004, only 28 have been found to be acceptable.
Another source reports that 16 chemical ﬁbre cloth producers have won MES from the European Union, while the requests from 28 ﬁrms have been rejected and another 12 are awaiting a decision.
Vb_Eng.indd 168 still considers China to be an NME, has adopted a similar policy, under which the authorities can apply rules normally reserved for investigations directed at a market economy (Stoler, 2003, p. 4).
Argentina is reported to have opted to consider China as having “full” MES, thereby giving up the possibility of applying the “selective” approach (probably due to the costs involved in undertaking investigations in speciﬁc sectors) (Tussie y Bianchi, 2004).
Thus, several countries are already providing an opportunity for Chinese ﬁrms to argue that they operate in a market-economy environment.
China and other NMEs are urging the United States and other countries that are currently applying an inﬂexible, across-the-board approach to take this more ﬂexible route.
The only favourable aspect of an NME designation from the perspective of the respondent country is that NMEs are currently not subject to countervailing duties.
Out of the six criteria, the two major hurdles are reportedly exchange rate policy and labour standards (Hufbauer y Wong, 2004, p. 17).
In evaluating the Russian Federation’s MES designation, United States authorities found that it basically meets all six criteria, although to varying degrees.
By contrast, it was found that Viet Nam does not meet the test on most counts.
Although Viet Nam has made strides in the area of wage-rate determination, it failed the test in respect of exchange-rate policy and currency convertibility, restrictive policies on foreign investment, continued government involvement in the economy and distortions in the banking sector.
The European Union has found that China has fulﬁlled only one of these ﬁve requirements, namely the absence of barter trade and the absence of State-induced distortions in the operations of enterprises as a result of privatization processes.
A study commissioned by China’s Ministry of Commerce concluded that, as of the end of 2001, “China is about 69 percent a market economy measured by the internationally accepted standard, exceeding 60% as the threshold of a market economy country”.
In a similar vein, a permanent adviser to the China Association of International Trade stated that, “Ninetyeight percent of China’s commodities are priced according to market demand and supply.
NME status allows antidumping investigators to use surrogate-market prices in estimating the prices charged by Chinese exporters.
It tends to be easier to prove the existence of dumping when using surrogate prices than under the antidumping rules applying to market economies.
Under the various constructed value methods, the biases can amount to up to 25% for both the United States and the European Union.
The highest dumping margins are associated with NME status (40% in the United States and 46% in the European Union).
However, it should be borne in mind that, compared to China’s total exports, the value of the exports that are subject to antidumping investigations is miniscule.
On the other hand, Australiaʼs experience seems to suggest that there are few additional or special protections associated with a strict application of the NME rules.
Contrary to what is generally thought, NME status does not allow trading countries to automatically have recourse to the use of surrogate third-country pricing and cost information.
Nor does it guarantee higher dumping margins in antidumping cases involving China.
Vb_Eng.indd 169 (2003, p. 3) points out that even where an investigation involves a country with NME status, there are still a series of steps that are normally required in order to use surrogate third-country information.
The Australian customs authorities prefer to use the domestic prices charged by other vendors of like goods in China whose prices are not distorted by price controls.
Where costs for raw material inputs are found to be affected by the supply of those materials by Chinese government-owned companies, the customs authorities ﬁrst attempt to obtain alternative price information for these materials from non-government-owned companies that supply such materials either to the same ﬁrm or to other exporters in China.
If this option is not available, customs authorities may resort to other “reasonable and appropriate” methods to determine suitable raw material input prices, including, but not limited to, surrogate price information from third countries.
Moreover, when surrogate information is actually used in an NME situation, the domestic market of the surrogate country should be “reasonably representative” of the domestic market of the affected NME, which also requires customs ofﬁcials to prove that the surrogate market is free of market distortions.
Given the above, removing China from the NME list should not greatly disadvantage the Latin American and Caribbean countries that have already granted MES status to China, since their ability to apply antidumping measures should not be seriously curtailed.
These countries can also accommodate their antidumping policies by relying more on a case-by-case approach.
On the other hand, it is clear that continuing to treat China as an NME in a seemingly discriminatory manner has been a stumbling block for efforts to improve bilateral trade relations with the rest of the world, including Latin America and the Caribbean.
Chinese authorities are actively seeking a review of its NME status in various forums and, as part of this effort, have sought to conclude a series of bilateral free trade agreements (FTAs) under which it would enjoy MES, as it now does in the case of New Zealand.
In the runup to the FTA negotiations with China which Australia agreed to undertake after its recognition of China as a market economy, Australia will reportedly begin to pursue antidumping cases based on costs incurred in China rather than using surrogate-country costs or prices.
Brazil and Chile have agreed to pursue a fast-track MES study regarding China.
The recognition of Chinaʼs MES by all the 10 ASEAN members was a crucial element in paving the way for the conclusion of an FTA with these countries in late 2004.
As of June 2004, The EU had 32 deﬁnitive antidumping measures in force and 22 ongoing antidumping investigations against China, while the United States had 52 antidumping measures in force (European Commission, 2004).
Vb_Eng.indd 170 for a joint feasibility study on a possible FTA between the two countries, whose initiation was announced midMay 2005.
In order for a ﬂexible, case-by-case mechanism to be effective, Latin American and Caribbean governments should work together with Chinese authorities and companies to ensure proper and authentic documentation of price and cost information.
An additional consideration is raised by the fact that investigating individual companies is a costly and time-consuming process, especially for developing-country authorities.
The caseby-case approach also places the burden of proof on the Chinese companies named in such allegations, which is yet another reason why bilateral cooperation between the countries of the region and China is so important in this area.
The Ministry of Commerce of China has announced its intention to provide support and assistance to Chinese enterprises in the process of acquiring MES, either for their speciﬁc industries or in antidumping cases in which they are involved, and has already taken substantive steps in this regard (Peopleʼs Daily Online, 2004b; China.org.
It should be remembered that, under WTO rules, investigating authorities are in all cases required to calculate accurate antidumping margins regardless of the countryʼs status.
Maintaining the status of a country or moving it from one status to another does not affect this obligation, nor does it in any way affect the determination of injury or of a causal link.
Regardless of how the `argin is arrived at, China has every right to use the WTO dispute settlement mechanism to challenge any dumping margin that it believes is not accurately calculated (Stoler, 2004, p. 3).MChina has been restructuring and developing the various components of its trade regime, including its own antidumping law and other trade remedies, since 1997.
It has initiated 34 antid!mping investigations since then, but has been relatively cautious in doing so (Jing Gu., 2005, p.13).
Instead, China has been adopting a pre-emptive diplomatic course of action in an eff`rt to avoid trade disputes.
Since 2002, the country has sought to persuade its trading partners to treat it as a market economy rather than retaliating with its own national antidumping measures.
Chinaʼs MES recognition by a large number of Latin American and the Caribbean countries can be analysed within this context.
As not only the major developed economies but also many large developing countries have become frequent users of antidumping rules, China could decide to change its approach.
The countries of the region should strive to avoid such an outcome by means of mutual cooperation on the NME and related antidumping issues.
Strategic aspects of relations between China and South America The year 2004 was a particularly busy one, with Chinese authorities visiting South America on several occasions.
During all of these visits, commitments were made to strengthen economic and trade relations.
In addition, the Presidents of Argentina, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru have visited Beijing, and many more ministerial and business delegations from these and other South American countries have visited China in 2004 and 2005.
These visits have resulted in nearly a hundred public commitments and agreements marking a vital step in relations between China and South America and their mutual interest in building a strategic relationship.
Vb_Eng.indd 171 retooling of old rural facilities have boosted the countryʼs infrastructure requirements and energy demand and these needs, together with the sharp increase in its demand for foodstuffs, are a powerful reason for strengthening relations with Latin American natural-resource exporters.
China also needs to ensure unfettered entry for its exports and to secure recognition as a market economy, which was successfully negotiated by the Chinese President during his visits to the region.
China has employed a combination of different approaches in forging closer relationships with Latin American countries, including various types of trade agreements, direct investments (particularly in infrastructure and energy), joint ventures with State enterprises and special science and technology arrangements.
The conclusion of a free trade agreement with Chile paves the way for more permanent trade and investment links.
As is to be expected, this strategy of deepening and diversifying economic relations entails a considerable political component.
China has grasped the signiﬁcance of its increasingly inﬂuential position in the world economy and, just as the United States and the European Union are seeking to ensure a major economic role for themselves in Asia, China is seeking to establish a presence in Latin America.
Although Chinaʼs efforts to create closer ties are not conﬁned to South America, there are various historical reasons why Chinaʼs relations with Central America and the Caribbean have sometimes ﬂowed less smoothly, although this is now changing quickly.
In early 2005, a high-level meeting took place in the Caribbean between the senior authorities of the Chinese Ministry of Foreign Affairs and their Caribbean counterparts, and China is now a member of the Caribbean Development Bank.
Nonetheless, the convergence of Chinaʼs and Brazilʼs positions in international forums, the economic potential of a bilateral relationship between those two countries and Chinaʼs dialogue with Chile in APEC have tended to focus its attention on South America.
For the countries of this subregion, China is the largest and fastest growing world market for the natural resources that abound in this part of the Americas.
If Chinaʼs soaring demand for these raw materials or semiprocessed commodities and natural resources continues, South American countries can expect their export growth and terms of trade to be bolstered by Chinese demand for a long time to come.
China is also a source of investment, particularly in infrastructure and energy, which supplements the available ﬁnancing for ventures in these sectors.
It is important for the countries to pinpoint the infrastructure and energy projects where this investment can be most effective in shortening the lead times for such undertakings.
This type of targeting will not only reinforce trade facilitation and investment links between with China and with Asia and the Paciﬁc, but will also generate positive externalities for the integration process as such.
Vb_Eng.indd 172 For China, the agreement with Chile opens the way for mining investments in the worldʼs leading copper producer, with the strategic alliance between China Minmetals Non-ferrous Metals Co.
Ltd. and CODELCO constituting a milestone in its efforts to ensure a supply of copper over the long term.
In addition, at least in theory, this agreement gives China access to the vast network of trade agreements that Chile has been establishing.
This would include preferential access to the MERCOSUR market, although that possibility is still being evaluated, as it would require Chinese investments.
The agreement with Chile may also prove to be the ﬁrst in a series of agreements with other South American countries over the next few years.
These agreements could then be converted into multilateral arrangements, much like what has been done with the agreement between China and ASEAN.
Apart from endogenous factors, the pace of progress in this respect will depend on how the advances of the Doha Round measure up against the headway being made by the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) and the European Unionʼs negotiations with MERCOSUR and the Andean Community.
For Brazil, Latin Americaʼs largest economy, China (along with India and the Russian Federation) represents a powerful ally in its quest for a multipolar world.
Indeed, Brazil and China have been working together in highly interesting and innovative ways in the Doha negotiations as part of G-20, a group that advocates the developing countriesʼ positions on agricultural issues.
The G-20 is playing a key role in the negotiations and reflects the unprecedented degree of influence that developing countries have gained in these talks.
China and Brazil have fairly similar stances on various items on the multilateral trade agenda, such as investment, intellectual property and services.
The two countries are also seeking to promote strategic alliances that will add value to commodities and processed products as well as investments that will encourage technology transfer.
Progress in space technology, aeronautics and biotechnology are examples of South-South cooperation in high-technology ﬁelds.
In the area of trade, Brazil can provide China with a reliable supply of soya and iron ore over the long term, as well as being Latin Americaʼs largest market for Chinese manufactures.
The Government of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has also shown a keen interest in concluding trade agreements with China.
The worldʼs ﬁfth-largest oil exporter is currently working to diversify its oil sales and foreign investment and to reduce its economic reliance on the United States.
Closer ties with China offer an opportunity to do so, while China itself is interested in setting up joint ventures and participating in mining and oil operations all over the world.
Colombia faces a more formidable challenge in this respect than its neighbour.
First, Colombia produces many of the intermediate goods that are also being exported by China.
Second, the country does not have the oil or mining reserves that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Ecuador do.
Nevertheless, during the Colombian Presidentʼs visit to Beijing in April 2005, a number of cooperation agreements were signed, and China committed to invest in the textile, infrastructure and hydrocarbons sectors.
According to the president of Proexport, an association of Colombian exporters, if Colombia is to compete successfully with China, it will have to decide which activities are strategic priorities, enhance the competitiveness of those sectors, differentiate its products and carry forward the modernization process at all levels.
These elements will play a crucial role in building economic complementarities with China, a task that can be much more readily achieved if both countries are involved in the dynamic creation of competitive advantages.
Peruʼs expectations at the prospect of closer economic relations with China have also been a focus of national debate.
In line with joint government declarations and the cooperation agreements signed in early 2005, movement in this direction will start with increased exports of raw materials, mining products and fruits and vegetables and with the development of tourism.
Chinaʼs interest lies in increasing its investments, especially in the hydrocarbons sector.
On this basis, the countries signed agreements aimed at developing tourism in both directions and facilitating the exportation of fresh fruit (especially of grapes to China and apples to Peru).
Reciprocal cooperation arrangements were also set up to promote investment in natural resources (including hydrocarbons), infrastructure and tourism.
In November 2004 the President of China visited Argentina with a view to strengthening trade relations and winning support through the provision of fresh funds to boost investment.
Earlier on, President Kirchner, along with several governmental ministers and a large business delegation, had visited China.
The two countries concluded a series of agreements to facilitate the entry of higher-valued-added soya products, meat and other processed food into China.
Argentine exports to China could increase from US$ 3 billion to an estimated US$ 10 billion in the next ﬁve years.
One of these agreements opened up the Chinese market to exports of fresh beef and poultry from Argentina, and under its provisions permits were issued to ﬁve meat-packing plants and 11 poultry producers in Argentina (El Cronista, 2005).
Free-trade agreement with Chile For Chile, a free-trade agreement (FTA) with China would not only be a signiﬁcant step forward in the implementation of its international strategy, but would also provide huge trade beneﬁts.
Estimates prepared by the Economics Department of the Chilean Ministry of Foreign Affairs indicate that an FTA with China would provide a strong incentive for exports to the Chinese market and would have a particularly strong impact on crop, livestock, forestry and ﬁshing products, which could increase by almost 95%.
Exports of mining products and of processed food and beverage products would also rise, thanks to the elimination of tariffs and tariff escalation.
In addition to liberalizing bilateral trade, an FTA could also increase market transparency by facilitating the correction of trade distortions and providing greater legal certainty for business dealings.
Such an agreement would be of paramount importance for Chile, especially since China seems to be on its way to becoming the countryʼs second-largest export market.
Vb_Eng.indd 173 can be credited for having opened the way for its FTA negotiations with China.
These talks fell in line with Chinaʼs desire to move forward in trade negotiations with its ASEAN neighbours and thus drew the attention of the Chinese authorities, who reasoned that the experience of negotiating with Chile could help them become more sophisticated in their negotiations ﬁrst with Asian partners and then with the rest of the world.
Yet another consideration was the historic ties between Chile and China, which created closer bilateral trade links during the 1990s and have maintained diplomatic relations since 1970.
Chile was the ﬁrst Latin American country to establish diplomatic relations with China, the ﬁrst to conclude bilateral negotiations on Chinaʼs entry into WTO and the ﬁrst to grant China market economy status.
All of the above, combined with the close contacts between Ministers and heads of State in the context of APEC, paved the way for President Lagos and President Hu Jintao to announce the opening of FTA negotiations at the APEC meeting held in November 2004.
In the ﬁrst round of negotiations, held in January 2005, the parties established what issues they would seek to reach agreement upon.
These topics include the procedures to be used for negotiating tariffs, market access, rules of origin, customs procedures, technical trade barriers, trade protection measures and dispute settlement.
During the second round (April 2005), the parties set up a high-level technical group of senior government representatives from the two countries.
In Investment initiatives in South America Out of the US$ 1.8 billion that China invested abroad in 2004 (in areas other than the ﬁnancial sector), Latin America received almost US$ 889 million.
According to statistics from the Chinese Ministry of Commerce, the mining sector received 55% of total Chinese investment abroad.
It also consumes three times as much energy per dollar of GDP as the world average.
Such a high level of consumption relative to a GDP that is growing by leaps and bounds calls for extremely high levels of domestic and foreign investment if bottlenecks in terms of energy and critical inputs are to be prevented from curbing the pace of growth.
This is why energy ﬁgures so prominently in relations between China and Latin America and why such large investments are being made to ensure a smooth and reliable supply for the future.
For instance, China has granted the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela a loan of US$ 4 billion for energy projects and is planning to step up economic cooperation to develop the countryʼs vast oil and natural gas reserves.
In return, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has committed to begin exporting 600,000 barrels a day of fuel oil and 1.8 metric tonnes of orimulsion (a fuel used to generate electricity).
There are, however, logistical problems (the lack of specialized reﬁneries and the absence of a suitable tanker ﬂeet) standing in the way of any major increase in oil exports to the Chinese market.
Vb_Eng.indd 174 the third (June 2005), progress was made concerning the procedures to be used in negotiating tariff offers and within the various groups.
Talks also began on how future negotiations might approach issues related to trade in services, investment, intellectual property, trade facilitation, scientiﬁc and technological cooperation, labour issues, small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) and social security, sustainable development and cooperation in the mining sector.
This is also an obstacle in terms of Chinaʼs plans to obtain supplies from a number of Latin American countries.
From a long-term perspective, however, China is actively involved in plans for future investment in the regionʼs hydrocarbons sector.
It is currently negotiating with Colombia concerning investments in the exploration of petroleum deposits (87% of which would be in virgin oilﬁelds).
The ﬁrst stage in the process was a meeting between the Colombiaʼs Staterun oil company and Chinaʼs Petrochem, which resulted in a cooperation agreement.
Chinese companies are not only interested in exploration and exploitation of crude, however, but also in the infrastructure required to export it.
Signiﬁcant progress has already been made in bringing Chinese capital into major projects, such as the construction of a pipeline between the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Colombia, which would beneﬁt all three countries.
This pipeline, in which Colombian investors are also involved, would run across the north of Colombia to the Paciﬁc, thereby facilitating the export of Venezuelan and Colombian fuel to China.
Chinese specialists are also involved in discussions with technical experts in other South American countries to ensure future supplies.
China has entered into negotiations with Argentina to form a strategic alliance with the recently created State enterprise Enarsa for oil and natural gas exploration.
In Brazil, headway has been made in negotiations between the Brazilian company Petrobras and the Chinese enterprise Sinopec to set up joint oil drilling ventures throughout the world: ﬁrst in the seas off the coasts of Brazil and China, and eventually off the coastlines of Africa, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia and Mexico.
Chinese engineers are also studying the production processes, operations and distribution networks of Brazilʼs ethanol industry. (b) Mining Steady and growing demand for minerals such as copper, iron and zinc has led the Chinese Government to explore ways of ensuring supplies, either through longterm import agreements, strategic alliances with Latin American mining companies or FDI.
In Brazil, the Baoshan iron and steel company of Shanghai is building a plant as part of one of the largest Chinese investment projects abroad.
In mid-2005, the Yanguang Group of China concluded an agreement with Vale do Río Doce and Itochu Corporation (Japan) to set up mineral and metallurgical coal production facilities with a view to manufacturing steel in Brazil.
Although this will supply China with 600,000 tonnes of copper over the next few years, it needs even more.
The Chinese company has therefore reached a US$ 2 billion investment and supply agreement with the Chilean Copper Commission (CODELCO).
Initially, Minmetals will invest US$ 550 million in exchange for a 50% stake in a joint venture with CODELCO.
In exchange, the Chinese have a supply contract for 55,000 tonnes of copper for the next 15 years.
The agreement gives Minmetals a purchase option on 25% of the Gaby mine, which has an estimated production capacity of 150,000 tonnes of copper cathode. (c) Infrastructure Although South America can cover part of Chinaʼs future demand for raw materials, the slow development of the subregionʼs infrastructure will create a bottleneck, given the volumes involved.
Hence Chinaʼs keen interest in helping to ﬁnance a wide variety of infrastructure projects.
China plans, for example, to invest in a project aimed at restructuring Argentinaʼs railways in order to reduce transport costs for beef and soya.
In Brazil, the Government of China has expressed interest in investing US$ 5 billion in infrastructure in the short term.
In railways alone, US$ 11 million is to be invested by 2008, with US$ 7 billion of that ﬁgure corresponding to private enterprise and US$ 4 billion to the public sector.
By increasing the number of kilometres of railroad tracks, Brazil can considerably reduce its soya shipping costs Pane_Cap.
China also agreed to provide competitive ﬁnancing for the construction of the gas pipeline that will supply the north-east of Brazil with natural gas starting in 2006.
Bilateral cooperation between China and Latin American countries could include instructional programmes and the exchange of experiences in key areas of innovation.
The Latin American countries have the capacity to design and make use of such agreements in order to take advantage of technological and investment complementarities.
China and Brazil provide a good example of South-South cooperation in such high-technology areas as space technology and aeronautics.
The Brazilian aeronautics enterprise Embraer has entered into a joint investment venture with a Chinese partner in the city of Harbin, in north-eastern China.
This enterprise, with an annual production capacity of 24 regional aircraft, has already delivered its ﬁrst series of planes to South China Airlines.
China and Brazil have also jointly designed, produced and launched two earth resource satellites (CBER-1 in 1999 and CBER-2 in 2003).
The images sent back by these satellites have been used for agriculture, forestry, soil analysis, mineral resource surveys, water conservation, cartography, environmental protection, disaster monitoring and urban planning.
The two countries plan to launch three more of these satellites over the next few years.
Thus, for example, technological cooperation can put satellites in orbit that provide data for use in livestock pest control, integrated border control and tracking.
Here again, the countries of the region can take advantage of opportunities for strengthening economic complementarity by undertaking creative, forward-looking efforts to identify and promote mutually beneﬁcial prospects.
As many of these opportunities will entail improvements in the development of energy resources, infrastructure and trade facilitation, as well as fresh investment, the subregionʼs integration process will also beneﬁt.
Possibility of joint binational ventures in sectors such as information technology, steel, agroindustry and trading companies.
Received investment worth US$ 1.3 billion, further investment estimated between US$ 5 billion and US$ 7 billion.
Association agreement between Petrobras and Sinopec to set up joint oil exploration ventures.
Baoshan iron and steel company and Vale do Rio Doce participating in building production plant.
The Yanguang company concluded an agreement with Vale and Itochu Corp. of Japan to set up a mineral and metallurgical coal production venture to manufacture steel.
Investment and supply agreement worth US$ 2 billion concluded by and China’s Minmetals: contract for of copper over 15 years and purchase option on 25% of Gaby mine.
Participation of Chinese capital in construction of pipeline between the Bolivarian Republic of and Colombia, with a view to facilitating exports to China.
Minmetals Corp. purchased property of the Canadian corporation Noranda, owner of the Antamina mining operation (September).
Cuban ofﬁcials acknowledged that 41 Chinese tourist agencies already do business with Cuba.
US$ 4 billion of credit for energy projects, in exchange for Venezuelan commitment to barrels a day of fuel oil and 1.8 metric tonnes of orimulsion.
DIRECON (Ofﬁce of International Economic Affairs) (2004), “Comunicado conjunto de prensa sobre seis coincidencias en la cooperación económica y comercial entre Chile y China”, Santiago, Chile, 18 November.
Fortin, Carlos (2005), “International forum on going global of Chinese enterprise-strategy and management of multilateral business”, Ministry of Commerce of the Peopleʼs Republic of China (MOFCOM), 28 April.
The New York Times (2005a), “Asian reaction to unocal bid is muted”, 29 June. (2005b), “Chinaʼs costly quest for energy control”, 27 June.
The Bioterrorism Act Free trade agreements have been giving the countries better access to markets.
While the incidence of tariffs as a trade barrier is declining, the importance of new sanitary, phytosanitary and security measures in transport and logistics is increasing, to the extent that these are becoming a key factor in systemic competitiveness.
This competitiveness extends beyond low prices to include appropriate infrastructure, efﬁcient transport systems and fast, simpliﬁed customs procedures, among other things.
This means strengthening the institutions involved with trade logistics, harmonizing different rules and regulations both regionally and multilaterally, and promoting and improving capability building, with particular emphasis on the needs of small and medium-sized exporters.
After the New York attacks of 11 September 2001, health authorities in many countries began to strengthen their public health and security measures.
Precautionary measures were increased at every stage of the food chain and supplementary provisions were announced to prevent toxic substances being introduced into the production process.
The Act is designed to achieve food security and to meet the need for implementation of production process certiﬁcation throughout the production chain.
A second requirement is to give advance notice to both the FDA and the Customs and Border Protection (CBP) Bureau of the arrival in the United States and content of each export shipment.5 The Act also requires foreign facilities to appoint a United States agent who lives or operates a business in the country, and is thus physically present there.
Non-compliance with this requirement may result in the loss of the product concerned, if it is perishable, since it will be held at the port of entry pending registration, and this will involve a cost for the producer.
The provisions will come into force automatically, and by the time they do so the Food and Drug Administration must have registered all installations that manufacture, process, pack or hold food for consumption in the United States, even if the provisions are still at the implementation stage.
Meat and poultry products and eggs are not subject to these rules, since the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) is wholly and exclusively responsible for regulating them.
In the case of food products, the FDA must be given two hoursʼ notice if transportation is by road, four hours if it is by air or railway and eight hours if it is by sea.
Pane_Cap_VI_Eng.indd 182 sector of the countryʼs economy, the Produce Marketing Association, which operates in the market for fruit, vegetables and other fresh produce.
This organization, backed by other distributors and producers, has asked the authorities to make the provisions enacted more ﬂexible, citing as an example the complexity of the monitoring system for perishable produce such as fruit and vegetables (Fundación Grupo Eroski, 2002).
In practice, the Bioterrorism Act represents the application of the concept of traceability in food production, processing and trading and lays down the requirement that records be kept of individual products or batches, these records being related unequivocally to the product or commodity.
Furthermore, the labelling must trace the movement of the product (by means of a code) from origin to market, or cover a stage in the process that links in to a record containing information on the stages not indicated in the labelling.
These provisions are a response to a new and justiﬁed security demand.
The challenge is to ensure that they do not become another type of market access barrier.
This is a legitimate and understandable concern in the case of small and medium-sized enterprises trying to fathom whether or not they have the capacity to adapt to and quickly comply with the new requirements.
In practice, rigid application of the regulations unaccompanied by technical capabilitybuilding assistance for SMEs would be detrimental to export diversiﬁcation and to efforts to increase the presence of such companies in export ﬂows.
In its analyses of the economic impact of the Bioterrorism Act, the FDA has acknowledged the existence of a number of costs for companies exporting food to the United States.
These include: (i) additional transportation to a secure storage facility; (ii) additional storage; (iii) delays in releasing transport equipment containing detained products; (iv) loss of value of products in the perishable foods category; (v) cost of labelling detained products, and (vi) cost of appealing against administrative detentions.
Considering that maritime transportation is more expensive for small exporters, what this legislation does in practice is to place additional costs on the external food sales of SMEs.
In the absence of public policies to address these issues, these costs could well neutralize the tariff cuts obtained in the free trade agreements signed with the United States.
To all this must be added the costs to companies exporting food to the United States of engaging an agent in the country, estimated at between US$ 700 and US$ 1,000 a year; furthermore, the time required to engage an agent is put at between 5 and 15 hours, if contact is in English over the Internet.
According to the FDA database, in 2004 there were 330 administrative detentions of food shipments from Colombia, Ecuador and Peru.
Since its establishment the Commission has provided training courses, exporter registration centres and Internet connection points for companies requiring these services.
This regulation implements one of the four provisions included in the Bioterrorism Act, and its purpose is to ensure the safety and security of foodstuffs.
Another two provisions concern registration of facilities with the FDA and advance notice of the arrival of foodstuffs imported or offered for import into the United States.
Standards and regulations in the region’s main markets United States Entering the United States market is a long and costly process, and can take years.
Exporters are responsible for meeting all the requirements of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA).
Furthermore, it may happen that, despite the time and money invested, for some products the restrictions prove to be insurmountable.
The Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS), an offshoot of the USDA, is in charge of protecting and promoting agricultural health in the United States.
The APHIS has regulatory responsibilities for preventing the countryʼs plants and animals from being affected by exotic pests and diseases.
Its Import Authorization System (IAS) allows interested parties to apply for import permits for fruit and vegetables, animal products and organisms.
The IAS publishes a list summarizing the animal health situation by country and by area from the USDA perspective, including speciﬁc diseases of livestock, poultry and other animals Phytosanitary barriers affect a large proportion of the fruit coming into the United States market.
All such produce is subject to a requirement for speciﬁc documentation certiﬁed by the APHIS representative in the countries concerned, and is usually submitted to a variety of tests and treatments before being exported.
To reduce the risk of potentially harmful pests being introduced in fruit and vegetables, most of these products have to comply with complex sanitary and phytosanitary requirements before they can enter the United States.
The most harmful pest detected in merchandise from Latin America and the Caribbean is the fruit ﬂy, of which there are over 300 varieties, many of them concentrated in the region.
To deal with the issue of quarantine, a Plant Protection and Quarantine (PPQ) unit has been created Pane_Cap_VI_Eng.indd 184 inside APHIS and this has divided products entering the United States into three categories: unrestricted, prohibitory and restrictive.
Products in the ﬁrst category are allowed in without being subjected to detailed inspection or quarantine.
They include, for example, aloe vera, coconut, garlic bulbs, ginger root, maguey leaf, mushrooms, palm hearts, tamarind and water chestnuts (APHIS, 1986).
The “restrictive” group of products consists of fruit and vegetables allowed in only after quarantine treatments and post-harvest inspections to ensure that potential threats such as the fruit ﬂy have disappeared.
This ﬂy is known for its ability to adapt to a great variety of climates and fruits.
Originally from Africa, it has spread around the globe through trade and travel.
The countries where this pest has not appeared have to take preventive measures.
In the case of the United States, some products may enter only if they have been duly inspected and have the resultant certiﬁcation from APHIS-USDA; others require quarantine treatment.
In some situations, quarantine may represent a major barrier to access for the regionʼs exports.
To comply with standards and regulations and be able to export, the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean have to pay high costs and pass through a long process.
All this is the result of the procedures and regulations established under the auspices of the USDA, APHIS and PPQ.
The European Union a) Technical standards European Union regulations lay down the characteristics required of imported products or their production processes, and may include provisions regarding terminology, symbols, labelling or packaging.
There are technical standards set by national laws (unharmonized) and others that apply right across the EU (harmonized).
The purpose of harmonization is to relieve exporters from having to cope with 15 (or 25, from 2004) different sets of regulations, replacing these with just one.
At the EU level, regulations are of two types: the “old” type, which lay down detailed and speciﬁc technical requirements, and the “new” type, which confine themselves to essential provisions aimed at achieving health, security and environmental goals.
Regulations of the ﬁrst type apply to vehicles, cosmetics, chemicals, foods and pharmaceuticals; those of the second to a variety of products such as toys, building materials, machinery, pressurized equipment, medical instruments, electrical and electronic equipment, gas appliances, etc.
Under the new approach, regulations have to be based on harmonized European standards 7 of a voluntary nature, or on producer initiatives.
It gives decision makers the option of applying the “precautionary principle” in cases where measures have to be taken to protect health but the scientiﬁc information on the risk is inconclusive or incomplete.
Furthermore, EU regulations allows risk management measures to be based not just on scientiﬁc evaluation, but on other “relevant” factors as well.
This provision has aroused some criticism, however, because the “other factors” are not clearly deﬁned.
EFSA provides independent scientiﬁc advice to the Commission on all matters directly or indirectly affecting food safety.
Although the decisions are made by the Council of the European Union and, in some cases, by the Commission,10 EFSA pronouncements have a large inﬂuence on food safety policymaking and legislation.
Regulation (EC) 178/2002 harmonizes the concepts, principals and procedures to be applied by member States when adopting national food safety standards.
Activities in this area span the whole food production chain from zoosanitary and phytosanitary aspects to the labelling of food products, as well as animal protection issues.
This is a Commission system for rapid information sharing among member States in the event of a serious and imminent hazard (third parties are also allowed to participate).
Should a substantive unresolved disagreement arise on scientiﬁc issues between EFSA and the competent body in a member State, a joint document must be drafted to clarify the issues at stake and indicate where the relevant data are uncertain, so that the Council can take a decision.
These measures were adopted after the Food and Veterinary Ofﬁce (FVO) had carried out an assessment mission in Brazil.
Traceability Food safety, a constant concern of all consumers in both developed and developing countries, has moved up the external trade agenda as its close functional relationship with security issues has been recognized.
Progress with the application of biotechnology techniques has served to highlight the subject of food safety and quality, turning it into a matter of worldwide interest, and to raise peopleʼs awareness of the potential dangers that the foods they consume might pose.
To enter these countriesʼ markets, foods now have to comply with new legislative provisions requiring them to be accompanied by full information on the production chain.
The United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) and the World Health Organization (WHO) have also recognized that this mechanism for tracking and understanding the life cycle of food is a crisis prevention measure for which member countries need to make regulatory provision in the near future.
In other words, traceability is the path used to follow a product from origin to destination (tracking or traceforward) or vice-versa (tracing or trace-back), taking in all the components that are added over the length of the production chain.
The purpose of keeping these records is to be able to identify the critical point or points when a health contingency occurs, and thus localize the emergency, isolate it and resolve it at the exact point of the production chain where it has occurred, without affecting the continuity of other trade ﬂows.
The ability to detect the problem quickly will depend on the means used to ensure successful tracking.
Since 1 January 2005, it has been compulsory for full information to be provided on the quality of the production process before food products can be allowed into the European Union.
Regulation (EC) 178/2002 of the European Parliament and Council of 28 January 2002 established the general principles and requirements for food legislation, created the European This measure was ordered after “Sudan red” was discovered in hot chilli products from India being sold in France.
The system of traceability applies to food, feed and food-producing animals; it concerns all operatives in the chain, industry, transport, distribution and retail.
Pane_Cap_VI_Eng.indd 186 Food Safety Authority and laid down food security procedures.15 16 17 The Regulation requires food labels to show the packaging date, use-by date and composition, with clear information certifying the processing it has undergone and its origin (modiﬁed or otherwise).
This information has to be easily understandable by consumers, but it also has to include precise details of each participant in the production chain, given that all of them have to take their share of responsibility under the traceability system.
The first chapter examines the difficult international economic situation and the outlook for the rest of the decade.
The global economy is facing difficult conditions again in the second half of 2012, with the epicentre in the euro zone.
A number of European economies are mired in deep recession and their governments are having serious difficulties in reconciling the need to regain growth with the urgency of reducing their high levels of deficit and debt.
As a result, mounting uncertainty and turmoil are sapping a global recovery that is already the weakest in 40 years.
Although the United States is performing somewhat better than the euro zone, its recovery remains fragile.
Moreover, its economy could slip back into recession in the first quarter of 2013 if major scheduled tax hikes and spending cuts go ahead.
Over the next few years, the developing countries, particularly China and other emerging Asian economies, will continue to be the main engine of the global economy and trade, while growth in the industrialized countries remains slow and volatile.
The industrialized countries still have some way to go in reducing household and public sector debt.
During this process, which could take another three to five years, financial constraints seem likely to continue, as do stringent fiscal consolidation and public debt requirements, short and erratic recoveries, high unemployment and further public sector interventions in finance and the economy.
Regarding trade policy in this complex international scenario, restrictive global trade practices remain at moderate levels.
In trade negotiations, the protracted stagnation of the Doha Round of the World Trade Organization (WTO) has accentuated an already strong tendency towards negotiating preferential agreements.
Much of this activity involves the economies of Asia and the Pacific.
Lastly, attention is drawn to a number of recent trade disputes at WTO.
Chapter II takes stock of the boom in commodity prices that began around 2003 and its evolving impact on the value of the region’s exports, drawing particular attention to the growing role of developing Asia, especially China, as a destination for commodity exports from Latin America and the Caribbean.
The resulting projections show that, even in the pessimistic scenario, prices for the region’s main export commodities will remain above their historical averages, even though they could fall by as much as 9% per year (especially in the case of minerals and metals).
The value exported by the region will continue to rise during the next four years at annual rates ranging from 0.7% to 10.5% in the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios, respectively, and 5% in the neutral scenario.
As a result, the countries in the region will have to work harder to increase their export volumes, if they are to maintain export earnings.
Chapter III looks at recent performance and the short-term outlook for trade and economic integration in the region.
It analyses foreign trade trends in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2011 and 2012 by main trading partner and category of product for the region overall and for the subregions, finding a sharp slowdown starting in the second half of 2011.
In fact, in 2012 exports and imports are likely to edge up by just 4% and 3%, respectively, owing, among other factors, to the crisis in the euro zone, weak growth in the Unites States and Japan, and modest growth in China and other emerging economies.
This chapter also examines the main developments over the past 12 months with regard to the various integration processes under way in the region.
On the one hand, there are no widespread moves to increase trade restrictions.
On the other, some of the region’s economies are continuing to sign new trade agreements at a rapid pace with partners in the region and beyond.
Lastly, a number of shifts have taken place in the region’s formal economic integration architecture.
Chapter IV examines the international integration of Latin America and the Caribbean in relation to the trends discussed in the rest of the document.
Three dimensions of the region’s export performance are analysed: (a) value chains, (b) employment generated by the export sector, and (c) export firms.
Briefly: (a) The examination of the region’s participation in value chains looks at the role of the maquila sectors and duty-free zones, as well as trade in intermediate goods.
In light of these indicators, it is concluded that, relative to other regions, particularly Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean is lagging behind in terms of integration into global value chains. (b) Employment generated directly by the export sector is analysed, as well as jobs linked indirectly to export firms.
The study performed for six countries suggests that export-related employment represents a significant and growing percentage (between 12% and 24%) of total employment. (c) The characteristics of the region’s export firms are examined by sector, size and destination.
It is concluded that the proportion of firms engaging in export activity is still very small.
In most of the region’s countries, export activity is concentrated in a few firms, usually large corporations operating in the natural-resource sector.
First, it is important to develop policies for bolstering intraregional trade, which is well placed to drive a process of structural change with equity.
This is because it plays an important role in export diversification, industrial development and direct and indirect job creation, and it is less concentrated than other types of trade by firm and involves a larger proportion of small and medium-sized enterprises.
Second, initiatives are needed to tap the potential for trade and investment with other emerging regions, especially Asia, and to foster a quality leap in those ties.
The complex reordering of the global economy All three engines of the global economy, especially the euro zone, slowed in 2012, sapping a recovery that was already the slowest in 40 years.
The crisis is deepening in the euro zone, after five quarters of growth close to 0%.
This is having a direct impact on the United States and China, for both of which the European Union was the largest export market in 2011.
Despite massive revitalization programmes, the recovery is proving to be the slowest of the entire post-war period.
As a result China’s exports are faltering too, and its demand for raw materials imports is slackening.
The main impacts of slower growth and weakening demand in the global economy’s three main engines are transmitted through the trade channel.
As the volumes of raw materials that emerging economies can export to these cooling markets shrink and their prices fall, the terms of trade downturn begins to erode the fiscal space available to them for potential countercyclical action.
Tensions in the Middle East and the Persian Gulf are endangering oil price stability and a spike in crude oil prices would make an international recession more likely.
Another area of concern is global food prices following their 6% jump in July —the largest since 2009.
Drought in the United States, production setbacks in the Russian Federation and unseasonal rains in Brazil have all combined to inflate these prices, especially for cereals (up 17%).
These higher prices could create inflationary pressures in the coming months, with the worst impacts being felt by the most vulnerable population.
Meanwhile, prices for industrial raw materials, such as minerals and metals, are falling as the global economy slows.
In this complex global context, world trade is slowing for the second year running.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) projects growth of 3.7% in global trade volumes in 2012, versus the 5% annual average expansion for the past two decades.
The projected world trade growth rate for 2012 also falls short of the rates for and the Caribbean is the region posting the highest growth in export volumes in the last quarter of 2011 and the first four months of 2012.
However, the European crisis and global risk aversion have dampened its export performance in the intervening months.
At the same time, the efforts of European banks to secure capital and liquidity at home is beginning to squeeze financing for trade in raw materials, much of which they normally provide.
The regulatory framework proposed for the banking sector under the Basel III accord is also onerous for trade financing because it raises the related capital requirements, in a manner not consistent with the low risk involved.
The euro zone moved closer to recession in the second quarter of 2012, amid the looming threat of a W-shaped recovery or double-dip recession.
Technically speaking, the euro zone has avoided a recession because economic activity stood still in the first quarter of 2012.
In practical terms, though, the euro zone (without Germany) has stagnated since the first quarter of 2008 (see figure 2).
Under a broader definition of recession —which takes into account unemployment, industrial output and investment— the euro zone is undoubtedly in recession now.
In fact, with the exception of Germany, none of the major European economies have regained the GDP levels they were posting in early 2008.
In an optimistic scenario, it will take two to three years for the euro zone to regain growth of close to 2%.
Germany and euro zone without Germany: year-on-year quarterly GDP variation, 2008-2012 B.
The measures being applied, particularly the widespread fiscal austerity, are exacerbating the euro zone recession.
The key issues of the crisis (public and private overindebtedness, fiscal deficits, unemployment and lack of growth) are being tackled late, timidly and with an apparently inadequate grasp of the situation’s gravity.
Political differences between Southern and Northern Europe are also hindering substantive agreements to deal with the crisis head on.
Especially in the countries of what is becoming known as the European periphery, the recession, along with high unemployment rates, is the outcome of deep fiscal austerity, a lack of confidence among economic actors and contracting credit.
This, combined with inability to remedy the weakness of the financial sector, is increasing the risk of “Japanese syndrome”, i.e. a decade of stagnation.
This may take the form of economic stagnation, falling potential output, loss of investment in human capital and innovation, high unemployment, wage freezes, cuts in social benefits, social capital erosion and worsening income distribution.
Emphasis on fiscal consolidation and public debt reduction will worsen these tendencies.
In such a scenario, it will be hard for the bloc to deal with necessary competitiveness challenges.
With currency devaluation ruled out, the only way most of the economies can gain competitiveness is by boosting productivity above the levels of Germany’s economy —a virtually impossible task amid economic stagnation and fiscal adjustment.
Some kind of reformulation of the social covenant that has prevailed in Western Europe since the post-war period therefore seems likely.
The actual content of a new covenant remains to be determined, as does the course and the fate of the broadest integration scheme ever attempted.
The difficult overall context in Europe masks a very mixed pattern among individual countries.
Germany is in the best position: while it is being affected by the depressed context in the region, its exports outside the European Union are benefiting from the euro’s falling value against the dollar and the yuan.
And the crisis is helping Germany’s public accounts because the mounting credit risk of a number of euro zone countries boosts demand for German bonds and pushes their real yields into negative territory.
This is helping bring down Germany’s deficit and makes it more likely to balance out in 2013.
On the other hand, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain are mired in deep recession exacerbated by stringent fiscal austerity measures.
Briefly, the impacts of these measures range from positive financial externalities for Germany and the countries of Northern Europe to a worsening economic scenario in Europe’s Southern Tier.
This is one of the economic and political divides between Northern Europe and Southern Europe that are making it hard to agree upon an orderly exit from the crisis.
The United States, meanwhile, is in a period of slow, vulnerable growth.
The United States regained pre-crisis output levels at the end of 2011, but this took twice as long as previous recoveries.
Its current recovery is, in fact, the slowest and most vulnerable of all recoveries since the 1970s (see figure 3).
Economic growth slowed to a modest 1.7% in the second quarter of 2012.
The rise seen in private consumption in the last few quarters is not a reflection of better wages, but of transfers and tax cuts worth US$ 1.4 billion, which has further added to public debt.
Cumulative growth in the four years after each crisis, 1975-2013 (index: year of the crisis=1) B.
The United States economy could slip back into recession in the first semester of 2013.
Automatic tax hikes and spending cuts worth US$ 560 billion —equal to 4.7% of GDP— will take effect in January unless Congress reaches an agreement to postpone some of them.
There is little likelihood of legislative agreement on the entire amount, particularly given the approach of the presidential and parliamentary elections in November 2012.
Even in the most optimistic of scenarios with a partial legislative United States Bureau of Labor Statistics, Current Population agreement, the most likely outcome would be modest growth for 2013, with a downturn in the first semester (see figure 3B).
This also hinges, however, on the effect of adverse external factors (recession in Europe, slacker growth in China and other emerging economies and the risk of higher oil prices), which could dampen United States growth in 2013.
The United States is seeking new sources of growth, given the weakened state of private consumption, which represents 70% of GDP.
Over the last eight quarters, private consumption has expanded at an annualized rate of 2.3%, as against 3.6% in the decade before the crisis broke out.
Consumption has been dragged down by asset value loss, while debt remains high and savings low.
In this context, households are enduring a forced adjustment since much of their limited available income is going to pay debt and rebuild savings.
With consumption likely to remain sluggish throughout 2013, a fresh boost to growth would have to come from investment and net exports.
But the fragility of the euro zone and the slowdown in China limit that possibility.
An export slump would leave the United States economy more vulnerable to another recession.
In this scenario, the renewed push by the United States to develop trade ties with Asia reflects the importance of that region’s market for driving United States growth.
China’s economic growth is a key factor for growth and trade projections for the global economy, as well as for the behaviour of international commodity prices.
China’s economy is slowing as a result of both external and domestic factors and the government is seeking to ensure 7.5%-8% expansion for 2012.
GDP growth was 7.6% in the second semester of 2012, marking the sixth consecutive quarter of deceleration and the lowest growth rate since the first quarter of 2009.
Chinese exports show annualized growth of just 1% in July 2012, a 16% drop in exports to Europe and a 0.6% increase in exports to the United States.
In view of China’s increasing linkages with other developing countries, the cooling of its economy affects their exports, too.
Nevertheless, the growth track projected for the Chinese economy in the coming years would keep raw materials prices high, albeit below the peaks of 2008.
If inflation holds below 3%, the authorities could deploy more expansionary monetary and fiscal policies in the second half of 2012; potential measures include further cuts in interest rates and bank reserve requirements, along with tax cuts to encourage consumption and special programmes to spur lending to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
The global economy today is not as resilient to potential crisis as it was in 2009.
The industrialized economies in particular have very little scope for addressing a new crisis, for a number of reasons.
On the monetary stimulus front, interest rates in the United States and the euro zone are approaching zero and several rounds of quantitative easing have already been deployed with limited results.
In addition, public debt and fiscal deficits are at unsustainable levels in most economies of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), so there is little possibility for fresh fiscal stimulus.
And lastly, private debt reduction will take a few more years; this, in addition to curbing domestic demand, makes monetary policy less effective as a reactivation tool.
The emerging economies also have less financial manoeuvring room to deploy countercyclical measures because of the effects of the recovery and expansion programmes implemented in 2009.
In several cases, these set off credit booms and in others, inflationary pressures, declining yields on public investment and even fears of property bubbles and bad loans.
Another limitation emerging as 2012 advances is the downturn in terms of trade and export values as a result of falling prices for some raw materials.
This is weighing especially on the fiscal balances of economies which export minerals, metals and energy.
A two-speed global economy is expected for the coming decade, with the emerging economies growing at twice the rate of the industrialized economies.
Convergence with the developed economies in terms of per capita income should continue for the rest of the decade, although at a slower pace than during the exceptional years of 2003-2010.
Trade between developing nations (South-South trade) will also be more buoyant than trade between industrialized countries (North-North trade) and at the current rates, South-South trade could exceed North-North trade by 2020.
The commodities “supercycle” which began in 2003 could last until 2020, with price growth below the peaks of mid-2008 but higher than the historical trend.
The divergence between monetary cycles, with low interest rates in the industrialized countries and higher rates in the emerging economies, will last for another few years.
The gap in interest rates and growth, and therefore in returns, could drive currency appreciation in emerging economies, which would hurt their export performance and hinder export diversification and competitive import substitution.
Moreover, capital inflows could, in some cases, generate credit overheating, current account deterioration and real estate or stock market bubbles.
Uncertainty and financial volatility will continue to dog the global markets until some sort of real progress is made towards resolving the euro crisis, which could take several years.
In the meantime, risk aversion and flight to quality may cause short but painful bouts of financial stress.
This will be the longest crisis of the post-war period, and with the most lasting effects.
The crisis was triggered by public and private overindebtedness and thus left a legacy of high fiscal deficits and public debt which will have to be reduced gradually.
During the five years leading up to the 2008 crisis, gross household debt rose by an average of 39 percentage points to reach 138% of income.
When the 2008 crisis drove home values down, many households saw their home value to debt ratio fall.
Moreover, falling income and rising unemployment made it hard to make mortgage payments.
Accordingly, it will take a few more years for the industrialized economies to fully recover.
The United States has made the most progress with debt reduction but high debt service in Ireland, Spain and the United Kingdom remains a serious constraint on private consumption.
There are noteworthy similarities in the experience of countries such as Finland, Republic of Korea and Sweden, which have successfully recovered from overindebtedness crises such as that currently beleaguering several European countries.
These include the following: (i) rapid resolution of bad loans; (ii) robust export performance supported by significant devaluation; (iii) rapid expansion of private investment; (iv) structural reforms to promote productivity and competition;2 and (v) stabilization of real estate market prices and resumption of new home sales.
Another similarity is that fiscal deleveraging took place only after growth had resumed, driven by exports and private investment.
In other words, fiscal deleveraging came in the final years of private debt reduction.
This contrasts with what is occurring in several European economies, where these processes are going on simultaneously.
Medium-term expectations are for slow, volatile economic growth in the industrialized countries while the developing countries continue to drive the economy and global trade.
For many industrialized countries the challenge lies in making further strides in household, financial sector and government debt reduction.
During this process, which could take at least five years, financial constraints seem likely to continue, as do problems with debt indicators, short and uneven recoveries, high unemployment and substantial government interventions in the financial system and the economy.
This likely scenario calls for a reordering of the global economic and political institutions to reflect the greater weight of the developing countries in the global economy.
There are major gaps in the governance of globalization today in such aspects as international financial regulation, reform of the international monetary system, efforts to combat the effects of climate change, international migration and the adjustment of the multilateral trade system in response to the proliferation of preferential trade agreements and global value chains.
In order to be effective, a substantive agreement on these matters must afford the emerging economies a larger role in decision-making.
However, the current context of slow growth, high unemployment and compulsory fiscal consolidation in the industrialized economies is limiting the political scope for reaching such agreements.
The commodity boom: analysis and outlook Burgeoning demand from China and other emerging economies have largely driven the surge in commodity prices since 2000, especially in mineral and metal prices.
Although these conditions have promoted growth in countries in the region which export these products, especially in South America, they have also made them more dependent on the resulting income.
By contrast, the Central American economies and most Caribbean countries are net importers of primary goods and have therefore suffered the adverse effects of rising commodity prices.
In the case of the Nordic countries, reforms included entry into the European Union and retail sector deregulation; in the Republic of Korea, restructuring corporate conglomerates and further opening the economy to foreign direct investment.
The current international uncertainty —combined with prospects for weak growth in the developed countries and slacker growth in the emerging economies— makes it necessary to consider how the region’s countries would be affected if their commodity exports were to falter.
This is examined in terms of three different demand and price scenarios for 2013-2015 (neutral, optimistic and pessimistic), looking in particular at the 10 main commodity groups exported by the region.
By decreasing share of total exports, these are oil, copper, iron, soybean, coffee, sugar, fish, meat, fruit and gas.
These 10 groups together accounted for 42% of the region’s total worldwide exports in 2011(see figure 4).
The estimates performed show that, in the neutral scenario, the price index for all 10 product groups will fall by an annual average of around 2% between 2013 and 2015 (see figure 5).
Even in the pessimistic scenario, prices for the main commodities exported by the region will remain above their averages for the 1990s and their troughs of 2005-2011, but will generally fall short of the peaks recorded in mid-2008 and in 2011 (especially in the case of minerals and metals).
Food and oil prices could continue to climb, depending on how prevailing circumstances affect supply.
The price supercycle that began at the start of the 2000s is therefore likely to continue, although at a slower pace.
This means that the countries of the region will have to work harder to boost their export volumes, if they are to maintain current levels of export income.
Despite the projected fall in prices, the value of total regional exports will continue to rise over the next three years, although much more slowly than in recent years.
The projected annual growth rate in the value of exports between 2013 and 2015 is 5% for the neutral scenario, compared with 0.7% and 10.5%, respectively, for the pessimistic and optimistic scenarios (see figure 6).
Overall, the region’s export performance will fall far short of upsurge seen in the second half of the past decade, during which annual export growth averaged over 20% in value terms.
The large proportion of commodities in Latin American and Caribbean exports to China and the favourable growth forecasts for that country ensure a threshold level of growth for the region’s commodity exports in the years ahead.
If the Chinese economy grows at rates of 7%-8% (as suggested by projections from various international organizations and the Chinese government’s own estimates), the region will be guaranteed annual growth of 16% (by volume) in its exports to that country.
In addition, to secure their supplies of raw materials, Chinese buyers commonly sign medium- and long-term contracts, particularly for metals (such as copper, nickel and iron ore, as the main inputs for the steel, construction and machinery industries in China).
This means that Chinese buyers could well take advantage of lower commodity prices to stockpile supplies (especially of metals, soybean and other grains), as occurred during the 2008-2009 crisis.
As ECLAC has argued in numerous publications, the bias towards commodities in the region’s export basket, especially in the case of the South American countries, presents both challenges and opportunities.
If, as expected, prices rise at a slower pace over the next few years, this will ease currency appreciation pressures and pave the way for boosting exports of more complex products (including natural-resource-based products).
Nonetheless, this process is not automatic and poses a number of challenges for public policy.
A public policy that aims to build up the component of national value within the commodity chain process must strengthen national networking (both between firms and between and within sectors) so that cooperation and consensusbuilding can be approached in a coordinated manner in order to tackle outstanding development challenges.
Trade and economic integration in Latin America and the Caribbean: recent performance and short-term outlook Total exports by the Latin American and Caribbean region expanded by 23% in 2011 to represent US$ 1.06 trillion, while imports rose 22% to US$ 1.01 trillion.
The region continues to run a trade deficit with China and the rest of Asia, offset by the surplus with the United States and new trading partners outside the region.
As in 2010, Latin American and Caribbean exports outstripped the world average.
They expanded by more than those of the United States, the euro zone and Asia, and were surpassed only by exports from Africa and the Middle East.
As in 2010, the region’s mining and oil exports posted the fastest growth, far outstripping total exports.
Exports of agricultural products also outpaced the regional average, despite greater price volatility during the second half of the year.
The region’s foreign trade has slowed sharply since the second half of 2011, heavily influenced by the recession in the euro zone, faltering economic growth in the United States and Japan, and slower growth in China and other emerging economies.
This is reflected in the figures for January-June 2012, when regional exports and imports were up by 4% and 6%, respectively (see table 1).
The slowdown has occurred in trade flows with all of the region’s major trading partners, although exports to the European Union showed the steepest decline: by 5% year-on-year in the first semester of 2012.
ECLAC forecasts that the value of the region’s goods exports and imports will climb by around 4% and 3%, respectively, in 2012.
These figures are some 20 percentage points below the growth rates posted in 2011.
By subregion, foreign trade growth will exceed the regional average in Central America and Mexico, but will be slower in South America.
Both exports and imports will see a drop in the Caribbean countries, mainly because they have greater trade links with the European Union than the rest of the region (see table 1).
The price component will suffer the most from the slowdown in regional exports, as it is expected to plummet from growth of 19% in 2011 to a contraction of 1% in 2012.
Export volume, on the other hand, is projected to rise by close to 5%.
Virtually all the countries of the region will see export prices fall (most sharply in South America and the Caribbean) and volumes increase.
Export volume growth in Mexico and Central America is likely to outpace the regional average, as a result of which these countries will outperform the rest of the region in terms of exports.
Import volumes are expected to grow by 4% in the region as a whole, more than offsetting the expected price decline of close to 1%.
ECLAC expects that the recession in the euro zone will cause a drop of around 5% in exports from Latin America and the Caribbean to the European Union.
The sharpest drop will be in exports from the countries of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) (-19%) and South American countries (-7%), contrasting with the 16% growth forecast for Mexico and Central America.
If the current situation in Europe continues, it could also have an indirect effect on the region’s trade with China, as a result of weaker demand for imports in China and the other Asian countries in response to lower European Union demand for Asian exports.
This trend is expected to intensify in 2013 as the region’s exports to China slacken and the prices for the commodities it exports to that market, such as copper, iron ore and fishmeal, fall.
Thanks in part to changes in the region’s foreign trade over the past decade in terms of export destinations, export performance in 2012 is expected to be better than during other recent international economic crises.
While the region’s exports declined by almost 5% in 2001 (the year of the “dotcom” crisis) and slumped by 22% in 2009, during the global financial crisis, they are forecast to grow by close to 4% in 2012.
Major shifts in the region’s foreign trade over the past decade in terms of export destination structure have built greater resilience.
In contrast, Asia’s share rose steeply (from 6% to 18%), with China jumping from 1% to 9%.
Exports within Latin America and the Caribbean also increased, from 16% to 20%.
In short, developing regions have grown as destinations for Latin American and Caribbean exports; since they are also the world’s fastest-growing economies, lower demand for Latin American and Caribbean exports in the industrialized countries has had less of an impact.
As in the rest of the world, trade restrictions have increased in Latin America and the Caribbean, although not across the board.
Particularly in Argentina and Brazil, faltering growth in the past few quarters has fuelled demands from certain sectors to protect national industry.
This has occurred in the context of a trend, already observed prior to the crisis, towards greater penetration of Asian manufactures (especially from China) which have displaced imports from the rest of the world as well as local production.
As a result, in recent months some countries of the region have introduced measures or made announcements that point to further import restrictions, mainly on industrial products.
Some of these actions have been called into question, both within and outside the region.
At the same time, a number of countries in the region have continued to sign new trade agreements.
In May 2012, the free trade agreement between Colombia and the United States entered into force, while the free trade agreement between Panama and the United States is expected to follow suit during the second half of 2012.
In June 2012 the association agreement between the European Union and Central American countries (including Panama) was signed, as was the free trade agreement between the European Union and Colombia and Peru.
Thus several of the economies of the region already (or will in the coming months) enjoy preferential trade relationships with both the United States and the European Union.
The number of trade agreements between countries of the region and Asia-Pacific has also increased considerably over the past 12 months.
This flurry of activity concerns only a small number of countries from the region, however, all on the Pacific coast.
Significant changes have taken place in the region’s formal economic integration architecture in recent months.
These include the admission of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as a full member of MERCOSUR, the formal establishment of the Pacific Alliance and progress towards the creation of a free trade area between Mexico and the Central American countries.
This is therefore a situation in flux, and it is difficult to predict how it will pan out.
That said, Meso-America appears to be moving towards ever closer economic integration, while the situation in South America is less clear-cut.
As for the Caribbean, the matter of how the costs and benefits of integration should be distributed among the economies of CARICOM is being hotly debated; addressing this issue will pose new challenges for the integration process.
With the admission of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as a full member of MERCOSUR, which was made official in July 2012, the grouping has become a market worth US$ 3.3 trillion with 275 million inhabitants.
The trading bloc has also added a major energy component to its profile as an agricultural powerhouse.
It was agreed that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would have until 2016 to gradually adopt the commitments arising from full MERCOSUR membership.
Meanwhile, Paraguay’s right to participate in MERCOSUR bodies was temporarily suspended following the events that led to the removal from office of the then President, Fernando Lugo, by Paraguay’s Congress in June 2012.
Also in June 2012, the framework agreement was signed formally establishing the Pacific Alliance.
Bringing together Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru, the Alliance aims to build a closely integrated area and work progressively towards the free circulation of goods, services, capital and people among its members.
These four economies constitute a US$ 1.9 trillion market with a population of 207 million.
The Pacific Alliance is also seeking to become a platform for political cooperation and for trade and economic integration whose global reach focuses above all on the Asia-Pacific region.
This represents a major step towards the creation of a larger economic space with a gross domestic product of almost US$ 1.3 trillion, a population of more than 150 million and close production and trade links with the United States.
In the Caribbean subregion, a debate has arisen in recent months in Jamaica over whether the country should remain a member of CARICOM.
The main reason is the large trade deficit Jamaica is running with its partners in this grouping, particularly with Trinidad and Tobago, the bloc’s largest economy.
Underlying the discussion is the issue of how the benefits of economic integration are distributed among the members, especially since these vary considerably in terms of size, level of economic development, population and other variables.
The global economic outlook and the challenges it poses for the international integration of Latin America and the Caribbean Prospects for the global economy for the remainder of the decade point to several years of slow growth in the industrialized countries.
Such a scenario reinforces the long-term trend towards a growing contribution by the developing economies to global economic variables.
Another trend that is rearranging the international production and trade map is the geographical fragmentation of production, which is increasingly structured in value chains.
These are characterized by substantial flows of The three previous agreements that have now been superseded were between Mexico and Costa Rica; Mexico, El Salvador and Nicaragua; and Mexico and Honduras. trade in intermediate goods and services and of foreign direct investment.
Variables such as physical and services infrastructure, connectivity and logistics are essential for this production mode to work smoothly.
Gauging by the share of intermediate goods in total exports, Latin America and the Caribbean is not entering global value chains as quickly as other regions, particularly Asia.
In 2011, the proportion of intermediate goods in the region’s worldwide exports (9.5%), though higher than in the early 1990s, was much lower than at the start of the 2000s (see table 2).
The slowdown was sharpest in Mexico, the region’s primary exporter of intermediate goods (31% versus 5%), and Central America (29% compared with 7%).
But if Mexico is not included, 54% of the region’s exports of intermediate goods go to the regional market itself.
This underscores the different subregional dynamics: whereas the intraregional is more important than the extraregional market for the South American economies, the opposite is true for Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, whose production and export structure is clearly oriented towards the United States market (see the cases of Brazil and Mexico in table 2).
In 2011 intermediate goods represented 9.5% of intraregional exports in Latin America and the Caribbean, the same proportion as in worldwide exports.
This is significant, bearing in mind that the proportion of manufactures is far higher in intraregional than in extraregional exports.
In other words, the higher share of manufacturing trade within the region does not increase trade in intermediate goods within the region.
This is an indication of the low level of production integration, as it suggests that most of the manufactured goods traded within the region are wholly made in the country that exports them.
Within the region, Mexico and a number of Central American and Caribbean countries are the economies most integrated into value chains, mainly through maquila activities and production in duty-free export zones.
But this value-chain integration seldom coincides with high levels of local value added.
What is more, under agreements adopted in the framework of the World Trade Organization, in 2016 many Central American and Caribbean countries will have to severely cut back on the fiscal incentives they extend to firms in duty-free export zones based on their export performance.
This will sorely test the ability of these zones to maintain their share in total exports.
From an analysis of input-output tables for six countries4 in the region, it was found that employment linked to exports represents a significant and growing percentage (between 11% and 24%) of total employment (see table 3).
With the exceptions of Argentina and Chile, indirect export employment (i.e. employment associated with the goods and services used as inputs by the export sectors) was more dynamic than direct export employment and its share of total export employment (direct and indirect) was rising.
Whereas in Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay more than one indirect job is created for every direct job in the export sector, in Chile, Colombia and Mexico the ratio is much lower than one.
The six countries examined all had a group of manufacturing sectors with a high density of indirect export employment.
These sectors are foods, beverages and tobacco; chemicals and pharmaceuticals; automobiles; machinery and equipment; and wood, pulp and paper.
All these activities have in common a high share in intraregional exports.
They are also labour-intensive and have greater linkages with other sectors and accordingly generate more export employment, especially indirectly.
This is particularly evident in the foods, beverages and tobacco sector in Brazil (5.6 indirect jobs for every direct job) and the chemicals and pharmaceuticals in Mexico (4.3 indirect jobs per direct job).
In 14 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean representing nearly 95% of the region’s total exports, there were some 114,000 export firms in 2011.
Approximately 32% of these were in Mexico, 19% in Brazil and 11% in Argentina.
The total number of export firms in the region increased by 15% between 2002 and 2011, and in several countries the number of export-oriented businesses grew at a faster pace than businesses overall, especially in countries that have followed consistent policies for developing the export Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Uruguay. sector.
However, this trend was interrupted by the crisis that broke out in 2009.
In fact, in several of the region’s larger economies, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Colombia, there were fewer export-oriented businesses in 2011 than in 2008, before the crisis.
The region overall has a similar number of export firms to Spain or France.
The percentage of export-oriented firms in Latin America and the Caribbean is still very small.
Around 2010, in most countries, the share of exporters as a percentage of the total number of firms remained below 2% and was less than 1% in many of them.5 These percentages are very low compared with several developed countries and emerging Asian economies (see table 3).
The export sector in many of the region’s countries is highly concentrated in a few firms, usually large corporations associated with natural resources.
Export firms in Latin America and the Caribbean are very heterogeneous and show a high turnover (especially the smaller firms).
Of all the export firms in the region, those that have been exporting continuously for several years (five to seven) usually account for some 30%.
In a number of countries in the region, these are natural-resource-related firms that are more capital-intensive than the average for the economy.
Proportionally speaking, exporters are greater in number among large firms than among SMEs.
The number of firms exporting more than one product to more than one destination has increased slightly, but mono-exporters with a single destination still prevail in all of the countries of the region.
Only about 3,600 firms export more than 10 products to more than 10 destinations; most of these are large companies.
The pattern is very similar for all of the countries of the region in this respect.
The correlation between export growth and total employment is smaller when exports are highly concentrated, which usually coincides with a relatively less developed manufacturing sector.
Therefore, decreasing export and agent concentration should be a key part of the effort to diversify exports and reduce structural heterogeneity.
Not only is the region itself the principal destination for most of its export firms: the number of products exported in intraregional trade is the largest, especially in the high-tech category, and these exports are the least concentrated.
Over half of the region’s export firms export within the region (between 55% and 69% of them, depending whether Mexico is included), even though it is the destination for just one sixth of total exports by value.
For most of the countries, the region accounts for the lowest average per-company export Costa Rica, where export firms represent around 4% of all firms, is somewhat of an exception.
In Panama, which is not shown in table 3, the top percentile of export firms accounts for 46.9% of total export value. value, the largest average number of products exported per firm and the lowest concentration indices.
Exports to the United States share some of the characteristics of intraregional exports, such as greater participation of export firms (including SMEs) and higher employment generation (direct and indirect) than exports to other markets, especially Asia.
SMEs represent 58% to 88% of the region’s export firms, and between 6% and 8% of the value exported.
Their contribution to direct export employment is twice their contribution to total exports.
Because they are more employment-intensive, SME exporters generate more jobs per dollar exported than large companies.
For example, SMEs participate indirectly in foreign trade as suppliers of goods and services to large export companies or by selling their output to traders for subsequent commercialization in international markets.
SME internationalization is still relatively low in Latin America and the Caribbean.
SMEs face substantial human capital constraints, strategic management issues and relatively higher fixed costs for entering external markets.
Moreover, they are less able than larger firms to meet destination market requirements (such as quality, sanitary, phytosanitary and environmental sustainability standards).
These hurdles, on top of the export structure of the countries of the region (markedly skewed towards capital-intensive and natural-resource-intensive sectors), keep the direct share of SMEs in total export value quite low.
The analysis of intermediate goods trade, export employment and exporting firms highlights the need for Latin America and the Caribbean to step up efforts to strengthen the regional market.
A production transformation that helps to reduce inequality calls for more and better productive employment and a larger presence of SMEs, manufactures and services in exports.
These are features that are better represented in intraregional trade than in any other type.
The regional market is an important one for high value-added and knowledge- and employment-intensive exports.
It also tends to be the most important market for export-oriented manufacturing firms and SMEs.
The regional market is made more attractive by the burgeoning middle class in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past two decades.
Moreover, in an international environment marked by poor prospects for growth in the industrialized countries, over the next few years the regional market should be able to cushion drops in demand for the region’s exports in those markets.
Another argument for strengthening the regional market is that the global economy is increasingly structured around macro-regions, there being only a few national markets large enough to be attractive on their own, separate from their regional context.
In today’s globalized economy, competitiveness depends more and more on regional factors such as adequate infrastructure, efficient transport systems, telecommunications connectivity and simple and streamlined customs procedures.
In all these areas, coordinated action among governments would be more fruitful than isolated national efforts.
Deep integration can provide regional public goods that neither national markets nor national governments alone can provide successfully.
The region continues to exhibit low levels of intraregional trade and production integration.
While more than 50% of the exports of intermediate goods from Latin America and the Caribbean (excluding Mexico) go to the region itself, they make up just 10% of total intraregional exports.
For most of the countries of the region, the most immediate opportunities for entering value chains lie in the regional market itself because of its higher trade density in manufactured goods.
Progress therefore needs to be made in creating an environment that is conducive to greater production integration among the economies of the region.
This calls for action on a number of fronts, such as further progress on trade facilitation and cumulation of origin, and gradual convergence of regulatory frameworks in areas such as the treatment of foreign investment, services and technical rules.
Headway must also be made in closing the physical infrastructure gaps that limit regional connectivity (and with it the possibility of balanced territorial development).
Latin America and the Caribbean should continue to forge closer ties with other developing regions, particularly Asia-Pacific as the main hub of global economic growth.
Economic growth in Asia (and especially China) has given the region the opportunity to build up its resilience and growth capacity.
This process brings major issues of its own by, for example, favouring the entrenchment of an export pattern based on unprocessed natural resources (in the case of South America) and the displacement of Mexican and Central American manufacturing exports in the United States market.
The region should therefore seek integration in the world economy in a way that optimizes the benefits of its growing links with Asia and other developing regions while reducing the cost.
The time has come for a quality leap in the relationship with China, for which it is urgent to combine national efforts and agree on a regional agenda of priorities.
So far, however, it has been China that has taken the initiative in bolstering relations with Latin America and the Caribbean.
This was apparent in the set of proposals made by China’s Premier, Wen Jiabao, during his June 2012 visit to the region.
The time seems to have come for the region to pull together and work as one in responding appropriately to the many substantial initiatives that China has brought to the table.
Here, there should be a pivotal role for the newly created Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC), on the strength of its inclusive nature.
India and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) are also key actors in the region’s strategy for building closer ties with Asia-Pacific.
Combined, these 11 economies represent a highly dynamic market of over 1.8 billion people.
India’s rapid growth and urbanization and its shortage of many natural resources (especially food, mining and energy products) make it a market of great interest to the region.
ASEAN is important because of its economic and demographic weight and because it lies at the hub of Asian industrial production networks and of the new architecture of economic integration now emerging in East and South-East Asia.
For example, avoiding excessive reprimarization of exports requires boosting their innovation and knowledge content.
Doing so calls for vigorous production development policies geared towards improving productivity, innovation, infrastructure, transport, logistics and workforce skills.
In each of these spheres there is space for building a regional cooperation agenda with China and other key actors in Asia-Pacific.
More and better regional cooperation and integration would be very useful in this regard.
Regional and subregional joint initiatives for innovation, competiveness, infrastructure and sustainability, including adaptation to climate change, would complement national public policies.
Active use of these spaces by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean would generate attractive trade and investment opportunities with China and Asia-Pacific as a whole.
There are substantial synergies between the two strategic guidelines put forth herein: enhancing regional integration and strengthening ties with other developing regions.
The three engines of the global economy lose momentum Global economic turmoil and uncertainty heightened in mid-2012, particularly in the euro zone, sapping a recovery that was already the slowest in 40 years.
The global economy faltered in the last quarter of 2011 following the delay by the industrialized countries in taking a tougher fiscal policy stance amid further global financial market troubles.
The opening months of 2012 brought an uptick in industrial output and capital goods sales and imports as the result of new monetary and structural measures in the euro zone and less restrictive monetary policy in the emerging countries.
Starting in May, however, difficulties in the euro zone reversed much of the progress made in preceding months.
The euro zone economy slipped into recession, and the governments have not managed to reach agreements leading the way out of the grave economic and financial situation.
The recession, along with high unemployment rates in several euro zone countries, is the outcome of fiscal austerity, a lack of confidence among economic actors and contracting credit.
These problems are hampering bank deleveraging, leading banks to further curtail lending.
Borrowing rates for Italy and Spain continue to be intolerable despite 19 European summits.
It is clear that the core components of the crisis are being addressed reluctantly and late, with not enough signs of understanding how serious the situation is.
The difficult overall context in Europe masks substantial heterogeneity among individual countries.
This is helping to bring down Germany’s deficit and makes it more likely to balance out in 2013.1 Other countries, such as Austria, Denmark, Finland, the Netherlands and Sweden, are in a similar position.
On the other hand, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Portugal and Spain are in a deep recession exacerbated by stringent fiscal austerity measures and soaring interest rates on their sovereign debt.
This is one of the economic and political divides between Northern Europe and Southern Europe that make it hard to reach agreements.
The United States is in a period of slow, vulnerable growth five years after the outbreak of the subprime crisis.
Despite substantive reactivation programmes, the recovery is proving to be the slowest since the 1970s.
In mid-2012 job creation was losing momentum and the unemployment rate remained above 8%.
There is a real threat of another recession in 2013 because of the US$ 560 billion in automatic tax hikes and spending cuts —equal to 4.7% of GDP— that will take effect in January 2013 if Congress does not reach an agreement for postponing some of these measures.
A withdrawal of fiscal stimulus measures, plus new taxes, would be a substantial drag on the economy, with growth projected at just 0.5% for 2013 and the economy expected to contract during the first half of the year (Congressional Budget Office, 2012).
As a result, growth is slowing in China while the authorities seek to ensure 7.5%-8% expansion for 2012.
Exports, imports and industrial output are cooling, owing in part to the recession in the European Union, China’s main destination market.
Because of China’s growing links with the other emerging and developing economies, its slowdown impacts their exports as well.
On the domestic front, inflationary pressures and property bubbles seem to be easing.
If it holds below 3%, the authorities could deploy more expansionary monetary and fiscal policies in the second half of 2012; potential measures include expected further cuts in interest rates and bank reserve requirements, along with tax cuts to encourage consumption and special programmes to spur lending to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs).
Recent projections put Chinese growth for 2012 within the 7.5%-8% range forecast by the government, which would help to keep commodity prices above the historical trend.
In this complex global context, world trade has been slowing in 2012 and is expected to grow by some 3.7% in volume terms (WTO, 2012a) versus the 5% expansion posted in 2011.
This slight recovery could continue into the second half of 2012, but the carry-over effect of slow growth in the second half of 2011 is likely to hold back growth for 2012 as a whole below the prior-year figure.
The trade policies of the world’s principal economies support an exit from the crisis but are also making it worse.
On the one hand, the need to increase exports and the stalemate at the World Trade Organization (WTO) Doha Round have led the main actors to step up efforts to finalize new trade agreements, especially in the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region.
On the other hand, the Group of Twenty (G20) have continued to resort to a variety of trade barriers, which have broadened since October 2011 as the crisis deepened and now apply to 3% of global trade.
The number of disputes brought before WTO in the first half of 2012 already topped the total for all of 2011.
These disputes increasingly involve sensitive policy areas that go beyond strictly trade issues, such as environmental and public health policies.
The global economic outlook is subject to several downside risks having to do, above all, with difficulties in the euro zone and their impact on demand.
A 1-percentage-point drop in income in the industrialized countries would trigger a drop of 2.2 percentage points in exports and shrink developing countries’ GDP by 0.8 percentage points (World Bank, 2012).
In this fragile global economic scenario, sharply spiking crude oil prices would make an international recession more likely.
Some credit constraints are beginning to be felt in the developing economies and, as usual, are weighing disproportionately on SMEs.
And cooling commodity prices are starting to narrow the fiscal space for commodity-exporting countries and slow their pace of economic growth.
The global economy today is not as resilient in the face of a new crisis as it was in 2009.
Leading interest rates are approaching 0% in the United States and the European Union, which translates into negative real interest rates.
Both of these economies have applied repeated rounds of quantitative easing, with limited results.
Because fiscal deficits and public debt are at unsustainable levels in most of the industrialized countries, there is little scope for new fiscal stimulus measures.
The private deleveraging now under way is a significant drag on economic growth, cutting into domestic demand in these countries.
The emerging economies also have less financial room for manoeuvre because of the effects of the recovery and expansion programmes implemented in 2009, which set off a substantial increase in credit in a number of countries that led to fears of property bubbles and bad loans and left a legacy of unprofitable investments.
Expectations over the medium run are for slow, volatile economic growth in the industrialized countries while the developing countries continue to drive the global economy and world trade.
During this process, which could take at least five years (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009), financial constraints would continue, as would problems with debt behaviour, short and uneven recoveries, high unemployment and substantial government interventions in the financial system and the economy.
The economy and global trade in a context of uncertainty and volatility World economic overview The global economic slowdown is worsening in 2012, against a backdrop of uncertainty and volatility.
In this unfavourable environment, industrial output growth in the developed countries fluctuated between 1% and 2% during much of 2011 while their exports continued to decline (see figure I.1).
In the developing countries, the pace of output and export expansion eased off as well but remained higher than in the developed countries, especially in terms of GDP growth.
The developing countries are still the main engine of the global economy.
The United Nations calculates global growth as a weighted average of individual country GDP growth rates, using as weights the countries’ GDP at nominal exchange rates.
This rate masks a high degree of heterogeneity: most euro zone economies are in recession, and the United States and Japan are seeing growth approaching 2%.
By contrast, the developing countries are relatively buoyant and account for most of the growth posted by the global economy in 2011 and 2012.
But slower growth in the industrialized countries is impacting the developing regions as well, through trade and financial channels, and pulling expansion down from 5.9% in 2011 to 5.3% in 2012.
The largest contribution is from the developing countries of Asia, headed by China.
One of the biggest challenges at present is job recovery, above all in the industrialized countries.
The economic recovery of 2010 brought improved employment rates in many countries, but the 2011 slowdown halted progress.
In all of the large economies, employment remains below 2007 levels except in Brazil, China and Germany.
This situation is also reflected in persistently high unemployment rates, especially in the advanced countries.
At least through June 2012 unemployment in the United States remained above 8%, topping pre-crisis levels.
In May 2012 unemployment in the euro zone was the highest in its history (11.1% of the workforce, or approximately 48 million people).3 Euro zone unemployment is expected to continue to rise and might not stabilize until sometime in 2013.
Overall, the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries would need to create 14 million jobs in order to return to pre-crisis levels of employment (OECD, 2012c).
Other worrisome trends are the increase in long-term unemployment (35% of total euro zone unemployment) and the percentage of unemployed young persons (United Nations, 2012).
The developing regions posted the strongest upturns in employment, but in some countries the economic slowdown of late 2011 and early 2012 is hampering the return to pre-crisis levels.
This is not the case in most of the countries of Latin America, where the first quarter of 2012 saw higher employment rates and lower unemployment than in the first quarter of 2008 (ECLAC, 2012).
The economic outlook for 2012 varies within each group of industrialized and developing countries.
This can be seen in the composite index of leading indicators, which predicts business cycle changes (see figure I.2).
In the first group of countries, the index points to a certain uptick in activity in Japan and the United States in 2012 while the situation grows more complicated in the euro zone.
In the second group, the pace of economic expansion is easing in China and India.
In contrast, Brazil’s economy resumed growth in the second half of 2012 after a sharp slowdown.
It includes both quantitative and qualitative indicators, notably the stock-exchange index, foreign trade, manufacturers’ orders, the monetary base, interest rates and consumer confidence.
In nearly all the euro zone countries (except Germany), job loss figures at year-end 2011 were higher than in 2007.
Unemployment rose the most and was highest in the most heavily indebted countries, owing in part to drastic fiscal cuts: Spain (24.6% in May 2012); Trade and foreign direct investment: recent trends and projections than 30% in value terms, but since then, its exports and imports have slowed.
The other developing countries saw the pace of expansion ease off during the same period, although there was a fresh uptick in the first quarter of 2012.
Developing countries with strong trade ties to Europe have been hard hit, especially those in Eastern Europe, Africa and East Asia.
In East Asia, supply chains in the electronics and automobile sectors were impacted by other factors as well, including the Japanese earthquake and flooding in Thailand in the closing quarter of 2011.
As these two countries recovered from natural disasters and demand in Asia and the United States strengthened, their exports picked up slightly in early 2012.
The 2009-2012 recovery differs not only between advanced countries and developing ones but also in comparison with previous recoveries (see box I.1) Against the backdrop of a slowdown in global trade, Latin America and the Caribbean saw faster export growth than any other region in the world in the fourth quarter of 2011 and first four months of 2012.
This performance is explained in part by the fact that the region is less dependent than others on the European Union as a destination market.
Moreover, demand in the United States and China (its two main trading partners) maintained positive growth; other this benefited Mexico and Central America the most in the first case and South America in the second (see figure I.3).
The 2009 crisis, which drove international trade down sharply, was followed by a strong recovery in 2010 as global trade volume expanded by almost 14% only to fall back to 5% in 2011 (WTO, 2012a).
This slowdown is due in part to decelerating demand (GDP) worldwide —from 4.1% growth in 2010 to a projected 2.5% in 2012 (United Nations, 2012)— most markedly in the industrialized countries, principally the euro zone.
Other negative impacts in 2011 were from the earthquake in Japan in the first quarter (causing the stagnation of Japanese exports) and tensions in North Africa that affected its oil exports.
Global trade rallied somewhat in the early months of 2012, but several factors seem to be working against growth for the remainder of the year.
Projections for 2012 overall point to an expansion of 3.7% in terms of volume, which is below the 5.1% annual average growth for the past two decades (WTO, 2012a).
Trade grew in the first quarter of 2012 owing to increasing domestic demand in the United States, more expansionary monetary policies in some of the larger middle-income countries, and an easing of financial market tension.
Starting in May, however, fresh turmoil in the euro zone spilled over into global trade as final consumer demand and investment receded amid heightened uncertainty.
The deepening European sovereign debt crisis (which brought a sharp fiscal contraction, high unemployment and a credit crunch) dampened the demand for imports.
The recession in Europe hit global trade hard because intra-European trade makes up one fifth of the total worldwide.
Nonetheless, European export value continued to grow briskly in the second and third quarters of 2011, mainly because appreciation of the euro drove dollar prices up.
Japanese trade was hurt by the earthquake in eastern Japan, flooding in Thailand (which has strong production links with Japan) and the global economic cooldown.
Japanese exports actually declined in the second and fourth quarters of 2011.
The developing regions are still driving global trade despite slower expansion of their own trade.
According to Kose, Loungani and Terrones (2012), since 2010 the global economy has been recovering from the worst, most synchronized crisis since the Second World War, and the pace has been similar to the two preceding recoveries.
But the pattern in industrialized countries has differed sharply from the one seen in developing countries.
The recovery in the advanced economies is expected to be one of the weakest since the Second World War.
The developing economies are growing faster, in terms of both GDP and exports (see the figure below).
The average for earlier recoveries includes the 1982 crises and the 1991 crisis.
Terrones, “Tras la pista de la recuperación mundial”, Finanzas y desarrollo, June 2012, p. 10-13.
Administrative Region of China) and Latin America and the Caribbean (where Brazil is the main recipient, as well as the fifth worldwide).
Commodity prices declined in the second half of 2011 and were somewhat volatile thereafter.
This drop was triggered by negative prospects for growth worldwide because of the debt crisis in Europe, concerns as to the sustainability of economic growth in the United States and fears of a potential cooldown in the emerging economies.
These downtrends reversed in early 2012 and even earlier in the case of oil as the prospects for global growth improved and specific events affected the supply of oil products.
Prices, except those of foodstuffs, saw another downturn towards mid-2012 owing to tensions in the euro zone and slowing growth in Asia.
Despite this less bright scenario, commodity prices are expected to remain above their historical averages in the coming years (see chapter II).
Trade finance flows ebbed in the second half of 2011 but posted a partial rally in the first quarter of 2012 (see figure I.4).
The decline in 2011 was due in part to deleveraging by European banks, which are the main source of this kind of financing.
Banks from other regions (especially Asia) are accounting for a growing share and helping fill the void left by European banks.
Data for East Asia point to a slight recovery that is likely due to the entry of regional banks into the finance field.
However, trade contracted more sharply in South Asia, largely because of the lack of financing.
While the pace of deleveraging is expected to ease, the adverse credit environment is likely to continue as heightened risk and stricter legislation under the Basel III accord drive interest rates up.
A recent International Chamber of Commerce survey suggests real improvement in the prospects for financing in developing regions in 2012.
Preliminary figures for April and May indicate that global trade finance lending has surged in Europe and Central Asia Foreign direct investment (FDI) flows continued to recover in 2011; slight growth is expected in 2012 (UNCTAD, 2012).
Developing countries received half of inward FDI flows in 2011 and are expected to maintain this share through 2014 (see figure I.5).
The difficult context in the North and growth in the South could speed up changes in the global economy North and South on diverging paths over the next few years For 2012-2020, many analysts forecast continued slow growth for the industrialized countries (the “North”) and a mild cooldown for the developing countries (the “South”).
The International Monetary Fund (IMF, 2012) and the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD, 2012a) project even faster growth for the South.4 According to these three organizations, the United States is likely to perform the best among countries of the North, followed by the euro zone, with Japan recording the slowest growth.
In the South, China is expected to continue to post the fastest expansion between 2013 and 2020, at a projected annual rate of nearly 8%.
Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean should grow by 4% to 5%, below the rate forecast for developing Asia (see table I.1).
Faster growth in the economies of the South is likely to lead to greater demand for imports than in the countries of the North (see figure I.6).
Import growth in the South has outpaced the North since the 1990s and reached more than twice the rate in the 2000s.
For 2013-2017, the International Monetary Fund projects higher growth for the South, although the difference with the North will likely narrow.
In this context, as Latin America and the Caribbean shifts its export focus to the other countries of the South, especially those in Asia, the region should benefit from growing demand in those economies.
While this is already the case with the countries of South America, it is not for those of the Caribbean, Central America and Mexico, where developing markets still account for a minor share of exports.
The complex economic future of countries in the North Recoveries from crises triggered by overindebtedness are also long because of subsequent government interventions, with their legacy of high fiscal deficits and public debt, which take several years to bring down (Reinhart and Rogoff, 2009).
In the United States household bankruptcies accounted for two thirds of private debt reduction between 2008 and 2011 (McKinsey Global Institute, 2012). the United Kingdom, among others) have made much less progress in debt reduction, and high debt service is a serious constraint on private consumption (see figure I.7).
The International Monetary Fund projects that almost all of the industrialized countries will see a financial account surplus or equilibrium in 2012.
This shift would have set off a deep recession in many industrialized countries were it not for fiscal-policy rescue packages (until just recently) and low interest rates.
During the five years leading up to the 2008 crisis, that debt rose by an average of 39 percentage points to reach 138% of income.
Recessions triggered by private overindebtedness tend to set off sharper drops in GDP, private consumption and employment than those caused by other factors, and they depress economic activity for at least five years.
In order to reduce their debt burden, households have to cut back on consumption and increase savings as they discover that their homes were overvalued, access to credit is constrained and future income expectations are dim.
Consumption is also impacted by heightened economic uncertainty, which encourages preventive Household debt reduction, along with a similar process at non-financial enterprises and financial sector deleveraging, is a substantial drag on the economy.
After a long period when the private sector as a whole (households, businesses and the financial sector) overspent income, the opposite has been the case since 2009.
The private sector financial balance went from a deficit equal to 2.4% of GDP in the third quarter of 2007 to a surplus of 8.2% in the third quarter of 2009 (Wolf, 2012).
Private returns are a key factor in the decisions that businesses make on how much to produce, invest, export and import and how many jobs to create.
The governments of many industrialized countries have staged massive interventions in the economy to contain the depression.
Falling consumption could have driven the economy into a deep depression, but this has not happened because governments compensated for the decline in private demand by stepping up public spending and cushioning the impact of debt with low interest rates.
In other words, the depression was being contained by sweeping government intervention.
Business decisions on how much to invest and produce and how many jobs to create hinge to a large degree on corporate earnings.
Reinvested earnings determine the accumulation of wealth and assets (both new and appreciated), along with the growth of liabilities to finance those assets.
A robust private sector therefore depends on expanding business balance sheets by adding assets and the corresponding liabilities.
Private-sector expansion can be sustained if the income generated by assets is enough to service the debt taken on to finance them.
It is hard to set a limit for the pace of an economic expansion, because lower interest rates or less stringent financial standards can speed up the pace for the short term.
The 2008-2009 financial crisis marked the end of a decades-long process in many industrialized countries when private-sector balance sheets (and corresponding assets and liabilities) expanded faster than revenue.
Balance sheets started to grow in the mid-1980s, and the economy became a “balance-sheet economy” with massive asset creation largely fuelled by asset appreciation and spiralling debt.
Indebtedness climbed in all sectors (households, non-financial businesses and banks) while the value of assets (corporate equities, commercial real estate, housing and patents) increased faster than the income they generated.
As private-sector assets shrank and consumption dropped, businesses took losses that led them to cut back on production, investment and hiring, sending the economy into recession.
Between 2008 and until recently, expansionary fiscal policies offset part of the decline in private demand and held off a serious crisis in many industrialized countries.
The government can contain a recession by intervening in the financial sector and running a fiscal deficit that, in part, counterbalances the drop in private demand.
The current “contained” recession could last several years, during which the private and public sectors would go through a debt reduction process to repair their balance sheets.
This would have a significant impact on demand and on corporate profits and act as a drag on economic growth overall.
Substantial fiscal stimulus measures implemented in many industrialized countries between 2009 and 2011 resulted in a steep rise in public debt; the countries have recently begun to withdraw these measures.
The debt-to-GDP ratio rose in most industrialized countries, largely because of increased spending on unemployment benefits and fiscal stimulus packages coupled with lower tax receipts owing to the recession and falling stock values (see figure I.8).
Average debt among OECD countries (that is, most of the industrialized countries) reached 100% of GDP in 2011 (OECD, 2012b).7 In 2012, a number of euro zone countries began to scale back their fiscal stimulus measures in order to avoid increasing their debt further.
High public debt, along with population ageing, will be a drag on growth in the industrialized economies over the coming decade.
In fact, low interest rates in some countries led governments to cut taxes or increase spending, thereby helping increase the size of the debt even further.
Unlike other authors, Panizza and Presbitero (2012) did not manage to reject the hypothesis that public debt does not affect growth in an econometric analysis.
Besides, for inflation to reduce the debt burden some sort of financial repression would be needed (like forcing banks to invest in government bonds) and would have other negative impacts for the economy.
In sum, the best way to reduce debt is to promote growth and generate primary fiscal surpluses.
The higher the bar in figure I.9, the greater the savings (through tax hikes or spending cuts) needed; this can have a negative impact on import demand and GDP growth.
According to OECD (2012b), this percentage is the highest level that, in normal times, does not work against (trend) economic growth and leaves room for dealing with a crisis, avoiding critical levels. 10 Including government assets improves the net debt position of some countries, such as Japan and Norway.
The future costs associated with population ageing in terms of higher spending on public health and on pensions pose another challenge for the fiscal adjustment required.
Higher spending on health might be desirable, but funding it could be difficult.
OECD (2012b) anticipates two scenarios: one where health spending would rise by just 3.5% of GDP by 2050 and another where the increase would be 6% of GDP.
Along with the higher spending associated with long-term care for older persons, the annual fiscal adjustment would increase by 1.5% of GDP in a number of countries.
The third kind of additional spending is on pensions and would require a significant fiscal adjustment, particularly in Belgium and the Netherlands.
OECD (2012b) recommends prudence on the part of its member countries regarding the speed at which they implement the required fiscal adjustment, bearing in mind the fragile macroeconomic context and the potential for using monetary policy to offset the negative demand impact of restrictive fiscal measures.
All of the euro zone countries are implementing fiscal adjustments, although the depth of the adjustments varies widely from country to country.
Several countries are facing high fiscal deficits and unsustainable rates for refinancing their public debt.
The stabilization programmes implemented in Ireland and Portugal in 2011 helped reduce their country risk; Greek debt negotiation in the first quarter of 2012 had a similar effect.
Uncertainty and fiscal contraction further complicated bank deleveraging and triggered a credit crunch, setting off a vicious circle of recession.
The result was a steady increase in risk premiums for other compromised countries, such as Italy and Spain.
So far, the funding to cover the widening public deficit has been provided by a private financial sector that is increasingly reluctant to lend.
This picture was further compounded by subsequent issues concerning the sustainability of the Greek stabilization programme and bank solvency in Spain.
In short, the situation in Europe is the primary source of external risks for the global economy (ECLAC, 2012).
In this context, several organizations project that euro zone growth will average less than 2% annually until 2020.
In late June 2012, euro zone political leaders agreed on a new package of measures for defusing the crisis.
The first is to create a single banking supervisor governed by the European Central Bank, thereby promoting financial integration.
It could take a long time to put this supervision in place, in part because of the need to define how to mesh the European regulation with national regulations.
Second, with centralized supervision European rescue funds could be used directly to save floundering banks.
Third, the Government of Spain would receive 100 billion euros for restructuring its banking system.
This measure would increase Spain’s public-sector debt, but only temporarily because once the single supervisor is up and running these loans would go directly to troubled banks.
Last, a package of measures for stimulating growth and job creation was approved (see box I.3).
First, the countries agreed that the rescue funds of the European Stability Mechanism (ESM), which will replace the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism and the European Financial Stability Facility in the near future, could be used to recapitalize euro zone banks directly without going through governments, once the single banking supervisor under the European Central Bank is in place.
ESM funds can be used to buy debt on the secondary market and will not be senior to other private creditors.
It was also agreed to provide Spain with 100 billion euros for restructuring its banking sector, with a first tranche of 30 billion euros in late July 2012.
Spanish banks will have to submit restructuring plans quickly and put their toxic assets in a “bad bank” soon.
In exchange for European assistance, three weeks later the Government of Spain adopted a new package of budget cuts totalling 65 billion euros through 2014.
At same summit, under pressure from a coalition comprising France, Italy and Spain, a 120-billion-euro Compact for Growth and Jobs was adopted, in line with Europe 2020 strategy priorities.
The compact includes recommendations for repairing public budgets by promoting growth, restoring bank lending to the economy, promoting competition in online industries and green growth, addressing unemployment and its social consequences and modernizing public administration.
But the amounts involved are still too small for such a broad agenda with such ambitious objectives.
After 19 European summits (with the latest held in June 2012), Italian and Spanish bond yields remain above sustainable levels.
In other words, the likelihood of an even larger euro zone crisis continues to grow.
Political disagreement among euro zone States as to debt mutualization, rescue fund eligibility and the timing of and conditions for direct capitalization of Spanish banks continues to cloud the horizon and cancel out the good news from the most recent summit.
Moreover, the appearance of other weak points in the Spanish economy also darkened investor perceptions.
The European Commission seems to be following the markets instead of conducting them, reacting late and on a scale that does not match the magnitude of the crisis.
The markets need guidance in the form of sweeping solutions that leave no doubt as to the commitment to European integration.
First, the necessary fiscal and banking unions are far away because there are still no firm commitments in this regard.
There is a need for credible medium-term fiscal consolidation programmes and aggressive short-term fiscal policies geared towards spurring growth.
As for banking union, there is still no consolidated supervision nor has a deposit guarantee mechanism been defined for Europe, at least in certain ranges, to avoid bank runs.
Second, restoring competitiveness requires profound, costly reforms that are not found in the recent Compact for Growth and Jobs (which represents just 1% of the euro zone’s GDP and whose implementation seems slow).
Third, the debts of Italy and Spain, subject to high refinancing rates, might not be sustainable over time.
In the face of a panic, available European rescue resources (from the European Financial Stability Facility and the European Financial Stabilisation Mechanism, which are to be combined into the European Stability Mechanism) would be far from enough for a financial rescue.
Fourth, at the June 2012 summit there was no reference to the creation of euro bonds, an instrument that would be necessary to bring down the cost of financing the debt of the countries currently most at risk.
In the United States, the recovery is still fragile and could be hit by a major fiscal adjustment starting in 2013.
As with other OECD countries, the United States’ fiscal deficit ballooned after the crisis, to 10.1% of GDP in 2009.
The weak recovery led the authorities to deploy new fiscal measures that slowed deficit reduction in 2010 and 2011.
Despite its short-term benefits, the large deficit pushed the debt up sharply.
Current legislation provides for a fiscal adjustment equal to 4.7% of GDP, ending certain tax exemptions and triggering automatic spending cuts in 2013 (Congressional Budget Office, 2012).
These measures would strongly curb GDP growth and could send the economy back into recession.
For this reason it would be advisable to put off some of the adjustment measures until 2014, which would require special approval by Congress.
The United Nations (2012) and International Monetary Fund (2012) project 3% growth over the next few years; OECD (2012a) forecasts put growth at just 2.2%.
In Japan, the large sovereign debt (above 200% of GDP) requires profound fiscal reform that, along with other factors, reduces growth potential to 1% for the remainder of the decade (OECD, 2012a).
The high fiscal deficit, which will top 10% of GDP in 2012 and 2013 and is being exacerbated by the cost of rebuilding the eastern part of the country in the wake of the earthquake, is pushing the public debt even higher.
The government therefore needs a detailed, credible fiscal adjustment plan for tackling the situation.
Among other initiatives, the government will double the consumption tax from the current 5%, to 10% by 2015.
In view of the situation, the United Nations (2012) is projecting average annual growth at just 0.6% through 2020, below the 1.1% to 1.4% projected by other organizations.
There are noteworthy similarities in the experience of countries (Finland, Republic of Korea and Sweden, among others) that successfully recovered from similar crises (McKinsey Global Institute, 2012).
Here, United States banks have made more progress in deleveraging than their European peers.
This, along with the need for deleveraging and the requirements of Basel III, is forcing them to cut back their lending volume and could in turn make it harder to exit the recession in Europe.
Each country has different priorities in this regard, such as facilitating foreign investment and business start-ups or reforming the labour market.
To do so, the countries need to steer clear of protectionist trade and foreign investment measures.
Fourth comes the need to promote private investment, particularly by addressing the main infrastructure deficits in many countries.
With a regulatory framework that ensures a reasonable return, the private sector could provide the capital needed to do this.
Last, the real estate market needs to be stabilized in order to halt falling property prices and revive the construction industry.
In short, experience in exiting recessions caused by financial crises shows that the priority for many industrialized countries should be to adopt the measures needed to reactivate the economy in the short term and leave fiscal deficit and public debt reduction for later, once private sector recovery is on firmer ground.
These measures should include greater fiscal stimulus to compensate for lower private demand, interventions in the financial and private sectors to promote household, corporate and bank debt reduction, and reforms to spur exports, investment and productivity.
These interventions could lead to an exit from the circle of recession and put the economy on the road to new growth.
In this new context, only when the private sector is once again driving the economy —only then, and not before— should governments turn to repairing their own financial position.
China and the rest of the South: engines of the global economy The developing countries (the South), and China in particular, are the main driver of global growth.
Within the South, China contributes the most, growing at a rate of 9.2% in 2011.
The annual growth target set by the authorities for 2011-2015 is 8%, which is a marked slowdown from the recent path.
However, several international organizations project that China could exceed this growth target (see box I.4); it would thus continue to be the fastest-growing economy worldwide.
While China has been affected by the current European crisis, the importance of Europe as a market for Chinese exports has declined in recent years while links to the rest of the countries of the South have grown stronger.
In addition, China’s economic policy is shifting towards stimulating consumer demand, as the engine of the economy instead of investment and exports.
At the projected rate of growth, China’s GDP in purchasing power parity terms would surpass that of the United States in 2017, according to the International Monetary Fund (2012).
This outcome could be a substantial tipping point in the international debate concerning globalization trends and their governance.
The three decades of economic reform in China that began in 1979 represent the most intense process of industrialization and urbanization in history.
When the reforms began, China’s GDP was only 9% of that of the United States; its GDP per capita was only 2% of the United States’.
The International Monetary Fund projects that by 2017 China’s GDP will surpass that of the United States and its income per inhabitant will be one fourth of the United States’.
Labour productivity in China as a percentage of labour productivity in the United States figure 1).
For comparison purposes, in 1990 labour productivity in India (Asia’s second largest developing economy) was higher than China’s; since 2001 it has been lower.
China has thus narrowed its productivity gap with the United States more than India has.
Multiple factor productivity (MFP) is a better indicator of an economy’s efficiency.
From 2000 to 2008, the Chinese economy grew at an annual average of 9.9%, with multiple factor productivity accounting for 43% of that growth.
In other words, nearly half of the increase in GDP is due to more efficient combined use of capital and labour.
From 1990 to 1999, multiple factor productivity accounted for 40% while the second most important factor was the stock of capital, accounting for 45% of growth during that period.
First is the structural change that has taken place in its economy, with resources shifting from low-productivity sectors (agriculture) to higher-productivity ones (manufacturing).
Second, companies are massively absorbing new technologies and production processes incorporated in imported machinery and equipment and in FDI.
Third, China has invested heavily in infrastructure, cutting the time and cost of transport and communications.
Last, strong upward pressure on wages requires greater productivity in order to remain competitive internationally.
Indeed, China’s unit labour cost in dollars increased by a factor of 2.4 between 2002 and 2010 owing to wage increases and currency appreciation a and is expected to surpass Mexico’s soon (see figure 2).
The other major emerging economies will also continue to expand in coming years.
India’s current-price GDP ranked eleventh in 2011, and its purchasing-power-parity GDP ranked third, surpassing Japan (IMF, 2012).
India managed to maintain a positive rate of growth over the past decade, including the 2008-2009 global financial crisis.
During that period, India accounted for more than 10% of world economic growth and became one of the main global growth hubs, along with China.
While India is the second largest emerging economy, its GDP per capita is lower than China’s.
India is increasingly open to foreign trade, with the goods and services export ratio rising from 7% in 1990 to 19% in 2010.
Compared with China, India’s trade openness is still modest in terms of exports; however, imports (goods and services) now account for a similar proportion of GDP in both countries.
India’s share of world trade in goods is still small (1.4% and 2.1% of global exports and imports, respectively, in 2010) compared with its share of global GDP.
Its export value was similar to Brazil’s but lower than Mexico’s (ECLAC, 2012).
In addition to China and India, there is an important group of emerging countries whose contribution to the global economy and world trade is also surging.
Over the past decade, the emerging economies nearly doubled their share of the global stock of international reserves.
China’s share rose nearly fourfold in a decade, to 30% of the world stock of official international reserves (nearly half of the total held by emerging and developing economies) in 2011, thanks to its substantial trade and current account surpluses throughout the period.
Other developing and emerging countries, such as those in the Middle East and North Africa, have significantly increased their share of global reserve holdings, owing to trade surpluses from oil exports.
Growing reserve holdings make the economies of developing countries less vulnerable to exchange-rate and balance-of-payments crises than during previous episodes.
The emerging economies, headed by China, also hold most of the assets managed by sovereign wealth funds.
Between 2002 and year-end 2011, assets managed by sovereign wealth funds increased from US$ 1 trillion to nearly US$ 5 trillion and the number of such funds rose more than in the preceding four decades.
Most of this growth came from the oil-exporting countries of North Africa and the Middle East and from trade-surplus countries in Asia.
These two subregions account for 55% of sovereign wealth funds overall and three fourths of the funds they manage (see figure I.10).
Funds fed by commodity exports (chiefly, oil) accounted for 56% of all sovereign wealth fund assets at year-end 2011 (see table I.2).
The other funds draw mainly on foreign currency reserves, fiscal account surpluses, State pension fund reserves and proceeds from privatizing State-owned enterprises (see figure I.11).
BBVA (2012) projects that China will contribute the most (one third) to global growth between 2011 and 2021, followed by India (12%) and the United States (10%).
Among the other EAGLES, those that are expected to contribute the most are Brazil (3%), Indonesia (2.4%), the Republic of Korea (1.8%) and the Russian Federation (1.7%).
Financed with revenue from other sources Funded with revenue from commodity exports basis of Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute and estimates from CityUK. for 2012 are projections. a Figures China is by far the largest actor in sovereign wealth funds, with 29% of the global total of assets held by such funds.
Those that are not funded by revenue from commodity exports are a crucial source of international liquidity: China and Japan each hold one fifth of all United States treasury bonds in terms of value outstanding.
Another recent development in the South’s advance is the growing use of the yuan in global trade.
In July 2009 China launched a pilot programme for promoting the use of the yuan in the settlement of cross-border trade transactions.
At first the programme operated out of five cities and worked with the special administrative regions of Hong Kong, China, and Macao, China, as well as the member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN).
In 2010 the system was expanded to 20 cities and provinces towards all of the countries of the world, covering 90% of exports; in August 2011 it was expanded to encompass all of China.
An agreement between China and Japan that took effect in June 2012 allows firms in both countries to conduct transactions directly in yuan and in yen.
At the G-20 meeting in Los Cabos, Mexico, BRICS leaders agreed to promote the use of their currencies in their international trade transactions.
These measures led to a rapid increase in the proportion of yuan trade settlements, from less than 1% in the first quarter of 2010 to 8% of total Chinese trade in the first quarter of 2012.
More recently, exporters are using it more as the system is expanded throughout China (see figure I.12).
HSBC, a private bank, expects that by 2016 one third of China’s trade could be in national currency.
Another indicator of more widespread use of the yuan is the fact that 4% of all letters of credit issued worldwide are in yuan, after the United States dollar (84%) and the euro (7%), according to Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT), an international payments system.
First, for importers and exporters it eliminates exchange rate fluctuation risk, making it possible to cut back on the use of hedging instruments and lower the cost of the commercialized product or service.
Second, it could streamline and lower the cost of payments with all countries (except the United States) by requiring just one currency exchange transaction instead of two.
Trade policy in the new international scenario Recent trade barrier trends The use of trade restrictive measures worldwide is modest but growing.
Regular monitoring of national trade policies, initiated by the World Trade Organization (WTO) and other institutions following the outbreak of the global financial crisis in 2008, has continued over the past 12 months.
One analysis, focusing in particular on G20 member countries (see WTO, 2012b), drew two main conclusions.
First, the adoption of new trade restrictive measures by the major world economies remains at a moderate level, covering less than 1% of global goods imports in all of the periods examined since October 2008.
On the one hand, new restrictive measures are being put in place faster than others are removed, so their cumulative impact is growing and now encompasses nearly 3% of global imports.
On the other hand, during the most recent period reviewed (mid-October 2011 to mid-May 2012), the reach of such measures nearly doubled in comparison with the immediately preceding period to stand at levels similar to those at the peak of the crisis, between October 2008 and October 2009 (see table I.3).
Moreover, the monthly average for new restrictive measures nearly doubled between October 2010 and April 2011 compared with the immediately preceding period; it has remained at similar levels since then.
The trade remedy measures were mainly initiations of anti-dumping investigations, generally involving imports originating in China and other Asian economies.
But there has been a marked decline in the number of new export restrictive measures, such as export duties and quantitative restrictions (see table I.4).
In recent months, the G20 members also made substantial use of subsidies, tax exemptions, localcontent requirements and local-supplier preference in government procurement.
However, since there is less information available on the use of these “behind the border” mechanisms compared with traditional trade barriers it is harder to document their existence and to quantify their impact on trade (WTO, 2012b).
From a medium-term perspective, there are still significant risk factors in the global economy that could lead to a further scaling-up of trade restrictions.
Among these risks are the expected cooling of global economic growth in 2012 compared with 2011 (including recessions in several European countries); persistent global imbalances between surplus and deficit countries; high unemployment in most of the industrialized economies; and the strong fiscal consolidation under way in the euro zone.
Recent developments in trade negotiations More than 10 years after they began, the negotiations of the Doha Round at WTO are floundering, with successful conclusion seeming highly unlikely.
The main reason is the inability to bridge the positions of industrialized countries and the main emerging economies concerning the commitments that each group is willing to make on liberalization of agricultural and industrial products and services.
These differences have blocked deals in other areas of the talks because the Round is being negotiated on a “single undertaking” basis under which the outcome for each area under negotiation is part of a single, indivisible package.
Compounding these problems are the deteriorating global economy, the approaching presidential and legislative elections in the United States and the change of authorities in China.
All of this is feeding a broadening perception that no agreement will be reached on the set of issues now on the Doha Development Agenda (see Kleimann, Guinan and Small, 2012; Hufbauer and Schott, 2012).
With the Doha Round at a standstill, the members of WTO have begun to explore alternatives for reaching deals in specific areas that could gather enough support outside the single-undertaking framework.
Among these are the ongoing efforts to reach an agreement on trade facilitation, an area that virtually all WTO members recognize as being of interest.
Two other areas that have been mentioned as potential candidates for partial agreements are the elimination of agricultural export subsidies, and the industrialized countries’ granting duty-free and quota-free access for at least 97% of the products exported by the least developed countries.12 But to date there has been no consensus on any of these initiatives.
Recently, the focus has been turning to exploring potential plurilateral agreements (see box I.5).
Some specialists have suggested that the future of WTO as a forum for negotiation in coming years should increasingly be linked to plurilateral initiatives because reaching agreement on them is less complicated.
Some of the areas where negotiation of plurilateral agreements has been suggested are regulatory in nature and fall outside the scope of WTO agreements.
Such is the case with proposals for creating a coordination mechanism between WTO and the International Monetary Fund for dealing with persistently undervalued currencies and for These two agreements were reached at the Ministerial Conference of the World Trade Organization, held in Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of China in December 2005.
However, neither has been fully implemented because it was agreed to link their implementation to progress on the Doha Round overall. setting rules on trade by State-owned enterprises and on the relationship between trade and climate change (Hufbauer and Schott, 2012).
While plurilateral agreements can be an expeditious way to break through institutional inertia at WTO, giving preference to such instruments poses a number of problems (Peña, 2012).
Some of the major developing economies have thus far been reluctant to take part in such initiatives, which are usually pushed for by the industrialized countries.
The effectiveness of future plurilateral agreements would unavoidably be limited if key actors in the global economy, such as the BRICS, remain on the sidelines.
This is especially the case when regulating issues that are of systemic importance and of interest to all countries, like the relationship between trade and climate change.
Moreover, focusing more on plurilateral negotiations poses the risk of fragmenting the world trading system and bringing its legitimacy increasingly into question, especially if there is a perception that plurilateral agreements give preference to the interests of the developed economies.
Furthermore, there is the risk of marginalizing the less developed members of WTO, particularly the least developed countries.
These are usually not invited to participate in plurilateral initiatives and, in any event, generally lack the capacities for doing so effectively.
Besides prompting the exploration of plurilateral initiatives at WTO, the Doha Round impasse has reinforced the already strong worldwide trend towards negotiating preferential trade agreements.
As of June 2012, 232 agreements in force had been reported to WTO and many other agreements were under negotiation or at the feasibility study stage.13 There are two major trends in this regard.
First, preferential agreements are, increasingly, deep integration agreements that provide not just for the liberalization of trade in goods (usually with limited exclusions concentrated in the agricultural sector), but also encompass trade in services and other, essentially regulatory matters as well.
In this sense, they go beyond tariff liberalization to aim at reducing the transaction costs faced by businesses in global value chains.
Second, an increasing number of agreements are transregional, that is, they involve economies in at least two different regions.
Recent progress in this matter in the principal economic regions of the world is reviewed below.
Plurilateral initiatives are seen as a way around the challenge of reaching deals acceptable to all of the organization’s current 156 members. a To date, the largest plurilateral initiative has been an agreement for liberalizing trade in services.
These talks, which began in January 2012 and are still preliminary, involve 20 WTO members (counting the European Union as one) representing 46 economies.
These include practically all of the developed countries, the four newly industrialized Asian economies b and some developing countries but none of the BRICS (Brazil, China, India, the Russian Federation and South Africa).
Another recent plurilateral initiative refers to expanding the Information Technology Agreement (ITA) concluded by 29 WTO members in December 1996.
ITA participants eliminated import tariffs on a number of information and communications technology products, such as personal computers, software and semiconductors.
Although it is a plurilateral agreement, ITA participants extend its benefits to all WTO members on a most-favoured-nation basis.
The number of ITA participants has grown substantially, to the present 75 economies accounting for 97% of world trade in included products. c In May 2012, informal discussions began on expanding ITA coverage to information and communication technology products that have appeared over the past 15 years.
In addition to these two initiatives, there is the agreement reached in December 2011 to expand coverage of the Government Procurement Agreement (GPA).
This plurilateral instrument, in force since 1996, establishes the conditions under which foreign suppliers can access procedures for the procurement of goods, services and infrastructure by government agencies of its parties.
To date, the parties are, almost exclusively, industrialized countries and newly industrialized economies of Asia and do not include any of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Nonetheless, China and other economies that have recently acceded to the World Trade Organization are also negotiating accession to the Government Procurement Agreement, which would boost the latter’s commercial attractiveness considerably.
Noteworthy among them is the Anti-Counterfeiting Trade Agreement (ACTA), negotiated between 2008 and 2010 and signed in October 2011, although it is not yet in force.
This instrument aims at strengthening cooperation among signatories to combat intellectual property rights violations such as trade in counterfeit goods, establishing standards that are higher than those set out in the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS Agreement).
Most of the ACTA signatories are industrialized economies, except for Mexico and Morocco.
This agreement has met with strong domestic opposition in some of the countries that negotiated it, including broad-based rejection by the European Parliament in a vote on 4 July 2012.
As a result, doubts remain as to whether it will come into force.
In the Asia-Pacific region, two wide-ranging economic and trade integration projects are taking shape that could end up competing against each other.
Canada and Mexico became negotiating partners in June 2012.14 The participating countries had targeted late 2012 for completing the negotiations, but it seems clear that this will not be possible because of their complexity and because of the proximity of elections in the United States.
These three countries have also signed an investment promotion, facilitation and protection agreement.15 The announced negotiations among the three major economies of East Asia will be extremely complex because of the marked sensitivities involved, but successful completion would be of great significance.
In addition to its considerable economic weight (see table I.5), such an agreement would likely impact the regional architecture of economic integration in Asia.
It would lay the groundwork for what is known as ASEAN+3, a project for creating a free trade area made up of the 10 member States of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) plus China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Against this background, tensions could arise In May 2012 the first round of free trade agreement negotiations between China and the Republic of Korea began.
This agreement could be integrated into a subsequent trilateral agreement that would include Japan as well. between the United-States-led Trans-Pacific Partnership and an all-Asian initiative headed, in practice, by China.
This factor should be carefully weighed by the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, some of whom are seeking to strengthen their economic and trade ties to Asia and the Pacific by means of trade negotiations.
The European Union continues to actively participate in preferential trade negotiations with partners in other regions, particularly Asia.
These negotiations are taking place within the framework of the Global Europe strategy launched in October 2006, partially in response to the lack of progress in the Doha Round (Kleimann, Guinan and Small, 2012).
In addition to its free trade agreement with the Republic of Korea, in force since July 2011, the European Union is negotiating similar agreements with India, Malaysia and Singapore; in June 2012 it announced the start of negotiations with Viet Nam.
Peru and an association agreement with the countries of Central America and Panama.
It is also negotiating an association agreement with MERCOSUR and a free trade agreement with Canada.
In short, it is in Asia-Pacific that major trade initiatives involving the Asian economies themselves, the United States and the European Union are playing out.
This reflects Asia-Pacific’s position as the primary hub of global economic growth and its pivotal role in the value chains that increasingly characterize global trade.
The world’s main economic powers are, to a certain extent, competing in the region —not just for tariff concessions See “Interim Report to Leaders from the Co-Chairs of the EU-U.S.
In some of these spheres, the preferences of industrialized economies like the United Key issues in recent trade disputes The increase in the number of disputes brought before WTO in 2012 compared with 2011 seems to confirm the uptrend in trade restrictive measures worldwide.
Eleven disputes were brought before WTO in the first half of 2012, versus eight in all of 2011.18 Among WTO member States, the most frequent respondents were the United States (three cases) and China (two).
In Latin America and the Caribbean, Brazil and Honduras are complainants in disputes with South Africa and Australia, respectively; the European Union brought a complaint against Argentina.19 Some of the more recent disputes concern issues that are beyond the bounds of trade in the strict sense and relate to several public policy areas.
Six of the 11 disputes brought in the first half of 2012 have to do with the use of trade policy instruments (anti-dumping, countervailing and safeguard duties).
The others primarily referred to technical barriers to trade, intellectual property rights, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, import licenses and other non-tariff measures, and export restrictions.
A number of the disputes filed since 2009 concern public health policy and other measures aimed at promoting a green economy.
How these differences are settled could have a profound impact on public policy in the countries involved, as well as on how these issues are regulated internationally.
At the intersection between trade and public health, Honduras and Ukraine each filed complaints against Australia.
Both countries are challenging Australia’s Tobacco Plain Packaging Act 2011, which requires that all cigarette packages have the same generic design.
Australia put the legislation in place in order to reduce tobacco use, an objective promoted by the World Health Organization.
Honduras and Ukraine hold that in so doing Australia is in violation of the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects States and the European Union do not coincide with those of China and other developing Asian economies; this is a potential source of tensions among them.
The strong and growing weight of Asia-Pacific in the global economy means that the repercussions of this process will be felt worldwide.
This dispute, which is still in the consultations stage, spotlights the delicate balance in the multilateral trading system between protecting intellectual property rights and protecting public health.
The importance of public health is recognized in article 8 of the TRIPS agreement and in the 2001 WTO Doha Ministerial Declaration underlining the importance of interpreting and implementing the TRIPS agreement in a manner supportive of public health.
Nevertheless, the outcome of this dispute will help determine how much flexibility there really is.
Although environmental issues had been challenged through WTO in the past, recent disputes in this sphere are tied to policies geared towards promoting sustainability and a green economy.
Environmental sustainability issues are moving up the global agenda and becoming a public policy focus at the national level.
Countries are competing to position themselves internationally in fast-growing industries such as renewable energy and clean technologies.
Noteworthy among recent disputes with environmental implications are the challenges filed by the European Union, the United States and other WTO members against Chinese restrictions on the export of certain raw materials.
In June 2009, the United States, the European Union and Mexico each brought a complaint against export restraints imposed by China on several raw materials (including bauxite, coke, fluorspar, magnesium, manganese and zinc) that are used in technology products.
China indicated that the measures in question had been implemented in order to conserve these natural resources and protect the health of its citizens.
China is a major producer of these raw materials and is the only source for some of them.
The dispute settlement panel found that the measures imposed by China resulted in export quotas that were not consistent with its obligations as a member of WTO, whose Appellate Body upheld these findings.
China was given until December 2012 to bring its legislation into line with WTO agreements.
In March 2012 the United States, the European Union and Japan filed a similar challenge against China concerning measures restricting exportation of rare earths.
The term rare earths refers to a group of 17 chemical elements20 that are used in a wide variety of high-tech products and new environmental technologies, so world trade in them is growing.
China, which accounts for 50% of the world’s reserves of rare earth minerals, has justified the export restrictions on the grounds of concern over environmental damage from large-scale rare earth mining and potential exhaustion of deposits.
The complainant countries allege that the measures affect rare earth supply and prices in the global market and give an advantage to Chinese industries that use them as inputs.
After the consultation process failed to yield an agreement, a dispute settlement panel was established in July 2012.
Other recent disputes involve the policies pursued by some countries to promote the development of renewable energies and associated industries.
In December 2010 the United States requested consultations with China with respect to measures in support of wind power equipment manufacturers.
According to the United States, the measures might be inconsistent with the GATT and the WTO Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures because they give preference to the use of local components over imported components for making such equipment.
In June 2011 it was announced that the parties had reached an agreement whereby China committed to eliminating the subsidies.
Still under way are challenges filed by Japan and the European Union in 2010 and 2011, respectively, against the domestic-content requirements of Canada’s Feed-In Tariff Program (FIT Program) for contracts with suppliers of renewable energies such as solar, wind, hydraulic, and bioenergy power.
The programme was created to promote a greener economy and protect the environment.
Both the European Union and Japan hold that some of its measures are inconsistent with a number of WTO agreements in that they favour the use of equipment for renewable energy generation facilities produced in Canada’s Ontario Province, putting potential foreign suppliers at a disadvantage.
Summing up, the WTO dispute settlement mechanism is increasingly being called upon to settle extremely complex issues that are related to sensitive public policy areas.
This poses the risk of outcomes that do not appropriately strike the necessary balance between protecting open world trade and pursuing other important objectives, such as protecting public health and the environment.
This could, in turn, lead to mounting challenges to the legitimacy of the multilateral trading system.
Pressure on the WTO dispute settlement mechanism will increase if shortcomings persist in the multilateral settings dealing with issues such as sustainable development and the fight against climate change.
The core challenge would therefore be to seek greater consistency among multilateral regulatory frameworks.
Durán, José and Andrea Pellandra (2012), “Cambios en la estructura económica e industrial mundial en la primera década del siglo XXI: El efecto de la emergencia de China sobre la producción y el comercio en América Latina y el Caribe”, Mexico City, 30 May, unpublished.
The rare earth elements include scandium, yttrium, lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, neodymium, promethium, samarium, europium, gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium, holmium, erbium, thulium, ytterbium and lutetium.
Terrones (2012), “Tras la pista de la recuperación mundial”, Finanzas y desarrollo, June.
Presbitero (2012), “Public debt and economic growth: is there a causal effect?”, MoFiR Working Papers, No. 65.
Introduction The rapid economic expansion of China and burgeoning Chinese demand for raw materials and food have triggered a boom in exports from Latin America and the Caribbean to China in recent years.
Largely due to growing demand from China and other emerging economies, commodity prices (especially mineral and metal prices) have soared since the early 2000s.
Both factors have contributed to growth in the commodity-exporting countries of the region (especially the South American countries).
But they have also made these countries more dependent on the income generated by such exports, which poses several challenges.
By contrast, the Central American economies and most Caribbean countries have, as net importers of primary goods, been hurt by rising commodity prices.
Amid international uncertainty and prospects of weak growth in the developed countries and a slowdown in the emerging economies, doubts are mounting about the sustainability of the strong demand and high prices of primary products that have benefited part of the region over the past decade.
All of this raises the question of how Latin American countries would be affected by a sudden end of their commodity export boom.
To answer that question, this chapter considers three different demand and price scenarios for 2013-2015, focusing on the 10 main groups of commodities exported by the region (oil, copper, iron, soybeans, coffee, sugar, fishery products, meat, fruits and gas).
Estimates show that, even in the worst-case scenario, commodity prices will remain above their historical averages over the next few years, albeit generally below the highs reached in mid-2008.
The high-price cycle that began in the early 2000s could therefore be expected to continue, although growth will slow.
As prices level off, the value of the region’s exports will continue to rise over the next four years but the pace will be substantially slower than in previous years and will not go above an annual rate of 10%.
As a result, the countries in the region will need to step up their efforts to boost export volumes if they are to maintain their level of export revenue.
Chinese imports from Latin American and Caribbean are mostly commodities, so favourable growth prospects in China mean that a certain minimum of the region’s commodity exports will continue to go to China.
If China expands by 7%-8% a year, the region’s export volume to the Chinese market would certainly increase by 16% a year and ensure continued growth in total export volume.
That said, slackening commodity prices give the region room to promote exports of related —albeit more sophisticated— products.
Deepening intraregional trade relations (characterized by an expanding proportion of this type of product) and improved relations with China and Asia-Pacific would contribute to a qualitative leap in the international integration of the region.
Trade in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past decade In the 2000s, commodities and commodity-based manufactures as a proportion of the total value of exports from Latin America and the Caribbean expanded as prices began to soar at the start of the decade (see figure II.1A).
Trends vary between the different subregions, however: whereas in South America and Mexico the share of these products has grown, in Central America and the Caribbean it has shrunk significantly.
The impact of prices on these trends is reflected in the evolution of exports at constant prices; the share of natural-resource-intensive goods is smaller in all of the subregions (see figure II.1B).
The above observations show the importance of distinguishing between export value and volume for an appropriate analysis of the “reprimarization” of the region’s exports, a trend discussed by several analysts in recent years.
While a volume analysis indicates the type of goods that have grown the most in terms of quantities exported, a study based on value shows which products have contributed the most to the increase in export revenue.
Rising revenue from the export of commodities and commodity-based manufactures has various implications for economies, encouraging specialization in these goods to the detriment of manufactures not based on natural resources.1 In addition, the analysis should take into These issues have been discussed extensively in the literature.
However, a comparison of growth rates clearly shows the surge in exports to this region in 2001-2010, especially to China (see table II.2).
A key characteristic of this expansion —as with intraregional trade— is that, despite soaring prices over the past decade, growth in export volumes has remained strong and has even outpaced growth in prices.
In fact, the variation in volume accounted for around 60% of the growth in export value.
A comparison of the 2000s with the 1990s shows that, for the region as a whole, the export value of commodities and manufactures based on natural resources rose more quickly (see table II.1).
By contrast, exports of other manufactures expanded at a lower average rate than in the 1990s, owing mainly to the slackening of exports from Mexico.
Excluding Mexico, the region’s exports grew faster in 2001-2010 across all categories.
A breakdown of growth by volume and price shows that in the 1990s export growth was mainly driven by expanding export volume, whereas in the 2000s prices had the greater impact (except in the case of manufactures not based on natural resources).
At the subregional level, trends in export volume and prices differ and are closely linked to the composition of each subregion’s export basket.
In South America, prices have risen more than export volume over the past decade, whereas in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean —which benefited less from surging commodity prices— volumes showed higher average annual growth rates.
Trends also varied within the subregions: in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela export value went up in the 2000s mainly because of rising prices, while countries such as the Plurinational State of Bolivia posted significantly higher growth in export volume.
A breakdown by type of product shows that primary product export value rose more quickly over the past decade in all subregions but that only in South America and the Caribbean countries did export volume expand faster than in 1991-2000 (see table II.1).
The more sluggish growth in the export value of manufactures not based on natural resources is mainly due to the behaviour of exports from Mexico, which were down sharply compared with the previous decade.
In terms of volume, the slowdown of manufactured product exports has been more widespread.
Much of the growth in commodities and commoditybased manufactures as a proportion of the export basket of Latin America and the Caribbean is attributable to the expanding share of China and the developing countries of Asia in general as a destination for the region’s exports.
In 2000, China absorbed just 1% of the region’s exports; by 2010 its share had shot up to around 8%.
The proportion going to all of the developing countries of Asia jumped from 3.5% to 15% in the same period, replacing the European Union as the region’s third most important destination (behind the United States, whose share contracted sharply, and the region itself).
Trade with China and the other developing countries in Asia has intensified, mainly in South America.
In 2000, exports from the South American countries to China accounted for around 2% of total export value; by 2010 the figure had risen to 13% and the share of the developing countries of Asia taken as a whole had gone from around 7% to 24% (see figure II.2A).
By contrast, the share of the United States plummeted from approximately 30% to 18%, while the proportion going to the region itself and the European Union held steady at around 28% and 20% respectively.
In Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean, however, China and the rest of the developing countries of Asia continue to account for a marginal share of their exports.
A breakdown by type of goods and destination shows that the proportion of commodities and commodity-based manufactures in the region’s export basket has increased mainly on the strength of sales to China and the developing countries of Asia taken as a whole.
The expansion has been driven by rising prices and export volume, as reflected in the growing share of these products in exports measured at current and constant prices (see figure II.3).
By contrast, the weight of commodities and commodity-based manufactures in exports measured at constant prices has declined for other destinations, reflecting the buoyancy of other manufactures in volume terms.
With regard to commodities and commodity-based manufactures, 19% of the jump in the value of the region’s exports between 2000 and 2010 is attributable to growth in exports to China.
In other words, out of every additional US$ 100 of exports in 2010 compared with 2000, US$ 19 went to China (US$ 12 went to the other Asian developing countries, US$ 24 to the United States, US$ 17 to the region itself and US$ 16 to the European Union).
By contrast, the percentage is just 3% for manufactures not based on natural resources (6% to the rest of the countries of developing Asia, around 40% to the United States and the region itself and 11% to the European Union) (see figure II.4).
South America was the source of 93% of the region’s total exports to China in 2010.
China accounted for 22% of the increase in the value of South America’s exports of commodities and commodity-based manufactures between 2000 and 2010 (for every additional US$ 100 of exports from the South American countries in 2010, US$ 22 went to China).
The percentage rises to 36% for all of the developing countries of Asia taken as a whole.
In the other subregions, however, growth was mainly driven by exports to the region itself or to the United States; China’s share was very small (between US$ 1 and US$ 6 for every additional US$ 100 in exports).
With regard to manufactures not based on natural resources, China’s share was very small in all subregions.
Exports within the region itself were high, however (especially for South America and Central America), as were exports to the United States (for Mexico and the Caribbean countries).
An analysis of the structure of exports to China by type of goods shows major differences between subregions.
Exports from South America are heavily skewed towards commodities and manufactures based on natural resources, especially since 2000, in terms of both value and volume (see figure II.5).
By contrast, Central America stands out because of the high proportion of manufactures not based on natural resources (especially high-technology manufactures exported by Costa Rica), the sharp growth of this category since the start of the past decade and the declining share of commodities and commodity-based manufactures.
Unlike Central America, the trend in Mexico has been a surge in the percentage of commodity exports and, to a lesser extent, of manufactures based on natural resources together with a significant slump in the proportion of other manufactures (high-technology ones in particular).
Lastly, the Caribbean countries show a decline in commodities but a sharp increase in manufactures not based on natural resources (specifically, medium-technology ones).
This trend is even more pronounced when analysing exports at constant prices, which also show a significant decline in the proportion of manufactures based on natural resources.
At a higher level of disaggregation, the analysis shows that the main products exported to China and worldwide by most countries in the region are commodities or manufactures based on natural resources and that, in general, their share of total export value has expanded over the past decade (see table II.3).
Prices of many of these products have shot up in this period, which largely explains why their share of total export value has increased.
Of the products listed as main exports to China, four are especially noteworthy: oil, electronic goods, copper and soybeans.
In 2000, oil accounted for practically none of exports to China from the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia and Ecuador, but by 2010 it had become their leading export to the Chinese market.
However, China continues to account for only a small proportion of these countries’ total exports.
Copper exports to China from Chile and, especially, from Peru expanded to such an extent that by 2010 the Chinese market accounted for a significant share of these countries’ total exports.
The share of soybeans in Uruguay’s exports to China climbed substantially, although soybeans are not Uruguay’s main export worldwide (see table II.3).
As a result, the developing countries of Asia have seen their share of total imports arriving in the region go from imports from China surging from 2% of the total to almost 15% during the period.
Imports arriving in the region are highly concentrated in manufactures not based on natural resources —especially so in the case of imports from China and from the developing countries of Asia, approximately 90% of which are goods of this type.
Differences in the composition of export and import flows, as well as changing patterns over the past decade, are reflected in the region’s trade balance.
Latin America and the Caribbean has been running an overall trade surplus with the world since 2002, but that surplus contracted sharply in 2007-2008 and has held relatively steady since then (see figure below).
This overall balance is due to a rising surplus in commodities and their by-products and a growing deficit in manufactures not based on natural resources, with wider variations in the latter since 2005.
By contrast, the overall trade deficit with China grew during the period owing to a larger deficit in manufactures not based on natural resources that was not offset by a rising surplus in other categories of goods (see figure below).
A breakdown by subregions shows that the main factor behind the trade deficit with China is the growing negative balance recorded by Mexico and, to a lesser extent, Central America and the countries of the Caribbean.
By contrast, South America has had a fairly balanced trade balance with China over the past decade.
A breakdown by type of goods shows that, as with their trade with the world, the countries of South America have posted a growing trade surplus with China in commodities and commoditybased manufactures since the early 2000s.
This explains the surplus that Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole is running in this type of goods.
By contrast, all of the subregions are seeing a growing trade deficit with China in manufactures not based on natural resources.
The growing deficit with China in manufactures not based on natural resources has sparked great concern in the region.
One of the facets of this problem is the competition that imports from China pose for Latin American firms in their own domestic markets, and the challenges this entails for the region’s manufacturing sector.
One way to gauge Chinese competition in domestic markets is to estimate, by sector of economic activity, the ratio between imports arriving from China and apparent consumption.
Durán and Pellandra (2012) conduct studies of this kind based on input-output tables for six countries in Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador and Mexico).
In each case they identify the industries most affected by imports from China substituting domestic output during 2005-2010.
Except for the primary sectors (agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing and oil and mining), in the 10 other sectors examined, which are manufacturing sectors, imports from China grew faster than those arriving from the rest of the world.
Among the manufacturing sectors, Durán and Pellandra (2012) identified at least five in which imports from China were eroding domestic production: textiles, clothing and footwear; rubber and plastic; metal and metal products; machinery and equipment; and automobiles and auto parts.
The authors compared China’s penetration in 2005 and 2010 and found that it increased in a number of key industrial sectors in several countries.
Among these sectors were machinery and equipment in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico; automobiles in Colombia, Chile and Ecuador; and textiles, clothing and footwear in Argentina and Brazil.
Commodity prices Since the early 2000s, commodity prices have skyrocketed, in many cases reaching record highs in mid-2008.
Although the global economic crisis that broke out in the second half of 2008 partially reversed the upswing in prices, another boom starting in early 2009 pushed prices for many products up to levels even higher than those recorded before the crisis.
According to Erten and Ocampo (2012), this commodity price pattern —which contrasts sharply with the price trend for manufactures— marks the initial phase of a new real commodity price supercycle, the fourth during the 1865-2010 period (see box II.2).
The second ran from the 1930s to the mid-1960s and peaked during postwar reconstruction in Europe, with a steep upswing and a weak downtrend.
The third began in the early 1970s, peaked in the mid-1970s and then trended down until the late 1990s; it was marked by a weak upswing and a sharp downtrend.
The fourth, which began in the early 2000s, has had a steep upswing and is ongoing (see the figure below).
In three of the four supercycles, metal prices have risen more sharply than agricultural product prices, especially in the most recent cycle.
While real prices for metals doubled and reached one of their all-time highs, agricultural product prices jumped some 75%, reversing the steep slide seen since the 1980s.
Evidence shows that average real prices for non-oil commodities have fallen from one supercycle to the next.
The exception is metals, where average real prices are higher in the current supercycle than in the preceding one.
But the current supercycle is still under way, so average metal prices could fall at the end.
Real oil prices show a marked uptrend over the long term, unlike other commodities.
Oil price supercycle intensity and amplitude have increased, and the correlation with non-oil supercycles has strengthened.
Excluding energy products, which climbed by 17%, prices of the other products slipped by an average of 12% (food prices slid 8%; agricultural raw materials fell 12%; minerals and metals posted an 18% drop).
Taking into account the average prices for each year, all product groups went up in 2011 as a result of the surge in the first half of the year.
The worsening euro zone crisis has resulted in the United States dollar again being used as a safe haven asset, causing the dollar to appreciate and dollar prices to fall.
In addition, mounting uncertainty as to the shortterm economic outlook has pushed risk premiums up in both commodity derivatives markets and credit markets.
This has made maintaining inventories more expensive and put downward pressure on the spot prices for these products.
Along with other large emerging economies in Asia, China is the main driver of global demand for metals because its economy is in a highly metal-intensive stage of development.
Nevertheless, while Chinese consumption of the principal base metals has soared in recent years and contributed a good deal to the worldwide increase in consumption, this has not necessarily been reflected in a significant rise in China’s share of global imports.
For example, Chinese consumption of aluminium and zinc accounts for a very large percentage of the worldwide total but is primarily supplied by domestic production, which made up some 40% of total production in 2010 (see table below).
By contrast, rising consumption of copper and iron has driven imports up sharply and increased China’s direct influence over international prices for these metals.
China’s consumption of copper went from some 13% of the global total in 2000 to nearly 40% in 2010, and its share of imports rose from about 10% to approximately 40% during that period.
China plays a smaller role in energy products because (except for coal) it does not account for a significant share of global consumption, although its share has been growing in recent years.
Nor does China account for a large percentage of global imports of these products, even though a large proportion of China’s oil consumption is supplied by imported oil.
Nevertheless, in the case of oil the aggregate effect of demand by the emerging economies as a whole is considerable (World Bank, 2012a).
China’s impact on agricultural commodity prices is not significant, either, because it is not a major source of demand on the international markets for most of these commodities.
To cite an example, China is a major producer of maize; although in 2009 its consumption of this commodity accounted for 20% of the global total, its share of imports was very small (as the table shows).
Soybeans are an exception to this general pattern because China’s share of global soybean imports has soared in recent years.
Chinese consumption and production of fish and seafood makes up a large percentage of the worldwide total; its share of imports is considerable, as well, but has not varied significantly over the past decade.
While copper makes up a much smaller share of the region’s exports to China than oil does, China’s greater influence over the price of copper means that the contribution by both products is similar.
Iron ore, aluminium and zinc account for 10%, 4.3% and 4.1%, respectively, of the increase in export revenue.
The impact of growing Chinese demand for commodities differs among the countries of the region because some are net commodity exporters (particularly, minerals and oil) and others are net importers.
Medium-term outlook, 2012-2015 To develop the gravity model, the Santos Silva and Tenreyro (2005) approach was used, as was the traditional Anderson and van Wincoop model (2003) formalizing the ordinary least square methodology originally proposed by Tinbergen (1962).
The elasticity of exports from each country in the region was calculated with regard to income in each of the main export destinations (China, the European Union, the United States and the region itself).
According to some analysts, the price supercycle uptrend that began in the early 2000s may be coming to an end, although there is no consensus on this.
Deverell and others (2012) suggest that, while demand for commodities is likely to slow, this is expected to be a gradual process and should not result in a sudden drop in prices.
Over the next few years, strong demand from China coupled with the gradual recovery of the developed economies may help to keep prices, on average, well above the levels observed during the 1980s and 1990s, meaning that the price supercycle would continue.
World Bank projections suggest that this will indeed be the case; they forecast a slight retreat in average commodity prices over the next few years.
Prices would, however, remain relatively high —in some cases even higher than in 2008 before the crisis struck (see figure II.7).
The product categories were food, beverages, oils, flours and meals and oilseeds, agricultural, forestry and fishing-related raw materials, Before proceeding to a detailed prospective analysis for 2013-2015, price changes during the first half of 2012 will be analysed, together with projections for the year overall.
Estimates indicate that prices for the region’s export commodities will fall by 5% on average in 2012, whereas in 2011 they increased by just over 20% (see table II.4).
Changing prices for minerals and metals, agricultural, fishing and forestry-related raw materials, and beverages are responsible for this drop in the average index; other categories experienced minor price increases.
Among the minerals and metals, copper and iron are particularly important because of their weight in the region’s export basket; their prices fell by approximately 14% and 20% respectively during the first half of 2012 compared with the same period a year earlier.
Other metals, such as aluminium, zinc, nickel, lead and tin, have followed a similar pattern.
Within the group of agricultural, fishing and forestry-related raw materials, prices for wood pulp, rubber and cotton in particular were down.
The largest drops in beverage prices were seen for coffee and cocoa.
These 10 product groups are more important to countries such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, Nicaragua, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, for which they represented over 50% of total export value in 2011 (see table II.5).
In the region overall, the countries accounting for the largest proportion of exports of these products are Brazil, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mexico and Chile, at almost 75% of the total for the region.
In addition to these 10 product groups, other commodities such as bauxite and gold account for a significant percentage of total exports from the countries of the Caribbean.
In some medium-sized and small countries, such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Chile, Ecuador, Plurinational State of Bolivia and Trinidad and Tobago, commodity exports make up slightly more than 20% of GDP as well as a substantial proportion of fiscal revenue.
Prices for these 10 commodity groups were down in general during the first half of 2012 compared with the same period of the previous year, in particular for fishery products, coffee and iron (see table II.6).
The data in table II.7 show that, in the neutral scenario, prices for the 10 product groups under consideration may fall by some 2% on average each year during 2013-2015, although certain groups (gas, fish products and fruit) could present positive average rates of variation.
In the optimistic scenario, the medium-term uptrend in prices for all product groups would continue and result in an average annual variation of 13.3% for the groups as a whole.
In less favourable conditions (pessimistic scenario) the average variation would be negative (a decline of around 9% annually), essentially as a result of falling prices for the major product groups in the region’s export basket: oil, iron, copper and soybeans.
Apart from in the optimistic scenario, prices are expected to fall across the 10 main commodity groups over the next four years.
Should prices decrease at the rate predicted by the pessimistic scenario, the average index would be below the highs seen in 2008 and 2011 but would still be above the 2009 low (see figure II.8).
Nevertheless, solely an extreme scenario with decreases similar to those seen in 2009 continuing throughout 2013-2015 would trigger a steep downward trend in prices for the region’s main commodities.
In order to estimate exports for the 10 commodity groups for 2012 as a whole, in addition to the price projections analysed above, income-elasticities were estimated at the product level using the gravity model and International Monetary Fund (IMF) projections of GDP growth rates for the main destination countries and regions (see table II.8).
These figures were then used to determine the projected variation in each country’s export volume.
These estimates were complemented by volume projections for the 10 commodity groups using the univariate ARIMA model methodology, based on monthly export series covering January 2006 to June 2012.
The scenarios for 2013-2015 were calculated using the price projections shown in table II.7, demand conditions drawn from the income-elasticities of exports (fixed in the Region or country IncomePessimistic elasticity of exports a International Monetary Fund (IMF) Optimistic Rest of Asia Neutral basis of International Monetary Fund (IMF) World Economic Outlook Update.
The projected scenarios for 2013-2015 include only demand and price variations for each product.
In the neutral scenario, the exogenous GDP and price projections implicitly include other factors related to, for example, supply conditions for each product.
The optimistic and pessimistic scenarios reflect price variations during 2005-2011 and 2008-2009, respectively, and represent more extreme situations that are considered less likely than the neutral scenario.
Analysing the income-elasticities of exports reveals that the average value of elasticity is greater in the case of China and the rest of Asia, ranging from 0.2 (Guatemala) to 4.6 (Ecuador).
Given that the income-elasticities of exports are structurally determined for 1995-2009, the projected scenarios for 2012-2015 do not consider possible changes in these elasticities over the new period, during which they are taken as exogenous parameters.
If these elasticities were to undergo structural change during the projected period, the volume estimates could be somewhat lower.
For the region as a whole, the export value for the basket of 10 main commodity groups is projected to be some US$ 440 billion in 2012 (around 1% higher than in 2011) and approach US$ 510 billion by 2015 (see table II.9).
Price rises in 2012 will be driven by soybeans, oil, fruit, and to a lesser extent, meat.
The figures presented in table II.8 correspond to weighted averages of the individual countries’ elasticities, calculated using each country’s share in total exports by destination as weighting factors.
Growth of the composite commodity price index is largely determined by four groups of products in the region’s export basket: oil, copper, iron and soybeans.
Overall, these groups accounted for 87% of exports of the 10 main commodity groups in 2011.
Trends for these four groups will now be examined in more detail, looking at price and volume projections for the neutral scenario and comparing them with the two other scenarios described above. (a) Oil The most important group in the regional export basket is oil (comprising crude oil, petroleum-based oils and their products).
Oil accounts for around 20% of total exports and 50% of commodity exports.
Global consumption of oil has increased in recent years, driven by economic growth in China and other emerging countries.
The international price of oil has been a key factor behind rising or falling export revenue in several countries of the region.
Between 2003 and mid-2008 the price of oil hit record levels and topped US$ 130 a barrel before plunging to around US$ 40 a barrel by the end of 2008 in response to the global economic crisis.
However, as demand gradually recovered and geopolitical tensions emerged in the Middle East (particularly in Libya and Iran), oil prices started to climb again and reached another all-time high.
In 2011, oil closed the year at over US$ 100 a barrel; in 2012, in spite of a downward trend during April to June, new geopolitical tensions triggered further price rises during July and August.
Demand for oil continues to be driven by China, India, the Republic of Korea and Japan; in all of these countries, production needs are pushing energy consumption up.
Nevertheless, the outlook for future economic growth is uncertain, and demand is therefore forecast to weaken during the second half of 2012.
Although geopolitical tensions are likely to fuel short-term price uptrends, the European crisis and slackening growth of the world economy are tempering predictions regarding the future price of oil.
As a direct result of reduced global demand and increased supply from the countries that are members of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC), the average price is expected to dip slightly (1%) and hit US$ 103 a barrel by year-end 2012 (see table II.6).
Morgan), the price of oil is expected to decline at an annual average rate of 1.4% between 2013 and 2015.
If the most pessimistic scenario comes to pass and further weakens the demand for oil and if geopolitical tensions surrounding certain producer countries ease, the price of oil could slump to US$ 73 per barrel in 2015 (averaging US$ 78 during 2013-2015).
The main export destinations for oil products are the United States (54.6%), the region itself the rest of Asia (5.5%).
It represents 6% of the region’s total exports and 14% of its commodity exports.
Chile, Peru, and, to a lesser extent, Mexico, Brazil and Argentina are the largest exporters of this group of products (see the table embedded in figure II.10).
Since the mid-2000s the price of copper has soared to unprecedented levels, hitting successive record highs thanks to the sustained expansion of demand in China and other developing Asian countries.
Future copper prices will be heavily dependent on demand, which is in turn closely linked to the outlook for world growth (in particular, to the impact of the crisis in the European Union) and to consumption patterns in China and other Asian countries.
These countries account for 99% of the region’s iron exports, which go mainly to Asia and the European Union (60% and 20% of total iron exports, respectively).
According to estimates from the World Bank, the Economist Intelligence Unit and other specialized entities, the price of iron will fall by 15.4% in 2012, dropping from US$ 168 a ton to US$ 142 a ton (see table II.6).
At this price, the value of the region’s iron exports will slide 10% in 2012, although this will be somewhat offset by larger export volumes.
Projections for 2013-2015 suggest that, in the neutral scenario, the price of iron will drop at an average annual rate of 8.1%, taking the average price for the period to US$ 122 a ton (see table II.7).
In this scenario, the value of iron exports could stand at US$ 50 billion in 2015 (see table II.9).
An optimistic scenario, on the other hand, with an average price of US$ 204 a ton, would produce an average annual export value increase of 2%, to US$ 82 billion by 2015 —an increase of 67% on 2011.
According to some estimates of the sensitivity of copper consumption to fluctuations in China’s GDP, a 1% drop in GDP produces a 0.3% decline in copper consumption.
Based on this ratio, Chinese imports of copper are also expected to slow during the second half of the year, with a small upturn towards year-end 2012 and during the first quarter of 2013 owing to seasonal factors in Chinese copper refineries, where peak output has historically been during the first quarter (Deutsche Bank, 2012).
Considering these factors, the rate of change in the price of copper for the year overall is expected to be negative (-7.8%) and push the average price down from 400 cents a pound in 2011 to 369 cents a pound in 2012 (see table II.6).
Morgan and Deutsche Bank estimate that the price of copper will fall at an average annual rate of 1.7% between 2013 and 2015.
In this scenario the average price of copper during the period would be 381 cents per pound (see table II.7).
At this price level, and assuming annual Chinese GDP growth of around 8.2%, the value of the region’s copper exports would slip from US$ 62.156 billion in 2011 to around US$ 62 billion in 2015 (see table II.9).
In all projected scenarios, Chile and Peru will be the most affected.
During the first half of 2012, Brazil’s cast iron exports fell by 22.8% (SECEX, 2012). (d) Soybeans According to the latest estimates from the United States Department of Agriculture, global soybean production will shrink by 30% in 2012.
Millions of dollars Bolivia (Plurinational State of) Others country’s exports regional total The soybean group (soybeans, soybean oil and soybean cake) is the fourth most important group for the region and accounts for a share of total exports and commodity exports (4.6% and 11%, respectively) similar to iron.
In recent years world soybean consumption has risen sharply, primarily due to soaring demand in China and the rest of Asia.
By the end of the past decade, soybeans had displaced other crops such as wheat, maize, sunflowers and oats.
Soybeans make up more than 50% of Argentina’s crops; in the other countries mentioned the number of hectares planted in soybeans has risen as well.
Soybean prices went up during the first half of 2012 owing mainly to poor weather, in particular in the United States.
These factors contributed to smaller harvests not only in the United States but also in Argentina and Brazil.7 As a direct consequence of smaller supply from the world’s three largest producers, the average price of soybeans is expected to increase by 12.4% in 2012 and reach US$ 608 a ton (see table II.6).
Specialized agencies such as the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and the World Bank expect that the price of soybeans will drop by an average 1.2% annually between 2013 and 2015.
If this scenario is borne out, the price of soybeans would fall from US$ 608 a ton to around US$ 593 a ton on average over this period (see table II.7).
In a more pessimistic scenario that weakens demand for soybeans even further, and if supply is restored thanks to more favourable weather conditions, the price of soybeans is expected to stand at US$ 524 a ton in 2015 (averaging US$ 539 a ton in 2013-2015).
Alternatively, should prices continue to rise steadily in a more optimistic scenario, soybean exports would increase to around US$ 89 billion in 2015 at an average price of US$ 765 a ton between 2013 and 2015.
Soybean price trends will have the greatest impact on Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, as may be seen from the data provided in the table embedded in figure II.12.
Of these countries, Argentina will be most affected because soybeans account for 45% of its total exports (42% of the region’s exports of these products).
The main export destination is China, followed by the European Union, Japan and the rest of Asia, which together receive around 70% of soybean exports from Latin America and the Caribbean.
Overall, exports of the 10 main commodity groups are expected to continue to expand, powered by strong growth in volume.
Neutral scenario estimates suggest that export volume will offset sagging prices, with the result that the value of these exports will rise in 2013-2015 at an average annual rate of 4.8% (see figure II.13).
Lower prices will mean that the countries of the region will have to work harder to maintain their levels of export income.
If all the products in each country’s export basket (that is, products from the 10 main commodity groups and other products, including manufactures) are taken into account, neutral scenario projections indicate that the average price index for the region’s exports will drop by 1.5% a year during 2013-2015.
This decline will be offset by an annual average increase of 6.5% in export volumes.
With the exception of the European Union, neutral scenario results show lower prices in the region’s export destination markets and much sharper falls for China.
These declines are primarily due to falling prices for oil, copper and iron ore, which are the main Latin American and Caribbean products imported by China.
In the pessimistic scenario, prices would fall across the board and China would once again account for the greatest impact.
Comparing this scenario with the plunging prices seen in 2009, it is clear that, even in the case of China, the average price decline expected during 2013-2015 would only be 30% of the drop in 2015 (see table II.10).
As for the value of the region’s exports, the projections suggest that the high average annual growth rates of over 20% recorded since 2005 will not continue.
Projected average annual growth rates for 2013-2015 range from 0.7% in the pessimistic scenario to 10.5% in the optimistic scenario, with a rate of 5.0% for the neutral scenario.
In this scenario, China and the United States would grow faster than the other destinations (see table II.11).
Destination market Despite the projected declines, especially for metals, prices for the main commodity groups will remain significantly higher in the years ahead than at the beginning of the current supercycle and in previous decades, even in real terms (see figure II.14).
Although demand from Europe will slide, it is expected that Chinese buyers will react to falling commodity prices as they did during the 2008-2009 crisis: by stockpiling supplies (especially of metals, soybeans and other grains).
During that period, both the volume and value of Latin American and Caribbean exports to other markets fell.
However, in the case of China prices plummeted 32.7% while volumes increased by 38.4%, meaning that the value exported by Latin America and the Caribbean increased by 5.6%.
There is another, albeit still unlikely, scenario in which the main obstacle has to do with the intensification of demand shocks (understood to mean episodes of much sharper contractions in consumption or imports than those examined here) because these have the greatest impact on exporters of certain commodities, especially oil and copper (Kilian, 2009 and IMF, 2012).
Variations in supply are more important for products like coffee, soybeans, grain and cotton.
The last two groups, while not analysed in this chapter, are also part of the export basket of some Latin American and Caribbean countries, although they are eclipsed by the groups studied here.
Conclusions Given the current international climate, commodity prices are likely to remain high in the years ahead while staying below 2011 levels (particularly in the case of minerals and metals).
Food and oil prices could continue to rise, depending on how specific conditions affect the supply of these products.
The main conclusion that may be drawn from the analysis carried out in this chapter is that, despite slackening prices, the region’s export value will continue to climb over the next four years although at rates that are somewhat lower than in previous years and will not exceed 10%.
If China grew by just 5%, the region would be guaranteed a 9% increase in export volumes to China, which equates to a little over 1.5 percentage points of total expected average annual export volume growth during 2013-2015 (4.5%).
Nevertheless, a trade relationship that is skewed towards a commodity-intensive export basket is cause for concern because it can contribute to reprimarization and thus to export growth without the changes in the production structure needed to turn out more sophisticated products, even within the commodity group.
This poses a number of challenges for public policy and its role in integration and inclusiveness.
An appropriate public policy aimed at fostering greater national value added in processes associated with commodity groups should enhance the formation of national networks (both between firms and between and within sectors) that can establish suitable mechanisms for cooperation and agreement and address unresolved development challenges.
Datos provisorios del año 2011 y cifras estimadas del primer semestre de 2012”, Buenos Aires, July.
Kilian, L. (2009), “Not all oil price shocks are alike: disentangling demand and supply shocks in the crude oil market”, American Economic Review, vol. 99, No. 3.
Ocampo, José Antonio (2011), “El auge de los precios de los productos básicos y el riesgo de enfermedad holandesa en América Latina”, Boletín informativo Techint, No. 336, september-december.
SECEX (Secretariat of Foreign Trade of the of Brazil) (2012), “Balança comercial brasileira.
Introduction This chapter begins with a brief analysis of foreign trade in Latin America and the Caribbean in 2011, broken down according to major partners and product categories for the region and its subregions.
This analysis reveals a sharp slowdown starting in the second half of 2011.
Section C reviews the region’s external trade performance during the first half of 2012 and presents forecasts for the year as a whole.
These point to a meagre expansion in both imports and exports, which have been dampened by the crisis in the euro zone, faltering economic growth in the United States and Japan, and slower growth in China and other emerging economies.
Preliminary trade figures for January to June 2012 indicate that the slowdown, especially among European economies, is already being transmitted through trade flows.
Regional exports grew by 4% over this period, and imports by 6%, while a growth rate of around 4% for exports and 3% for imports is forecast for the year as a whole.
ECLAC expects that the economic downturn in the European Union will shave 5% off Latin American and Caribbean exports to that market in 2012.
There will also be an indirect impact on the region’s trade with China, whose effects will be felt more acutely during 2013 as export value to the Chinese market rises only slightly owing largely to falling commodity prices.
Section D looks at trade policy developments in the region over the past 12 months.
Latin America and the Caribbean has not remained on the sidelines of the global trend towards greater trade restrictions (see chapter I), although only a few countries have actually implemented such measures.
In addition, the number of new trade agreements being signed by some economies in the region with both regional and external partners continues to multiply.
Section E reviews the main developments over the past 12 months as regards the institutional aspects of economic integration in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Major shifts are taking place in the regional architecture of formal economic integration, as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela joins the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR), the Pacific Alliance is launched, and strides are made towards establishing a free trade area between Mexico and the Central American countries.
That said, MesoAmerica appears to be moving towards ever closer economic integration, while the situation in South America is less clear-cut.
As for the Caribbean, the matter of how the costs and benefits of integration should be distributed among the economies of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) is being hotly debated; addressing this issue will pose new challenges for the integration process.
The region’s foreign trade performance in 2011 Latin America and the Caribbean saw a foreign trade slowdown in 2011, as the situation in the euro zone worsened and the global economic recovery floundered.
The region’s exports to countries in the “rest of the world” category grew the most in 2011, even outpacing its exports to China.
This reflects the growth of exports to other developing countries in Africa, the former Soviet Union and the Middle East, as South-South trade becomes increasingly important (see table III.1).
South American exports and imports grew faster than the regional average in 2011, while those of Mexico and Central America lagged behind the average and Caribbean exports posted the weakest growth.
Exports rose faster than imports in five of the largest economies (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil, Colombia, Mexico and Peru), giving the region a larger trade surplus than in 2010 (see table III.2).
Despite the 2011 slowdown, the region’s exports once again outperformed world exports.
They expanded by more than those of the United States, the euro zone and Asia, and were surpassed only by exports from Africa and the Middle East (see table III.3).
The region’s foreign trade slowdown began during the third quarter of 2011, intensified in the fourth quarter and continued into the first two quarters of 2012, hitting its lowest point in June 2012 (see figure III.1).
This trend has been seen across the region: nearly every country, with the exception of Costa Rica, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama, experienced lower export growth during the fourth quarter of 2011 compared with the same period in 2010.
A similar pattern emerges for imports, as growth was down in all of the countries of the region except for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Panama and the CARICOM countries.
Exports to China dipped by 1.0% during the second quarter of 2012.
The region’s imports from all of its principal markets of origin began to slow in the third quarter of 2011 and did so more sharply during the second quarter of 2012 (see table III.4).
The region’s foreign trade slowdown has been reflected in trade flows with all of its major trading partners.
Exports to all of the region’s main destinations began to slacken in the third quarter of 2011, and the pace fell even more during the subsequent three quarters.
Exports to the European Union slowed drastically, growing by just 2% in the first quarter of 2012 and contracting by 10% during the second quarter, compared with the same During 2011, higher prices accounted for 80% of the increase in the region’s export value.
The price increase for the region overall was 19%, but it exceeded 20% in South America (except for Chile, whose export prices rose by 11%).
In the Central American countries, the contribution of rising prices (12%) and expanding export volumes (8%) was more evenly divided.
The Caribbean countries experienced negative export volume growth, but this was more than offset by higher prices for their export products (see figure III.2).
The lowest growth (18%) was registered by manufacturing exports, driving their share of regional exports down from 57% in 2010 to 54% in 2011.
At the same time, the share of primary products in total exports increased as reprimarization of the region’s export structure continued.
On the import side, as in 2010, the biggest increases were seen in fuels, followed by consumer and capital goods.
Intermediate goods grew at a slower pace than the regional average, and their share of regional imports slipped from 51% in 2010 to 49% in 2011 (see table III.5).
In 2011, exports within the region grew more slowly than the region’s total exports to the world.
Intraregional trade, measured in exports, grew by 19.3%, four percentage points below total regional exports.
Trade between the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela and Mexico and the rest of the region, meanwhile, expanded at rates higher than the regional average.
Intermediate inputs Agricultural products Mining and oil Share Southern Common Market and the Caribbean Andean countries Growth rates Product category Mexico and Central American Common Market (CACM) a of intrasubregional trade within the main integration schemes either, with the sole exception of CARICOM, whose percentage of intrasubregional trade dropped from 17.6% in 2010 to 15.4% in 2011.
Foreign trade in the region during the first half of 2012 and outlook for the year overall ECLAC forecasts that the value of the region’s goods exports and imports will climb by around 4% and 3%, respectively, in 2012 (see figure III.4 and table III.6).
This represents a heavy slowdown compared with 23% and 22% growth, respectively, for 2011.
The serious global economic scenario is, indeed, already taking a heavy toll on trade flows.
Export volume, on the other hand, is projected to rise by close to 5% (see figure III.4).
Export prices are likely to fall most sharply in South America and the Caribbean, by around 2% in both cases.
Virtually all of the countries of the region will see a drop in export prices.
The only possible exceptions are the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Mexico and Paraguay, where prices may not change or may even increase slightly.
The slump in the price component of exports will probably be offset by an increase in export volume in the vast majority of the countries of the region (see table III.6).
Export volume growth in Mexico and Central America could outpace the regional average (see figure III.4A).
The composite price index for the region’s main export commodities, which climbed 22% in 2011, will drop by around 5% in 2012 (see table II.4 in chapter II).
This is in response to heightened volatility and sharp declines in the prices for some products in the export basket triggered by the deteriorating growth outlook from the second half of 2011 (see chapter II).
Metal prices, including copper, zinc, tin and lead, fell significantly over the first four months of 2012.
Prices for some crops, such as soya and palm and their respective products, also began to lose ground in this unfavourable context, although not as quickly given the drought in the United States and smaller harvests in Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay.
The Caribbean countries will likely be the only ones to see a slight drop in import volume; Mexico and Central America are expected to post the largest increase (see figure III.4B).
In Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay and the CARICOM countries, goods trade values are expected to fall for both exports and imports, performing well below the regional average (see table III.6).
During the period January-July 2012, commodity and manufacturing exports from these three countries fell heavily in volume terms.
In commodity exports, the largest drops occurred in soybean and soybean products in the cases of Argentina and Paraguay, and in petroleum and iron ore in the case of Brazil.
For manufactured goods, exports of automobiles and automobile parts, machinery, agro-industrial equipment and others slowed, particularly in the intraregional circuits (SECEX, 2012, INDEC, 2012).
An analysis of regional exports during the first half of 2012 according to main destination reveals that most Latin American and Caribbean countries experienced declines in their exports to the European Union.
CARICOM and South American countries were the hardest hit (see figure III.5B).
By country, exports from Paraguay and the CARICOM countries fell the most, followed by El Salvador, Chile and the other MERCOSUR countries (see table III.7).
Most of the drop in Caribbean exports to the European Union was due to weaker sales of fuels and minerals (specifically, oil from Trinidad and Tobago, which accounts for 67% of Caribbean exports to the European Union).
Latin American and Caribbean imports from the European Union posted slower, but still positive, growth (see figure III.5A).
The best-performing products were machinery and mechanical equipment from Costa Rica, and shrimp and agricultural products such as bananas, oranges, tomatoes and lemons from Central America, whose export volume was up although prices were down.
Mexico’s exports of crude oil, passenger vehicles and electronic equipment such as voice receivers were among those posting the highest growth.
All these products enjoy tariff preferences under the association agreement Mexico signed with the European Union in 1999.
ECLAC expects that the slowdown in economic activity in the European Union will have a dual impact on exports from Latin America and the Caribbean.
The first impact, which will be direct and immediate, will be a fall in exports to that market.
Countries with closer trade links to Europe will bear the brunt of this drop.
The second impact, an indirect one, will be caused by falling demand for imports in China and the other Asian countries in response to lower European Union demand for Asian exports.
This trend is expected to intensify in 2013 amid slackening of the region’s exports to China and falling prices for the commodities it exports to that market, such as copper, iron ore and fishmeal.
These sectors represented 88% of total regional exports to the European Union in 2011 and accounted for 94% of the region’s total export value to Asia in 2011 (see table III.9B).
They will therefore be more exposed should exports to China and the rest of Asia slacken in 2013 in response to the economic contraction in the European Union.
The sharpest drop will be in exports from CARICOM countries (-19%) and South American countries (-7%), contrasting with the 16% growth forecast for Mexico and Central America.
Assuming that commodity prices fall by around 10%, the indirect effect will be to slow the growth of the region’s export value to China down to 2% in 2013, well below the 9% increase projected for 20121 (see table III.8).
However, if China’s economy continues to grow above 8%, the region’s exports to China will continue to expand at a similar rate to 2012.
Six sectors will bear the brunt of the expected fall in the region’s exports to the European Union This figure corresponds to the “pessimistic” scenario of the three analysed in chapter II with respect to regional exports for 2013-2015. basis of United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database (COMTRADE) and official information from the respective countries. a ECLAC projections.
Thanks in part to changes in the region’s foreign trade over the past decade in terms of export destination structure, export performance in 2012 is expected to be better than during other recent international economic crises.
Exports within Latin America and the Caribbean also increased, from 16% to 20% (see table III.8).
In short, developing regions have grown as destinations for Latin American and Caribbean exports; since they are also the fastest-growing economies in the world economy, lower demand for Latin American and Caribbean exports in the industrialized countries has had less of an impact.
Recent trade policy developments in the region these actions have been called into question, both within and outside the region (see box III.1).
Meagre economic growth and the resulting decline in demand from the United States and Europe have sparked fears that China and other Asian countries are redirecting to the region manufacturing exports that previously went to industrialized countries.
In addition, some countries have been affected by currency appreciation, partly as a result of short-term capital inflows attracted by interest rate differentials with the industrialized countries.
These factors may be intensifying the trend, already observed prior to the crisis, towards greater penetration of Asian manufactures (especially from China) in the region, displacing imports from the rest of the world as well as local production (see figure III.6).
There is concern that this may lead to deindustrialization, especially in countries with a larger manufacturing sector.
Particularly in Argentina and Brazil, measures have been introduced or announcements made over the past few months that point to further import restrictions as part of more active industrial policies (UNCTAD, 2012, pp. 54-55).
The most relevant of these measures are as follows: • Over 600 products are subject to nonautomatic import licensing, including computers, tractors, automobiles and auto parts, plastics, chemicals, tyres, toys, footwear, textiles and apparel.
On 25 May 2012, the European Union requested consultations with Argentina at the WTO on these measures, initiating a dispute settlement process that could culminate in the establishment of an arbitration panel.
The Argentine restrictions also apply to the other members of MERCOSUR, prompting complaints from those countries.
Other countries in the region, including Chile, Colombia and Peru, have also expressed concerns.
On 26 June 2012, Argentina unilaterally suspended for three years Economic Complementarity Agreement No. 55 (ECA 55), signed in 2002 between Mexico and MERCOSUR, which governs trade in the automotive sector between Mexico and each of the member States of MERCOSUR.
Argentina’s decision reverses the free trade regime formerly in place with Mexico: automobiles from Mexico are now subject to a tariff of 35%, and auto parts to a tariff of between 16% and 18%.
Automobiles from Argentina meanwhile are subject to a tariff of 20% in Mexico, and auto parts to a tariff of between 0% and 20%.
According to the Argentine authorities, this decision was taken in light of the potential negative impact on its automotive sector of an agreement reached between Brazil and Mexico in March 2012.
Negotiated at the request of Brazil, it partially reversed the free trade regime previously in force between the two countries.
With effect from March 2012, bilateral trade of light vehicles is only tariff free up to certain maximum amounts; these will be progressively raised until a free trade regime is once again in place in March 2015.
Significantly, in recent years there has been a large surplus on the Mexican side of bilateral trade between Argentina and Mexico in the automobile industry.
The Mexican authorities have disputed Argentina’s decision and have announced that they will challenge it within the framework of the Latin American Integration Association (ALADI).
In Brazil, in addition to the abovementioned renegotiation of ECA 55, the “plan Brasil Maior” (“Bigger Brazil Plan”) came into effect in August 2011, aimed at boosting the competitiveness of domestic industry by promoting technological innovation and value added.
The plan contains some measures seeking greater controls over imports, such as shortening the period for anti-dumping investigations and introducing a preference margin of up to 25% for domestic products in public procurement processes.
In September 2011, Brazil also raised the domestic tax on certain vehicles by 30 percentage points until 31 December 2012.
Vehicles with a minimum of 65% of their content sourced in MERCOSUR or Mexico are exempt.
At the eighteenth Extraordinary Meeting of the MERCOSUR Trade Commission held in Mendoza (Argentina) in June 2012, Decision No. 25/12 was adopted to allow each member of the trading bloc to raise its tariff on external imports above the common external tariff on up to 200 tariff lines, up to the WTO maximum (bound) level (35%).
These increases will apply for a period of 12 months, renewable for further 12-month periods until 31 December 2014.
This same measure had been adopted in December 2011 for up to 100 tariff lines.
Over and above the legality of trade policy measures taken by some of the countries of the region, their economic impact should be carefully weighed.
Affording certain sectors protection is a valid tool for coping with the challenges facing the region as a result of the weak and volatile recovery of the world economy following the crisis in 2008 and 2009.
Nevertheless, the instruments used should be transparent, have a clear time horizon, and comply with the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and those of integration agreements and other trade agreements to which individual countries are party.
Likewise, the negative effects on the region should be minimized, in particular on less-developed countries.
Last, in a world economy increasingly made up of value chains, blanket restrictions on trade, especially on capital and intermediate goods, ultimately hurt the competitiveness of the country imposing them because they have a negative impact on production sectors (whether they export or target the domestic market) that use those imported goods as inputs.
Several of the economies of the region already (or will in the coming months) enjoy preferential trade relationships with both the United States and the European Union.
In May 2012, after several years’ delay, the free trade agreement between Colombia and the United States entered into force, while the free trade agreement between Panama and the United States is expected to follow suit during the second half of 2012.
In June 2012 the association agreement between the European Union and Central American countries (including Panama) was signed, as was with the free trade agreement between the European Union and Colombia and Peru.
Both agreements are expected to enter into force in late 2012 or early 2013 (see box III.2).
The number of trade agreements between countries of the region and Asia-Pacific has increased considerably over the past 12 months.
The agreement between Chile and Viet Nam was signed, and negotiations between Colombia and the Republic of Korea were successfully concluded.
In June 2012 Mexico’s incorporation into the negotiations on the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) was approved, taking the number of participants from the region to three.2 This flurry of activity concerns only a small number of countries from the region, however, all on the Pacific coast.
Some (Chile and Peru) already possess an export structure that is heavily directed towards Asia; others (Colombia, Costa Rica and Mexico in particular) export primarily to the United States but are seeking to forge closer ties with the fast-growing Asia-Pacific region.
In the case of Costa Rica and Mexico, which chiefly export manufactures, the policy aim is to become more deeply embedded in Asian value chains.
It provides that tariffs will be phased out for the bulk of bilateral goods trade, including for all industrial and fishing products (with the exception of some agricultural products).
The agreement also contains commitments on subjects such as trade in services, government procurement, intellectual property rights, dispute resolution, sustainable development, and regional integration and cooperation.
In several areas, the commitments made go beyond the scope of the relevant World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements.
In 2011 the European Union accounted for 16% of Colombia’s exports and 14% of its imports, while these shares for Peru were 18% and 11%, respectively.
Sustainable development is one of the goals of the agreement, which seeks to adopt a common position on issues such as the sustainable management of forests, the conservation of biological diversity, the prevention of illegal fishing and climate change.
The parties also commit to make labour and environmental protection a priority, its share as an origin of imports varies within a narrower band of 5% to 10%.
With regard to political dialogue, one objective is to foster common positions on matters such as development finance, migration, environment, security, good governance, and the fight against terrorism.
The aim of the cooperation pillar is to provide resources, mechanisms, tools and procedures to ensure the effective implementation of the association agreement, in addition to the financial assistance for development already committed by the European Union for Central American countries until 2013.
The priority areas include human rights, governance, social cohesion, migration, climate change and regional integration.
It is anticipated that both agreements will enter into force provisionally towards the end of 2012 or during the first half of 2013, once they have been ratified by the European Parliament and the respective parliaments of the signatory Latin American countries.
Implementation will be final once ratified by the parliaments of all the member States of the European Union. in line with international conventions.
There is a comprehensive chapter on cooperation, aiming to promote competitiveness and innovation, modernize production systems and facilitate trade flows and the transfer of technology among the parties.
An accession clause allows the other member countries of the Andean Community to join the agreement at a later date.
It covers trade, political dialogue and cooperation and establishes a free trade area between the European Union and the countries of Central America (with some exceptions in the agricultural sector).
The agreement also includes commitments on trade in services, investment, intellectual property and public procurement.
Costa Rica and Panama took on greater commitments to openness in procurement than the other Central American countries.
Recent developments with regard to economic integration in Latin America and the Caribbean Besides negotiations with partners outside the region, the architecture of regional economic integration has shifted significantly over the past 12 months.
In Meso-America, a single free trade agreement has been signed between Mexico and the five Central American countries, and Panama has been incorporated into the Central American economic integration subsystem.
In South America, meanwhile, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has become a full member of MERCOSUR, and Paraguay’s right to participate in the bodies of this bloc has been temporarily suspended.
The Pacific Alliance has been formally created; the members of this integration initiative are currently Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Peru.
The single free trade agreement between Mexico and Central America was signed in November 2011 and is expected to enter into force during 2012.
It will replace the three agreements currently binding this group of countries.
This will cut transaction costs for economic operators and promote the development of production linkages.
This represents a major step towards the creation of a larger economic space with a gross domestic product of almost US$ 1.3 trillion, a population of more than 150 million and close production and trade links with the United States (see table III.11).
The MERCOSUR summit held in Mendoza in June 2012 brought changes in the composition of the group.
A decision was taken to admit the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela as a full member, a process that had been under way since that country’s withdrawal from the Andean Community in 2006.
It was agreed that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela would have until 2016 to gradually adopt the commitments arising from full MERCOSUR membership (see box III.3).
MERCOSUR has thus become a market worth US$ 3.3 trillion with 275 million inhabitants (see table III.12).
The trading bloc has also added a major energy component to its profile as an agricultural powerhouse, given that the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela possesses the largest proven oil reserves in the world.
The two decisions are linked, as the reason the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was not admitted to MERCOSUR earlier was because this had not been ratified by the Congress of Paraguay.
Also in June 2012, at the fourth summit of the Pacific Alliance, held at the Paranal Observatory in Chile, the framework agreement was signed formally establishing the Pacific Alliance.
These four economies constitute a US$ 1.9 trillion market with a population of 207 million (see table III.12).
To achieve these goals, the presidents of the four member countries have drawn up a programme of work with several components (see box III.4).
Establish a road map with specific initiatives on sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
Continue to identify sectors of common interest so as to move towards harmonization or mutual recognition of regulations or technical standards that have an impact on trade.
Design initiatives aimed at deepening integration with regard to services and capital, identifying existing obstacles and assessing the need for and advisability of negotiating an agreement on services and investment within the framework of the Pacific Alliance.
With a view to advancing towards full liberalization of migration flows between its members, implement a plan for cooperating and sharing information on these flows in real time.
Take joint action to promote exports and attract investment, particularly in Asia.
The Alliance, in which Costa Rica and Panama participate as observers, has positioned itself as a reference for economic integration in the region and is breaking with the subregional pattern.
It includes South American countries as well as Mexico and may also include Central American countries in the future.
In practice, this initiative will supersede the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative which did not come together and, unlike that body, membership does not depend on being a State on the Pacific coast.
The four current members of the Alliance are already connected via a network of bilateral free trade agreements and are therefore in a good position to work towards more ambitious integration goals.
In the Caribbean subregion, a debate has arisen in recent months in Jamaica over whether the country should remain a member of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
Jamaica is running a large trade deficit with its partners in this grouping, particularly with Trinidad and Tobago, the main economy in the bloc.
Nevertheless, at the thirty-third Regular Meeting of the Conference of Heads of Government of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), held in Saint Lucia in July 2012, Jamaica reiterated its willingness to remain a member of this grouping.
With regard to external trade relations, CARICOM is engaged in negotiations with Canada, the Dominican Republic and the United States (see box III.5).
Among other reasons, this is because member countries have been contending with the global crisis and implementation of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy project has not been a priority.
Nonetheless, the CARICOM leaders have recently tried to inject renewed vigour into regional integration as a way of dealing with global challenges.
As one of the new initiatives, in May 2012 an intergovernmental working group was set up to develop protocols on public procurement and contingent rights.
The latter concern the rights of highly qualified CARICOM nationals and their dependants, such as the right to non-discriminatory access to social services in their country of residence.
An intergovernmental group was also created to formulate a policy on corporate mergers and acquisitions.
In early July 2012, the Heads of State and Government of the CARICOM countries met in Saint Lucia to discuss institutional reform, foreign policy, trade and development.
The countries made a commitment to enhance coordination, with a view to developing a common foreign policy.
One of the main topics was the growth and development of the regional economy in the context of the global economic crisis, and, in particular, strengthening the financial sector and shaping a regional fiscal policy.
With regard to external trade relations, little progress has been made in the negotiations launched in 2009 regarding a free trade agreement between CARICOM and Canada.
The World Trade Organization (WTO) waiver for the current CaribbeanCanada Trade Agreement (CARIBCAN), according to which Canada accords nonreciprocal trade preferences to the Caribbean countries, is due to expire on 31 December 2013; Canada has confirmed that it will not seek renewal.
The Canadian government has thus stated its intention to conclude the free trade agreement negotiations in early 2013.
CARICOM and the United States are negotiating changes to their Trade and Investment Framework Agreement, and this process is expected to conclude shortly.
The United States has also agreed to extend the benefits available under the Caribbean Basin Trade Partnership Act (CBTPA) to countries in that subregion that are currently excluded.
Grenada, Montserrat and Suriname have all already formally requested eligibility for these benefits.
CARICOM and the United States are also in contact to address concerns among Caribbean rum producers over the subsidies granted by the United States Virgin Islands and Puerto Rico to multinational producers based in their territories.
In 2011 these subsidies amounted to US$ 452 million for producers in Puerto Rico and US$ 133.5 million for those in the United States Virgin Islands; they thus undermine the competitiveness of CARICOM producers in their main export market, the United States.
It remains to be seen how the Community of Latin American and Caribbean States (CELAC) and the Union of South American Nations (UNASUR) will go about entering a complex and shifting map of regional economic integration.
Both forums have to date mostly focused on political coordination and dialogue.
Yet their respective programmes of work also comprise action in the economic and trade sphere.
This is especially true of UNASUR, whose working group No. 3 is tasked with formulating proposals to foster intraregional trade among its members.
A key question is how the final proposals will fit in with the commitments UNASUR members have already undertaken under subregional integration schemes and other trade agreements.
The process of economic integration in the region is, then, undergoing major readjustments; the current situation is in flux and the eventual outcome is difficult to predict.
Meso-America appears to be making strides towards ever closer integration, while the situation in South America is less certain.
Achieving deeper integration among the subregions of Latin America and the Caribbean also remains a challenge.
Nevertheless, the major missing link in Latin American economic integration is still between Mexico and MERCOSUR, given the size of the economies in question.
On this point, as already discussed in this chapter, there have been more setbacks than advances in recent months.
Bibliography Durán, José and Andrea Pellandra (2012), “Cambios en la estructura económica e industrial mundial en la primera década del siglo XXI: El efecto de la emergencia de China sobre producción y comercio en América Latina y el Caribe”, unpublished, May.
Datos provisorios del año 2011 y cifras estimadas del primer semestre de 2012, Buenos Aires, 23 July.
Chapter IV The global economic outlook and the challenges it poses for the international integration of Latin America and the Caribbean A.
Introduction As explained in chapter I, prospects for the global economy for the remainder of the decade point to several years of slow growth in the industrialized countries.
These are characterized by substantial flows of trade in intermediate goods and services and of foreign direct investment.
This chapter, which is divided into five sections plus this introduction, looks at how the integration of Latin America and the Caribbean into the global economy fits into these trends.
Section B summarizes some of the key factors shaping the global economic environment that the region will face for the remainder of the 2010s.
The three ensuing sections examine the region’s export performance in three relevant dimensions: participation in value chains (section C); export employment (section D); and the participation of businesses in export activity (section E).
Last, section F draws on the analysis set out in preceding sections to propose guidelines for action, underlining the importance of capitalizing on the potential of the region’s own market in addition to continuing to strengthen links with other developing regions.
International economic outlook for the remainder of the decade Over the next few decades, how well Latin America and the Caribbean integrates into the global economy will largely be determined by its links with the other developing regions.
Latin America and the Caribbean is both witness to and protagonist of the changes taking place as the global economy’s centre of gravity shifts towards developing countries.
As explained in chapter I, in recent years developing countries have come to figure decisively, not only because of their contribution to world output but also because of their share of trade and foreign direct investment flows, their stock of international reserves and their resources managed by sovereign wealth funds, among other variables.
If current trends continue, developing economies will account for more than half of world output and exports by the end of this decade.
The prospect of a lost decade of growth for much of the industrialized world is just speeding up this structural change in the global economy.
This rebalancing of the global economy is being driven by Asia-Pacific, whose growing prominence over the coming decades will make that region increasingly important for Latin America and the Caribbean.
This importance stems not only from Asia-Pacific’s rapid economic growth but also from its large and growing population (see table IV.1).
The expected expansion of the middle class in Asia over the next few decades (see chapter I) offers a good opportunity for Latin America and the Caribbean to diversify its exports to Asia.
Middleclass consumption patterns usually reflect a demand for differentiated goods and services, creating openings in sectors such as agroindustry and niche tourism.
Trade is the main channel for the growing economic linkages between Latin America and the Caribbean and other developing regions.
Between 2000 y 2011, the industrialized economies’ share of total exports from Latin America and the Caribbean fell from 75% to 56% while the proportion going to the developing economies (including Latin America and the Caribbean itself) rose from 25% to 44%.
This trend is even sharper if Mexico —which sends some 80% of its exports to the United States— is not included.
Without Mexico, 60% of the region’s exports goes to developing economies (see table IV.2).
Nevertheless, the industrialized economies still take in nearly 90% of Mexico’s exports, almost two thirds of exports from the Caribbean and more than half of Central America’s exports.
On the other hand, most South American economies that export natural resources are increasingly shifting their export focus to China and the rest of Asia.
On the import side, the developing economies’ share of the Latin American and Caribbean region’s foreign trade has also surged.
This trend, unlike changing export patterns, is seen across all of Latin America’s subregions.
The developing economies’ share of the region’s total imports rose by nearly 20 percentage points in a decade, from 30% in 2000 to almost 50% in 2011.
But this substantial increase has been seen not only in South America, as is the case with exports, but in Mexico and the countries of the Caribbean as well.
Only in Central America was the percentage increase in imports sourced in developing countries a modest one.
Even so, it was already more than 47% in the early 2000s thanks largely to buoyant trade among Central American countries and between them and Mexico (see table IV.2).
Compared with trade relations, reciprocal foreign direct investment linkages between Latin America and the Caribbean and the rest of the developing world are still incipient.
Over the past two years, the industrialized economies (which traditionally have been the primary source of foreign investment in the region) taken as a whole accounted for an average 80% of greenfield foreign direct investment in Latin America and the Caribbean.
During the same period, however, the developing economies (particularly those of East and South-East Asia) accounted for most of the investments in the region through mergers and acquisitions.
By contrast, the bulk of outward foreign direct investment (both greenfield and through mergers and acquisitions) from Latin America and the Caribbean towards developing economies went to the region itself (see table IV.3).
There is, then, considerable room for building up reciprocal direct investment between the region and the rest of the developing regions and transition economies.
Existing strong trade links with Asia could be a springboard towards a second stage marked by growing reciprocal investments (see section F).
Latin America and the Caribbean in value chains Share of intermediate goods in the region’s foreign trade To gauge the quality, density and impact of foreign trade on the economy and on employment, it is necessary to understand the export sector’s internal and external linkages.
This subsection uses data on intermediate goods trade and free export zones to track the development of external linkages and the region’s participation in global value chains.
International trade has been growing faster than global output over the past 30 years, largely because trade in intermediate goods and services has soared as production processes fragment into global value chains (Backer and Yamano, 2012).
The rise of international supply chains is not only due to changes in production but also to shifting patterns of consumption in the advanced countries towards massive and expanding demand for manufactured goods.
To meet this demand, the Asian economies in particular sought arrangements drawing on their comparative advantages and then moved towards regional value chains built on nearby industry interconnections.
Trade in intermediate goods is a useful indicator of production process fragmentation.1 This is because the development of value chains boosts trade in such goods (including parts, components and accessories), especially in the manufacturing sector.
According to World Trade Organization (WTO) estimates, intermediate goods accounted for 51% of global goods exports (not counting In 2011, intermediate goods made up 10% of Latin American and Caribbean exports within and outside the region, despite considerable differences in the composition of both export baskets (see figure IV.1).
This is significant, because manufactures make up a far larger share of intraregional exports than of extraregional exports.
In other words, the substantial trade in manufactured goods within the region is not translating into an increase in intraregional trade in intermediate goods.
The proportion of intermediate goods in intraregional trade in Latin America and the Caribbean is low compared with other groupings of economies (see figure IV.2).
Gauging by the share of intermediate goods in total exports, Latin America and the Caribbean is not entering global value chains as quickly as other regions, particularly in Asia.
In fact, intermediate goods as a percentage of the region’s total exports dropped sharply over the past decade (see figure IV.1), having lost a great deal of momentum since the 1990s, especially in Mexico (the region’s primary exporter of intermediate goods)2 and Central America (see table IV.4 and figure IV.3).
While intermediate goods as a percentage of the region’s total exports fell sharply over the past decade, the decline was much less marked in the case of intraregional exports because commodities account for a smaller share.
As commodity prices soared in the 2000s, their share of the region’s total export value rose while the proportion of intermediate goods declined.
The boom in Mexican exports of intermediate goods during the 1990s coincided with the first few years of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) being in force.
But if Mexico is not included, 50% of the region’s exports of intermediate goods go to the regional market itself (see figure IV.4).
For the two largest economies in South America (Brazil and Argentina), intermediate goods account for a larger share of intraregional exports than of total exports.
This underscores the importance of intermediate goods trade between the two countries, particularly in the automobile sector.
The situation is similar in the Dominican Republic and El Salvador, whose substantial intermediate goods trade with the region is concentrated in the textile sector and in Central America.
In the case of Costa Rica, the Asian markets are also an important destination for its electronics exports.
The participation of Latin America and Caribbean businesses in global value chains is the subject of recent studies as well as current research.4 Flores and Vaillant (2011) describe global value chain insertion for businesses in some countries of the region during 2000-2007.
They show that specializing in exporting unsophisticated products not included in the dynamic core of what is termed “the product space” (poorly differentiated and relatively The role of maquila operations and free export zones The countries of the region often have entered global value chains through linkages located in export processing (maquila) or free export zones.
In a maquila operation, part of the production process is outsourced to third parties who assemble processed parts using inputs brought in from abroad on the condition that the end product be re-exported.
Operations conducted in these free zones are usually eligible for various sorts of tax and other benefits.
Free export manufacturing zones were created as an instrument for promoting the international economic integration of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
These zones have been useful in promoting and diversifying exports, attracting foreign investment and creating jobs in many countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, especially those that are closest to mass consumption markets (Granados, 2005).
As table IV.6 shows, the closer a country is to the United States, the greater the percentage of free zone exports in its total exports.
In many cases, though, maquila operations do not have solid links to the national production structure because most of the inputs are imported.
Such operations are guided, to a large extent, by global profit maximization objectives pursued by transnational companies.
Such objectives are unrelated to those aimed at developing the national production system, although they do occasionally overlap (Durán and Ventura-Dias, 2003). unprocessed natural-resource intensive goods) has kept these countries from taking on a leading role in global value chains, unlike other developing countries (those of South-East Asia in particular).
A breakdown of maquila operations into imported inputs and domestic value added for a number of countries in the region shows that the domestic value added of maquila exports averages 18% of total maquila export value and is the highest in Uruguay, at 61%.
The average for the countries of Central America is 26% (see table IV.6).
In Latin America and the Caribbean, Costa Rica is seen as a global value chain entry success story.
Costa Rica’s strategy for diversifying its export pattern towards higher value-added and knowledge-content products and activities shows how public policy can be paired with a strategic vision to change export patterns substantially in a relatively short period of time (see box IV.1).
This would indicate that they are modernizing their export basket, particularly in intermediate goods.
However, Mexico, Brazil and Argentina, in that order, are still the countries with the most sophisticated exports.
In July 2007, the members of WTO set a deadline of 31 December 2015 for a group of 19 countries to phase out free export zone incentives that constitute banned export subsidies under the World Trade Organization Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures.
In examining intermediate goods trade, this section contributes to an understanding of how the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean fit into global value chains.
In the region’s export pattern, it is only in Mexico, Central America and, to a lesser extent, the Caribbean that participation in these chains figures heavily, mainly through maquila operations and free export processing zones where production is primarily aimed at the United States market.
The cases where participation coincides with high local value added are even relatively few.
These figures refer to foreign and domestic market revenue reported under the Decree for the Promotion of the Manufacturing, Maquiladora and Export Services Industries (IMMEX) and are INDEX estimates.
Policies geared towards attracting foreign direct investment were coupled with benefits under the country’s free manufacturing export zone system and trade agreements, either under the umbrella of the World Trade Organization or preferential agreements.
Among the former is the Information Technology Agreement, in which Costa Rica has been a participant since its entry into force in 1997.
These agreements, along with others like those with Canada, Chile, Panama, the Dominican Republic, Singapore, the other countries of Central America and some Caribbean Community countries, covered 83% of Costa Rica’s exports and 72% of its imports in 2007-2009.
The country’s attractiveness as an export platform for multinational companies is greatly enhanced by its political and social stability, the relatively high education level of its population and its privileged location close to the United States market with access to the Atlantic and Pacific oceans.
These trade agreements have done more than improve access for Costa Rica’s exports to third markets and reduce the cost of imported goods.
In the case of CAFTA-DR, an additional benefit came from Costa Rica’s commitment to opening mobile telephone, Internet and insurance services (which used to be State-owned monopolies) to competition.
This initiative led to a marked expansion of telecommunications coverage, for example.
According to figures from the Vice Ministry of Telecommunications of Costa Rica, the percentage of households with Internet access went from 9.8% before liberalization to 31% in 2011, and the percentage of mobile telephone lines went from 33.3% of the population to 103.2% (Deloitte, 2012).
Because telecommunications are an essential infrastructure service for economic activity, opening the telecommunications market has boosted the international competitiveness of the Costa Rican economy.
Costa Rica is now part of five global value chains: electronics, medical inputs, automotive, aeronautics/aerospace, and inputs for the film and television industry.
Based on information at the company level, a MonjeAriño study (2011) estimates that the local content (including goods, services and labour) of these five chains averaged 36% of their export value in 2009.
Factors impacting the region’s participation in global value chains (a) Access to markets Lower tariff and non-tariff trade barriers are among the requirements for fostering the emergence and development of regional and global value chains.
A good example is provided by the economies of Asia, where trade liberalization (initially unilateral and subsequently negotiated) was pivotal in building the industrial production networks known as “Factory Asia”.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, some free trade agreements (with the United States in particular) were useful in developing production linkages through assembly plants and maquila operations.
In addition to tariffs, rules of origin can have a marked impact on transaction costs for businesses participating in value chains.
Restrictive rules (those that give inputs sourced in a partner country under a trade agreement preference over those originating in other markets, which could be cheaper or higher-quality) impose an efficiency cost on value chains.
This cost will be multiplied if, as is increasingly the case in the region, a country has trade agreements with multiple partners and each agreement has a different, specific rule of origin for the same product.
The bilateralist approach to negotiating rules of origin under trade agreements is not a good fit with the reality of value chains, where an end product can use a variety of inputs imported from different origins.
As tariffs continue to decrease around the world, regulatory considerations increasingly come to bear on the operation of value chains.
This trend is seen more and more in the agenda for trade agreements that, in addition to seeking tariff preferences, aim to create a favourable environment for establishing and developing value chains by reducing transaction costs for economic operators (WTO, 2011).
The most recent agreements usually contain provisions aimed at a certain degree of harmonization of national standards in spheres such as trade in services, treatment of foreign investments, subsidies, trade facilitation and harmonization or mutual recognition of technical standards.
This deep integration agenda is grounded in the fact that in a world of value chains the lines between trade in goods, trade in services and foreign direct investment are increasingly blurred because all three are usually present in a value chain spanning two or more countries.
In short, trade barriers are ever more regulatory in nature (“behind the border”). (b) Logistics Logistics is one of the main factors affecting business competitiveness and integration in value chains.
Empirical studies show that small producers spend relatively more on logistics than large producers do.
In Chile, the average cost per ton for large exporters is three times lower than for small and medium-sized producers (Becerra and Vicuña, 2008).
In Costa Rica, transport costs for marketing one kilogramme of tomatoes account for nearly one fourth (23%) of the total cost for a small exporter, followed by customs (11%) and taxes (6%).
For large exporters the major item of expense is customs (10%), followed by transport (6%) and taxes (5%).
Because of logistical and operational inefficiencies, then, the profit (competitiveness) margin for small producers is 19% smaller than for the region’s large exporters (Fernández and others, undated).
Latin America and the Caribbean lags well behind world leaders in terms of foreign trade transaction costs.
In most of the region’s countries, exporting or, especially, importing a container costs several times more than in Malaysia or Singapore, the world’s most efficient economies (see figure IV.5).
Projections of the region’s needs for the next few years show that Latin America and the Caribbean is not allocating enough funding to economic infrastructure.
Overview This section looks at domestic linkages between export sectors, drawing on data from input-output tables for a group of six countries on which such information is available (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico and Uruguay).
The focus is on direct and indirect jobs generated by the export sector in these countries The number and quality of export-related jobs largely depends on how a country fits into the international trading system, which is seen in the sectoral structure of its exports.
The number of jobs generated by exports depends on the sectoral composition of exports, how labour-intensive they are and what linkages they have with other sectors.
Jobs directly and indirectly related to the export sector accounted for 9% to 24% of total employment in the countries reviewed; overall, this share has been growing over the past decade.
In all of the cases except Colombia, export employment grew faster than total employment (see table IV.7).
Except for Argentina and Chile, jobs indirectly related to exports (those associated with goods and services used as inputs by export sectors) outpaced those directly related to exports, and their share of total export employment rose (see table IV.8).
Assuming 3.9% annual growth in regional GDP and 1% annual population growth.
This section is based on an upcoming ECLAC publication on inclusive trade and on two research projects under way (Durán and others, 2012 and Urmeneta, Durán and Castresana, 2012).
And because it has few backward linkages it accounts for just a small percentage of indirect export employment (3.7%), generating just 0.3 indirect jobs for each direct job.
In Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay, more than one indirect job is generated for each export-related direct one; in Chile, Colombia and Mexico the ratio is well below 1 (see table IV.8).
The breakdown of indirect employment across sectors of economic activity also differs from country to country.
Other factors include changes in technical coefficients (which determine the number of workers needed per unit produced and the relationships between sectors of activity) and labour productivity.
A variation in exports can impact employment (and its disaggregation into direct and indirect jobs) in different ways, depending on the labour-intensiveness of the sector and its linkages with other sectors.
If exports are concentrated in commodities requiring little interaction with the rest of the production system, fewer indirect export jobs will be created.
An examination by aggregated sectors grouped in four categories shows the weight of the agro-export sector (including food, beverages and tobacco) and light industry (especially textiles and clothing, footwear, wood, pulp and paper) in the mix of direct and indirect export jobs in five countries in the region.
Mexico stands apart in that the heavy industry sector (chemicals, plastics, metalworking) generates the bulk of employment directly and indirectly related to exports (see figure IV.6).
A more detailed analysis of 11 sectors suggests that there are three groups of activities.
The first group consists of sectors that account for a large share of exports but do not contribute much to job creation because they are not very labour-intensive and have few linkages to the economy.
The second group comprises sectors that account for a small percentage of total exports but are directly or indirectly labour-intensive and therefore generate more export employment than sectors in the first group.
Its contribution to total output and exports is small, but it is a labour-intensive sector —with 258 workers per US$ 1 million of output— and accounts for more than 20% of both export employment and total employment.
Nevertheless, since it has few backward linkages, almost 100% of its export-related jobs are direct ones, with barely 0.1 indirect jobs for each direct job.
On the other hand, this sector has a substantial impact on the generation of jobs directly related to exports, creating more than 40% of the total.
The third group of sectors accounts for a large share of exports and has significant linkages, so it generates more export-related jobs –primarily indirect ones because it is less labour-intensive than the average for the economy.
It is the second largest in terms of exports and is moderately labour-intensive (20 workers per US$ 1 million of output, compared with 58 on average for the economy).
This sector therefore accounts for a small percentage of total employment (2.5%) and of direct export employment (about 9%).
However, with its substantial backward linkages it accounts for nearly 30% of indirect export employment, generating six indirect jobs for each direct one.
Other examples of such sectors are oil and mining in Chile and Colombia and food, beverages and tobacco in Uruguay.
International trade increases employment through exports, but there is also the risk of import-related job loss.
A lower import ratio in 2005 would have prevented the loss of some 1.8 million jobs.
The net effect would therefore have been a gain of more than 5.2 million trade-related jobs. • In Chile, a higher export propensity than in 1996 would have generated some 334,000 additional jobs in 2003.
An increase in imports would have meant the loss of 132,000 jobs that year.
The net effect would have been a gain of more than 201,000 trade-related jobs. • In Colombia, a lower export propensity in 2005 would have meant an estimated 416,000 fewer export-related jobs than would have been the case if the export coefficient had remained at the 1997 level.
But a lower import ratio would have saved some 818,000 jobs, so there would have been a net gain of 402,000 jobs. • In Uruguay, a higher export propensity would, in the aggregate, add 84,000 jobs.
A higher import ratio in the economy would mean 32,000 fewer jobs.
The first step was to estimate exports and imports in the most recent year for each country if the export coefficient (exports/output) and the import penetration ratio (imports/apparent consumption) in each sector had remained at the same level as in the previous input-output table.
The next step was to calculate the variation in exports and imports in each sector, that is, the difference between the value recorded for the most recent year and the estimate for that year based on the coefficients for year one.
The last step was to apply the employment ratios for each sector to the resulting variations in exports and imports, in order to arrive at a measure of jobs created and jobs potentially lost by changing the degree of openness in each sector for the years examined.
In Brazil, while the net impact for all sectors is positive, some would have seen a loss of export-related jobs (automobiles and auto parts) and others would have posted a small loss as a result of a higher import penetration ratio (rubber and plastics, and non-metal minerals).
In Chile the net outcomes are more heterogeneous, with job loss in a number of sectors (especially textiles, clothing and footwear, other activities, and food, beverages and tobacco).
In Colombia, agriculture, forestry, hunting and fishing, and other activities would have seen the largest net job loss (because of the lower export propensity); the machinery and equipment and chemical and pharmaceutical sectors would have substantial net gains (owing mainly to a lower import penetration ratio).
Uruguay also has sectors with a net job loss (oil and mining, textiles, clothing and footwear, and non-metal minerals) primarily due to a higher import penetration ratio.
Export employment by destination In the countries examined, employment generated by exports differs markedly depending on the destination market.
Because the labour content of export products varies between sectors, the impact of trade in terms of job generation depends on sectoral composition.
In 2007, exports to Latin America and the Caribbean made up 32.5% of total exports; the jobs related to those exports accounted for 34.2% of total employment.
By contrast, exports to the United States accounted for a small proportion of total exports and employment (7.9% and 5.9%, respectively).
These differences are reflected in the distribution of export-related employment by region.
Exports to the European Union and, to a lesser extent, China and the rest of Asia account for a higher share of export-related employment than of export value.
The opposite is true for exports to other countries in the Latin American and Caribbean region and to the United States. • In Chile (2003), there is a marked difference between China and the United States as destination markets.
China accounted for more than 10% of Chile’s exports (primarily from the mining sector) but a smaller share of export employment.
By contrast, the United States market ranked third among export destinations (with 16% of the total, chiefly agricultural commodities and manufactures based on them) but accounted for nearly 30% of export employment. • In Colombia there are also substantial differences according to destination.
In terms of job generation, the leaders are the three main destinations for Colombian exports, that is, the United States, the Latin American and Caribbean region (although its contribution to export employment is lower than its contribution to export value) and the European Union (greater contribution to employment than to export value).
In 2005, most of Colombia’s exports to Latin American and Caribbean countries were manufactured goods (especially, chemicals and pharmaceuticals).
The other destination regions account for a very small share export value and export employment, even though the sectoral composition of exports differs. • In 2005, Uruguay’s exports and export employment were fairly evenly distributed among destination regions.
Nevertheless, the Latin American and Caribbean region (the prime destination for exports, at 35% of the total) accounted for a somewhat smaller share of export employment while the European Union (the third-ranking destination, with 17% of the total) contributed slightly more to job generation than to total export value.
A breakdown of export-related employment between intraregional exports and exports to the rest of the world shows that the former are more employment-intensive in the manufacturing sector.
Between 73% and 98% of total employment related to intraregional exports is in manufacturing (see table IV.10).
A breakdown according to number of businesses yields similar results: most of the businesses that export manufactured goods do so to Latin America and the Caribbean (see section E).
Employment and backward linkages in the main export sectors A look at the linkages and each link’s contribution to employment in the countries can yield useful findings as to the volume of indirect export employment related to the region’s main export sectors.
It is the one with a ratio of indirect employment to direct employment that is higher than average for the export sector.
In Brazil, the three export sectors with the highest level of linkages are steel products and derivatives, machinery and equipment, and iron ore extraction.
A similar situation occurs in the sector accounting for the largest share of exports (food and beverages), in which indirect employment accounts for a high proportion of the total.
In Chile, mining and extraction is not among the sectors with substantial linkages because the linkage index is equal to the average of all the sectors and there are fewer links.
If both indicators for a sector are higher than the average for the economy, it is rated as having a high linkage level.
The linkage level is low if both indicators are below the average.
If the value for one indicator is higher than the average and the other is lower, the level of linkage is rated as average.
The number of sectors in the input-output table (55 in Brazil, 26 in Chile, 38 in Colombia, 36 in Mexico and 54 in Uruguay) affects the linkage indicators. coffee products sector has a high level.
In Mexico, the main export sectors have medium levels of linkage and in some cases, such as the electronics equipment sector, the linkages index is lower than average for the economy.
In Uruguay, the five top export sectors have medium levels of linkage.
The meat and meat products sector and the tanning and dressing of leather and leather products sector have relatively high linkage indices but a smaller than average number of links.
The sectors with the five top export products account for a large share of total export employment: 52% in Brazil, 73.5% in Chile, 37% in Colombia, 49% in Mexico and 42% in Uruguay.
This is because the principal export sectors in the countries examined account for much more indirect employment than direct employment.
For the five countries reviewed, diagram IV.1 shows the principal export sector, the number of direct and indirect jobs associated with it (in thousands of persons), the sectors that supply that sector (in percentages) and their contribution to indirect employment (in percentages).
In Brazil, the number of indirect jobs (2.87 million persons) in the principal export sector (food and beverages) is five times the number of direct jobs (512,000).
There are six supplier sectors (agriculture, fishing, commerce, transport, power and rubber products), with indirect job generation split among them in descending order.
Something similar happens in Mexico in the electronic equipment sector, although this sector has a lower ratio of direct jobs to indirect jobs.
The ratio is also lower in the mining sector in Chile and the oil sector in Colombia.
In Colombia and Uruguay, the top supplier sector accounts for a large proportion of employment and demand.
Linkages are shorter in the mining sector in Chile, the oil sector in Colombia and the meat industry in Uruguay.
In these latter two, the principal supplier sector accounts for the largest share.
The share of demand is expressed as a percentage for each supplier sector.
The graph does not show data for Argentina because the coefficients are from 1997.
Tracking export employment by sex shows that the percentage of women in export-related jobs ranges from 21% to 35%, approximately, depending on the country.
There are no substantial differences in the breakdown of direct and indirect export employment by sex.
In Brazil and Chile, the percentage of women in the export sector is lower than in economic activity overall.
Only 11.9% of employed women in Brazil were directly or indirectly related with exports; in Chile the percentage was 12.7%.
In Mexico, the share of men and women in export employment as a percentage of total employment was similar (see table IV.11).
Export-related jobs for women tend to be low- or medium-skilled, and the share of women with a high level of education is smaller than it is for economic activity overall.
In some sectors, a significant percentage of women employed in the export sector have jobs that can be regarded as precarious, lacking in social security coverage and poorly paid or even unpaid, especially in agriculture in a number of countries.
Overview The number of export-oriented businesses in an economy depends on many factors, some domestic and some external.
Among the domestic factors are the size of the economy, its degree of development and production specialization, and its trade policy stance.
One of the principal external factors is the dynamism of international trade.
The number of export firms operating with nontraditional destinations usually grows more when there are trade agreements in place with those destinations. 13 In 14 countries in Latin America and the Caribbean representing nearly 95% of the region’s total exports, there were some 114,000 export firms in 2011.
The total number of export firms in the region increased by 15% between 2002 and 2011 (see table IV.12). 14 In several countries the number of export-oriented businesses grew at a faster pace than businesses overall, especially in countries that have followed consistent policies for developing the export sector.
However, the crisis that broke out in 2009 slowed the growth of the number of these firms, and it has proven difficult to regain that momentum.
In several of the region’s larger economies, including Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Colombia, there were fewer export-oriented businesses in 2011 than in 2008, before the crisis.
A linear estimate was made where data were lacking (Paraguay 2007; Argentina and Plurinational State of Bolivia, 2011).
In Chile, the number of firms exporting to Mexico, China, the Republic of Korea and Canada rose sharply between the date that free trade agreements with those countries took effect and 2011 (77%, 74%, 71% and 69%, respectively).
Growth has been slower for more traditional destinations involving a larger number of firms.
In most countries, the share of exporters as a percentage of total firms has remained below 2% over the past decade and was less than 1% in many of them (see table IV.17).
The relative exception is Costa Rica, where the proportion of export firms is in the area of 4% of the total number of businesses.
The breakdown of export firms mirrors, albeit in a more concentrated manner, the structural heterogeneity of the economies of the region.
In many of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, the export sector shows a high concentration of exports in a handful of companies, usually large ones.
The universe of export firms varies widely because it is subject to high turnover in most of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean.
Many new firms enter the universe of exporters every year (entering exporters); just as many leave it (exiting exporters).
Turnover is higher among smaller firms, and it picked up during the 2009 crisis, when the number of entering firms fell and the number of exiting firms increased.
In many countries in the region, the turnover coefficient, at more than 35%, is very high compared with the developed countries.
Except for Brazil, turnover is even higher than in Spain, which is one of the industrialized countries that has seen considerable churn in the universe of exporters.
Argentina is different in that the universe of exporters has remained virtually stable: the turnover coefficient is far lower (around 10%) and has been falling in recent years.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, export firms that have been exporting continuously for several years (five to seven) usually account for some 30% of all exporters.
In a number of countries of the region, these are natural resource-related firms that are more capital-intensive than the average for the economy.
The percentage of successful export firms is higher if firms that have become and continued to be exporters over the past few years are included.17 Despite the decline in exports in 2009, average exports per firm doubled in the past decade.
Average export values per firm in the second column of table IV.13 decreases by nearly half if firms with the highest export values or those that export the principal commodities (in many countries these categories overlap) are excluded.
Such is the case in Argentina (when leaving out the top 25 exporters), Brazil (when excluding the 50 major exporters), the Plurinational State of Bolivia (excluding the four largest mining companies), Chile (leaving out eight mining companies and two pulp companies), Colombia (leaving out the top 10 exporters) and Peru (excluding the five major mining exporters).
If this group is expanded to include new exporters that have continued for at least three years, these percentages increase significantly (to 39% in Mexico, for example).
In Uruguay in 2010, average export value was US$5.7 million, falling to just US$ 75,000 for exiting exporters.
Average export value in Chile was nearly US$ 11 million in 2011, whereas the average for exiting firms was around one tenth of that figure.
Proportionally, the number of exporters is larger among major companies than among SMEs.
Taking the 500 largest firms in the region (in the eight countries for which data is available), virtually all of them are leading exporters (see table IV.14).
In 2010, the top 20 exporters accounted for 35% of total exports from the region’s eight largest economies; the top 100 accounted for 47%.
It is the third largest oil producer in the world and accounts for more than 95% of the country’s exports and more than 10% of the eight economies’ total exports.
Exports make up a large share of total sales by large firms: 72% for the 100 leading exporting companies and 51% for the top 20 (see table IV.14).
More than 80% of the major export companies in Latin America and the Caribbean are linked to natural resource exploitation and processing.
An examination of investment commitments by major companies shows that natural resources will figure more heavily in the region’s exports over the coming years.
Soybean farming moving the agricultural frontier in Brazil and Argentina, deep oil discoveries (mainly off the Atlantic coast of Brazil), the discovery of gas fields (in Argentina and Mexico) and projected mining investment and output in the Andean countries would seem to be pointing in this direction.
In 2010, mining accounted for 28% of the value exported by the region’s 500 largest companies; oil accounted for 10% and food for 7%.
Other noteworthy sectors (most of which are natural-resource based) were agribusiness, auto parts, paper and pulp, and the steel industry (6% each), and petrochemicals (2%).
Latin America’s automobile and auto parts industry concentrates 12% of the exports of the region’s large companies.
This industry, which was born in the import substitution era, is now a complex intraregional exporter with considerable scope for growth, although it is facing increasingly stiff competition.
In Uruguay, importers outnumbered exporters The difference is even larger in Paraguay: 15,158 importers and 1,041 exporters in 2011.
Importing is usually easier than exporting, depending on factors such as product, specific origin or destination and tariff regulations.
Many individuals have become importers, too, taking advantage of advances in communications to import a host of products, usually in small amounts.
Throughout the countries of the region, trade opening has favoured direct importation by individuals, either with an intermediate destination or for consumption, so it is more appropriate to refer to agents carrying out import operations than to import firms as such.
In Brazil in 2011, 55% of the exporters also imported; for major exporters (more than U$ 100 million in exports a year) the share rises to 65%.
Other examples are Colombia (where in 2010 about 45% of exporters also carried out import operations) and Uruguay (where the percentage was 34% in 2010).
In Chile in 2009 nearly all of the major exporters carried out import operations as well, and almost half of the exporters were also importers.
These figures are in line with those seen in a highly industrialized export-oriented country like Germany, where firms that export and import make up the majority.
It would therefore seem that import strategies can have a significant impact on survival potential, productivity and intensive and extensive margins for export firms.
This obviously depends on the prevailing production structure, the international situation and trade policies.
Importance of the Latin American and Caribbean market for the region’s export firms Not only is the region the principal destination for most of its export firms: the number of export products is larger, and exports are less concentrated.
More than half of the export firms do so within the region (between 55% and 69% of them, depending on whether Mexico is included), even though it is the destination for just one sixth of their total exports.
For most of the countries, the region accounts for the lowest average per-company export value, the largest average number of products exported per firm and the lowest concentration indices.
By contrast, fewer firms export to China, but the average export value per company, as well as export concentration, is higher.
The region accounts for the largest number of exported products (87% of the total, using the six-digit Harmonized Commodity Description and Coding Systems) and the highest average number of products exported per firm (4.8).
As a result, exports from companies to the region have the lowest concentration indicator: 0.02 according to the Herfindahl-Hirschmann index (see table IV.15).
For a set of nine countries, 26% of the export firms are low-technology, 25% are medium-tech, 19% export commodities, 8% are high-tech and 7% have not reported such information (see figure IV.7.A).
The number of firms that export commodities or high-tech products is small in proportion to the share of such products in total export value.
Conversely, the percentage of low-tech firms to total exporters is larger than the percentage of low-tech exports to total exports.
In the nine countries examined, 39% of the firms that export high-tech products export to the region, which is the principal market for these products (see figure IV.7.B).
Some 39,000 firms in Latin America and the Caribbean (mostly SMEs) export a single product to a single destination.
On the other hand, only about 3,600 firms export more than 10 products to more than 10 destinations; most of these are large companies.
The pattern is very similar for all of the countries of the region, so the aggregate representation is mirrored, with slight differences, in each of the countries (see figure IV.8.A).
Among the region’s export firms, there is a higher concentration of exports to Asia and a higher proportion of business involved in exports to neighbouring countries, the United States and the European Union.
From this viewpoint, trade with Latin America and the Caribbean tends to be more inclusive because it is less concentrated in terms of both products and firms.
In almost all of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, most export firms export to elsewhere in the region or to the United States.
In Chile, Colombia and Peru, the United States was the individual export destination for the highest number of firms –slightly above neighbouring countries and well above destinations in Asia such as China, the Republic of Korea and Japan.18 The main reason is that most SMEs target the regional market.
Data for Argentina (2008), Chile (2009) and Colombia (2009) show clearly how important the region is as a destination for most export SMEs (see figure IV.8.B).
Only 714 firms exported to China, with 285 products (based on customs data).
According to a Production Research Centre study, more than 63% of Argentina’s export SMEs exported to the region in 2010 (50% in 2005, according to Crespo, 2006).
Specificity of export-oriented SMEs Export SMEs share many of the features and problems seen in the universe of SMEs in Latin America.
SMEs make up 58% to 88% of the total number of export firms, depending on the country.
They account for some 17% of direct export employment but less than 7% of exports (see table IV.16).20 The region’s SMEs are less productive than in the developed countries; they have a higher level of informality, and it is usually harder for them to access credit.
Many of them remain in the informal sector because of the expense and paperwork involved in formalization.
They are less specialized and encounter more difficulties in entering domestic linkages and global value chains.21 The lack of comparable studies and data22 makes it difficult to assess the performance of the region’s export SMEs, but at least five conclusions may be reached. (i) SME internationalization is relatively low in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Moreover, they are less able than larger firms to meet destination market requirements (such as quality, sanitary, phytosanitary, and environmental sustainability standards).
These hurdles, on top of the export structure of the countries of the region (markedly skewed towards capital-intensive and natural resource-intensive sectors), keep the direct share of SMEs in total export value quite low. (ii) The region’s export SMEs, because they are more employment-intensive, generate more jobs per dollar exported than large companies do.
In Costa Rica in 2010, there were 204 jobs for every US$ 1 million exported by SMEs; the figure for large companies was just eight direct jobs.
Exports by SMEs in the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean usually span a markedly heterogeneous universe of products.
There is a higher percentage of SMEs in the food, beverage and tobacco sector, in the chemicals industry and in the metalworking sector, as well as in services related to the exportation of goods.
Most of the indirect jobs generated by exports are concentrated in these sectors.24 (v) SME participation in the export sector is enhanced by their indirect contribution.
International trade involves a far higher number of firms than is usually reported in trade statistics.
For example, SMEs participate indirectly in foreign trade as suppliers of goods and services to large export companies or by selling their output to traders for subsequent commercialization in the international markets.
There is a series of indicators of this, including the number of SMEs that supply direct exporters.25 In countries like the United States, SMEs account for half of GDP and employment and less than 30% of export value.
In Brazil, export-oriented microenterprises are those that export up to US$ 120,000, and export-oriented small enterprises export up to US$ 1.2 million.
In Chile, the Export Promotion Bureau (PROCHILE) defines export SMEs as exporters whose total annual sales revenue ranges from US$ 60,000 to US$ 7,500,000.
ECLAC estimates based on studies by PROCOMER (2011) and DIRECON (2010b), without considering the firms’ export coefficient or export propensity. 24 In Chile, nearly 90% of SME exports are non-traditional products, chiefly medium technology-intensive manufactured goods such as food, metalworking products and garments.
Services have also become a major export item for SMEs in countries like Costa Rica, where small and medium-sized enterprises are the principal exporters in this sector. 25 In Peru, it has been estimated that for each export agent an average of 7.4 other firms participate in the export chain.
This figure climbs to 11.2 firms in the agricultural, textile and garment-making sectors.
Conclusions The region’s export firms have increased in number and average export value, but their growth has been slowing and they still account for a small percentage of all businesses (see table IV.17).
The percentage of exporters is higher among large companies than among small firms, and a very high portion of total export value is concentrated in large companies.
As a result, the structure of export firms is more concentrated than for all companies taken as a whole.
Large companies account for a very large share of export value, but they do not necessarily generate the most jobs.
Therefore, decreasing export and agent concentration should be key for diversifying exports and decreasing structural heterogeneity.
The increase in export concentration in terms of firms that is taking place in some countries is related to the rising price of commodities discussed in chapter II.
Falling prices for some of the region’s key commodities in 2012 and, potentially, in 2013, would therefore have a positive effect by reversing the trend towards higher concentration of export firms in recent years.28 The type of international integration affects the equation between destinations, firms and employment.
Exports to neighbouring countries and, to a lesser extend, to the United States tend to involve a larger number of agents, both in job generation and in number of firms (including SMEs).
Exports to these destinations generate more jobs (direct and indirect) than exports to Asia do.
For the six Preliminary data for the first half of 2012 show that the concentration of exports in the top one percentile of firms dropped to 70% in Chile.
The trend seems to be similar in other countries with substantial mining exports. countries examined using input-output tables, between 82 and 93 jobs were generated for every US$ 1 million in exports to Latin America and the Caribbean or the United States.
By contrast, US$ 1 million in exports to China generated only between 30 and 64 jobs (depending on whether they were mining products or agricultural ones).29 In Mexico (2003), the relationship is similar, although the figures differ: every US$ 1 million in exports to the United States generated 27 jobs, whereas for China the figure was 16 jobs.
A few strategic guidelines The regional market needs to be strengthened The background information set out in this chapter highlights the need for Latin America and the Caribbean to step up efforts to strengthen the regional market.
As shown above, the regional market is important for high value-added and knowledge- and employment-intensive exports.
It also tends to be crucial for export-oriented manufacturing firms and SMEs.
For this reason, intraregional trade contributes to inclusive development that is based on the creation of dynamic competitive advantages (as opposed to the region’s traditional static comparative advantages associated with its abundant natural resources and relatively low labour costs).
The regional market is also made more attractive by the burgeoning middle class in Latin America and the Caribbean over the past two decades (Franco, Hopenhayn and León, 2011).
In an international environment marked by slack growth prospects in the industrialized countries over the next few years, the regional market should be able to absorb part of the drops in demand for the region’s exports in those markets.
This has not been the case in the past two decades, however.
During that time, intraregional trade has behaved procyclically, amplifying regional GDP fluctuations and showing greater volatility than exports outside the region (see figure IV.9).
The global economy is increasingly structured around macro-regions, as only a few national markets are large enough to be attractive on their own, separate from their regional context.
In all these areas, coordinated action among governments would be more fruitful than isolated national efforts.30 Deep integration can provide regional public goods that neither national markets nor national governments alone can provide successfully.
Headway therefore needs to be made in creating an environment that is conducive to greater production integration among the economies of the region.
This calls for progress in addressing the regulatory dimension of integration and closing the physical infrastructure gaps that limit regional connectivity (and with it the possibility of balanced territorial development).
Chile’s exports to China account for more than 20% of total export value but involve just 6% of the export firms and 1.4% of export-oriented SMEs, while the proportion of jobs associated with this destination is very low (5.5%).
All of these rely on competitiveness levels being similar in neighbouring economies.
Creating an integrated economic space on a regional scale is an ambitious project and as such must be tackled gradually.
An important first step would be to expedite the cumulation of origin among the region’s economies.
On a more demanding level (both technically and politically) would come discussions seeking convergence among existing integration schemes.
It is also important to make joint progress in other areas, such as infrastructure development, reduction of asymmetries and innovation.
Progress in these areas would not only help increase the entire region’s international competitiveness but would also further more balanced territorial development with increased social cohesion.
Here, regional and subregional institutional arrangements, such as the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA), the Cumulation of origin is also an option for countries in the region that have signed trade agreements with the same extraregional partner.
Jara (2011) examined the potential for cumulation of origin among a number of countries and groupings in the region that have agreements in place with the European Union (Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, the countries of Central America and the Caribbean Forum of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (CARIFORUM)), concluding that cumulation would bring substantial benefits.
Mesoamerica Project (both in the area of infrastructure) and the MERCOSUR Structural Convergence Fund (in reducing development asymmetries), have shown their value and should be deepened and extended to other areas in which regional public goods can be created.
The region’s infrastructure deficit is a substantial barrier to greater production integration.
Examples include reforms aimed at introducing single windows for foreign trade and programmes for authorized economic operators.
The implementation of reforms such as those described falls mainly within the purview of national governments, as does closer coordination among agencies (such as customs and health and migration services).
However, regional or subregional coordination of national efforts can create significant synergies.
One example of this is integrated border control and standardized procedures and formalities, which can help to reduce overlap and cost and smooth the movement of goods across borders.
If the countries of the region make progress in innovation, competitiveness, business internationalization and greater participation in global and regional value chains, job quality and wages will improve.
Combining these efforts with forceful policies geared towards bringing SMEs into the mix will make it possible to tackle the challenges of growth, equality and international insertion as well.
On the one hand, a strategic vision is needed to pair policies geared towards export promotion and diversification, innovation and technology dissemination, attraction of FDI and skills development.
This would enable the region to emulate —with the necessary adaptations to different national situations— the experiences of several countries in Europe, Asia and Oceania that have positioned themselves successfully in the world economy (Devlin and Moguillansky, 2010).
This can be done directly by encouraging new SMEs to export or ensuring that more SMEs who are occasional exporters continue to export (essentially, by diversifying their exports to include more than one product and more than one market).
This same objective can be pursued indirectly through clusters and domestic production linkages in which SMEs supply larger, direct exporters.
Doing so will call for more ambitious training, quality certification, partnership and other programmes.
To this end, closer coordination between production development and trade policies is essential.
The current phase of the global economy underlines the continuing relevance of the concept of open regionalism proposed by ECLAC almost 20 years ago.
The aim of open regionalism is for explicit integration policies to be compatible with and complement policies aimed at increasing international competitiveness.
In other words, the objective is to develop regional strengths in order to better tackle global challenges.
As integration deepens in a framework of open regionalism, it acts as a factor of competitiveness by complementing integration in the main international markets with a boost to intraregional trade.
This then encourages intra-industry trade, export diversification and a greater presence of SMEs in export flows.
The larger scale provided by an integrated regional market would not only spur trade within the region but would also attract more foreign direct investment and help to form and strengthen trans-Latin enterprises.
The regional framework would, as well, provide an enabling setting for incipient regional production chains and for sharing and leveraging innovation.
Equality too would benefit from increased internationalization of SMEs and job creation in more value- and knowledge-intensive activities than those usually typical of Latin American and Caribbean exports to extraregional markets.
Ties to Asia and other developing regions must be enhanced The profound transformations taking place in the world economy challenge the region to rethink its international position and its global alliances.
The developing economies’ share of global economic aggregates is growing, and this trend is being reinforced by a combination of slow growth and high uncertainty in the United States and Europe that is likely to last for several years.
Faced with these changes, Latin America and the Caribbean should continue to forge closer ties with other developing regions, particularly Asia-Pacific as the main hub of global economic growth.
The region therefore should seek integration in the world economy in a way that optimizes the benefits of its growing links with Asia and other developing regions while reducing the cost.
The time has come for a quality leap in the relationship with China.
Trans-Latin companies are farther along the international learning curve than many Chinese firms are, especially in banking, financial and business services, energy, mining and the agro-food sector.
These spheres therefore hold considerable potential for building Sino-Latin American business partnerships.
China’s substantial surplus savings could help fund infrastructure, energy, transport and logistics initiatives in Latin America and the Caribbean, especially in view of the low interest rates and slow growth projected for the industrialized economies over the next five years.
The challenge for the region lies in identifying a portfolio of projects where Chinese investment would be most useful in speeding execution.
Infrastructure projects falling under the umbrella of the Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA) and the Mesoamerica Project are natural candidates.
For the region as a whole to become a relevant economic and trade partner for China, it must urgently combine national efforts and agree on a regional agenda of priorities.
This can be seen in the set of proposals put forth by China’s Premier, Wen Jiabao, during his June 2012 visit to the region (see box IV.3).
Chapter I undertakes a short- and medium-term analysis of the post-crisis international economic situation, concentrating on its implications for international trade prospects in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It examines the recovery of the global economy, which has centred mainly on the Asian economies (especially China) and other emerging economies, together with the role played by international trade in this recovery both globally and regionally and the heterogeneity of trade performance between different regions of the world.
Chapter II reviews developments in regional trade during and after the crisis from both a long-term and a more immediate perspective, as well as the trade policy applied by the region’s countries during this period.
Consequently, while the recovery in regional trade has been substantial, particularly in South America, it has heightened an already somewhat excessive reliance on commodities that incorporate little know-how or technological progress.
Also looked at are the most prominent recent initiatives to enhance trade ties between countries in the region belonging to different integration schemes.
The chapter then briefly analyses the state of regional cooperation efforts relating to physical infrastructure, given the importance of this for integration, not least in the area of trade.
Lastly, it examines the main milestones since the second half of 2009 as regards trade negotiations conducted by Latin American countries and integration schemes with partners outside the region.
Chapter IV analyses recent trends and future prospects in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), an incomplete customs union of 15 States in the Caribbean that includes most English-speaking countries in the region plus Suriname and Haiti.
Chapter V examines the strategies recently adopted by Japan to enhance its economic relationship with Latin America and the Caribbean from the perspective of a public-private partnership that aims to take advantage of opportunities in the region not only in the area of natural and energy resources but also in respect of food security and infrastructure.
The conclusion is that this is a good time for Japan and Latin America and the Caribbean to revisit and strengthen their economic relationship, including a reformulation of ODA.
A crisis created in the centre and a recovery driven by the emerging economies As of mid-2010, the recovery in the global economy and trade is proving more robust than expected, but more uneven than could be desired.
The world economy grew at an annualized rate of over 5% during the first quarter of 2010, essentially because of strong growth in Asia.
Not only did China grow by 12% (see figure 1), but Hong Kong (Special Administrative Region of China), Malaysia and Singapore grew at even higher rates.
GDP projections for the year were revised upward in mid-2010, as the recovery was seen to be taking place faster than had been anticipated (see figure 1).
International trade in the quarter, meanwhile, was 25% up on the same quarter in 2009.
This sharp recovery in international trade, also led by the Asia-Pacific region, Japan and India, has helped to gradually restore confidence among consumers, businesses and the financial markets, reactivating consumption and investment.
Notably, the buoyancy of the emerging economies has not been confined to the four countries (Brazil, the Russian Federation, China and India) known as the BRICs.
International trade has played a vital role in the recovery of the global economy.
Trade and open markets prevented the crisis from deepening further and have successfully transmitted signals of rising demand.
A number of the factors that led to the decline in global trade in 2008 and early 2009 are now contributing to its recovery, with final demand in emerging countries acting as the main engine of growth (see figure 2).
Other factors include the reactivation of demand for capital goods and intermediate inputs, partly thanks to the normalization of financial markets and credit and to fiscal stimulus plans.
These have also supported an adjustment in inventories and a new cycle of electronic products.
Growth in world trade by value has also been helped by recovering prices for a number of commodities, particularly oil.
More generally, the regulations of the international trading system have helped ensure a better outcome by providing scope for crisis measures to be taken without threatening trade relations.
This has helped to sustain confidence in the trading system and has allowed the Asian recovery to rapidly spread worldwide.
E.09.II.G.149. a Aggregate GDP for countries outside the region was calculated on an exchangerate basis.
Output and trade in Latin America and the Caribbean have also recovered more quickly than expected.
This solid revival is largely based on the dynamism of domestic demand, a pick-up in investment and robust exports driven by demand from China and the rest of Asia, and by the normalization of demand in the United States.
This positive overall picture, however, masks a high level of heterogeneity in the region’s countries (see table 1).
The recovery has been slower in countries that are importers of commodities and depend on tourism and remittances, owing to the still weak performance of the industrialized countries that are the main source of these latter flows.
Large disparities in growth rates (high in emerging economies and low in industrialized ones) undermine the chances of a more sustainable recovery.
The faster recovery has partly been due to the great dynamism of Asia and the emerging economies and to the remarkable countercyclical reaction in the fiscal, monetary and financial policies of most industrialized and developing economies.
The recovery in the first group of countries has been weak on the whole, with the United States doing relatively well, especially in comparison with the European Union.
In the latter, the recovery has been complicated by large fiscal deficits in certain countries and the additional fiscal impact of financial rescues, a situation that severely affected Greece before spreading to other Mediterranean countries and those in the east of the Union.
Public-sector budgets in the largest European Union economies have also been cut sharply, setting the stage for even weaker European growth in 2011.
Other trends also point to reduced dynamism in the world economy and trade in the second half of 2010 and during 2011.
First, much of the restocking of inventories carried out to meet demand in the recovery phase is complete.
Third, the massive expenditure involved in fiscal measures means that public debt has been rising to very high levels.
In the Group of Seven (G-7) countries, for example, debt is expected to reach 113% of GDP in 2010.
A number of countries are accordingly taking fiscal austerity measures, reducing public expenditure drastically.
Yet the withdrawal of fiscal stimulus could imperil economic performance over the coming months.
Ahead lies the difficult task of sustaining growth while maintaining fiscal stability in the industrialized economies.
This challenge involves not only matching the gradual withdrawal of stimulus with a recovery in private spending, but also ensuring that two necessary transitions take place in the sources of global demand.
The first transition is from public-sector stimulus towards private-sector spending, and the second is from economies running external deficits to those running a surplus.
This is where action is needed on fiscal sustainability, financial sector restructuring and stagnating productivity growth.
Progress towards these goals requires international coordination on exit strategies, financial reform and rebalancing of the global economy.
The direct impact of the European fiscal crisis on Latin America and the Caribbean appears to be limited, but the medium-term consequences could be greater.
Only a small proportion of the region’s exports go to the European countries worst affected.
If risk premiums spike because of a sovereign debt default, however, emerging regions, including Latin America and the Caribbean, could find it much harder to access financing.
It is also possible that European firms, and Spanish ones in particular, might invest less in the region.
If the fiscal crisis were to spread to the other large European countries, and if austerity measures were long-lasting, European demand would weaken yet further, and this would certainly affect Latin American exports to the continent.
This is a low-probability scenario, however, given that recent data for the European economies show an increase, albeit marginal, in projected growth and financial market confidence.
Regarding emerging economies, there are doubts about the sustainability of their recovery in a context of limited economic activity in the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).
If the industrialized economies do not fall back into recession and are able to keep growing, even at current low rates, emerging economies will be able to sustain growth of some 6% a year in the next two to four years, giving a growth floor of 3% for the world economy.
This is being made possible by the growing bonds between emerging economies themselves, notably the close trade relations among Asian economies, as well as China’s stronger ties with Africa and Latin America and the Caribbean.
There are particular concerns about the future pace of growth in China.
This is the variable of most interest for the external trade of South America, just as the growth of the United States economy is of greatest concern to Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean.
China could continue growing at rates of some 9%, relying on domestic consumption and investment demand.
Indeed, it grew by 9.1% in 2009, with privatesector consumption growth exceeding output growth for the first time in many years, while net exports deducted 4 points from GDP growth.
A gradual appreciation of the renminbi would help with this by reducing the external surplus and creating demand for products from the rest of the world.
Conversely, an abrupt revaluation would be risky because it could heighten the dangers of overheating in the Chinese economy by accelerating capital inflows and overstimulating asset markets.
A number of emerging economies have already begun to gradually dismantle their stimulus packages and raise interest rates, widening the rate differential with the industrialized economies.
Capital flows into emerging economies have recovered strongly following the drastic slump of 2008 and 2009.
The recovery has been more marked for bonds and shares and less so for syndicated loans, which are still below pre-crisis levels.
This growth disparity between industrialized and emerging economies is worrying because it is encouraging destabilizing flows of capital into the latter, potentially leading to overheating in these economies and fuelling speculative bubbles and currency appreciation that are bringing down import prices and impeding export diversification.
This is why the International Monetary Fund (IMF) is taking an innovative approach in this area, having expressed a willingness to consider the possibility of controls on capital inflows.
A possible (although improbable) government debt crisis in certain countries could complicate the global economy and finances and the outlook for Latin America and the Caribbean.
A European financial crisis would raise the cost of investment and trade financing.
Lower growth in these industrialized countries would in turn affect emerging countries’ exports.
Weak final demand in the industrialized countries and possible economic and financial contagion from the euro area could adversely affect commodity prices and demand, damaging commodity exporters in Latin America and other emerging regions.
The economic and financial crisis has raised the profile of emerging economies, not only in global production and trade but also in international finance and governance.
Long-term projections indicate that what are currently developing countries will probably account for 60% of global GDP by 2030.
The combined GDP of the BRIC countries accounted for 15% and 22% of global output in 2008 at current prices and in purchasing power parity terms, respectively.
In 2010, international reserves held by developing countries were 1.5 times as great as those held by industrialized ones.
The 2008-2009 financial crisis laid bare a tremendous asymmetry: the developing countries are the main sources of savings, while it is the industrialized countries that are spending them.
For all their growing importance in the global economy, the emerging economies are not yet in a position to take up all the slack from the United States, Europe and Japan.
Notwithstanding the short-term uncertainties, it is safe to say that in the medium and long terms the focus of economic, trade and financial growth will shift towards developing Asia and emerging countries generally, which drives home the importance of South-South trade and initiatives to strengthen it.
South-South trade is increasingly substantial and is now becoming one of the main engines of global goods trade, while South-South FDI is rising steadily.
The share of South-South trade in the global total rose from 9% to 18% over the same period; over 40% of world trade involves developing countries, and 43% of that amount is South-South trade.
Although South-South FDI flows are still small, intraregional FDI in developing Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean has been dynamic and is showing signs of entering an important stage of international expansion.
In the latter case, almost 10% of inward FDI flows are from the region itself, originating with so-called “trans-Latins”.
South-South trade is already a major trade segment in Latin America and the Caribbean, accounting for almost 29% of total exports.
The most important developing-market export destination is the region itself, accounting for 18% of total exports, followed by developing Asia with 6%.
Africa, the Middle East and central Europe are still minor destinations in the region’s export total.
Trade between emerging Asia and the Middle East has continued to grow and is based mainly on oil, while intraAsian South-South trade is known as the best example of global production complementarities.
Overview of regional trade during the past decade Trade with leading extraregional and intraregional trading partners expanded strongly in the post-crisis period, recovering from the sharp contraction of 2009.
Comparing export and import growth by value in the first half of 2010 from the levels seen in the same period of 2009 reveals that the three leading destinations experienced double-digit increases, with exports to Asia and the United States expanding more strongly than those to the European Union (see figure 4).
In the post-crisis period, the exports of the Andean countries, MERCOSUR and Chile performed the best, while those of Mexico and the Central American countries lagged behind.
This is a result of the relatively strong prices for commodity exports, which account for a larger share of total exports in South America than in Mexico and Central America.
Breaking down sectoral growth in exports from Latin America to both the European Union and the United States shows that agricultural export values have been less volatile than those of mining products and oil, reflecting greater volatility in the prices of the latter.
Again, the region’s export basket is more manufacturing-intensive in the case of the United States than of the European Union.
Lower demand for agricultural and mining products in the United States and the European Union during the crisis was partly offset by the strength of China’s imports.
A sample of volume growth rates for the most important products to the region’s countries during the crisis and post-crisis periods illustrates the remarkable role played by the Chinese market in cushioning the effects of the crisis, as demand for products such as fresh fruit, vegetables, crude oil and iron ore held up strongly despite the adverse conditions.
When trade growth is broken down by value, the data show that prices increased for both the region’s exports and its imports.
Export prices have increased by more in 2010, which will improve the terms of trade, reversing some of the deterioration experienced by commodity exporters during the crisis in 2009 because of highly volatile fuel prices.
The renewed surge in the region’s export volumes during 2010 is also striking.
Despite the strength of the recovery so far in 2010, the value of the region’s trade has yet to return to its pre-crisis peak (see figure 5).
A preliminary overview of export performance in the past decade shows that the region’s exports have grown by less than the global average and have underperformed relative to other developing regions such as Asia, Africa and the Middle East in both value and volume.
The region’s export growth rate has also been lower in the past decade than it was in the 1990s.
The export effort of Latin America and the Caribbean is thus proving inadequate and the region is continuing to lose global trade share (see figure 6).
While the export growth rate of South America has doubled, that of Mexico and Central America has fallen by more than half.
Exports from all South American countries other than the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have grown by more than the regional average over the past decade.
Conversely, export growth rates have underperformed the regional average in all Central American countries except Nicaragua.
The slackening of export growth in both Mexico and Central America over the past decade has been reflected in the performance of imports, since these countries’ exports include a large component of inputs imported for the maquila industry.
Natural resources have been the region’s most dynamic exports over the past decade, especially in South America.
This pattern of growth has created the conditions for a recommodification of the regional export structure.
After falling from some 52% of total exports in the early 1980s to a low of 26.7% in the late 1990s, the share of raw materials has risen over the past decade to reach almost 40% of the total in the last two-year period (2008-2009) (see figure 7).
This increase in the share of raw materials has taken place at the expense of medium-, high- and low-technology manufacturing exports, all of which have grown by much less than in the 1990s.
This is consistent with the reduced dynamism of engineeringand labour-intensive manufacturing exports.
Differences in the growth rates of raw material and manufacturing exports have led to a readjustment of the relative shares of exports from Mexico on the one hand and South America on the other.
Other countries in South America also increased their share of the region’s goods exports, particularly Argentina, Colombia, Peru and Chile.
The low growth rates of CARICOM and the Dominican Republic meant that all these countries’ shares of the region’s total goods exports declined (see figure 8).
By contrast with goods, services exports have expanded slightly faster in the past decade than they did in the 1990s.
Nonetheless, they grew more slowly than global exports of services and than those of Africa, Asia, China and the European Union.
As with goods, Mexico has significantly underperformed the region as a whole over the past decade.
Also noteworthy is the weakness of export growth in the Caribbean subregion, where services constitute a large share of total exports.
As for South and Central America, no well-defined pattern exists and there is a high degree of heterogeneity.
This preliminary overview of export performance in the decade shows that the region has not succeeded in significantly improving the quality of its international trade.
On the one hand, the South American countries have displayed greater export dynamism in the aggregate, but this has largely been determined by exogenous factors such as the renewed strength of international demand for raw materials and the consequent rise in their prices.
On the other, Mexico and Central America, whose exports include a greater share of manufactures, have proved less dynamic in the aggregate, largely because of intense Chinese competition in their main market, the United States, especially for products whose manufacture involves intensive use of unskilled labour.
The expansion of natural resource-related sectors, driven mainly by demand from Asia, has not contributed enough to the creation of new technological capabilities in the region.
Although returns in these sectors have improved, and there have actually been productivity gains, the absence of active production development policies has led to a widening of productivity gaps with countries deemed to be at the frontier, especially the United States.
One major challenge is to prevent the growing trade between the two regions from reproducing and entrenching a centre-periphery trade pattern in which Asia (particularly China) emerges as a new centre and the countries of the Latin American and Caribbean region as a new periphery.
What is needed, then, is progress towards trade relations that are more in keeping with the economic and social development patterns this region needs.
There is thus an urgent need for an effort to promote higher levels of innovation and endogenous development of technological capabilities, both in natural resourcerelated sectors and in manufacturing and services.
Public policy has an irreplaceable role to play in generating such capabilities and the systemic competitiveness they bring with them.
Actions to further the development of intraregional trade are also desirable given that this trade presents positive features such as greater manufacturing intensity and a greater presence of SMEs, the main drivers of highquality job creation and social cohesion.
Furthermore, intraregional markets could serve to cushion demand shocks originating outside the region, provided progress is made with financing mechanisms for intraregional trade.
The data show that the potential for intraregional trade was not sufficiently exploited during the recent crisis.
Regional integration initiatives and negotiations with extraregional partners The crisis strongly affected intraregional trade, and recovery has been slow.
The exports of Latin America and the Caribbean to all leading destinations other than China contracted during 2009.
Intraregional trade fell by 28% in 2009, by much the same proportion as the region’s exports to the United States and the European Union (26% and 28%, respectively).
Exports to Asia fell by just 5% and those to China actually rose 5%.
The recovery in intraregional trade during the first half of 2010 compared with the same period the previous year has been slower than the recovery in trade with Asia and the United States (see figure 9).
The crisis led to a drop in intraregional trade ratios, with the exception of MERCOSUR.
After rising steadily from the early 1980s onward, by the late 1990s intraregional trade accounted for a little over 20% of the total in Latin America and the Caribbean as a whole and 25% in the case of MERCOSUR and the Central American Common Market.
These increases were reversed after 1999, however, when the level of intraregional trade dropped sharply as the repercussions of the Asian financial crisis struck the region.
Currency upheavals in MERCOSUR and the Andean Community subsequently led to a collapse in trade between the South American countries.
Although the intrasubregional trade ratio continued to rise in the Central American Common Market (CACM), the region as a whole did not see a return to the earlier peak (see figure 10).
The state of economic and trade integration in Latin America and the Caribbean presents large variations between the different subregions or integration schemes.
In particular, the more ambitious trade integration initiatives have been badly affected by differences of opinion in the region.
This can be seen in the abandonment of the project of creating a South American free trade zone, which was floated in 2005 within the framework of the then South American Community of Nations (SACN).
Likewise, negotiations to create a free trade area under the auspices of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) have progressed little since they were launched in 2004.
MERCOSUR has shown some positive developments in the last 12 months, most notably with the agreements reached at its summit in San Juan, Argentina, from 2 to 3 August 2010, dealing with a number of measures designed to improve the customs union.
These agreements include the gradual abolition of double charging of the common external tariff (CET), the adoption of a mechanism for distributing customs revenue and the adoption of a common customs code.
These three issues, it should be noted, were the subject of intensive negotiations from 2004 onwards.
In addition to these advances, progress was made in the liberalization of trade in services and in the consolidation of the MERCOSUR Structural Convergence Fund (FOCEM) and the creation of the MERCOSUR Guarantee Fund for Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises and Local-Currency Payment System.
Pending challenges for MERCOSUR include making faster progress towards the goal of doing away with non-tariff restrictions on intra-zone trade, making greater use of the mechanisms provided by MERCOSUR itself for the resolution of trade disputes arising between its members, and making headway with the incorporation of community regulations into national law.
Another important development during the period was the resumption of negotiations for an economic partnership agreement with the European Union.
These are testing negotiations but, if they come to fruition, they could create major benefits for MERCOSUR.
The members of the Andean Community have continued to pursue further cooperation and integration in a number of areas.
These efforts are embodied in the 12 agreed areas of operation of the Strategic Agenda approved by the foreign and trade ministers of the Andean Community in February 2010.
Major efforts here include those being made to develop Andean technical standards, strengthen Andean agricultural health, food safety and quality systems, and facilitate trade.
The Central American Common Market (CACM) economic and trade integration process has been more dynamic over the past 12 months than similar processes in South America.
Having achieved free trade between them years ago, with minimal exceptions, the CACM members are now working to complete their planned customs union.
To this end, they are in the process of harmonizing the 4% of their tariff universe that is not yet subject to a common external tariff.
Progress is continuing in areas such as modernization of the Standard Central American Tariff Code, the development of Central American technical regulations for different products, mutual recognition of sanitation records for food, drinks, medicines and hygiene and cosmetic products, and the establishment of integrated customs.
The process leading to effective Panamanian membership of the Central American Economic Integration Subsystem is also under way, with completion planned for late 2011.
Deeper trade links between Panama and Central America have been accompanied by growing integration in other areas.
These include energy, with Panama forming part of the Electrical Interconnection System for Central America (SIEPAC), whose purpose is to create a common Central American market for electricity.
Panama is also coordinating work to develop a Central American short-distance sea transport system (cabotage).
Depending on their outcome, the contacts that have been taking place between Brazil and Mexico since August 2009 with a view to negotiating a strategic economic integration agreement may favourably influence economic and trade integration initiatives in the region.
A decision to begin negotiations during 2010 could act as a catalyst for integration efforts throughout the region by tying together the leading economies of South America and Meso-America.
Since its creation in 2007, the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative has been exploring initiatives to achieve trade convergence between its 11 members.
These discussions have not as yet included the subject of tariff convergence, as the priority has been to achieve convergence via cumulation of origin.
By connecting up the different bilateral agreements, this would favour the integration of production between Pacific Basin countries and reduce the transaction costs involved in trade between them.
Its members have also agreed to seek progress on technical barriers to trade, sanitary and phytosanitary measures, customs procedures, services, dispute resolution and trade defence, among other topics.
This forum could serve as a catalyst for convergence in terms of expanded markets and integrated production by contributing to the development of regional value chains and thereby increasing the attractiveness of Latin America and the Caribbean as an economic and trading partner for Asia-Pacific.
Most Latin American and Caribbean countries have continued to actively negotiate trade agreements with partners outside the region, particularly the European Union and, increasingly, Asian countries.
This intensive activity undoubtedly owes something to the lack of movement on the Doha Round, but it could also be a response to slow progress with the main trade integration projects in the region.
Conversely, not much progress has been made on the region’s trade relations with the United States, as demonstrated by the fact that the United States Congress has yet to ratify the FTAs signed with Colombia and Panama over three years ago.
Having concluded negotiations on a partnership agreement with CACM and a trade agreement with Peru and Colombia, the European Union continues to implement the strategy of forging closer ties to Latin America that it decided upon in the mid-1990s.
Negotiations on a partnership agreement between MERCOSUR and the European Union have recently resumed and will be interesting to follow over the coming months.
Negotiations to bring the United States into the TPP began in March 2010, and have now been joined by Australia, Peru and Vietnam, while other countries from both Asia and Latin America are considering joining the process.
While not economically imposing now, the TPP offers the potential to build a “trans-Pacific community” that could counteract the centripetal tendencies now being seen in East Asia.
A number of countries in the region are still very actively pursuing extraregional negotiations.
This could create strains within the subregional integration schemes, as has been demonstrated by the negotiations between the Andean Community countries and the United States and European Union.
Commitments that countries from the region negotiate individually with extraregional partners (particularly developed countries) may present discrepancies with the obligations they have accepted in their regional or subregional scheme, with potentially large implications for the latter.
Although this situation poses a major challenge to Latin American trade integration, there are no obvious solutions.
Consequently, there seems to be a need to retain some scope for flexibility and even variable geometry in the different subregional schemes so that this situation can be accommodated.
There is currently no obvious framework for implementing the ambitious South American trade convergence initiatives launched in the middle of the last decade.
This limits the scope for progress towards a larger integrated economic space, even though such a space would benefit the development of intraregional trade, with all its benefits (a larger presence for manufactures and SMEs, greater potential for integrating production systems, etc.).
This situation contrasts with that in Meso-America, where intensive negotiations are going on both to enhance current agreements or replace them with more comprehensive ones, and to create larger economic spaces by bringing about convergence between existing agreements.
Nonetheless, the difficulties in progressing towards liberalization of intraregional trade must not become an obstacle to enhanced regional or subregional cooperation in other areas where action is needed at least as urgently to deal with the competitiveness challenges facing Latin America and the Caribbean.
Trade and integration in the Caribbean: trends and outlook The global financial crisis has worsened the economic difficulties of the Caribbean countries and exposed their vulnerability to external shocks.
The crisis had a large impact on the trade of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) because of its dependence on external markets.
In 2009, Caribbean goods exports fell 43% by value, largely because of lower prices for the energy products and raw materials that dominate the export baskets of the largest goods exporters, such as Jamaica, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago.
External sales of services were less affected, although they also fell by 10% (see figure 11).
Given that Jamaica, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago have large goods-producing sectors by the standards of the rest of the Caribbean economy, these declines were very significant.
Preliminary data for 2010 show that exports have begun to recover, albeit with large variations between countries.
This is partly because trade in services is more crisis-resistant than trade in goods, being less dependent on trade financing, less fragmented globally and less sensitive to changes in demand.
Other than Guyana, Suriname and Trinidad and Tobago, the CARICOM economies specialize in services, particularly tourism and to a lesser extent financial services.
These countries have suffered from the drop in tourist arrivals from Europe and, especially, the United States.
Goods now circulate very freely within the Caribbean, as most tariffs on merchandise originating in the countries of the common market were abolished in the 1990s.
A number of non-tariff barriers have also been eliminated and a timetable has been adopted for abolishing unauthorized import duties and taxes.
With the single market, all barriers to trade in goods and services and to the movement of several categories of workers are to be removed.
Implementation of the single market is further entrenching the integration process via harmonization of the regulatory regime and economic policies and the creation of a monetary union.
New CARICOM agreements have been signed, ratified and enacted into domestic law by most members.
The exceptions are the Bahamas and Montserrat, which have decided to remain outside the CSME, and Haiti, which has postponed implementation.
Intrasubregional trade represents a large share of the total, but is skewed towards a few countries and a handful of products.
Intra-Caribbean exports are increasingly dominated by Trinidad and Tobago, which accounted for 80% of the total in 2008.
The country mainly sells natural gas and oil to Jamaica, Barbados and Guyana.
This trade is very important for small economies; the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS), and Grenada, Dominica and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines in particular, sell half their exports in the subregional market.
Intra-Caribbean trade is also above the average for the subregion in Guyana and in Trinidad and Tobago, but represents a smaller proportion of total trade for the Bahamas, Haiti and Jamaica (see figure 12b).
All countries other than Bahamas have adopted the Common External Tariff (CET), which has itself been substantially reduced.
CARICOM has also adopted a common trade policy towards external partners, albeit with some exceptions.
Progress has also been made on free intraregional trade in services, the main comparative advantage of the region.
All members have adopted a negative list whereby all sectors and measures are to be liberalized unless otherwise specified.
All member countries have put into place legislation to permit the free movement of highly skilled personnel, including university graduates, media workers, sportsmen, artists and musicians wishing to provide a service or set up a business.
The data for Suriname should be interpreted with caution since no specific destination is attributed to most of the country’s exports.
Another important achievement has been the establishment of a Regional Development Fund to assist disadvantaged members.
The Fund seeks to alleviate difficulties faced by some countries in the transition to an integrated market for goods and services.
Notwithstanding progress towards the establishment of CSME, there has been less movement in certain areas.
The promotion of exports is of the utmost importance for all CARICOM countries, because in the medium term smaller economies can only build up their economic infrastructure and develop by importing capital goods and intermediate inputs, as well as technology.
Over the long run, countries must maintain equilibrium in their balance of payments, as they can only grow over the long run at rates of growth compatible with their external position.
This is the main reason why the performance and development patterns of small open economies have been and continue to be heavily constrained by the vicissitudes of the external sector.
Given the very limited financial resources of Caribbean countries, aid for trade (AfT) has a key role to play in strengthening their ability to capitalize on international trade opportunities.
The ability to implement regional decisions depends heavily on external financial assistance.
The implementation of the single economy component of the CSME, which should have started in 2009, needs to be fast-tracked.
In particular, the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas provides for the development of a common trade policy and coordination of policies to promote the development of critical economic sectors including industry, agriculture and transport.
This creates opportunities for the integration of development and trade policy that will allow the region to maximize the benefits from trade agreements.
CARICOM needs to establish a mechanism to manage the implementation of decisions taken by the Heads of Government Conference.
CARICOM States are still failing to enact regulations agreed on by the organization’s decision-making bodies into local law.
CARICOM should take the necessary action to remove the remaining obstacles to effective functioning of the single market.
These include the harmonization of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and technical standards, removal of unauthorized taxes on regional goods, implementation of the consumer protection regime, abolition of work permit requirements for service providers and implementation of licensing arrangements for service providers.
The recently created CARICOM Development Fund (CDF) may not be enough to deal with the issue of special treatment for the most disadvantaged members.
Because of the lack of secure funding for the CDF, the inadequacy of its capital fund and the temporary nature of its assistance, it is possible that it will be not able to achieve its goals.
Therefore, the CDF needs more secure funding and a larger pool of resources.
As an alternative for supporting the less advanced members, consideration could be given to the World Bank recommendation that additional resources be sought to strengthen the role of the Caribbean Export Development Agency.
The Economic Partnership Agreement (EPA) with the European Union provides opportunities for export diversification, increased inflows of investment and financial and technical assistance to promote regional integration.
Concerns about slow disbursement of European Development Fund (EDF) resources notwithstanding, those Caribbean governments that have not yet established EPA implementation units need to move quickly to do so.
CARICOM should try to clarify the development cooperation components of the EPA.
Caribbean governments should urge the European Union to speed up disbursement of the funds allocated to promote regional integration.
It is important for CARICOM and the Dominican Republic to rapidly resolve their differences over the tariff treatment of exports from the Dominican Republic to CARICOM.
The CARICOM member countries need to position themselves better to capitalize on the market access provided by the EPA and thereby diversify their exports.
This repositioning will require that countries take full advantage of the financial and technical assistance available under the EPA with a view to developing production capacity, strengthening institutions and improving competitiveness.
To attract inflows of FDI from the European Union, CARICOM needs to improve the business climate.
Required measures include promotion of macroeconomic stability, creation of a skilled workforce, provision of adequate infrastructure and development of strong, independent institutions.
Export diversification efforts under way in the Caribbean are moving in the right direction, but the process needs to be accelerated.
Export diversification is critical to reduce the effects of external shocks, enhance productivity, create new comparative advantages and promote economic growth.
Supply-side constraints have to be addressed if export diversification is to be successful.
Significant constraints that require urgent attention include deficient physical infrastructure including roads, ports and telecommunications, weak private sectors, weak institutions and an inadequate supply of expertise.
It is important to strengthen local technical capacity to produce more sophisticated exports based on human capital development and to achieve export diversification that enhances intersectoral linkages.
Foreign technologies have few spillovers without the development of local capacity to innovate.
Deepening the regional integration process will not by itself solve these issues of low technical capacity and limited human capital development.
In particular, tourism services need to be linked more strongly to the creative industries and domestic agriculture with a view to enhancing production and employment spill overs.
Given the limited financial resources of Caribbean countries, aid for trade (AfT) will have a vital role to play in relaxing supply-side constraints.
AfT can help to promote export diversification by providing the financial and technical assistance needed to implement and administer the EPA, improve infrastructure, strengthen institutional capacity and improve the innovation and marketing capacities of private-sector firms.
CARICOM should encourage donors to improve the implementation and effectiveness of AfT initiatives by correcting the main shortcomings identified by beneficiaries.
Most importantly, the predictability of AfT funding needs to be improved to facilitate speedy and efficient implementation of export diversification programmes.
Other improvements that should be considered include increased input from Caribbean countries in the design of AfT initiatives and more emphasis on the development of local capacity.
Economic cooperation and ties between Japan and Latin America and the Caribbean This section analyses the recent strategies adopted by Japan to intensify its economic relationship with Latin America and the Caribbean.
ECLAC has emphasized the need to create opportunities for cooperation in the region.
In the previous edition of Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy, and in the recent report Opportunities for Convergence and Regional Cooperation, ECLAC has proposed that cooperation efforts should be concentrated, as the cooperation agenda is becoming more important than the trade liberalization agenda.
Asia, viewed through Japan, offers some clues as to the possible paths to promote regional cooperation.
Integration and cooperation in Asia have generally been mutually reinforcing and complementary.
After many years of market-led integration, the Asian economies are pursuing formal integration with an approach that goes beyond free trade to include innovative agendas such as industrial development, competitiveness and scientific and technological development.
The proposals formulated by ECLAC to promote cooperation in Latin America and the Caribbean closely match the historical experience of the Asian economies.
Accordingly, ties with Asia-Pacific do not have to be confined to trade and investment but also need to include cooperation.
Latin America and the Caribbean have a great deal to learn from Asia where this agenda is concerned, and the region should also be exploring new ways of enhancing inter-regional cooperation with Asia.
Japan is not only the largest donor in Asia, but the main Asian donor to Latin America and the Caribbean.
One of the main contributions made by Japan in Asia has been to promote interaction between investment, trade and official development assistance (ODA).
The Japanese ODA model applied in this region has emphasized infrastructure improvements and training with a view to revitalizing the production sector and promoting trade and investment in the recipient country.
Similarly, the economic partnership agreements (EPAs) offered by Japan have sought to supplement trade liberalization with a broad framework of medium- and long-term cooperation.
A number of Japanese firms now regard the region as a strategic base for their global operations.
Historically, the relationship between the two parties has turned mainly on economic issues.
At present, the private sector and government in Japan are coordinating their efforts in a public-private alliance set up to take advantage of opportunities in the region.
In the 2010 edition of the Diplomatic Bluebook, the Japanese Government emphasizes that Latin America and the Caribbean are increasing their economic presence in the world.
The basic data underlying this opinion are clear enough: a population of 560 million, regional GDP that is currently three times as great as that of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and growing rapidly, and considerable mining, energy and food resources.
Japanese firms’ perception of the region has improved in recent years, particularly since it became clear that Latin America and the Caribbean had been able to overcome the challenges of the global economic and financial crisis and resume growth at higher rates than expected.
To strengthen economic ties with Latin America and the Caribbean, the Government of Japan is trying to provide Japanese firms with the support needed to facilitate operations in the region.
A major effort is needed from Latin America and the Caribbean so that Japan comes to regard the region as one of the hubs of its global corporate strategy.
The Japanese business sector is still in shock over its experience during the “lost decade” and this experience continues to colour its perception of the region.
When the crisis broke out in August 1982, Japanese banks were involved in the region’s largest projects with private-sector financing operations worth over US$ 30 billion, including more than US$ 13 billion in syndicated loans.
The Japanese Government had to commit large quantities of public funds to roll over private debt.
Along with the banks, many Japanese firms pulled out of the region at a time when Asia was becoming a better option.
A number of Japanese firms have overcome their bias, but the memories remain.
Despite these experiences, however, economic relations between Japan and Latin America and the Caribbean have started to show some signs of improving.
In the last five years, the region has been the world’s fastest-growing destination for Japanese exports in percentage terms, while for imports it ranks second.
Although the amounts involved do not place Latin America and the Caribbean near the top of the ranking, Japanese trade with the region is growing rapidly (between 2005 and 2009, exports increased by 34.8% and imports by 26.3%, see figure 13).
This trend is expected to strengthen in the coming years as both sides’ economies recover.
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean need to embark upon initiatives like those of Brazil and Mexico, the two main recipients of Japanese FDI in the region, with a view to participating in Japanese and global value chains.
The Japanese public-private alliance is becoming more active as the region is rediscovered.
Large general trading companies (sogo shosha) remain at the forefront, accompanied by other Japanese firms.
During the 2010 fiscal year (April 2010-March 2011), the sogo shosha are expected to implement worldwide investments for what is likely to be a record total of over US$ 27.5 billion.
Latin America and the Caribbean need to make an effort to attract this capital.
Much of the fresh investment by the Japanese private sector is likely to go not only to natural and energy resources, but also to infrastructure and food security.
EPAs and bilateral investment treaties (BITs) should help to spur business and investment by Japanese firms in the region.
The Government of Japan is prepared to use the public and private advisory and assistance tools available to it to help Japanese firms (ODA, financial assistance for the Japanese private sector, insurance for commercial activities abroad, and so on).
The next task for Japan is to strengthen its assistance mechanism by pledging more resources to the region.
Another need is to streamline interactions between Japanese government institutions, as there is no “one-stop shop” for Japanese firms requiring assistance.
Latin America and the Caribbean could help with this by seeking more and better Japanese investment in the region.
Besides liberalizing and facilitating trade and investment, the Japanese EPAs include additional measures to strengthen the economic relationship.
Japan signed the first “full” EPA in its history with Mexico after agreeing to open up its farm sector.
Mexico negotiated the agreement with a view to it becoming the cornerstone of the country’s strategy to expand and diversify trade and investment with Asia.
In its first five years of operation (2004-2008), Japanese exports rose by 60%, driven by the automotive sector and steel products, while Mexican exports to Japan increased by 50%.
The EPA has also enhanced the role of Mexico in Japanese and global value chains.
According to a study by the Japanese Embassy in Mexico, in 2008 Mexico imported what were mainly intermediate goods from Japan (parts, components, etc.) to the value of US$ 11 billion.
Mexico then used these goods to make final products and export them to the world’s leading markets in a trade worth US 14.3 billion.
The Japan-Mexico EPA included a special chapter on bilateral cooperation for the first time in the history of the agreements of this type signed by Japan.
The cooperation covered by the agreement encompasses nine areas: trade and investment promotion, supporting industries, SMEs, science and technology, technical and vocational education and training, intellectual property, agriculture, tourism, and the environment.
Cooperation in these areas has been expanded and deepened thanks to the EPA.
Technical cooperation is the common denominator of a system of cooperation in which Japanese ODA plays an important role.
In Asia, cooperation has expanded into new areas such as monitoring of financial institutions and transactions and cooperation to expand electronic transactions.
There is also great demand for human resources development in practically all areas.
For the first time, the EPA between Japan and Mexico also included a specific chapter on measures to improve the business environment.
The country’s EPAs also seek to improve the business environment with a view to enhancing the bilateral economic relationship.
Even in Asia, Japanese firms face a variety of difficulties that in practice turn into non-tariff barriers (continual and unexpected changes in laws and regulations affecting business, lack of transparency in administrative procedures, inadequate infrastructure, concern about citizen security, non-compliance with intellectual property rules, and so forth).
Latin America and the Caribbean could become a rival to Asia if the region were to resolve these problems in the medium or long term.
Under the auspices of the Japan-Mexico EPA, efforts have been made to integrate firms from the two countries more closely in the global value chain, develop scale economies and increase productivity.
In practice, this mechanism also operates as a cooperation framework, in the sense of both parties cooperating to resolve some particular problem.
In the years it has been operating it has produced positive results.
The concept of the public-private alliance arose in Japan as a result of successful Japanese cooperation within Asia.
Japan played an important role in the construction of what is now known as “Factory Asia”.
In the mid-1980s, the Japanese private sector became the catalyst for an inward investment boom in Asia.
Japanese ODA played a decisive role in creating an investment- friendly environment by funding infrastructure and human resources development.
The next goal for Japan is to double the size of Asia’s economy by 2020.
Since mid-2009, Japan has been implementing an initiative whose main component is an ODA package of up to US$ 20 billion.
This initiative is meant to enhance the growth capacity of Asia and increase domestic demand in the region’s countries.
Latin America and the Caribbean also need Japanese ODA, not only to develop economically and socially but also to drive innovation and scientific and technological development with a view to improved participation in the global economy.
Like Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean are now paying back more than they receive in loan assistance within the Japanese ODA framework.
Given the contraction in loan demand, a large part of the ODA resources made available by Japan in Asia are now devoted to technical cooperation.
Asia is the largest recipient of this type of Japanese cooperation in the world; China heads the ranking, followed by other Asian countries.
It is important for the region’s countries to better inform Japan of their technical cooperation priorities and needs.
The experience of Japan in Asia provides a number of lessons that the region should study carefully.
It is important for Japan to participate more actively in its capacity as world leader in .
Owing mainly to fiscal constraints, this amount was gradually reduced until, by 2008, it had fallen by more than two thirds.
The picture looks completely different when Japan’s aid for trade (AFT) ODA flows to the world are analysed.
In three years, the Japanese Government delivered a promised increase in AfT that was originally scheduled to take place over five years.
At the World Trade Organization (WTO) ministerial summit of 2005, the main donors increase the amounts they committed to aid of this type by 2010.
In 2008, Japan exceeded its initial target and made the largest contribution at that time, US$ 13.5 billion.
It is important to realize how great the demand for this type of assistance is in Latin America and the Caribbean too, particularly where infrastructure is concerned.
Conclusions Over the coming years, the region will face an international economy that will be less dynamic and more uncertain than in the previous half-decade.
This is a reminder that the cycle of financial instability is not over.
This situation is also one in which emerging economies will play an ever-greater role in trade and finance.
A preliminary overview of export performance during the past decade shows that, at a time of greater challenges in innovation and competitiveness, the region has not significantly improved the quality of its integration with the global economy.
The countries of South America have displayed greater export dynamism in the aggregate, but this is strongly associated with exogenous factors such as the renewed strength of global demand for raw materials and the consequent rise in prices.
Meanwhile, Mexico and Central America, whose exports are more weighted towards manufactures, have been less dynamic overall, largely because of intense Chinese competition in unskilled-labour-intensive products in their main market, the United States.
Growth in natural resource-related sectors has not contributed enough to the creation of new technological capabilities in the region.
Although returns in these sectors have risen, and there have been notable gains in productivity, the absence of active production development policies has meant that the productivity divide relative to countries considered to be at the frontier, especially the United States, has widened.
This being so, the trade relationship between the region and Asia presents both opportunities and challenges.
Among the latter, it is particularly important to ensure that the growing trade between the two regions does not reproduce and reinforce a centre-periphery type of trade pattern between the countries of the South, with Asia (and China in particular) becoming a new centre and the countries of the region a new periphery.
There is a need to forge a trade relationship that stimulates not just growth, but also greater progress with innovation, export diversification and job quality.
An effort is urgently needed to promote greater levels of innovation and endogenous development of technological capabilities, both in natural resource-related sectors and in manufacturing and services.
Production and trade tied to the strongest comparative advantages in natural resources do not necessarily represent an obstacle to higher-quality participation in the international economy, but can rather complement the development strategies of the region’s countries.
The hypersegmentation of global markets on the one hand, and the acceleration of technological developments in areas such as the life sciences and cognitive sciences on the other, offer a variety of opportunities to decommodify the raw materials the region exports by means of stronger differentiation and the incorporation of value added and know-how.
This in turn requires the development of specialized services that allow more value to be generated and captured up and down products’ value chain (product design, advertising, improved input management, logistics, transport, engineering and consultancy services, insurance and finance, among others).
This provides a way of enhancing forward and backward linkages by strengthening the ties between direct and indirect export sectors and the rest of the economy, especially SMEs producing goods and services, which are the main creators of jobs in the region.
Actions to further the development of intraregional trade are also desirable given that this trade presents positive features, such as greater manufacturing intensity and a greater presence of SMEs, the main drivers of highquality job creation and social cohesion.
The data show that the potential of intraregional trade was not adequately exploited during the recent crisis.
The region is strengthening its South-South ties, particularly in its remarkably dynamic trade with China and other Asian economies.
The region’s future growth will increasingly depend on its success in improving the quality of these relationships.
Chapter I A crisis created in the centre and a recovery driven by the emerging economies A.
Introduction As of mid-2010, the global economic and trade recovery is proving more robust than expected, but more uneven than could be desired.
This faster rebound is due in part to the expanding Asian and emerging economies and in part to the forceful countercyclical response in the form of fiscal, monetary and financial policies adopted by most of the industrialized and developing countries.
Markedly dissimilar rates of growth —high in the emerging economies and low in the industrialized ones— are working against a more sustainable recovery.
Progress towards such a recovery requires international coordination in managing strategies for exiting the crisis.
Financial reforms and a rebalancing of the world economy are needed, too, with the economies with the largest current-account surplus stepping up domestic spending.
Some emerging economies have begun to phase out their stimulus packages and raise interest rates.
This increases the interest rate differential with the industrialized economies and could send destabilizing capital flows towards the emerging economies, setting them up for eventual overheating and speculative bubbles.
Currencies tend to appreciate as speculative bubbles form, making imports cheaper and hampering the diversification of exports.
The bubbles can burst if the rise in spending is not managed well, with grave fiscal, financial and balance of payments repercussions.
Countercyclical policies helped cushion the impact of falling private spending and stem the loss of confidence in the financial markets.
The recovery began in China and continued in India, spreading to the rest of the Asia-Pacific region and from there to the other emerging economies.
The swift recovery of industrial activity in the Asian economies in turn spurred demand for raw materials, with positive spillover effects for raw material exporters such as South America.
As a result, since late 2009 some international organizations have been revising upward their projections for world economic growth in 2010.
The world economy grew at an annualized rate of more than 5% during the first quarter of 2010 (IMF 2010a), essentially because of strong growth in Asia.
International trade in the quarter, meanwhile, was 25% higher in value terms than in the same quarter in 2009.
This sharp recovery in international trade, also led by the Asia-Pacific region, China, Japan and India, has helped to gradually restore confidence among consumers, businesses and the financial markets, reactivating consumption and investment.
Despite the global recovery, marked disparities between industrialized and emerging countries persist.
Recovery in the European Union has been complicated by the fiscal impact of financial rescues, a situation that severely affected Greece before spreading to other Mediterranean countries and those in the east of the European Union.
Public-sector budgets in the largest European Union economies have also been cut sharply to ensure their sustainability over time, setting the stage for even weaker European growth in 2011.
China posted better-than-anticipated economic and trade growth in the second half of 2009 and first half of 2010.
This expansion in emerging economies has not been confined to the countries known as the BRICs (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India and China).
Trade and open markets prevented the crisis from deepening further and then successfully transmitted signals of rising demand.
A number of the factors that led to the decline in global trade in 2008 and early 2009 are now contributing to its recovery, with final demand in emerging countries acting as the main engine of growth.
Among these factors is the revival of demand for capital goods and intermediate inputs, owing in part to the normalization of the financial markets and lending and to the fiscal stimulus plans.
These have also supported inventory restocking and a new growth cycle for electronic products.
Growth in world trade by value has also been helped by recovering commodity prices, particularly oil.2 More generally, the international trade system helped ensure a better outcome by providing scope for emergency measures to be taken without infringing trade regulations (Lamy, 2010).
This solid revival is largely based on growing domestic demand, a pick-up in investment and robust export performance driven by demand from China and the rest of Asia, and by the normalization of demand in the United States.
This positive overall picture, however, masks a high level of heterogeneity in the region’s countries.
The best performance has been seen in countries that export raw materials.
The recovery has been slower in countries that import commodities and depend on tourism and remittances, owing to the still weak performance of the industrialized countries that are the main source of these latter flows.
The Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) puts Colombia, Egypt, Indonesia, Turkey, South Africa and Viet Nam in this category As figure I.2 shows, these prices peaked in mid-2008, plummeted in the third quarter of that same year and began to recover in early 2009.
They are now substantially below the 2008 peak but are holding above historical levels.
Crisis and recovery: the world and trade blocs The world economy and finance Between the second half of 2009 and May 2010, the global economy recovered from a crisis —which, according to the United Nations, drove global GDP down by 2% in 2009— faster than expected thanks, above all, to dynamic growth in Asia.
Between January and June 2010, the United Nations raised by 0.6 percentage points —to 3%— its projection for global GDP growth in 2010 (aggregate based on exchange rates) (United Nations, 2010).
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) increased its projection as well, by 0.4 percentage points, to 4.6% (aggregate based on purchasing power parity).3 Generally speaking, confidence on the part of economic agents and private demand is beginning to return, with double-digit growth in production and world trade.
Global economic recovery from the recent crisis is very uneven: while the slump in output and trade was pretty much synchronous throughout the world, recovery has been modest in the industrialized countries and substantial in most of the emerging areas.
The method used by the IMF and the World Bank to calculate global GDP differs from the one used by the United Nations (aggregate based on purchasing power parity), which gives higher rates of growth.
As a consequence of the global crisis, all of the countries performed worse in 2009 than in 2008.
Within the Group of Twenty (G20), which includes the world’s largest economies, the worst decline was in the Russian Federation: following a positive growth rate of nearly 6% in 2008, the crisis triggered a drop of almost 8%.
There were significant setbacks in Germany and Italy in both years (see figure I.1).
Massive intervention in the financial markets prevented their collapse and contributed to the subsequent recovery.
Money markets stabilized, stock markets picked up and banks in most countries resumed lending.
Confidence shrivelled further in May 2010 in the face of the critical fiscal situation in Greece and other European countries with high indebtedness and public deficits; for some of them this led to the downgrading of their debt ratings.
Pressures on financing, uncertainty as to the policies that would be adopted and more pessimistic expectations for the future rippled through the interbank markets and decreased the appetite for risk as shown by massive purchases of assets in emerging regions.
Capital flows into emerging economies have recovered well after contracting drastically in 2008 and 2009.
The rebound is more substantial in stocks and bonds and less so in syndicated loans, which are still below pre-crisis levels (OECD, 2010a).
Heterogeneous growth across industrialized and emerging economies is a delicate issue because it is encouraging the flow of capital to the fastest-growing economies and increasing the risk of overheating the carry-trades that favour the formation of asset bubbles.
This hampers economic policy in the emerging economies because failure to restrict capital flows encourages bubbles and currency appreciation, with a negative impact on competitiveness and export diversification.
Attempting to limit the expansion of private spending by increasing interest rates would reinforce the interest rate differential and encourage speculative attacks against the currency.
That is why the IMF is exploring innovations such as controlling capital inflows (IMF, 2010b).
For starters, the root causes of the financial crisis have not been addressed satisfactorily.
Most of the industrialized countries have still not put in place the stricter financial regulations that could prevent or moderate future crises.
At the G20 meeting in Toronto, Canada in June 2010 it was agreed that the countries will not have to strengthen bank capitalization until 2012 and that a global bank tax seemed unlikely.
It was also decided that the countries need to regulate the financial derivatives markets more strictly in order to protect banks from overexposure.
The goal is, then, to make trading in financial derivatives more transparent and require that all transactions go through exchanges that would act as guarantors.
One exception to this general picture is the United States, where sweeping new financial regulation legislation was enacted that encompasses financial derivatives, increases government authority over banks and puts new consumer protections in place (see box I.1).
Banks may continue to operate in the markets for interest rate, currency swap, gold, silver, high-risk swap and hedge derivative instruments.
The legislation raises portfolio risk capital reserve requirements and bars banks from financial activities that are not in the interest of their clients.
It also bars them from investing in hedge funds and private equity funds, and limits their liabilities.
The Dodd–Frank act increases government powers to intervene in troubled financial institutions that put the financial system at risk.
It also sets up a council of experts to identify and prevent systemic risks and, if necessary, authorize the tax charges needed to address the problems.
The legislation also steps up consumer protections, creates a new body within the Federal Reserve that can issue new rules, even for the risk rating agencies, and establishes new conditions for mortgage lending.
This agency’s consumer protection regulations do not extend to the automobile industry.
The European Union committed to reform its financial system rules along the lines of the principles agreed by the G20 and has indicated that it is determined to change the existing regulation model in favour of a more centralized, transparent system that would encompass all types of financial institutions and instruments.
Following a round of studies and consultations, the European Union is expected to propose new rules in September 2010, for implementation in 2011.
This European Union bill has many similarities with the law enacted in the United States.
Both reforms give greater powers to the authorities in charge of financial derivatives markets, require that derivatives be traded through a central clearinghouse and require transparent disclosure of transactions in a central database.
But there is one significant difference: while the United States act sets some limits on banks’ financial operations, the European Union bill tends to be stricter and is geared to preventing speculation in credit risk swaps.
Strengthening international cooperation Addressing the global financial situation requires enhanced international coordination and cooperation on several fronts, such as making progress on financial reforms, bank recapitalization and restructuring requirements and the timing of and modalities for exiting the crisis in keeping with specific national realities.
This coordination should be permanent and is a relevant task for the G20.
Close countercyclical coordination when the crisis broke out in the third quarter of 2008 prevented a deeper, more prolonged recession.
There was also a coordinated —if perhaps somewhat belated— effort in May 2010 to deal with the Greek crisis.
The fact that it was necessary to resume that coordinated effort 18 months later shows that the cycle of financial instability is not over (OECD, 2010b).
After all, following the great crisis of the 1930s, the early withdrawal of stimulus measures in the United States, the lack of international coordination and the turn towards protectionism in the United States and subsequently in Europe made the crisis more prolonged and severe.
Indeed, the plunge in world trade took place in 1937, several years after the onset of the crisis.
The value of world trade dropped by 30% during the crisis but is recovering at a similar pace (see figure I.2).
The remarkable global economic expansionary cycle from 2003 to 2007 characterized by burgeoning growth started to improve somewhat.
For products with rising prices, the average improvement between the lowest point in Asia put considerable upward pressure on international prices.
This trend reversed suddenly in the second half of 2008 when the global crisis hit the region hard.
Indices began to stabilize in the second quarter of 2009 and then and the current price is 79%.
Among products in the latter category, the recovery of coal and natural gas prices ran from October to December while steel and wheat continued their downward trend (ECLAC, 2010a).
So, not only was the drop in global trade larger than in previous crises —the recovery has been faster.
Nearly half of the variations are price movements on internationally traded products.
Commodity prices (especially energy commodities) rose sharply during the pre-crisis period until mid-2008, fell during the crisis and partially recovered post-crisis.
The fluctuations in energy prices are quite marked, less so for agriculture products.
All in all, the general index for these prices is still high compared with their historical trend; the average is similar to 2007 values.
The revival of global trade from mid-2009 on into 2010 is being driven by the developing countries, especially in Asia.
The pace of recovery has been slower in the industrialized countries, and they have contributed less to the worldwide growth in exports (see figure I.3).
After the crisis, Asian trade rebounded at twice the speed of the industrialized countries.
In emerging countries, exports and imports have already neared or surpassed their pre-crisis levels while flows in the industrialized countries are still below the levels posted in 2008.
High trade growth rates in the Asian countries reflect thriving domestic demand and their relative specialization in manufactured goods, the global demand for which has partially recovered.
China is at the hub of many global value chains, especially for medium- and hightech products.
Because many of the segments of these value chains are Asian, rapid growth in China has pulled Asian exports —including Japan’s— up.
The value of Chinese exports rose 65% in the first quarter of 2010, spurring a 48% expansion of exports from Japan and a 34% rise in Asian exports (WTO, 2010a).
China’s expanding trade ties with Africa and Latin America, plus trade among Asian countries, is making South-South trade an increasingly relevant driver of world trade.
So, the liberalization of South-South trade in goods and services and initiatives geared to promote such trade will likely be the key force behind future global economic growth.
Decisions made by Latin America and the Caribbean to strengthen and improve trade ties with China, India, Africa and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) will therefore determine how much growth the region can aspire to in the near future.
In the past decade, developing countries contributed more to the growth of global exports than the industrialized world did.
For example, the impact of the crisis on global goods trade was greater than on trade in services.
This is similar to what happened during the 2001 recession (see figure I.5a).
Regarding the evolution of global trade by product, trade in durable goods fell the most during the crisis.
Between the third quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2009, the largest drops were in consumer durables such as automobiles and auto parts and in investment goods such as industrial machinery (see figure I.5b).
Purchases of these goods were postponed in the face of lower final demand, scarcer credit and uncertainty as to the future.
For this reason and because of the construction industry crisis in several countries, trade in iron and steel was also hit hard since these are key construction inputs (WTO, 2010b).
The greatest drop in services was in transport, which is closely linked with goods trade.
By contrast, “other services”, which include financial, business, information technology and construction services, weathered the crisis better.
Moreover, the internationalization of the production chain, the huge number of parts and components needed to build a motor vehicle and falling global demand for cars had a domino effect that weakened the position of countries where the weight of the automobile industry in the productive and export base is substantial (for more details see box I.2).
Among the leading producers, only China and India posted positive growth rates in 2009 (48% and 13%, respectively).
Those most affected were the Russian Federation (-60%), the United States (-34%) and England (-34%).a Major producers such as Germany, Japan and the Republic of Korea saw declines of 31.5%, 13.8% and 8.2%, respectively.
Support from governments and private banks to stimulate the domestic market considerably helped offset the drop in external markets, in industrialized and emerging countries alike (ECLAC, 2010b).
In industrialized countries, tight credit, the lack of a strong domestic market and the automobile industry’s close trade ties with the United States (epicentre of the global crisis) combined to push the industry into a steep decline in most of the top producer and exporter countries, making restructuring inevitable.
Post-crisis, the automobile industry faces a new scenario caused in part by the phase-out of incentives for the sector both in developed countries and in emerging ones.
According to several consulting firms, growth in the automobile sector will be moderate and will be led by Brazil, China and India because consumers in the developed economies will tend to moderate their spending on durables.
There are new challenges, too, that can be grouped into four trends.
First, because of high oil prices and shrinking family income in the wake of the global crisis, plus fiscal adjustments in most of the European countries, consumers will tend to prefer smaller (economical) automobiles.
Second, continuing weak demand will put pressure on costs and thus intensify competition.
Third, new fuel consumption and greenhouse gas emission standards are being put in place, especially in mature markets.
Compliance with them will require substantial investments in new technology research and development that will not necessarily have a guaranteed return.
And there is the challenge posed by the need for a labour force that is flexible both in skills and in working hours.
In this new environment, mergers and acquisitions will be the order of the day, as will alliances among automobile companies.
The automobile industry in Latin America: Recent evolution and prospects Brazil, Mexico and Argentina are the region’s leading producers of motor vehicles; respectively, they rank 6th, 10th and 21st worldwide.
The reconfiguration of the global automobile industry, hastened by the global crisis, has so far favoured Brazil and Mexico.
In Mexico, companies such as Volkswagen, Chrysler and Ford will invest substantially in new projects in 2010.
Prospects are also very good for Brazil this year, according to estimates from the consultancy ABECEB.
Unlike Mexico, the impetus in Brazil is coming not only from the international auto makers installed there but also from a long-term development plan for the industry that has firm government support through the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES).
In Argentina, production and exports are expected to reach a record high in 2010, boosted above all by external demand from Brazil although other relevant markets will recover as well.
Nevertheless, Argentina’s trade deficit with Brazil has been widening over the past few years because its auto part industry is not competitive enough.
To correct this weakness, the government recently announced a soft financing line that could range from US$ 101.7 million to US$ 305 million.
In 2009 China surpassed the United States as the largest automobile market, with sales of nearly 10 million units.
The crisis and financing for trade The recent global financial crisis once again put trade finance at the top of the international agenda.
Heavily globalized financial markets, in addition to making financing more accessible, are also an effective vector for financial malaise in the principal markets and institutions.
Stricter lending terms, capital allocation restrictions and curtailed interbank lending, plus the preference for stricter, securitized loans, made financing for international trade less available.
Data from the Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication (SWIFT) show that the volume of interbank trade transaction messages fell in 2008 and 2009 but began to rebound in February Shrinking trade finance made it harder for importers and exporters to access credit.
The World Bank estimates that the tight supply of credit for trade was behind 10% to 15% of the drop in global flows during the crisis.
The drop in financing would have had an even greater impact were it not for the measures taken by multilateral, regional and national institutions to increase lending and guarantees.
Especially noteworthy are the commitment by the G20 members to ensure the availability of at least US$ 250 billion in additional trade finance and the role of the export credit agencies (see additional details on the measures to support trade finance in chapter II).
The multilaterals also have trade finance support programmes to help ensure the liquidity of private institutions in countries where this is needed, by means of guarantees and insurance in addition to credit facilities.
Also noteworthy in this regard is the WTO’s aid for trade initiative, which identified improving access to trade finance in developing countries as a work area since the launch of the initiative in 2005.
Behind this process is a complex financial system that, depending on its capacities, can either greatly facilitate or obstruct international trade.
Exporters use financial instruments to leverage their accounts receivable in order to finance their operations, buy importer default insurance and gain more freedom to seek out new markets and clients.
And they take advantage of financial incentives to win sales through competitive advantages and to free up capital for other uses.
Buyers are able to finance their purchases and obtain guarantees for the timely delivery of a product.
Because of these benefits, the expansion of world trade is closely tied to the availability of low-cost financing for long-term investments and more immediate needs.
The many financial instruments currently available to facilitate crossborder trade reflect the sophistication of the global financial system.
Even before the physical exchange of goods, buyers and sellers can access financing, insurance and guarantees to meet their cash flow and risk reduction needs.
For example, an exporter can take out a loan using documentary proof of the transaction (such as an invoice) as collateral.
Financing can also be granted with collateralized securities or, for highly standardized commodities, warehouse deposit certificates.
Suppliers who offer credit to their buyers can also raise capital immediately or limit their foreign exchange risk by turning to medium-term discounting of promissory notes (forfaiting).
Besides financing and payment arrangements, exporters may turn to guarantees and insurance plans to lessen their exposure to economic, commercial transport and political risk, among others.
These guarantees and insurance are provided by private institutions (such as insurance companies and banks) or government agencies (credit export agencies).
United Nations publication, Sales No.E.05.II.F.30 Commercial credit is available, above all, from private banks; it is mostly shortterm.
It also commonly provides financing for activities related to the transaction, such as the purchase of raw materials or working capital loans.
Because the security for the financing depends on the transaction itself (delivery of the product to the importer, or payment to the exporter) and because any of the parties could fail to meet its obligations, banks require a significant amount of documentation.
But market conditions frequently make credit expensive or credit facilities largely unavailable to exporters.
When bank credit is tight, the impact is greatest on smaller companies, which are often hard-pressed to meet the documentary and security requirements imposed by banks (Duval and Sengupta, 2003).
Conversely, large companies are in a better position to lend and obtain financing from nonbank sources because they can more easily turn to other instruments such as bills of exchange, countertrade arrangements and promissory notes.
They can also provide the buyer with direct credit to expedite the sale.
Countries with larger economies have government trade support programmes that complement financing available in the private sector.
A good example are export credit agencies, which offer insurance and guarantees to lower the cost of private bank loans for importers.
By lowering the cost to the importer and decreasing the risk for the bank, these agencies act as trade facilitators in transactions in which traditional financing methods are not viable.
Trade trends in the main countries and regions of the world Overview of the main trade policy measures during the crisis During the months immediately following the outbreak of the crisis, industrialized and developing countries alike adopted measures that had a restrictive impact on trade.
This gave rise to concern as to a likely resurgence of protectionism, especially in view of the experience of the 1930s.
Then, the trade barriers erected by the principal economies contributed to the plunge in world trade and intensified the effects of the Great Depression (Baldwin and Evenett, 2008, 2009; Gamberoni and Newfarmer, 2009).
This concern led the governments of the G20 member countries to adopt, in November 2008, the policy commitment to refrain from imposing new barriers to investment or to trade in goods and services for a 12-month period.
In April 2009 the commitment was extended through the end of 2010.5 Trade restriction measures adopted around the world at the peak of the crisis (between the fourth quarter of 2008 and the close of the second half of 2009) took many forms.
Generally, the industrialized countries favoured subsidies for sectors affected by the crisis, such as the automobile industry, iron and steel and financial services.
This aid was occasionally provided within the framework of actual rescue programmes for these industries.
Among them were increasing tariffs and introducing import licenses and minimum customs values (ECLAC, 2009).
During the quarters immediately following the outbreak of the crisis, the number of trade defence investigations rose in industrialized and emerging countries alike.
This trend was less marked in the case of new trade defence measures (see figure I.6b).
But it is consistent with historical evidence, which shows that measures are usually implemented 12 to 18 months after an investigation is initiated (Bown, 2010a).
The developing countries —led by India— accounted for 80% of the trade defence investigations initiated from the third quarter of 2008 to the second quarter of 2009.
The crisis also triggered a rise in government procurement discrimination, often in the context of economic stimulus plans.
Such developments were seen in industrialized countries and in developing countries, too, and they have spread to the two largest economies in the world: the United States and China (see table I.2).
Such discrimination is often informal, in the form of discretionary public authority practices, especially at the subnational level.
This opacity, which makes it difficult Despite this commitment, 17 G20 countries introduced trade restriction measures between then and late February 2009 (Gamberoni and Newfarmer, 2009). to detect and combat such practices, is an example of what has been called “murky protectionism” (Baldwin and Evenett, 2009).
Rising protectionism in government procurement is worrying, since such contracting accounts for 15% to 20% of the gross domestic product of the OECD countries (WTO, 2009b).
The percentage has probably risen since the crisis erupted, because of the more active role taken on by the State as an economic actor and even as a buyer of goods and services.
Price preferences granted for local (Australia and New Zealand) goods and services for purchases by the New South Wales government.
Ban on the use of certain imported wind turbines by parties bidding on power generation projects under the Alternative Sources of Energy Incentive Programme (PROINFA).
Removal of items from the list of goods exempted from the “Buy China” policy.
Recent evolution of trade policies in the global economy The institutions that have been monitoring world trade policy since the crisis erupted continued to do so during the second half of 2009 and the first half of 2010.
The principal conclusion emerging from their analysis is that, despite the seriousness of the crisis, there has been no generalized trend toward protectionism (OECD, 2010b; WTO, 2010c).
At the aggregate level, the restrictive trade measures that were introduced were not a significant factor in the 12.2% drop in world trade volume in 2009.
The drop was caused, above all, by the collapse of demand and the shortage of financing for trade triggered by the crisis, and by the proportionally larger decline in the demand for highly-traded goods and the vertical integration of global value chains (OECD, 2010b).
The WTO Secretariat estimates that new import restrictions introduced around the world between November 2009 and mid-May 2010 affected some 0.4% of global imports.6 This figure is down from the estimated 1% of global imports affected by import restrictions imposed between October 2008 and October 2009, at the peak of the crisis (WTO, 2010c).
The sectors most affected by restrictive trade measures introduced between November 2009 and May 2010 were basic metal products (especially steel), agricultural products and transport materials.
The measures most commonly adopted during the period This figure includes investigations initiated that could potentially lead to the application of trade defense measures.
Some of the investigations might not lead to definitive measures, so including them in the estimate would tend to overstate the percentage of trade actually affected by restrictive measures. were the initiation of new trade defence investigations (especially antidumping), import tariff hikes and import licenses (WTO, 2010c).
Initiating new investigations and imposing new trade defence measures have followed similar trajectories since the second half of 2009: they peaked when (or even before) the crisis broke out and subsequently dropped off sharply.
So, the third quarter of 2009 saw the largest number of new investigations since the onset of the crisis.
Subsequently, during the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010, the numbers returned to levels similar to those posted in the three quarters immediately preceding the crisis (see figure I.6a).
The fourth quarter of 2009 saw the largest number of trade defence measures imposed in more than two years, in response to the rising number of new investigations during the quarters immediately following the eruption of the crisis.
After this peak, the number of new measures fell off sharply in the first quarter of 2010, to the lowest level since the second quarter of 2008 (see figure I.6b).
As happened during the period between the fourth quarter of 2008 and the second quarter of 2009, the developing countries —led this time by Argentina— accounted for most of the new trade defence investigations initiated between the third quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of 2010, with 73% of the total.
China was once again the chief target, both of new investigations and of new measures imposed.
Seventy-one percent of the new investigations in the fourth quarter of 2009 named China, as did 47% of those initiated in the first quarter of 2010.
Its share of new measures imposed was 72% and 82%, respectively (Bown, 2010a, 2010b).7 Measures such as subsidies for certain industries and discriminatory practices in government procurement could well have had a greater impact on trade flows than direct trade restrictions did.
As explained earlier, recent data show that the latter affected less than 1% of global trade (WTO, 2010c).
However, it is difficult to quantify that impact because, among other reasons, the measures implemented are many and diverse and the information available as to their nature is incomplete, especially when subnational levels of government are involved.
Even so, the crisis has shown that the lack of multilateral discipline on government procurement leaves considerable leeway that the governments of many countries have used to favour local providers of goods and services to the detriment of their foreign competitors (ECLAC, 2009).
In principle, it is to be expected that the global economic recovery under way since mid-2009 would bring protectionist pressure down from the levels seen during the Global safeguards are excluded from the figures for both periods because they are applied on a most-favoured-nation basis and thus are not country-specific. past two years.
The industrialized countries need to reduce their large fiscal deficits in an environment of high unemployment (around 10% in the European Union and the United States) and rebounding imports.
In such an environment, phasing out the stimulus programmes implemented by governments during the crisis (which did moderate protectionist pressure to some extent) could lead to an increase in trade barriers (Gregory et al., 2010; WTO, 2010c).
For that same reason, there is no certainty that the number of new trade defence investigations, which has been falling since the last quarter of 2009, will continue to decline in the coming months.
Although the pace of new trade restriction measures has slowed in the past few months, the risks associated with their cumulative effect should be borne in mind.
It would also seem advisable to extend beyond 2010 the Group of Twenty’s November 2008 commitment to refrain from introducing new barriers to investment or trade in goods and services (OECD/WTO/ UNCTAD, 2010).
As explained above, while none of the G20 countries have fully honoured this commitment, it has helped keep trade restrictions from proliferating.
There seems to be a growing tendency to restrict exports, chiefly food products and raw materials.
The most frequent measures involve introducing or increasing export duties, banning exports or establishing export contingencies.
This increase in export restrictions would seem to be worldwide (WTO, 2010c).
The case of the Russian Federation illustrates the importance of multilateral regulations in this regard.
According to several studies, the Russian Federation was among the countries that implemented the most trade restrictions during the crisis (WTO, 2010c; Evenett, 2010); it is not yet a member of the WTO.
Recent evolution of trade in the region’s principal trade partners Following the contraction between late 2008 and mid-2009, the pace of recovery of the United States economy has slowed.
The unemployment rate remains high, and economic growth is still below potential.
The value of imports during the first few months of 2010 is still 16% below the pre-crisis level, constrained by the weak recovery of domestic demand.10 This performance reflects the sharp drop in 2009 and the partial recovery in 2010.
Exports recovered considerably during this period, initially thanks to the depreciated real exchange rate but also because of the strong recovery and high demand in China and other emerging countries.
The value of exports during the first four months of 2010 is only 6% below the figure for the same period in 2008, before the crisis (BEA, 2010).
As a result, the trade deficit went up again, but it is still 30% lower than before the crisis.
The revival of imports in the United States is driven largely by the restocking cycle, rising fuel imports and a normalization of consumer spending (Roubini Global Economics, 2010).
But, despite the substantial impact of fiscal stimuli, economic growth —and imports— have been weaker than expected.
The current political debate centres on how to contain public debt and the fiscal deficit, making it hard to introduce new stimulus measures that would boost economic recovery.
High rates of growth in the emerging countries of Asia, led by China, are affecting trade relations between the United States and its partners.
Because of the crisis and weak demand in Europe, Asia has moved ahead of the United States as the chief destination market.
Between January 2009 (their lowest point during the crisis) and January 2010, United States exports to China grew 65%.
Burgeoning growth in China thus supported economic growth in the United States.
The dollar’s appreciation against the euro had a substantial impact on United States imports and exports.
It is estimated that towards mid-2010 the dollar was overvalued by 10%, even considering its 25% depreciation since 2002.
According to estimates, this overvaluation of the multilateral exchange rate reduces United States exports by between US$ 200 billion and US$ 250 billion (Cline and Williamson, 2010; Bergsten, 2010).
Overvaluation is due mainly to the bilateral exchange rate with China (and other currencies pegged to the renminbi).
This bloc of currencies is estimated to be undervalued with relation to the dollar.
Exports to China were the chief cause of the 2009 increase in United States exports.
Mexico was the principal beneficiary of the recovery of United States imports.
Because of the slow recovery of domestic demand, imports into the European Union and the United States as of April 2010 are still some 10% below their pre-crisis level.
Exports have not returned to their pre-crisis level, either, owing largely to poor domestic market performance and weak demand in the United States.11 The value of European Union foreign trade (excluding intraregional trade) fell 20% in 2009 compared with 2008.
In value terms, exports were off 23% and imports dropped by 25%.
The hardest hit countries in the region were Bulgaria, Finland, Greece, Lithuania and Romania, all of whose exports shrank by more than 30% In 2009, exports to the region’s principal destination fell more than average.
External sales to the principal extraregional destination market (the United States), declined more than those to the other main destinations (China and the Russian Federation).
Imports from China, Approximately 60% of European trade is intraregional. the region’s principal extraregional origin, dropped by 13% —less than the overall average of 23%.
Purchases from the other important trade partners (Brazil, Japan, Norway and the Russian Federation) declined by more than 25% (Gambini, 2010; Pappalardo and Nowak, 2010).
Government measures to boost the recovery were hampered by the complex fiscal situation and high public indebtedness of the countries in the region.
The problems faced by some European Union members, especially Greece, made a new stimulus plan to spur domestic demand impossible.
Indeed, countries like England, Ireland, Spain and Portugal have taken a conservative fiscal stance that is driving domestic demand down even further.
In any event, the European Union’s economic difficulties led the euro to depreciate against the dollar.
The benefit that this has for extraregional exports should be more obvious in the second half of 2010.
Exports from Latin America and the Caribbean to the European Union have been recovering in 2010, although they are still below pre-crisis levels.
In Asia, the economies with the largest domestic market, such as China, India and Indonesia, weathered the crisis better than did the countries that are more dependent on foreign trade (IMF, 2010c).
By early 2010 Asian imports and exports surpassed pre-crisis levels, thanks to recovering domestic demand, restocking inside and outside the region and strong Chinese demand for commodities.
Domestic demand in Asia continues to recover; the International Monetary Fund (IMF) expects 7.5% growth for the region in 2010.
The rate of economic growth is projected to slow to below 7% in 2011 as fiscal stimulus measures are dismantled and the pace of restocking slackens in the rest of the world.
Because Asia’s trade ties with the euro zone are less substantial than with the United States, the economic and financial problems of some European countries should have a limited effect on this region.
Continued strong growth in China is due in part to a major economic stimulus package, coupled with a tremendous expansion of credit.
In addition, as global trade flows plummeted in 2009 (by 12.2% in volume terms) China displaced Germany as the world’s leading exporter of goods and became one of the key trade partners of Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC, 2010c).
With growth at nearly 10% for 2010 (11.9% in the first quarter and 10.3% in the second because of adjustments in the real estate market and in lending), China will continue to be the main engine of global growth and the best external market for exports from Latin America and the Caribbean.
The processing trade, as part of global value chains, accounted for 49% of China’s total trade, while processing trade exports and imports fell 13% and 15%, respectively, in 2009 (Hong Kong Trade Development The rebound of Chinese trade has been remarkable.
During the first four months of 2010, China’s international trade rose by 43% over the same period in 2009, to US$ 856 billion dollars.
This brought the trade surplus down by 79% during the period, compared with the first four months of 2009.
Trade (processing trade excluded) grew by 46% in the first four months of 2010 compared with the same period in 2009.
Processing trade, which accounted for 39% of China’s total trade during the period, was up 38%.
China’s overall trade balance went from a US$ 12 billion surplus to a US$ 39 billion deficit during the period.
The processing trade balance posted a US$ 85 million surplus for the first four months of 2010 —a 6.5% increase over the same period one year prior (Hong Kong Trade Development The Japanese economy is showing signs of recovering from the crisis despite a stubborn unemployment rate that is stuck at about 5% (which is high for Japan).
Industrial production is recovering, business expectations and earnings are improving and exports have picked up, thanks especially to Chinese demand.
However, the Japanese economy is going through another deflationary phase (Cabinet Office of the Government External conditions are still challenging for the Japanese economy.
Emergency economic measures and partial recovery in the United States and the European Union, albeit weaker in the latter, have helped grow exports.
But there is concern that deflation and persistently high unemployment could impact private consumption and undermine the economic recovery as exports continue to perform poorly because of weaker demand in Europe.
Short- and medium-term prospects Some governments of the industrialized countries that rescued their national banks and companies in 2008 and 2009 are now in need of rescue, while others face severe fiscal policy margin restrictions.
But the biggest global economic policy challenge is how to sustain growth and ensure fiscal stability over the medium term.
Doing so requires matching the phase-out of stimulus programmes with a recovery of private spending.
If fiscal stimulus measures are withdrawn too early in Europe, recession will be the most likely result.
Only when the recovery faces fewer challenges than at present will it make sense for fiscal consolidation to be a priority.
In other words, premature austerity programmes that jeopardize growth should be avoided.
On the other hand, if public debt is not controlled and credible signals for fiscal consolidation in the medium term are not sent, financial tensions will persist and could worsen, restricting economic policy further.
There should therefore be two changes in the drivers of global demand: (i) a transition from government stimulus measures to private spending and (ii) a transition from economies with external deficits to others with surpluses (IMF, 2010a).
The current fiscal crisis in Europe is generating uncertainty as to the soundness of the global recovery in the coming months, with potential consequences for the economy and trade in Latin America.
High fiscal deficits and doubts as to the sustainability of public debt have set off a crisis of confidence in southern Europe, with Greece at the epicentre since early 2010.
As a result, the government bond differentials of some countries have skyrocketed, and the governments of those countries have implemented substantial budget cuts.
Greece is also receiving aid from the IMF to clean up its fiscal accounts.
The slow recovery of the economies of the European Union and the high risks that several of them face are breaking the historical economic pattern that deep recessions are usually followed by rapid rebounds.
Historically, the European cycle has lagged behind the cycle in the United States by two to three quarters.
So, just when the response could start to gain traction, the round of fiscal adjustments put the brakes on growth again and is delaying recovery.
The increased sovereign risk of some European countries is affecting Europe’s financial stability because some banks —especially in Germany and France— have significant exposure to the sovereign debt of those countries.
In turn, uncertainty as to vulnerability and economic policy challenges have increased interbank funding tensions.
Another factor that is complicating the bank situation is funding pressure related to bond maturities over the next few years.
In view of the situation, in June 2010 the European Union established a financial stability facility that can issue debt guaranteed by its shareholder countries for on-lending to countries that cannot raise funding normally, such as Greece.
A potential —albeit quite unlikely— fiscal debt crisis in certain countries could complicate the global economy and financial picture, as well as the prospects for Latin America and the Caribbean.
A European financial crisis would increase the cost of financing for investment and trade.
This could favour Europe’s extra-Community exports but would check external sales from the United States.
Slower growth in those industrialized countries would in turn impact emerging country exports.
As their revenue fell they would import fewer consumer and capital goods as well as fewer intermediate goods for re-export.
Some of these negative impacts could be mitigated with new, modest fiscal stimulus measures in the emerging countries.
But emerging country demand and imports would not be enough to offset falling demand in the European Union and the United States, and the overall effect would be slower growth worldwide than in 2010.
There is no question that the emerging economies have come to the rescue of the global economy and that their importance is growing.
However, they are still not in a position to fully supplant the relative weight of the United States, Europe and Japan.12 The direct impact of the European fiscal crisis on Latin America and the Caribbean appears to be limited.
Only a small portion of the region’s exports go to the hardest hit European countries.
However, if risk premiums spiral out of control because of sovereign debt default, emerging regions, including Latin America and the Caribbean, could find it harder to access financing.
There are other trends that point to weaker global economic and trade performance in the second half of 2010 and in 2011, although it seems unlikely that the world will fall back into recession.
First, the new cycle of inventories to meet demand during the recovery is nearly complete.
Third, because of the massive spending associated with the fiscal measures, public debt is mushrooming.
Such is the case with the Group of Seven countries, whose relative debt is estimated to be 113% of GDP in 2010 (World Bank, 2010).
But dismantling the fiscal stimulus measures China’s GDP is approximately one third of that of the United States, and private consumption accounts for just 36% of China’s GDP.
Therefore, if export growth slows by 10%, private consumption would have to increase at least five points more in order to maintain a constant rate of growth.
That is why it is important for the Chinese economy to transition towards growth that is driven more by private consumption (Akyuz, 2010). could endanger economic growth during the coming months.
Timing the phase-out of stimulus measures to match the gradual recovery of private spending is thus the main OECD economic policy challenge.
In the current environment, there is also some uncertainty as to the future of global trade in raw materials.
On the positive side, the potential postponement of stimulus withdrawal in many countries (above all, the low interest rates), international liquidity and steady demand from China and other emerging markets would sustain a certain degree of growth in those markets.
On the negative side, weak final demand in the industrialized countries and the potential for economic and financial contagion from the euro zone could negatively impact commodity prices and demand, as well as commodity exporters in Latin America and the Caribbean and other emerging regions.
In any event, it seems unlikely that commodity prices will fall because demand in general remains high, driven by China and other emerging economies.
Regarding emerging economies, there are doubts about the sustainability of their recovery in a context of limited economic activity in the OECD (Mussa, 2010).
If the industrialized economies do not fall back into recession and manage to keep growing, even at the current slow pace, emerging economies will be able to sustain growth of some 6% a year in the next two to four years, ensuring a growth floor of 3% for the world economy.
This would be thanks to growing ties among the emerging economies themselves, notably the intense intra-Asian trade (linking China to Japan, the Republic of Korea and the 10 ASEAN economies), as well as China’s growing trade ties with Africa and Latin America.
Of course, if the industrialized economies fall back into recession in 2011 it would be hard to maintain the current rapid pace of growth in some emerging economies.
There are, in particular, concerns as to the future rate of growth in China.
This is the variable of most interest for external trade in South America, just as the growth of the United States economy is of the most concern for Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean.
China can continue to grow at rates hovering near 9%, relying on domestic consumption and investment demand.
Indeed, it posted 9.1% growth in 2009 as private consumption outpaced output for the first time in many years while net exports subtracted four points from GDP growth.13 A gradual appreciation of the renminbi would help reduce the external surplus and create demand for products from the rest of the world.
Conversely, an abrupt revaluation would be risky because it could heighten the danger of overheating the Chinese economy by accelerating capital inflows and overstimulating asset markets.
In this case, monetary and fiscal policy should offset these pressures on spending by limiting the expansion of output.
This does not seem conducive to a more robust recovery of the global economy.
The emerging economies in the global environment and South-South trade Notwithstanding the short-term uncertainties, it is safe to say that the focus of economic, trade and financial growth will increasingly shift towards developing Asia and emerging countries generally, which drives home the importance of South-South trade and initiatives to strengthen it.
The combined GDP of the BRIC countries (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India and China) accounted for 15% and 22% of global output in 2008 at current prices and in purchasing power parity terms, respectively.
The developing-country share of foreign direct investment (FDI) was almost 40% in 2009.
The 2008-2009 financial crisis laid bare a tremendous Although the GDP grew 9.1% in 2009, exports in constant currency dropped 10.5% and imports rose 2.8% (WTO, 2010b). asymmetry: the developing countries are the main sources of savings, while it is the industrialized countries that are spending them.
The developing countries, especially China, are thus playing an increasingly important role in international finance.
Of particular note is China, which holds more than one fourth of global reserves.
China’s enormous and growing reserves are the direct result of its permanent current-account surplus and its efforts to manage the renminbi exchange rate.14 China is the principal holder of United States government debt, but it recently diversified its holdings as explained in greater detail in box I.4.
In this regard China thus far surpasses Japan, the second largest holder at US$ 990 billion.
With its enor mous reser ves, China has become a key player in the international financial markets.
China’s State Administration of Foreign Exchange (SAFE), which manages China’s international reserves, has actively invested in United States treasuries, with assets of US$ 868 million at the close of May 2010 (see the figure below).
To keep the value of the renminbi from strengthening too much and jeopardizing Chinese exports, the Chinese central bank purchases foreign currency and issues renminbis in exchange.
This keeps the exchange rate under control, but the United States and other countries accuse China of manipulating its exchange rate to keep the price of its products artificially low on the global markets.
The renminbi is still far from being an international reserve currency (Dobson and Masson, 2009), but it is already circulating informally in the Russian Federation, Pakistan, Viet Nam and five other Central Asian countries.
Currency swap agreements are in place with Hong Kong (Special Administrative Region of China), Malaysia and the Republic of Korea as a step towards using the renminbi for bilateral trade.
Argentina, the Republic of Belarus and, more recently, Brazil, have joined these initiatives.
These accords now total US$ 95 billion, with an additional US$ 15 billion to US$ 20 billion expected for Brazil (Deloitte, 2009).
It is believed that this decrease in China’s holdings is due to the Chinese authorities’ decision to diversify their sovereign bond holdings in favour of other markets, especially European ones.
The uptick after March could be due to their sudden withdrawal from the European markets in view of the euro zone’s fiscal crisis and resulting devaluation of the euro, which had a negative effect on returns in renminbis.
Before the onset of the European financial crisis, there were doubts as to whether the Chinese central bank would continue to buy large amounts of United States treasury bonds.
United States authorities were worried about the potential withdrawal of Chinese investors from these markets.
But during the first half of 2010 Chinese investors tended to withdraw from the European markets and turn to the United States market and, to a far lesser extent, to the Japanese market.
By late June 2009, short-term United States debt held by China reached US$ 159.5 billion, of which most (US$ 158.5 billion) was in Treasury bonds and the remainder was in agencies (US$ 244 million) and corporations (US$ 1.129 billion) (United States Department of the Treasury, 2010).
As Chinese reserves grew, China focused on purchasing United States treasury securities, which bear the explicit guarantee of the United States government, and, to a lesser extent, on debt issued by the United States mortgage agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, which bear the same implicit guarantee.
According to data from Japan’s Ministry of Finance (MOF, 2010), between January and May 2010, Chinese investors also invested 1.3 trillion yen (approximately US$ 14 billion) in Japanese sovereign bonds, most of them short-term.
In May alone, the Chinese bought bonds for the equivalent of 1.02 trillion yen and sold nearly 280 billion yen, for a net balance of 735 billion yen (US$ 8.2 billion).
If China’s appetite for investing in the Japanese market continues, it would be easier for the Japanese authorities to issue such instruments in the future while maintaining a relatively stable interest rate.
As part of the diversification process, SAFE purchased several foreign companies: in 2008.
China Investment Corporation, which manages sovereign funds equivalent to US$ 300 billion, is mandated to invest its enormous reserves overseas.
The share of South-South trade in the global total rose from 9% to 18% over the same period.
In short, more than 40% of world trade is between developing countries; 43% is South-South trade.
Although SouthSouth FDI flows are still small, intraregional FDI between developing countries in Asia and Latin America and the Caribbean has been dynamic and is showing signs of entering an important stage of international expansion.
By contrast, the relative importance of industrialized countries as an export destination has diminished.
The United State’s share of Latin America’s export basket fell from 60% in 2000 to 40% in 2009, while the European Union’s share has held at 13%.
The most important developing-market export destination is the region itself, accounting for 18% of total exports, followed by emerging countries in Asia with 6%.
Trade between the emerging countries of Asia and the Middle East has continued to grow and is based mainly on oil, while intra-Asian South-South trade is known as the best example of global production complementarities.
South-South trade in Latin America becomes even more relevant if Mexico is excluded from the figures; in this case, nearly half of the region’s exports are South-South.
The region’s South-South trade is balanced equally between intraregional and interregional trade.
The developing countries of Asia, especially China, have become relevant trade partners for several of South America’s economies.
Strong Chinese demand for food, energy, metals and minerals has benefited the countries that export them, improved their terms of trade and spurred their economic growth.
Exports from Latin America and the Caribbean to China rose 5% during the recent crisis while exports to other regions fell 27%.
Nevertheless, developing Asian countries are still an underexploited export market for Latin America and the Caribbean.
The region’s trade with those countries is subject to the same —albeit more marked— limitations that affect the region’s international trade in general.
Latin American and Caribbean exports to Asia are skewed more to natural resources than its exports to the rest of the world.
The region needs to find ways to increase the degree of processing of its natural-resource-based export products and seek new Asian markets for differentiated, higher value-added products.
The countries of Latin America should take greater advantage of dynamic growth in Asia and the Pacific, developing new ties to forge ahead in innovation and competitiveness (a gap in Latin America’s experience) and strengthen the link between trade and investment and between production and technological development.
Developing countries in Asia offer investments that could provide complementary financing for regional initiatives, especially in infrastructure and energy.
A major challenge is to identify projects in areas in which Asian investments are most viable, in order to expedite execution.
This should not only facilitate trade and trade ties with the Asia-Pacific region but also generate externalities for Latin American integration.
The strategic partnership with Asia should therefore be linked to the modernization of regional integration so as to create unified markets with increasingly shared standards and a more certain legal environment.
To raise their profile in Asian production and export chains, the countries of the region need to form trade and investment associations that go beyond free trade agreements.
Although such agreements can be useful, they are not enough to generate the scale and the critical mass required to promote trade and technological partnerships between the two regions or to reduce the marked asymmetries between the large volumes of trade and the small volume of reciprocal investments.
But this does not obviate the need to carefully examine the potential effects of proliferating free trade agreements in the Asia-Pacific region, since they could lead to a shift in trade that would work against exports from Latin America and the Caribbean to developing countries in Asia.
In short, in the next few years the region will face an international environment that will probably be less dynamic than in the past five-year period, with uncertainties that will serve as a reminder that the cycle of financial instability is not over.
This environment in turn highlights the emerging economies’ increasingly important role in trade and finance.
Latin America and the Caribbean are strengthening those South-South ties, particularly in its remarkably dynamic trade with China and other Asian economies.
Future prospects for growth in the region will depend more and more on reinforcing those ties.
Auboin, Marc (2009), “Boosting the availability of trade finance in the current crisis: background analysis for a substantial G20 package”, Policy Insight, vol. 35, June.
Masson (2009), “Will the renminbi become a world currency?”, China Economic Review, vol. 20, No. 1.
Vilarrúbia (2010), “Crisis y recuperación del comercio internacional: el papel de la financiación al comercio”, Información comercial española.
Introduction This chapter presents a preliminary overview of the Latin American and Caribbean region’s trade performance in the 2000s.
The chapter also includes a detailed This analysis is a preliminary version of a more exhaustive examination of the situation which will be prepared by the Division of International Trade and Integration for publication later this year. review of the trade policies applied by the countries of the region during and since the crisis.
As discussed in the 2008-2009 edition of Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy, these measures were more targeted and more restricted in scope than those applied by industrialized countries.
Regional trade during the crisis and post-crisis periods Trade in goods After having experienced one of the steepest declines in the last 72 years in 2009, the Latin America and Caribbean region’s trade flows rebounded in 2010.
An upturn in the value of trade (exports plus imports) of 20% (21.4% in exports and 17.1% in imports) is expected this year.2 This upward trend is being seen in all the subregions, although export growth is much stronger in South America and CARICOM than in Central America, the Dominican Republic, Mexico and Panama.
Import growth will be highest in the MERCOSUR countries, but will be far below the regional average in the Andean countries and CARICOM (see table II.1).
The main factors driving this recovery have been the growing strength of the world (including the region’s) economy and China’s and the rest of Asia’s sustained demand for a several of the Latin America and Caribbean region’s commodity exports.
The recovery has also been fuelled by better terms and conditions for commercial credit (see box II.1) and the trade incentives offered by some countries, especially Brazil and Mexico (see section C).
The slower growth rate for imports is largely accounted for by the weaker demand for imports of goods in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, which is in turn a result of the drop in its GDP and the restrictions placed on imports as part of its reform of the foreign-exchange market.
Under this reform, since June 2010 all purchases of foreign exchange have been handled by the central bank through the new Transaction System for Foreign Currency Denominated Securities (SITME).
Many institutions have also created a liquidity window to supplement their traditional programmes.
These efforts to provide more financing options in line with the rules of the World Trade Organization (WTO) have been led by regional development institutions and programmes.
The countries of the region have also had greater access to financing from export credit agencies in the United States, Europe and Asia.
When credit markets in Latin America began to run into trouble, official lenders increased their credit operations, especially in the energy and telecommunications sectors in Brazil and Mexico, and some firms in the region used credit from these sources to shore up their export and import activities during the crisis.
In 2008, Brazil’s and Argentina’s central banks launched a new clearance system for trade between the two countries.
The objective of the Local Currency Payment System is similar to that of the Reciprocal Payments and Credit Agreement of the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA), which is to reduce the need to buy and sell dollars for trade operations between participating countries.
Under this system, importers make payments in their local currency, and the Argentine and Brazilian central banks settle the dollar amount of such payments between themselves.
With the help of these financial measures, since mid-2009 the region has regained much of the ground that it had lost during the crisis.
The increase in the cost of finance seen in late 2008 and 2009 was reversed, thus bolstering banks’ lending capacity.
O’Connell, “Americas trade and supply chain: lessons learned”, Trade Finance, April 2010.
A close analysis of the upturn in the value of trade shows that prices have improved both for the region’s exports and for its imports.
The sharper increase in export prices seen in 2010 will improve the terms of trade and thus make up for part of the loss sustained by commodity exporters during the 2009 crisis as a consequence of the marked volatility of fuel prices.
Nonetheless, despite the strong recovery observed thus far in 2010, the region’s trading activity has not yet regained its pre-crisis highs in value terms (see figure II.1).
Value Price Volume Trade in services The crisis had considerably less of an impact on trade in services than it did on merchandise trade in 2009, with service exports and imports falling less (10.6% and 6.3%, respectively) than exports and imports of goods (22.6% and 24.9%, respectively).
Chile and Mexico had the steepest decreases in service exports, and Central America and Mexico experienced the sharpest declines in service imports.
Trade in services displayed greater resilience during the crisis for a number of reasons, including the fact that the production of services is less geographically dispersed and that many specialized service contracts in such areas as accounting, information technology and legal services are not necessarily subject to economies of scale.
In the service sector, imports have rebounded more strongly than exports, primarily because of the boost given to the transport sector by the recovery in international merchandise trade.
The fact that the “other services” category has been particularly robust during and since the crisis backs up the argument for specialization, since that category tends to be associated with knowledge-intensive activities (ECLAC, 2007 and 2008).
The region’s trade performance, by origin and destination The region’s export and import trade levels plunged in 2009 in the wake of the international crisis, but this trend was reversed in 2010, when trade flows in both directions made a comeback (see figure II.2).
The increase was particularly sharp in trade with China and the rest of Asia, and trade flows with those markets appear to be approaching their pre-crisis highs (see figure II.3).
This swift recovery reflects the high elasticity of international trade relative to the recovery of GDP, especially in South-South trade, and most particularly in the case of commodities.
The post-crisis period is defined as January-March 2010, which is when flows of service exports and imports stabilized.
Thanks to the post-crisis strength of the region’s trade flows, which is reflected in the fact that, as of June 2010, it had posted a trade surplus for 16 months in a row, a trade surplus of slightly over US$ 46 billion is expected for 2010.
As a result of the sharper increase in exports recorded for the first half of 2010, the region posted a surplus of slightly over US$ 22 billion for that period.
This was in large part due to the recovery of its trade with the United States, the trading partner with which it has the largest surplus of all.
Although the region continued to run deficits with China and the rest of Asia, its trade balances with these markets were significantly better in the second quarter of 2010 than before; this was thus another factor in the growth of the region’s overall trade surplus.
Exports to the European Union were higher in the first half of 2010 than in the first half of 2009, but the increase was smaller than it was for exports to the region’s other trading partners, including those within the region (see figure II.2 and table II.3).
This appears to be a sign that the region has been subject to some degree of trade contagion from the European crisis and that European demand for the region’s products will lag behind as a result.
The South American countries are the ones that are feeling this the most.
Costa Rica, as the Central American country with the closest trade links to Europe, is also being affected to some extent.
On the other hand, a number of countries in the region, particularly Mexico and the Central American and Caribbean countries, will benefit from the more vigorous recovery of import demand from the United States.
This is also true of the upswing in demand in intraregional markets, where the recovery is more solid and is being led by private consumption and exports.
The figures for trade with the United States for January-June 2010 reflect the positive impact that its economic recovery is having on the region’s exports, as well as that country’s strengthening demand for goods (see figure II.4 and table II.3).
Imports from the United States were up during this period in all the countries except the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, whose imports from this source are expected to drop further as a result of the projected reduction in its GDP and tighter exchange controls (ECLAC, 2010d).
Bilateral relations with China and the rest of Asia are of particular importance because trade flows with these countries have been the most robust before, during and since the crisis (see figure II.4).
The international crisis notwithstanding, in 2009 the region’s exports to China were up by 8%, with most of the increase being accounted for by Brazil and, to a lesser extent, by Colombia, Costa Rica, Guatemala and Honduras.
In the first half of 2010, during what has been defined as the post-crisis period, exports to and imports from China both climbed steeply (see figure II.5).
Since the crisis, growth rates for exports to Asia (and especially China) have risen sharply for all the countries except Costa Rica and Honduras, and some countries (including Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, El Salvador and Plurinational State of Bolivia) have actually posted triple-digit growth rates (see table II.3).
Intraregional export trade plunged by more than 30% during the crisis, but has surged since then, particularly in the case of trade flows between Mexico and the rest of the region (see figure II.6).
The data available on the region’s exports, disaggregated by country, for the first half of 2010 point to a fairly evenly distributed recovery for the region, with two exceptions: Colombia and Honduras.
Colombia’s negative growth rates are attributable to the tighter restrictions applied by the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela on imports in general, and on those from Colombia in particular.
In the case of Honduras, political tensions in 2009 had an impact on relations with El Salvador, Guatemala and Nicaragua, but export and import figures are expected to improve in the second half of the year, once these difficulties, which are not directly related to trade, are overcome.
The region’s trade, by product category As the region emerges from the crisis, it has been witnessing growth in all product groups, but especially in mining and petroleum, which jumped by almost 59% in the first half of 2010 (see table II.4).
The upswing in agricultural products has also been particularly robust, with these exports surpassing their pre-crisis levels (see figure II.7).
Exports of manufactures and mining products will have to gain greater momentum if they are to return to their pre-crisis levels in value terms, however.
Demand for imports of intermediate goods and fuels has been on the rise, but a full return to pre-crisis averages will depend on the region’s success in sustaining high growth rates.
Trade policy responses during and after the crisis Trends in the region’s trade policies since the second half of 2009 demonstrate that policymakers resisted the temptation to revert to protectionism following the outbreak of the recent worldwide economic crisis (ECLAC, 2009).
As shown in table II.5, most of the restrictive measures implemented during this period were confined to just a few countries.
The number and scope of these types of measures are quite limited, given the scale of the external shocks affecting the region in 2009 (for more information on the measures taken or announced by each country during the period under review, see table A.1 in the annex).
This relatively positive assessment of the region’s trade policy outcomes notwithstanding, individual countries’ policy positions differed significantly.
Veliz, “Medidas de política comercial adoptadas por los países de América Latina para hacer frente a la crisis”, Opciones de política comercial para mitigar los impactos de la crisis internacional en América Latina: ¿hay margen para el diseño de políticas regionales?, Red MERCOSUR, 2010.
This is reflected in the 38% upswing in the number of antidumping investigations initiated in 2009 compared to 2008 (see figure II.9a), which was far larger than the overall increase at the global level (6%).
The number of definitive anti-dumping measures applied in the region jumped by 130% between 2008 and 2009 (see figure II.9b), which also greatly outstrips the corresponding figure at the global level (28%) (Bown, 2010).
This increase does not necessarily bear any direct relation to the crisis, however, since the anti-dumping measures applied in any given period are usually the outcome of investigations that were begun between 12 and 18 months earlier (Bown, 2010).
In 2009, Argentina initiated the largest number of new anti-dumping investigations in the region (55% of the total) and applied the largest number of definitive anti-dumping measures (48% of the total).
A wide range of Chinese industrial products were the main object of the investigations and of the measures applied in the region.
As in the rest of the world, the number of new investigations and new anti-dumping measures decreased in the first quarter of 2010 (see figures II.9a and II.9b).
The large number of investigations initiated in the second half of 2009 may translate into an increase in the number of measures applied during the second half of 2010, however.
There are a variety of reasons why the countries of the region show a preference for trade defence measures and for anti-dumping duties in particular.
For one thing, these measures are generally less visible internationally than an increase in tariffs would be and can target specific countries and specific industries within them, whereas tariff increases should, in principle, be applied to all markets that do not enjoy preferential status under the most-favourednation regime.
They can even be applied to imports from trading partners that do enjoy preferential status and that are usually not subject to tariffs,5 and can be justified as a response to unfair trade practices.
Nevertheless, it is important to note that the large number of dumping Unless the preferential agreement prohibits the use of anti-dumping measures between the parties, as is the case with the free trade agreement between Chile and Canada.
This is not the case with most of the trade agreements and subregional integration systems in Latin America, however. investigations initiated in the region during the reporting period will not necessarily lead to the application of definitive anti-dumping measures in all cases.
Partly, in all likelihood, for the reasons just discussed, there have been relatively few tariff increases during the reporting period.
Those that there have been have mainly been applied within the framework of MERCOSUR in specific sectors, such as dairy products, textiles and clothing, and leather items.
There have been some cases in which other types of non-tariff barriers have been used, such as non-automatic import licensing, minimum customs values and quotas, but these measures have generally been confined to one, two or three countries in each case.
One recent development which falls outside the domain of trade policy as such but which has important implications for external trade has been the establishment of a dual exchange rate for imports in the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela.
Under this system, which was established in January 2010, the exchange rate for public-sector and priority imports (the latter category includes, for example, some foods, medicines and medical equipment) is 2.6 bolívares fuertes to the dollar, whereas the rate for other imports is 4.3 bolívares fuertes to the dollar.
This makes imports that fall into the second category more expensive and consequently promotes the substitution of local products.
This measure may have a considerable negative impact on Venezuelan imports from countries such as Argentina and Chile, which produce various items that are subject to the 4.3 bolívares fuertes/dollar exchange rate (ICTSD, 2010).
In spite of the above assessment, a number of informal trade barriers have been in use in the region during the reporting period.
These barriers’ lack of transparency hinders efforts to check, monitor and quantify them.
For example, in the case of Argentina, unspecified restrictions on imports of food products that are also produced locally were announced in May 2010 and immediately prompted complaints by Brazilian and European Union authorities.
The European Union even indicated that these restrictions could hamper its negotiations with MERCOSUR, which had been relaunched in June 2010 after a hiatus of nearly six years.7 Since August 2009, the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela has also imposed various import restrictions on Colombian products following the suspension of its diplomatic relations with that country in July 2009.
The agreement to re-establish diplomatic relations between the two countries reached by their Presidents on 10 August 2010, which includes the normalization of trade relations among its objectives, is thus a very promising development (see box II.2).
They also decided to work towards bilateral integration as a means of promoting the development of both nations, particularly border areas and communities, where they agreed to undertake joint social and economic programmes.
The Presidents of these two countries also decided to set up the following five commissions: 1.
A commission to work on debt payments and the reactivation of trade relations. 2.
A commission to work on an economic complementarity agreement between the two countries.
A commission to develop a work plan on social investment in border areas. 4.
The main exception has been the announcement by the Brazilian authorities in May 2010 regarding preferences for domestic goods and services in government procurement operations.
Argentina’s imposition of a large number of antidumping measures and other restrictions on imports from China (see table A.1 in the annex) has prompted initial indications of possible retaliation by that country.
In April 2010, China temporarily suspended imports of soy oil from Argentina and, since then, has reduced its imports of that product by a considerable amount.
While the official reason offered for this was the adoption of stricter quality standards, the Chinese authorities themselves have intimated that the cuts are connected with Argentina’s increased barriers to its exports.
Argentina is the world’s largest exporter of soy oil and, prior to the introduction of these restrictions, China was the largest importer (accounting for 45% of Argentine exports of this product in 2009).
Argentine and Chinese authorities have met a number of times in recent months in an attempt to resolve this situation.
A number of trade liberalization measures have been taken in the region during the reporting period, including tariff reductions in various countries.8 For example, Brazil cut its tariffs for a large number of industrial goods that are not produced in the country (including capital goods, electrical items, metallurgical products, paper and pulp, graphics, medical equipment and motor vehicles).
On 1 January 2010, Mexico launched the second stage of the broad industrial tariff reductions that it has been phasing in since January 2009 (ECLAC, 2009).
Other countries, such as Ecuador and Nicaragua, have moved to cut tariffs on strategic products (especially intermediate and capital goods not produced in the country, in Ecuador’s case, and foodstuffs, in the case of Nicaragua).
Along these same lines, in November 2009 the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela lowered its tariffs on more than 50 items that are used in the generation of electricity.
In addition, Ecuador terminated the balance-of-payments safeguard that it had introduced in January 2009.
Summing up, the region’s responses to the external trade crisis have varied substantially from one country to the next and have encompassed both restrictive and liberalizing measures.
Be that as it may, trade restrictions clearly heightened the impact of the crisis on intraregional trade to some extent, and this has particularly been the case in South America.
In 2009, intraregional trade shrank by about 30%, which was five points more than the decrease in the region’s total imports.
This is partly attributable to the fact that intraregional exports are more income-elastic than extraregional exports because they include a larger proportion of manufactures.
It is also likely, however, that part of this differential is due to the trade barriers put in place since late 2008, which have had a particularly strong impact on some of the main intraregional trade flows (such as the Argentina-Brazil and Colombia-Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela flows).
As was also true in the first half of 2009, Central America and the Caribbean erected far fewer new trade barriers than South America (see table A.1 in the annex).
The Central American governments, in particular, continued to work to deepen subregional integration during this period.
Preliminary overview of export performance in the 2000s As the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean approach the end of the first decade of the twenty-first century, it is clear that they are more closely linked to the international economy and have more open trade regimes than before.
This crisis was the most serious that the world had known since the Great Depression of the 1930s, and it triggered the steepest downturn in world trade since that time.
The region did not emerge unscathed from this series of events but, in the second half of 2009, it benefited from the swift recovery of world trade and GDP.
This seems to be an appropriate point in time to look at what effects these events have had on external trade and, hence, on the region’s integration into the international economy.
A preliminary analysis of the Latin America and Caribbean region’s external trade performance is offered in the following section.
Another section is devoted to trends in intraregional trade during the past decade.
The analysis of trade in goods is based on data from the United Nations Commodity Trade Database (COMTRADE), while that of trade in services is based on the services accounts of the countries’ balance of payments.
The overall picture An analysis of the region’s export and import growth rates for the last three decades points to a decline in its exports of manufactures in the 2000s relative to the results for the 1990s.
These figures are heavily influenced by the slowdown in Mexico’s exports in that period, however.
In fact, if the results for Mexico are factored out of the regional calculations, the growth rate for the region’s exports jumps by over four percentage points (see table II.6).
Two different export patterns thus emerge since, while South America doubled its export growth rate, Mexico and Central America saw their rates plummet by over 50%.
All the South American countries except the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela had export growth rates above the regional average, whereas the growth rates of all the Central American countries, apart from Nicaragua, were below it.
Over the last two decades, the region’s imports have slowed more than its exports.
Here again, if the results for Mexico are factored out of the equation, the decline is much smaller.
The plunging growth rate for imports in Argentina (the rate dropped from 23% in the 1990s to just 5% in the 2000s) has also been an influential factor.
These figures reflect the collapse of Argentine imports in 2001 and 2002 in the wake of the demise of the convertibility regime and the region-wide downturn in 2009.
The slackening growth rates for Mexico’s and Central America’s exports and imports in the 2000s are linked, since these countries’ exports contain a large component of inputs that are imported by the maquila industry.
The results of a comparison of the Latin America and Caribbean region’s exports of goods with those of other world regions are cause for concern (see figure II.10), since the region’s exports, whether measured in terms of value or volume, grew by less than world exports and the exports of the developing countries of Asia, Africa and the Middle East.
This, viewed in conjunction with the fact that the region’s exports also grew more slowly than they had in the 1990s, leads to the unavoidable conclusion that the Latin America and Caribbean region’s export effort is falling far short of what is required and that its share of world trade is shrinking.
The region’s service exports expanded at a slightly higher rate in the 2000s than in the 1990s (see table II.7), although more slowly than world exports of services and those of Africa, Asia, China and the European Union (see figure II.11).
In other words, the region’s share of global service exports is also on the decline.
An examination of the countries’ individual results for exports of services shows that, as in the case of merchandise exports, Mexico’s performance during the 2000s was significantly weaker than that of the region as a whole.
The performance of the Caribbean subregion (where services account for a large share of total exports) was also lacklustre.
No clear pattern emerges for South America or Central America, where the results were quite uneven from country to country.
In order to provide a detailed analysis of the modest showing of the region’s exports in the 2000s compared to those of its main competitors in the international market, the following section offers an examination of disaggregated figures for the different components of goods and services exports at the country and subregional levels in the 2000s and 1990s.
Exports of natural resources and manufactures A first-level disaggregation of trade data that is quite revealing in analytical terms is the breakdown of total exports into natural resource exports and those that entail some degree of processing.
The resulting figures indicate that exports of primary products surged in the 2000s, marking up a growth rate four times as high as the rate for the 1990s,9 and that they were particularly strong in the South American and CARICOM countries (see table II.8).
As mentioned earlier, the stronger showing of exports of natural resources stems from the sharp rise in the prices of these subregions’ main export products, especially in the case of petroleum, copper, soy, coffee, bananas, iron and steel.
These price rises are closely associated with the emergence of the Chinese economy as a major source of demand for raw materials, as a central player in the world economy and as an increasingly important trading partner for the region.
The region’s performance in exports of manufactures marks a sharp contrast with its showing for primary products, with the growth rate for the former falling sharply from one decade to the next.
This overall rate conceals sharp differences from one country to the next, however.
On the one hand, Mexico witnessed a steep drop in the average growth rate for its exports of manufactures, as did countries such as Costa Rica, the Plurinational State of Bolivia and the member countries of CARICOM.
Panama and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela also posted negative average growth rates.
On the other hand, South America’s average growth rate for manufactured exports surpassed the region’s overall average and its own rate for the 1990s.
When exports of manufactures are broken down into technology-intensive and factor-intensive goods, it becomes clear that natural resource-intensive manufactures were more dynamic10 (see table II.9).
On the other hand, exports of low-, intermediate- and high-technology manufactures, as well as engineering- and labour-intensive manufactures, had below-average growth rates, which points to a weak link between the export sector and knowledge-intensive production sectors.
Only three countries (Cuba, El Salvador and Panama) had negative growth rates for raw material exports in the 2000s.
Central America, where low-technology manufactures have seen the strongest growth, and the Caribbean, where intermediate-technology exports have risen the most, have not followed this trend.
The positive effects that price increases for many of South America’s export products had on its terms of trade during much of the 2000s were a decisive factor in this regard (see box II.3).
Between 2000 and 2008, these countries’ average export growth rate was 22% when measured by value, whereas it was just 6% when measured by volume.
Prices for crude oil, copper, iron ore, soybeans, natural gas, and meat and offal rose the most.
Mexico and Central America, on the other hand, registered larger increases in export volumes (see figure 1).
The statistics on the prices and volumes of the region’s exports for 2009 and the projections for 2010 underscore the price volatility of the items in the region’s export basket.
In 2009, as international demand slackened in the aftermath of the crisis, exports dropped by somewhat over 12% when measured by prices and by 9.7% when measured by volume.
The projections for 2010 are encouraging for both components, although the anticipated outcomes are still quite disparate between regions, specifically between South America on the one hand and Mexico and Central America on the other.
This increase in the relative share of the region’s total exports represented by unprocessed raw materials corresponds to the figures for the “primary products” heading in the tables and figures given in the following sections.
Processed raw materials are included in the “natural resource-based manufactures” category rather than in the “primary products” category.
For the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, the prices of crude oil and petroleum products climbed by an average of 17% between 2000 and 2008, while the volume of those exports slipped somewhat (‑1.5%).
As a result, the oil industry’s share of total exports, measured by value, rose from Chile, the combined price increase for just three products (copper ore, processed copper and non-monetary gold) was nearly 26.6%, while the volume of those exports increased moderately (4.6%).
As a result, the share of total exports represented by these products jumped from 41% in rise in the prices of four products (fresh vegetables, copper, petroleum products and non-monetary gold) was coupled with a 14% increase in volume.
Because manufactures account for a larger share of total exports in these other countries, however, their overall average price increases were smaller.
Thanks to the steadily increasing prices of the region’s main export products, its terms of trade improved by an average of 20% between 2000 and 2008, although the rate differed from one area to another.
The terms of trade for the Andean countries and Chile improved by slightly over 70% and 60%, respectively, but they rose less for MERCOSUR and Mexico and worsened by some 18% for Central America, primarily because it is a net importer of food and fuel.
In 2009, after the crisis, the terms of trade for the region as a whole deteriorated, but the Central American countries posted a 6.2% improvement in their terms of trade thanks to lower prices for fuel and some food items (see figure 2).
Projections for 2010 indicate that the region will witness a further 7.1% rise in its terms of trade, with the Andean countries gaining more ground than MERCOSUR and Mexico (see figure 2).
Primary product exports have thus taken a larger share of the total at the expense of high-, intermediate- and low-technology manufactures, which expanded by far less than they had during the 1990s.
This is consistent with the slower growth of exports produced by engineering- and labour-intensive manufacturers.
The differing growth rates for exports of primary products and manufactures gave rise to a shift in the export shares of Mexico and South America.
A number of other South American countries (especially Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Peru) increased their share of the region’s total goods exports.
The low growth rates posted by the CARICOM countries and the Dominican Republic, meanwhile, meant that their share of the region’s total merchandise exports shrank.
Service exports Service exports over the past decade were relatively robust in the balance-of-payments categories of “other services” and “transport”, but fairly flat in the “travel” category, where the growth rate was below the average for the preceding decade (see table II.10).
As a result, the first two categories, particularly “other services”, have increased their share of the region’s total commercial services exports (see figure II.14).
As in the case of goods exports, Mexico’s service exports performed less well than those of the region overall, with a sharp downswing in “other services”.
This may reflect the weaker showing of Mexico’s merchandise exports, since some components of the “other services” category, such as legal, logistical, financial and accounting services, are directly linked to export activity.
These figures should be viewed with caution, in any event, since the available statistics on trade in services are less reliable than the figures on merchandise trade, although the countries of the region have been making a determined effort to increase the accuracy of their services trade information systems.
The member countries of CARICOM for which information is available also performed less well than the region as a whole.
The upswing in service exports in the “transport” and “other services” categories went hand in hand with the boom in exports of goods and especially exports of natural resources.
Panama also posted double-digit growth rates in all three categories, thus consolidating its economy’s increasingly service-oriented profile.
Changes in the structure of trade in goods and services during the 2000s The overall structure of the region’s exports of goods and services changed significantly between the start and end of the 2000s, as the share of total exports represented by primary products jumped by nine percentage points (from 25% to 34%).
The growth of this category has largely been at the expense of high-, intermediate- and low-technology manufactures, since the share of natural resource-based manufactures expanded slightly and the share of services remained fairly steady (see table II.11).
This expansion of the share of primary products was seen throughout South America, as well as in Mexico, the Dominican Republic and the member countries of CARICOM.
The exception to this trend was Central America, where the share of primary product exports shrank and the share of low-, intermediate- and hightechnology manufactures swelled by slightly over six percentage points.
Panama and Cuba are special cases, since their already strong specialization in trade in services increased further during the decade, with services coming to account for nearly three quarters of these two countries’ total exports.
As noted earlier, this readjustment between the share of primary product exports and the shares of manufacturing and, to a lesser extent, services exports is primarily a consequence of the rise in raw materials’ prices sparked by heavy demand from Asia.
The strength of primary product exports has not, however, been accompanied by equally robust growth in exports of related services (logistics, quality certification, marketing, biotechnology consulting services and so forth).
In the closing years of the decade, China’s and the rest of Asia’s share of total exports from the region began to climb, as will be discussed in greater detail in the section on trends in intraregional and extraregional trade.
Concentration and diversification in the region’s trade in goods, by product and destination market An analysis of changes in the degrees of concentration and diversification in the region’s exports of goods by product type, based on the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index, points to an increase in diversification between the start of the 1990s and the late 2000s (see figure II.15).
This aggregate result is the sum total of sharp differences across countries, however.
Brazil, Argentina and Mexico are the most diversified, just as they were in the early 1990s.
Countries that rely on raw material exports (such as the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Ecuador, the Plurinational State of Bolivia, Chile, Panama and, to a lesser extent, Paraguay and Peru) are at the other extreme.
The levels of concentration in all these countries, except Panama and Paraguay, have risen during the last two decades.
The Central American and Caribbean countries, Colombia and Uruguay are somewhere in between, all within a range that is considered to be highly diversified (a Herfindahl-Hirschman coefficient below 0.10).
All the Central American countries except Honduras registered major gains in their degree of diversification.
In terms of destination markets, the region’s exports as a whole are still quite heavily concentrated, although slightly less so than before.
This can be accounted for by the closer geographical ties that Mexico, the Central American and Caribbean countries and, to a lesser extent, Ecuador, Colombia and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela have with their main export market: the United States.
For most of these countries, the increase seen over the last decade in the share of their exports going to Asia, which had previously been quite small, has been a factor in reducing the high degree of market concentration exhibited by some of these countries’ exports in the early 1990s.
Mexico is the only country of the region with a GLI coefficient of over 0.33, the threshold above which a more technologically sophisticated pattern of specialization is considered to exist (see table II.12).
Where intraregional bilateral trade is concerned, three countries exhibit high levels of intra-industry trade (Brazil, Colombia and Argentina); 10 others have coefficients of between 0.10 and 0.33, which point to potentially more technologically sophisticated trade relations that have yet to take firm hold.
Inter-industry trade predominates in the four remaining countries (a GLI coefficient of below 0.10).
When the figures are broken down by trading partner, the Latin America and Caribbean region’s highest intra-industry trade coefficients are with the United States and with itself.
This result is in keeping with the higher percentage of manufactures in trade flows within the region and with the United States.
The Grubel-Lloyd Index measures the intensity of intra-industry trade between any two countries, that is, a situation where the two are trading similar goods.
The closer the coefficient is to 1, the greater the level of trade in similar industries, a high level being generally associated with a more technologically sophisticated trading pattern.
Bilateral trade flows with Asian countries are largely made up of inter-industry trade, with Latin America primarily exporting raw materials and importing manufactures.
This situation is a cause for concern, particularly since China and the rest of Asia are becoming an increasingly important market for the region’s exports.
So far, the region has been benefiting from the dynamism of these markets by drawing upon its traditional, static comparative advantages.
The challenge is to prevent the flourishing trade between the two regions from reproducing and entrenching a centreperiphery trade pattern in which China emerges as a new centre and the countries of the Latin America and Caribbean region as a new periphery (ECLAC, 2010b).
What is needed, then, is to move towards trade relations that are more in keeping with the economic and social development patterns that this region needs.
Intraregional trade during the past decade13 The levels of intraregional trade flows (measured by exports) in Latin America and the Caribbean have fluctuated between 12% and 20% of total trade over the past 25 years, with the figure for the late 2000s being 18% (see figure II.16).
At the end of the 1990s it was buying nearly 60% of the region’s total exports, but this percentage has been declining, and by 2009 the United States’ share had shrunk to 40%.
In contrast, China’s share, which was less than 1% in the early 1990s, has climbed steadily during the 2000s and now stands at nearly 7%.
Despite the international and regional financial shocks experienced by the region between 1990 and 2009, export flows to markets within the region grew more than flows to outside markets as a whole (see table II.13).14 This pattern is seen to a greater or lesser extent in the region’s exports to all the various groups and to Chile and Mexico.
This long-standing trend was interrupted in 2009, however, when a procyclical trend re-emerged, and intraregional trade fell off steeply in the aftermath of the international crisis, plunging by nearly 28%—five percentage points more than the drop in exports to the rest of the world.
The evident conclusion is that the intraregional market’s potential effectiveness in cushioning extraregional demand shocks was not adequately exploited during the crisis.
In 2001, trade in information technology products plummeted and world import demand slumped.
In addition, fallout from the Asian crisis and sluggish international demand triggered two financial crises within the Andean Community and MERCOSUR following bank failures in Ecuador and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, in the first case, and the end of the convertibility regime in Argentina, in the second.
An examination of the composition of exports to the region’s main markets shows that intraregional trade contains a larger share of manufactures and is more diversified.15 Practically 80% of the total is accounted for by manufactures, primarily natural resource-based and intermediate- and low-technology products.
By contrast, exports to the European Union, China and the rest of Asia display a more concentrated trade pattern.
This is largely a reflection of the composition of Mexico’s exports; if they are factored out, then the share of the total represented by manufactures falls to 50%.
Much as was found when exports to markets within and outside the region were compared, the figures for exports within each integration scheme reveal a much higher percentage of manufactures than is the case with exports to other markets.
Manufactures make up 82% of total trade flows within each of the four subregional integration schemes, but natural resources account for a larger share of exports to other subregions.
This is particularly true in the cases of the Andean Community and MERCOSUR (see figure II.18a).
Trade in manufactures within the different integration schemes involves a significant percentage of products with a greater technology content (especially intermediate and low technologies), as well as natural-resource-based manufactures, the latter being particularly important in the case of CARICOM (see figure II.18b).
Products figuring prominently in intraregional trade flows include prepared foods, items used in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries, plastics, white goods (stoves, washing machines, heaters, etc.), motor vehicles and textiles.
All these categories of goods are mainly produced by medium-sized and small firms, together with a limited number of highly internationalized enterprises operating on a region-wide scale (ECLAC, 2010c).
The growth rates for exports of manufactures from the various subregional integration schemes to the Latin American and Caribbean countries in 2000-2008 outstripped the rates for those subregional schemes’ total exports of manufactures to the world as a whole in every case (see table II.14).
Only the growth rates for Latin America’s exports of manufactures to Asia and China were higher.
This is a reflection of the fact that China and the rest of Asia have become important markets for Mexico’s and Costa Rica’s exports of electronics and spare parts.
Using Lall’s classification (2000), manufactured products are defined as those involving some degree of processing, which differentiates them from basic commodity exports.
Thus, for example, they include processed copper, petroleum-based oils and agroindustrial products.
Although the composition of exports to China, the rest of Asia and the European Union is clearly concentrated in commodities and natural resource-based manufactures, there are some exceptions.
For example, a larger proportion of Costa Rica’s and Mexico’s exports to China are made up of high-, intermediate- and low-technology manufactures.
An analysis of the data indicates that, in addition to representing a larger share of the total, intraregional exports of manufactures have been very dynamic and did not slacken during the 2003-2008 boom in commodity markets.
In order to gain a fuller understanding of the nature and importance of intraregional trade, an attempt was made to identify the pairs of countries and subregions between which intraregional trade flows have been strongest in the late 2000s.
This analysis confirmed that the bulk of intraregional trade takes place within integration schemes: 24% of all intraregional trade in Latin America and the Caribbean occurs among the countries that belong to MERCOSUR, and another 10% takes place among the Andean countries;17 64% of all intraregional trade occurs within South America, and 8% within Central America and the Caribbean.
These types of flows will be referred to as “intrasubregional trade” (see table II.15).
The member countries of the Andean Community plus the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela are classified as “Andean countries”.
Trade flows between different subregions (“intersubregional trade”) are strongest between the Andean Community and MERCOSUR.
This type of trade is also greater from South to North, as the South American integration schemes export more to Central America and the Caribbean than the reverse, owing to the South American countries’ larger production scales and the more inward-looking nature of intrasubregional trade among the Central American and Caribbean countries, as will be discussed in a later section.
As measured by the value of exports, Mexico has closer trade ties with the countries of South America and the Central American Common Market (CACM) than with the member countries of CARICOM, Cuba, the Dominican Republic and Panama.
The exports of South American integration schemes to Mexico are also significant, although Latin America is the destination market for no more than 4% of Mexico’s exports.
In order to take the analysis of intra-industry trade presented in the preceding section to a deeper level, the Grubel-Lloyd Index coefficients were calculated for trade between each pair of countries in the region based on trade statistics for 2008.
The highest-density intra-industry trade flows were found to be those occurring between El Salvador and Guatemala and between Costa Rica and Guatemala.
These flows could already be classified as intra-industry trade (with a GLI coefficient of over 0.33) as far back as 1990, and the data for 2008 point to a considerable increase that has raised their coefficients to over 0.5 in both cases.
The highest GLI coefficient for 2008 (0.56), and the one that rose the most during the period in question, corresponds to Argentina and Brazil.
Other bilateral trade flows that qualify as intra-industry flows for 2008 are those between El Salvador and Costa Rica, Mexico and Brazil, and Ecuador and Colombia.
These countries are promising candidates for the establishment of regional or subregional value chains, and public policymakers should explore and help develop that potential.
The country pairs with the second-highest intraindustry trade potential, based on data for 2008 (GLI coefficients of between 0.10 and 0.32) include Mexico and Argentina, Colombia and Peru, and Argentina and Uruguay.
Finally, some countries’ bilateral trade relations with countries in the same subregion are clearly of an intra-industry nature.
Conclusions This preliminary overview of the region’s export performance in the 2000s suggests that, against a backdrop of mounting challenges in terms of innovation and competitiveness, the region has not succeeded in making significant headway towards greater integration into world trade flows.
On the one hand, the South American countries have, in the aggregate, turned in a stronger export performance, but this showing is closely associated with exogenous factors, such as stronger world demand for raw materials and the resulting price rises.
On the other hand, Mexico and Central America, whose exports include a larger share of manufactures, have turned in a weaker performance in the aggregate as a consequence, in large part, of greater competition from China in their principal market (the United States), especially for products that are intensive in unskilled labour.
The expansion of natural resource-related sectors has not been a significant contributing factor for technological capacity-building in the region (ECLAC, 2010a; Pérez, 2010).
Although higher rates of return and even productivity gains have been seen in these sectors, the absence of proactive policies to enhance productivity has resulted in widening productivity gaps between the countries of the region and those on the leading edge, especially the United States.
The region’s trade relations with Asia thus offer both opportunities and challenges.
One major challenge is to prevent the growing trade between the two regions from reproducing and entrenching a centre-periphery trade pattern in which Asia (particularly China) emerges as a new centre and the countries of the Latin America and Caribbean region as a new periphery.
There is thus a pressing need to promote higher levels of innovation and endogenous development of technological capabilities, both in natural resource-related sectors and in manufacturing and services.
Production activities and trade flows linked to natural resource-intensive comparative advantages need not necessarily hinder the region’s efforts to position itself more advantageously in the international economy, but can instead complement the Latin American and Caribbean countries’ development strategies.
The hypersegmentation of global markets, on the one hand, and the acceleration of technological developments in areas such as the life sciences and cognitive sciences, on the other, offer a variety of opportunities to decommodify the raw materials that the region exports by means of stronger differentiation and the incorporation of value added and know-how (Rosales, 2009; Pérez, 2010).
This, in turn, requires the development of specialized services that allow more value to be generated and captured up and down the product value chain (product design, advertising, improved input management, logistics, transport, engineering and consultancy services, and insurance and finance, among others) (Kuwayama and Durán Lima, 2003).
This offers a way of enhancing forward and backward linkages by strengthening the ties between direct exporters and the rest of the economy, especially SMEs, which are the main source of job creation in the region.
The ultimate aim, then, should be to work towards a systemic form of competitiveness, and public policy has an essential role to play in this.
In order to be successful, such an effort will require the coordination of a wide range of policies, including policies to increase the competitiveness of SMEs by means of programmes for improving quality certification systems and enforcing technical and sanitary standards, as well as training programmes.
All these components are needed in order to foster a greater presence for SMEs in export flows, clusters and international value chains.
Actions to further the development of intraregional trade are also desirable in view of the positive features of these trade flows, which include greater manufacturing intensity and a greater presence of SMEs, which are key drivers of high-quality job creation and social cohesion.
Furthermore, intraregional markets can cushion demand shocks originating outside the region if improved financing mechanisms for this type of trade are made available.
The available data indicate that the potential offered by intraregional trade was not sufficiently exploited during the recent crisis.
Durán Lima, José and Alessia Lo Turco (2010), “El comercio intrarregional en América Latina: patrón de especialización y cálculo de potencial exportador”, Opciones de política comercial para mitigar los impactos de la crisis internacional en América Latina: ¿hay margen para el diseño de políticas regionales?, Red MERCOSUR.
Durán Lima, José, Sebastián Herreros and Gonzalo Veliz (2010), “Medidas de política comercial adoptadas por los países de América Latina para hacer frente a la crisis”, Opciones de política comercial para mitigar los impactos de la crisis internacional en América Latina: ¿hay margen para el diseño de políticas regionales?, Red MERCOSUR.
Introduction of non-automatic import licensing for products such as textiles, car parts, electrical equipment and machinery, vehicles, clothing, chemicals and paper.
Introduction of “reference values” for imports of products such as fungicides, electromechanical domestic appliances, electric lighters and compact discs from particular countries.
Establishment of reference values for exports of fruit, dairy products, honey and copper products Reduction of tariffs from 35% to 2% for up to 200 hybrid automobile units from outside MERCOSUR (March 2010).
Creation of new tariff lines, in some cases resulting in lowered tariffs for products such as cod (from 10% to 0%) and electrical equipment (from 18% to 0%) from 1 January 2010.
Creation of new tariff lines, in some cases resulting in higher tariffs for products such as heatresistant bricks, valves for oleohydraulic or pneumatic transmissions and electric razor parts.
Various tariff reductions (from a range of 12% to 14% to one of 0% to 2%) for capital goods and information technology and telecommunications products in December 2009, March 2010 and Introduction of a 10,000 ton quota for powdered milk imports from Uruguay in the period from September to December 2009.
They include, among others, (i) fiscal benefits for mainly export-oriented firms; (ii) the creation of Exim Brasil, a subsidiary of the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES) specializing in external trade; (iii) creation of a foreign trade guarantee fund; and (iv) a system of preferences for locally sourced goods and services in public procurement processes.
Conclusion of dumping investigation into imports of blenders from China (provisional duties reimbursed).
Start of safeguard investigation into powdered milk and Gouda cheese in September 2009.
Start of dumping investigations into: Wheat flour from Argentina (December 2009) Melamine resin panels from Austria (March 2010) Gradual dismantling of balance-of-payments safeguard adopted in January 2009.
Imposition in August 2009 of a foreign-exchange safeguard consisting in the application of the Ecuadorian national tariff to 1,346 products from Colombia.
Introduction in May 2010 of mixed tariffs on imports of footwear (6 dollars a pair plus 10%) and of textile products and wearing apparel (5.5 dollars per net kilo plus 10%).
Reduction to 0% for six months of the import tariff on machinery and equipment for the sugar industry (from May 2010).
In December 2009, MERCOSUR temporarily increased its common external tariff for 11 tariff lines covering dairy products (from 14% and 16% to 28%), 157 tariff lines covering yarns and fabrics (from 14% and 16% to 18%) and 3 tariff lines covering leather articles (from 20% to 35%).
The tariff increases for dairy products are provisional, effective until 31 December 2011.
End of safeguard investigation into imports of cotton yarn (no measures were applied).
Establishment of an import quota (up to 10,000 units) for vehicles from Argentina.
For public-sector imports and those identified as of high priority, the applicable exchange rate is 2.6 bolívares fuertes to the dollar.
For all other imports the applicable exchange rate is 4.3 bolívares fuertes to the dollar.
Venezuela (Bolivarian Republic of) Removal in November 2009 of value added tax from imports of electricity production and generation equipment and material for a period of five years.
Imports require prior authorization from the Ministry of Science, Technology and Intermediate Industries stating that the imported goods are not produced locally or are not available in sufficient quantities.
Import ban from November 2009 on certain new air conditioning appliances with high electricity consumption, and on used air conditioners and refrigerators.
Lifting from May 2010 of the import ban on parts and components for passenger vehicle assembly under the imported assembly material for vehicles (MEIV) regime.
Introduction of sanitary restrictions on imports of meat and milk from Nicaragua in January 2010.
Abolition of anti-dumping duties on imports of polyvinyl chloride from the United States.
No anti-dumping duties were applied; the existing price agreement with the Danish exporter of the product was terminated.
Start of anti-dumping investigation into: Seamless steel tubes from China Denim cloth from China Application of definitive anti-dumping duties to steel chains from China (renewal of measure imposed in July 2003).
Second stage (from 1 January 2010) in the five-year reduction of the general (most-favoured-nation) tariff applied to 97% of manufactured products from 1 January 2009.
Start of a safeguard investigation into imports of toilet paper in January 2010.
A previous investigation into the same product that began in October 2009 ended in November the same year without any measures being taken.
Application of provisional safeguards to imports of tubular fabric and polypropylene sacks.
Start of safeguard investigation into imports of socks and stockings (March 2010).
Start of a safeguard investigation into imports of washbasins, bathtubs, china sanitary ware and the like from China (April 2010).
Increase in tariffs on alcoholic beverages (15 to 30 percentage points) and on cigars and cigarettes (30 percentage points) in September 2009.
Introduction The state of trade integration initiatives in Latin America and the Caribbean varies significantly from one subregion to another and between different integration schemes.
In particular, the region’s most ambitious trade integration initiatives have been seriously affected by divergent views on the issue —as evidenced, for example, by the abandonment of the project to establish a South American free trade area, conceived in 2005 under the then South American Community of Nations (SACN).
Similarly, negotiations on setting up a free trade area under the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA) have made little progress since they began in 2004.
The Bolivarian Alliance for the Peoples of Our America (ALBA) has been the most outspoken critic regarding the benefits of trade liberalization for the region.
ALBA and its associated initiative known as the Peoples’ Trade Agreement were both established in 2004 in direct opposition to the Free Trade Area of the Americas (FTAA) project, now also discontinued.
There follows a brief analysis of the status of regional cooperation on physical infrastructure, given its importance for integration, not least in the area of trade.
Lastly, this chapter examines the main milestones since the second half of 2009 as regards trade negotiations conducted by Latin American countries and integration schemes with partners outside the region.
The situation in the Caribbean subregion will be addressed in chapter IV.
Recent developments in the different subregional schemes For the most part, MERCOSUR has shown positive developments in the past 12 months.
At its summit held in San Juan, Argentina, on 2 and 3 August 2010, agreements were reached on a number of measures to improve the customs union, including the gradual elimination of double charging of the common external tariff from 2012, the adoption of a mechanism for distributing customs revenue and the adoption of a common customs code.
These three issues had been the subject of intensive negotiations in MERCOSUR since 2004.
This plan of action has a four-stage timeline, the target being to complete the liberalization programme in 2015, as provided under the 1997 Montevideo Protocol on Trade in Services (see table III.1).
To date, the members of MERCOSUR have exchanged views on the current situation and the process is still at the first stage.
In accordance with the provisions of the Montevideo Protocol, the seventh round of negotiations on specific services-related commitments was completed in December 2009 with the adoption of the States parties’ schedules of specific commitments.
The six previous rounds of negotiations led to the consolidation of the existing restrictions, but did not bring about a significant liberalization of the market within the free trade zone (ECLAC, 2008).
Consolidate the regulatory status quo of sectors where no commitments yet exist.
Eliminate restrictions on market access and national treatment in the least sensitive sectors.
Take steps to harmonize or complement regulatory frameworks in sectors where this is deemed necessary.
Identify mechanisms to boost the share of less developed operators in the regional services market.
Eliminate restrictions on market access and national treatment in sectors of intermediate sensitivity.
Take steps to harmonize or complement regulatory frameworks in sectors where it is deemed necessary.
Identify domestic regulatory measures that could constitute bureaucratic barriers to intra-zone trade, with a view to their elimination.
Eliminate restrictions on market access and national treatment in the most sensitive sectors.
Eliminate domestic regulatory measures that have been identified as bureaucratic obstacles to intra-zone trade.
A third positive development was the creation in December 2008 of the MERCOSUR Guarantee Fund for Micro, Small and Medium-sized Enterprises, which aims to guarantee, directly or indirectly, the loans taken out by micro, small and medium-sized enterprises involved in productive integration activities in MERCOSUR.
Member States will make an initial contribution of US$ 100 million (Argentina will contribute 27%, Brazil 70%, Paraguay 1% and Uruguay 2%).
In the same vein, a decision of July 2009 grants national treatment to enterprises from or headquartered in any MERCOSUR country in contracts awarded in the framework of FOCEM-financed projects.
Another recent initiative with great potential is the local-currency payment system introduced for bilateral trade.
The system is expected to lower the transaction costs associated with using the dollar as an intermediary currency, thereby boosting the share of smaller enterprises in trade between MERCOSUR countries (see chapter II).
To date, this scheme has been applied only to trade between Argentina and Brazil, with as yet modest results, but it is being used increasingly.
In July 2009, the scope of the local-currency payment system was extended to all transactions among MERCOSUR States.
At the institutional level, in December 2009 a significant step was taken towards the accession of the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela to MERCOSUR when the Brazilian Congress approved the country’s full membership, which now remains to be approved only by the Congress of Paraguay.
With regard to trade negotiations with extraregional partners, the most significant development in the past year for MERCOSUR is certainly the resumption, announced in May 2010 and brought to fruition one month later, of talks for an association agreement with the European Union, which had been suspended since 2004 (see section D).
Between December 2009 and March 2010, the free trade agreement (FTA) signed in December 2007 between MERCOSUR and Israel came into force in Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay.
This is the first time that MERCOSUR has entered into an FTA with a partner from outside the region.
An FTA was also signed with Egypt during the San Juan Summit in August 2010.3 One significant pending challenge for MERCOSUR is to expedite progress towards the elimination of nontariff barriers to intra-zone trade including, especially, non-automatic import licensing.4 Progress in the recently resumed negotiations with the European Union could help to catalyse this process.
Another challenge is to make greater use of the mechanisms provided by MERCOSUR for the settlement of trade disputes between its members.
In these cases, members tend to take unilateral action and discuss it only afterwards with the partner involved (INTAL, 2010).
The bilateral trade frictions between Argentina and Brazil mentioned in chapter II are an example of this.
A third challenge is to incorporate the regulations issued by the MERCOSUR decision-making bodies more fully into the regulatory framework of the member States.
It is estimated that over 50% of these regulations have not been incorporated (INTAL, 2009).
Also during this period, the different views of individual member States of the Andean Community on the nature of integration and the role of trade in development have become clearer.
Taking into account the added effects of the recent crisis, it has not been a good time to progress from the existing zone of free trade in MERCOSUR has preferential agreements with India (signed in 2004 and in force since June 2009) and with the Southern African Customs Union (signed in 2008, currently at the ratification stage).
These agreements have a more limited scope than a free trade agreement, both because they cover fewer products and because they involve reciprocal preferential tariffs, but not the total elimination of bilateral trade tariffs.
Despite this, the members of the Andean Community have been extending their cooperation and integration in a range of areas.
Progress has been made in incorporating social, political, production and environmental elements into the integration process, in line with the concept of comprehensive integration.
These efforts are evident in the 12 areas of the strategic agenda adopted in February 2010 by the ministers of foreign affairs and trade of the Andean Community countries.
Underpinning the agenda is a recognition of member States’ diverse approaches and points of view; on that basis, it seeks to preserve the achievements made over the four decades of the Community’s existence and to advance pragmatically in new areas on which there is consensus, such as economic complementarity and trade integration (see box III.1).
Trade integration and economic complementarity; promotion of sustainable production, trade and consumption 4.
Physical integration and border development The liberalization of trade in services has been suspended in the Plurinational State of Bolivia since December 2006, in accordance with Decision No. 659 of the Commission of the Andean Community (“Service sectors subject to further liberalization or regulatory harmonization”).
Decision No. 659 also provides that financial services and the further liberalization of the minimum percentages 5.
Against this background, significant efforts are under way to develop Andean technical standards, strengthen Andean agricultural health, food safety and quality systems, and facilitate trade.
Having, with few exceptions, achieved mutual free trade years ago, the CACM members are now working to complete their planned customs union.
Progress is continuing on the modernization of the Standard Central American Tariff Code, the development of Central American technical regulations for various products, the mutual recognition of sanitation records for food, beverages, medicines, cosmetics and toiletries, and the establishment of an integrated customs system.
The inclusion of Panama in the Central American Economic Integration Subsystem is also under way, with effective completion planned for late 2011 (see box III.2).
As a precursor to the signing of the agreement on Panama’s admission to the Subsystem, from March 2010 the country participated actively (having previously been an observer) in the negotiation of an association agreement between Central America and the European Union, which was concluded in May 2010 (see section C).
Closer trade relations between Panama and the rest of Central America have gone hand in hand with increasing integration in other areas.
These include energy, with Panama forming part of the Electrical Interconnection System for Central America (SIEPAC), aimed at creating a common Central American market for electric power.
Panama is also coordinating efforts to develop a Central American short-distance sea transport system (cabotage) (Martínez-Piva and Cordero, 2009).
Under the terms of its agreement with the European Union, Central America, as a subregion, made commitments in a range of areas (see box III.3), which should lead to a substantial reduction in the remaining barriers to the free movement of goods.
The protocol establishes the terms, time frames, conditions and modalities for Panama’s inclusion in SIECA and the conditions for the adoption and entry into force of the protocol, which include Panama’s participation in COMIECO within the framework of the relevant legal instruments.
Between the signature of the joint declaration and 31 December 2010, Panama will carry out all the preparatory technical activities required to join SIECA.
These activities are set down in the Technical Cooperation Agreement between the Ministry of Trade and Industry of Panama and SIECA, and include the holding of specific thematic workshops to engage national stakeholders from the country’s public and private sectors in the debate, with the participation of delegates from the other Central American countries.
The Ministry of Trade and Industry will prepare and submit to the governments of the five countries of SIECA, by April 2011, a draft protocol on Panama’s incorporation into the Central American economic integration process, which will contain the terms, conditions, modalities and time frames for proceeding with the inclusion of Panama in the SIECA mechanisms.
The provisions of the draft protocol will take account of the FTA between Panama and Central America, as well as its bilateral protocols.
Once the negotiations for the accession protocol have been concluded, it will be signed by the Government of Panama and those of the other SIECA member countries, and procedures will be initiated for its ratification by the National Assembly of Panama by December 2011.
The terms, time frames, conditions and modalities for the inclusion of Panama in SIECA may vary or be adjusted depending on the outcome of the association agreement talks between Central America and the European Union, the signing of which could involve a commitment to further regional economic integration that would include Panama as one of the Central American parties.
Panama took part in negotiations on the association agreement between Central America and the European Union, but in order for the agreement to come into effect for Panama, the country will first have to ratify the SIECA accession protocol and adopt the required Central American economic integration instruments.
However, any delay in completing Panama’s admission to SIECA will not delay the entry into force of the association agreement between Central America and the European Union for the other member States of the economic subsystem.
Competition • Adoption of regional standards and establishment of a regional competition authority (seven years).
Government procurement Reasonable efforts to establish a single point of access, at the regional level, for public procurement.
Cumulation of origin is without doubt technically complex, given the different origin regimes in trade agreements between the member countries of this initiative and the fact, as noted earlier, that some members still lack preferential trade agreements with other members of the group.
Nevertheless, cumulation of origin could contribute significantly to greater integration of the production chains of the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative economies by giving producers and exporters in each member country access to a broader range of suppliers while maintaining their preferential treatment in destination markets.
The table overestimates the degree of free trade among the members of the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative since it does not distinguish between the different types of agreements currently in effect.
While some of these are FTAs with almost universal product coverage, others cover a more limited number of products and grant preferential margins instead of eliminating tariffs.
The process is envisaged to be flexible, allowing each country to advance in both modalities.
Its role includes promoting policy coordination and the improved positioning of Latin America and the Caribbean in relation to major international developments, as well as communication, cooperation, linkages, coordination, complementarity and synergy between subregional bodies and institutions.
Also during the first Unity Summit of Latin America and the Caribbean, heads of State and Government from the region adopted the Cancún Declaration, which contains a programme of work covering a wide range of areas.
For example, to continue pursuing integration initiatives at various levels (regional, subregional, multilateral and bilateral) as a means to advance towards the objective of setting up a common economic forum for Latin America and the Caribbean, although it does not indicate how such convergence will be reached.
The Declaration similarly urges trade ministers to seek consensus on measures to stimulate intraregional trade in goods and services.
It remains now to be decided how these general mandates will be translated into concrete action.
Whatever advances are made in the recently launched negotiations among the Latin American Pacific Basin countries, it should be recalled that the ultimate objective is Latin American convergence.
Only that will enable the countries to leverage the benefits of convergence towards broader markets and greater production chain integration, and make Latin America and the Caribbean more attractive as a potential economic and trading partner compared with other regions (particularly Asia).
As a result, the ongoing process in the Pacific Basin should be seen as a step towards that goal, not an end in itself (ECLAC, 2010a).
The Plurinational State of Bolivia withdrew from the previous agreement in December 2009, considering the chapters on investment, services, intellectual property and government procurement incompatible with the country’s new Constitution, which had entered into force in February 2009.
The scope of the new agreement is limited to trade in goods and leaves unchanged the liberalization commitments agreed under the previous free trade agreement.
Continue to promote integration initiatives at the regional, subregional, multilateral and bilateral levels that are open to international trade in the belief that they will enable the establishment of a common economic forum for Latin America and the Caribbean. 17.
Furthermore, we entrust them to implement measures to boost the market access of exports from developing countries, especially smaller economies and landlocked developing countries.
We want to create the conditions that enable those countries to obtain a greater and more equitable share of the market so that they can reap the benefits of intraregional trade. 18.
Furthermore, we entrust our trade ministers to continue working towards the creation of a fairer and more equitable multilateral trade system that is able to satisfy the needs of developing countries, especially least developed countries.
In that regard, the urgent need to conclude the negotiations of the Doha Round of negotiations of the World Trade Organization (WTO) should be emphasized. 19.
Show our recognition to the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) for its contributions to policies leading to the development and integration of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean and express support for its thirty-third session to be held at the end of May in Brazil.
The scope of the existing agreement is very limited, granting reciprocal tariff preferences on only about 300 products.
By contrast, the FTA now being negotiated would eliminate tariffs on a substantial number of products, in line with the stipulations of the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The agreement would be comprehensive, with chapters on issues including cross-border trade in services, telecommunications, maritime services, investments, government procurement, dispute settlement and cooperation on environmental and labour issues.
In accordance with that mandate, negotiations have been under way since November 2009 with a view to converging the three FTAs currently in force between Mexico and Central America —between Mexico and Costa Rica, between Mexico and Nicaragua, and between Mexico and the Northern Triangle— into a single agreement.
This type of initiative has obvious benefits: it facilitates progress towards the creation of a wider economic space in Meso-America, promotes the integration of production between Mexican and Central American enterprises and reduces transaction costs.
Progress on cumulation of origin, for example, would enable Central American enterprises to incorporate inputs from different countries in the subregion into the products that they export to Mexico without losing access to the tariff preferences established in the existing agreements.
Agreement on the text of the instrument, as well as on the common set of rules of origin to be applied to trade between the six countries, is expected to be reached in 2011.
There is already an incipient link, through cumulation of origin, between Mexico and the signatory countries of CAFTA-DR.
Following an amendment to this agreement in 2008, the United States allows the application of preferential rates to a certain quota of clothing made in Central America and the Dominican Republic with Mexican fabric, while Mexico does likewise for a certain quota of clothing made in Central America and the Dominican Republic using raw materials from the United States.
The rapprochement between Brazil and Mexico in recent months represents a new development with a large potential impact for strengthening Latin American economic integration.
It is the result of a decision adopted by President Lula da Silva and President Calderón in August 2009 to explore the options for deepening their countries’ bilateral economic and trade relationship.
Although neither country has announced the beginning of talks, in May 2010 they agreed on the terms of reference for the negotiation of a possible strategic agreement on economic integration.
The terms of reference are as follows: • The agreement will be broad.
Among other measures, a mechanism that contributes to legal certainty and the predictability from the point of view of economic agents in both countries will be established. • The parties will follow the negotiating principles that the substance of the negotiations will dictate the duration of the process and that nothing will be agreed until everything is agreed.
They are the region’s largest and second-largest economies, respectively, as well as the most populous countries and the leading exporters of goods and services (see table III.3).
A trade agreement between the two countries could help to diversify the structure of Mexico’s foreign trade, lessening its dependence on the United States market (which received 81% of Mexico’s exports in 2009).
This, in turn, would help to lessen the knock-on effects on Mexico’s economy of drops in United States demand.
Negotiations are at an advanced stage with an agreement remaining to be reached on the treatment of only a few sensitive products.
One issue to be clarified over the coming months is how a possible trade agreement between Brazil and Mexico would relate to the trade agreements currently in force between Mexico and MERCOSUR and its member countries.
Mexico signed Economic Complementarity Agreement No. 54 with MERCOSUR in July 2002, whose objectives include the creation of a free trade area between Mexico and MERCOSUR.
It stipulates that all these other agreements will remain in force until the implementation of the free trade agreement between Mexico and MERCOSUR.
It will also be necessary to assess the implications of possible bilateral negotiations between Brazil and Mexico for the external negotiations strategy of MERCOSUR, which has so far favoured joint negotiations involving all four members.
The only exception to this was when Uruguay signed an FTA with Mexico in 2003.
The new agreement liberalizes trade in services between the parties in a wide range of sectors, including architecture, engineering, editorial, construction, advertising and distribution services.
Since 2009, MERCOSUR and Colombia have been engaged in negotiations on trade in services, and the possibility of Ecuador joining this process in the future remains open (LAIA, 2010).
Accordingly, even if only concluded projects and those currently being implemented are considered concrete progress, the overall progress in 2010 remains significant: 236 projects (46.1% of the portfolio) and US$ 43.869 billion invested (58.5% of the portfolio’s total estimated investment).
It can be seen that, although the international economic crisis affected the subregion during that period and led to an economic standstill in 2009, concrete progress was made in terms of physical integration.
Its objective is to promote physical integration in the areas of transport, communication and energy and seek to foster sustainable development in the region.
The work of the Meso-America Project began in 2001, under the Puebla-Panama Plan, but it was officially relaunched in mid-2008.
Its objective is to promote the regional integration of the south-southeast of Mexico and Central America (as well as Colombia and the Dominican Republic, which joined later) through the implementation of infrastructure and social projects to boost development and make the region more competitive, and thereby have a positive impact on the countries’ populations.
Under the Meso-America Project, cooperation, development and integration activities are being coordinated in various thematic areas, including transport, energy, telecommunications, trade facilitation and competitiveness, health, environment, natural disasters and housing.
Annual variation Level of progress The recent international economic crisis significantly affected the world’s economies and global trade and its negative repercussions extended to the infrastructure sector and transport services.
Regional integration processes in Latin America would therefore be expected to slow, in line with previous experiences.
However, an assessment of the physical dimension of integration (infrastructure and services) shows that the most significant initiatives in this area have made substantial progress despite the crisis.
The Initiative for the Integration of Regional Infrastructure in South America (IIRSA) and the Meso-America Project in Central America are good examples of the progress made in terms of positive integration at the regional level (Cipoletta, 2009).14 An analysis of progress in the project portfolios of both initiatives is presented below.
A regional perspective determines the selection of IIRSA projects, which must be agreed on by all 12 South American countries.
As at February 2010, the project portfolio included 512 transport, energy and communications infrastructure projects, split between nine areas of integration and development and representing an estimated investment of US$ 75.087 billion.
In early 2010, concrete progress was being made on 382 (74.6%) of the 512 projects in the IIRSA portfolio: 52 projects (10.2%) had been concluded, were at the active preparation stage.
Information is given for 2007-2009 and early 2010 so that different periods during the Initiative can be compared with the business cycle in the region (boom period, beginning of the crisis and trough).
Estimated investments in IIRSA portfolio projects that can be considered advanced or concluded totalled US$ 68.2 billion in 2009 and US$ 68.9 billion as at February 2010.15 Those figures represented 35% of total estimated investments for the IIRSA portfolio in 2007, which represents a positive trend in progress on regional integration infrastructure projects.
This upward trend is seen not only in the amounts invested, but also in the number of projects considered at an advanced stage or concluded in those years: 145 in 2007 (41% of all IIRSA Also noteworthy is the growth in estimated investment in the IIRSA portfolio as a whole in recent years.
In addition to making advances on the project portfolio, IIRSA has developed other tools to support its objectives.
One of these is the methodology for analysing the productive integration and development potential of value added logistic services, which will be used to identify the contribution of IIRSA projects to the integration of production in their area of influence and to ensure that sufficient logistic services are made available to the productive sector, as a user of infrastructure.
Another tool is the Strategic Environmental and Social Evaluation (EASE) methodology, a new environmental and social planning instrument that will make it possible to assess the combined impact of the projects in the portfolio.
Work has also been done on a methodology to evaluate transnational integration projects with a view to identifying, in an objective and transparent manner, the cost-benefit implications for each country of multinational projects.
This methodology is being developed with the support of ECLAC, and is in the final phase of development.
As part of its work plan on sectoral integration processes aimed at identifying regulatory or institutional barriers to the development of basic infrastructure in the subregion, IIRSA has produced numerous studies and analyses on the standards and regulations governing the provision of infrastructure services.
Sectoral integration processes are under way in relation to maritime, air and multimodal transport, border crossings, energy integration, funding instruments and information and communications technologies (ICT).
These processes are aimed at convergence of the relevant regulations and standards, competitiveness in service provision, This includes projects that have been concluded, that are being executed or that are at the pre-execution stage (the latter includes the pre-feasibility, feasibility and investment phases).
Projects that are at the profiling stage are excluded. promotion of private investment in infrastructure, and trade and transport facilitation.
In sum, IIRSA has achieved significant progress in the planning and implementation of physical integration projects at the regional level, even during periods of economic crisis; however, much ground remains to be covered to attain the proposed objectives.
A more efficient way must be found to reconcile the high priority afforded to developing the portfolio of infrastructure projects with the need to address the shortcomings in formulating and achieving the objectives of the sectoral processes, given that these processes are vital to energizing and boosting the efficiency of the infrastructure markets for integration in the region.
As at June 2009, the estimated investment in the network totalled US$ 7.192 billion and the construction and modernization works were 50% complete, equivalent to 6,629 kilometres of highways.
Prominent recent achievements include the inauguration of the highway between Guatemala and the state of Tabasco (Mexico) in October 2009 and the modernization of the border crossing The consensus-based implementation agenda comprises an initial selection of 31 high-impact projects on physical integration and sustainable development in the region, chosen from the IIRSA portfolio and agreed on by all the governments.
The aim is to stimulate the funding and implementation of the chosen projects in the short term.
As part of the modernization of customs and border crossings, progress has been made on applying the MesoAmerican Procedure for the International Shipment of Goods (TIM) at El Amatillo border crossing between El Salvador and Honduras, with reductions of up to 75% in transit time.
In summary, what stands out with regard to physical integration initiatives in the region (specifically IIRSA and the Meso-America Project) is that such integration works now exist (in the past there were virtually none) and, what is more, were still being built even at the height of the economic crisis.
Regional physical integration is progressing and being consolidated and extended and drawing-board projects have become concrete works.
These advances not only strengthen the economic and political integration processes under way in the Latin American and Caribbean region, they also facilitate the economic and social development of its countries.
Negotiations with partners outside the region Overview Between the second half of 2009 and the first half of 2010, many countries in the region continued to conduct trade negotiations with partners from outside the region, whether as part of their respective subregional schemes or individually.
A major factor in this was the scant progress in the Doha Round during the period, as well as the virtual standstill in the more ambitious trade integration projects within the region.
The flurry of negotiations in the last 12 months with parties from outside the region represents the continuation of a process that Chile and Mexico began in the 1990s, joined by several countries in the region during the 2000s.
A wide network of varied agreements has thus been taking shape, especially since the second half of the past decade, linking the region not only to its traditional markets outside the region (the United States and the European Union), but also, increasingly, to the Asia-Pacific region (see table III.4).
The negotiation of an association agreement between the European Union and the five countries of the Central American Common Market (CACM) plus Panama was successfully and formally concluded, as was a comprehensive trade agreement between the European Union, Colombia and Peru.
Both agreements must now be signed and ratified, and may enter into force in early 2012.
These instruments follow in the footsteps of the October 2008 agreement between the European Union and 15 countries of the Caribbean that are members of the Caribbean Forum of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (CARIFORUM) and the association agreements in place with Chile and Mexico.
The European Union thus continues to pursue its strategy, adopted in the mid-1990s, of forging closer ties with Latin America.
FTA: free trade agreement. b The other party to the agreement with the European Union is the Caribbean Forum of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (CARIFORUM), which is made up of 14 countries from the Caribbean Community (CARICOM) plus the Dominican Republic. c The Plurinational State of Bolivia withdrew from the negotiations in June 2008.
The decision to resume negotiations for an association agreement between the European Union and MERCOSUR, suspended since October 2004, was also confirmed at the Madrid Summit.
The first round of talks following this decision took place in June 2010.
Despite the difficulties described, one element that may augur greater progress in the negotiations this time is the sustained increase in China’s share of the region’s foreign trade.
According to ECLAC projections, if this trend continues, China could take the place of the European Union as the region’s second largest trade partner after the United States (see figure III.2).
In this context, achieving preferential access to MERCOSUR for its exports would allow the European Union to make up, at least partially, for the cost advantages generally associated with Chinese products.
Estimates and projections based on GDP growth rates from 2000 to 2009 in Latin America and the Caribbean, the Asia-Pacific region, China, the United States, the European Union and the rest of the world.
The growth in trade is expected to reflect the long-term growth rate of the economies.
Negotiations with the Asia-Pacific region Over the last decade, Asia has grown in importance substantially as a trade partner for Latin America and the Caribbean (see table III.6).
As noted in ECLAC (2010c), the region’s trade with Asia in 2009, particularly its exports, fell by less than it did with the rest of the world.
This was largely because China was the only leading destination country to record an increase in exports from the region in 2009, a year that was marked by the global crisis (see figure III.3).
This is evidence of the strength of the Chinese economy during the crisis, when it sustained demand for various commodities exported by the Latin American and Caribbean region.
The December figure for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela was estimated, following the trend of the previous three months.
The data for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela are national totals to which the structure of the IMF Direction of Trade Statistics was applied.
The growing importance of Asia as a trade partner, in addition to its economic buoyancy, has led several Latin American countries to develop preferential trade links with the Asian region.
These links are relatively recent and to date involve essentially the countries of the region that are on the Pacific coast (see table III.7).
In December 2009, Colombia and the Republic of Korea embarked on negotiations for an FTA, the first negotiations of this kind that Colombia has entered into with an Asian country.
While bilateral trade agreements can benefit the partner countries, a more coordinated strategy is needed between countries or groups of countries in the region to create a relationship with the Asia-Pacific region that will reinforce trade and investment links and strengthen production and technology ties.
Satisfying the needs of the vast Asian market may often need partnerships between the region’s exporting countries.
The creation of the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative is a preliminary step in this direction (ECLAC, 2009a, Another scheme that offers some potential as a platform for building closer ties between Latin America and the Caribbean and the Asia-Pacific region is the TransPacific Strategic Economic Partnership Agreement.
As this initiative is now being led by the United States, it is analysed in greater detail in the next section.
Negotiations with the countries of North America (a) United States In contrast to the progress made in the region’s trade negotiations with Europe and Asia, there have been no major developments in negotiations with the United States since the signing of the FTAs between the United States and Peru (April 2006), Colombia (November 2006) and Panama (June 2007).
It is particularly worrying that these last two agreements, as well as the FTA signed with the Republic of Korea in June 2007, have yet to be submitted to the United States Congress for ratification.
This is because of concerns expressed by members of Congress and a number of circles in the United States that shed doubt over the approval of the agreements.
In the case of Panama, the concerns relate to the transparency of the tax system and certain aspects of labour regulations, although a few months ago other obstacles were also raised.
As for the FTA with Colombia, several members of Congress have made its approval conditional on the adoption of measures to strengthen the protection of labour rights in that country.
The United States authorities have stated that they are working with the governments of Colombia and Panama to overcome these obstacles, but have not indicated when they might submit either agreement to Congress.
It seems unlikely that this will happen before the United States midterm elections, to be held in November 2010 (Van The aforementioned elements appear to indicate that the region is a low priority for United States trade policy.
TPP is the first free trade agreement to link three continents (America, Asia and Oceania).
Rather, it is a strategic move to make TPP a vehicle for trans-Pacific economic and trade integration.
There is some concern in the United States regarding the prospect that the various economic integration initiatives currently being implemented or under consideration could lead to the creation of an exclusively Asian bloc.
This would be the case if an initiative on an East Asian FTA, which would bring together China, Japan, the Republic of Korea and the 10 member countries of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), came to fruition.
Another initiative that is under consideration, put forward by Japan, is to set up a larger free trade area that would also include Australia, India and New Zealand.
These two projects are commonly referred to as ASEAN+3 and ASEAN+6, respectively According to the United States trade authorities, although it has little economic weight now, TPP offers the potential to build a trans-Pacific community that could counteract the centripetal tendencies now being seen in East Asia.
The United States is thus seeking to secure its economic interests in Asia, the most dynamic region in the world economy, which accounted for more than 60% of the United States trade deficit in 2009 (see table III.8).
To that end, the United States has expressed its intention to make TPP a twenty-first-century agreement that sets a high standard on trade matters and on labour and environmental protection issues, and which other countries from the Pacific basin could join in the future.
Chile, a founding member of TPP, has bilateral FTAs in place with Australia, the United States and Peru, and is currently in negotiations with Viet Nam.
Peru has bilateral FTAs in force with Chile, the United States and Singapore, while the other four participants (Australia, Brunei Darussalam, New Zealand and Viet Nam) together represented only 0.5% of its total exports in 2008.
An Export Promotion Cabinet was set up to develop and coordinate the implementation of the Initiative.
The last area will involve the negotiation of new trade agreements, particularly with countries in Asia, and the entry into force of pending agreements.
The opening of negotiations to bring the United States into TPP had already been announced at the end of the Bush administration (September 2008) by the United States Trade Representative at that time, Susan Schwab.
The decision was ratified by the Obama administration towards the end of 2009, following a review of United States trade policy. 23 As at June 2010, Viet Nam had not yet indicated whether it would participate definitively in the negotiations.
Other Latin American countries that have expressed an interest in joining the TPP negotiations, or have been cited as potential members, are in a similar situation to Chile and Peru.
For example, Costa Rica has FTAs with the United States (its main trading partner) and Chile, and in March 2010 signed an agreement with Singapore, while the remaining TPP participants (Australia, Brunei Darussalam, New Zealand, Peru and Viet Nam) together represented a mere 0.6% of its exports in 2009.
Although Colombia’s FTA with the United States has yet to enter into force, the country has arrangements in place with Chile (bilateral) and Peru (in the framework of the Andean Community).
The other five participants in the TPP negotiations represented only 0.5% of its exports in 2009.
In short, for the countries of Latin America, TPP in its current form is not a particularly attractive medium for gaining access to new key markets, except to the extent that it promotes cumulation of origin across all the agreements already existing between the eight countries that are party to the negotiations.
From the trade viewpoint, the appeal of TPP depends on new economies, especially Asian countries, joining the negotiations.
This does not seem likely in the short term, however, owing in large part to the constraints associated with the leadership of the process by the United States.
The credibility of United States negotiators is diminished by the uncertain approval prospects of outstanding agreements (all with countries from the Pacific basin) and by the absence of Trade Promotion Authority (TPA).
Under TPA, the United States Congress temporarily renounces its powers to introduce amendments to trade agreements negotiated by the Executive Branch and may vote only for or against such agreements.
TPA is considered essential for concluding any trade negotiations, since otherwise Congress can subsequently, at its discretion, modify what has been negotiated.
Aside from the opportunities it presents, the expansion of TPP poses risks for the countries of the region involved in the process.
As noted above, the United States is seeking to use TPP to set higher standards on issues such as intellectual property and labour and environmental protection.
Countries in the region that have already negotiated these issues in their respective FTAs with the United States run the risk of having to make new concessions in politically sensitive areas in connection with a wide range of public policies.
Another initiative which warrants mention although, strictly speaking, it falls outside the realm of trade, is Pathways to Prosperity in the Americas, launched by the United States in 2008.
The initiative reflects a certain change of vision in the approach of the United States to Latin America and the Caribbean, and the recognition that while trade spurs economic growth for the countries in the region, the gains have not been equitably shared.
Pathways to Prosperity seeks to close this gap by empowering small farmers, small businesses, craftspeople, workers, women, indigenous communities, Afro-descendants, young persons and vulnerable groups to participate effectively in the global economy.
To this end, the initiative’s aims include deepening cooperation to expand access to financial services, ensure the effective enforcement of fundamental labour rights and decent working conditions and expand educational opportunities.
In conclusion, the United States does not currently appear to have a clear trade strategy towards the region.
To date, its only clear strategic move as regards trade negotiations is TPP, a trans-Pacific project in which the participation of the Latin American and Caribbean countries is not the main objective from the United States’ perspective.
The priority that the United States has afforded TPP seems to reflect, among other things, an interest in establishing a counterbalance to the evolving Asian regional architecture.
In the past 12 months, significant efforts have been made to extend this network.
To this end, for example, the Canadian Parliament adopted legislation to implement the FTA between Canada and Colombia (signed in November 2008) in June 2010 and an FTA was signed between Canada and Panama in May 2010.
Lastly, on various occasions Canada has expressed an interest in increasing its links with the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative by participating as an observer at some of its ministerial meetings.
Conclusions As stated at the beginning of this chapter, the current climate in South America is not conducive to bringing to fruition the ambitious trade convergence initiatives that were launched in the mid-2000s.
This limits the scope for progress towards a larger integrated economic area, even though this would promote the further development of intraregional trade, with all the associated benefits, including a larger presence of manufactures and SMEs and greater potential for integrating production systems.
This situation contrasts with that in Meso-America, where intensive negotiations are taking place to enhance current agreements or replace them with more comprehensive schemes, and to create larger economic areas by combining existing arrangements.
Another trend that has started to take shape more clearly over the last year is the creation or strengthening of preferential ties between Central America (including Panama), Colombia, Mexico, Peru and Chile.
As the network of trade agreements between these countries becomes more complete, it will provide greater leverage for initiatives aimed at gradual trade convergence between the members of the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative.
As a first stage, this could take the form of agreements to allow cumulation of origin between these 11 countries.
Connecting the various bilateral agreements would foster integration of production among the members of the Latin American Pacific Basin Initiative and reduce the transaction costs associated with trade between those countries.
The overall dynamic of economic and trade integration initiatives in Latin America may change over the coming months depending on developments in the talks the region’s two largest economies, Brazil and Mexico, have been holding since August 2009 on possible negotiations for a strategic economic integration agreement.
A decision to open negotiations in 2010 could galvanize integration efforts throughout the region by linking the largest economies in South America and Meso-America.
Nonetheless, difficulties in progressing towards liberalization of intraregional trade must not prevent enhanced regional or subregional cooperation in other areas where equally urgent action is needed to deal with the competitiveness challenges facing Latin America and the Caribbean.
In this context, one issue being addressed in the main subregional integration schemes is trade facilitation, in recognition of its importance as a factor in competitiveness (for a brief comparison of activities in this regard within the various schemes, see annex table III.A-1).
Most countries in Latin America and the Caribbean have continued to actively pursue negotiations for trade agreements with partners from outside the region, especially the European Union and, increasingly, Asian countries.
These intensive negotiations are without doubt fuelled by lack of progress in the Doha Round, but could also be seen as a response to the abandonment or stagnation of the main trade integration projects in the region.
It will be particularly interesting to follow developments over the coming months in the recently resumed MERCOSUREuropean Union talks.
This situation poses a major challenge to Latin American trade integration, and there are no obvious solutions.
Indeed, it seems clear that several countries will continue to pursue negotiations with extraregional partners.
Consequently, it seems that the different subregional schemes must retain some scope for flexibility and even variable geometry so that this situation can be accommodated.
At the same time, the Plurinational State of Bolivia also filed several complaints against Colombia, Ecuador and Peru for non-compliance with Decision No. 667 of the Andean Community, which provides that the Andean Community shall negotiate with the European Union as a bloc.
It is thus recognized that, where it is not possible to negotiate as a Community, member countries may hold bilateral negotiations with third parties.
In 2009, it was agreed that paper certificates of origin would be gradually replaced by electronic ones.
At the national level, this has been used in Colombia since 2005, in Peru since 2000 (established by law), and in Ecuador, since 2008.
In Guatemala, this has been regulated under domestic law since 2008, in Nicaragua, since 2010, and in Costa Rica, since 2009.
A bill on this issue was drafted in El Salvador in February 2009.
With regard to technical standards, all three schemes are involved in the Pan American Standards Commission (COPANT).
Significant progress has been made and work is in hand on outstanding regulations.
The 2009 plan of work includes activities to establish and implement an Andean Food Safety System and update existing standards.
Common standards are compulsory as soon as they are adopted and enter into force when they have been incorporated into domestic legislation in each State party.
Significant progress made in harmonizing the criteria and procedures for the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures.
Integrated border control It has been established that national administrative procedures at border crossings will be compatible and carried out simultaneously, where possible.
The border integration and development policy (1999) defines the areas for border integration.
Once approved by MERCOSUR, the standards are compulsory, but their entry into force is subject to their incorporation into domestic legislation.
Implementation and harmonization of customs procedures (code, regulations and single manual for customs procedures) Not addressed.
The unified customs document and the harmonization of customs procedures entered into force on 1 June 2010.
Following the resolution of 97% of the disputes associated with defining the customs code, the code may be adopted at the MERCOSUR summit on 2 and 3 August 2010.
El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras have made further progress towards harmonizing procedures.
Awaiting adoption of the integrated tariff at the summit in August 2010.
An information system on the Central American tariff has been set up.
On 9 April 2010, the draft of the new version of the Community customs transit regulations, which will be more effective, was completed.
In the plan of work for July-December 2010, there are plans to sign the customs procedures for international land transport.
Introduction The global economic and financial crisis has exacerbated the economic difficulties of Caribbean economies, revealing once again their vulnerability to external shocks.
This chapter analyses recent trends and future prospects of the Caribbean Community (CARICOM), which is an incomplete customs union of 15 states in the Caribbean including most English-speaking countries in the region, Suriname and Haiti.
This analysis of trends and the outlook for CARICOM is timely for several reasons.
First, the Community is in the middle of a process of reforms to complete the Caribbean Single Market and Economy (CSME)1 by 2015, and it is thus useful to take stock of the progress made so far towards this goal.
Second, countries in the region have been hit hard by the global economic and financial crisis, in part because their economies and public finances were already fragile before entering the turmoil.
These events have diverted the attention of policymakers to mostly domestic issues, while postponing the implementation of various subregional integration commitments already in the pipeline.
Third, in 2008 an EPA with the European Union entered into force.
Given the potential that the EPA offers in strengthening Caribbean trade integration, it is opportune to assess the implementation status of this Agreement.
Fourth, it is necessary to take stock and assess the initiatives, programmes and policies (both in place and forthcoming) aimed at diversifying the region’s highly concentrated export base.
The latter country accounted for the lion share of CARICOM GDP and trade in 2008.
Levels of development also vary significantly, with per capita income ranging from US$ 729 in the case of Haiti to US$ 21,683 in the case of the Bahamas.
In this context, CARICOM distinguishes between less developed countries (LDCs) and more developed countries (MDCs), with the former group receiving special treatment.2 The LDCs are more dependent on international trade taxes than the MDCs and, as such, are more vulnerable to revenue losses from tariff liberalization.
Several CARICOM members have high levels of public debt as a share of GDP.
Within CARICOM, seven small islands have advanced further in their integration within the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).
The purpose of the Caribbean Single Market and Economy is to establish a single economic area in which businesses can operate to boost productive efficiency and foster higher levels of investment and trade integration.
The groups of more developed and less developed countries were defined in the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas of 2001.
Nevertheless, most of the CARICOM States have been classified as middle income countries.
The impact of the crisis and its aftermath on CARICOM trade The global financial and economic crisis hit CARICOM trade hard, mainly because, as exporters of a limited number of commodities, the economies in the region depend heavily on external markets.
As this region’s goods exports consist mainly of fuels and other commodities, the decrease in volume was exacerbated by the drop in commodity and food prices in the same year.
Bearing in mind that Trinidad and Tobago, Suriname and Jamaica have large goods-producing sectors relative to the rest of the economy, these declines were very significant.
Preliminary data for 2010 show that exports have begun to rebound, even though there is a great deal of variation between countries (see table IV.2).
Within CARICOM, Haiti deserves special attention, as it was affected not only by the global crisis, but also suffered an earthquake in January 2010.
Despite the huge human and economic losses, exports seem to have withstood the quake relatively well. 3 CARICOM services exports suffered relatively less from the crisis.
This is in part because trade in services resists better to a crisis than trade in goods, being less dependent on trade finance, less fragmented internationally and less subject to demand swings (Borchert and Mattoo, 2009).
Most CARICOM economies are largely service providers, with service sectors dominated by tourism and to a lesser extent financial services.
As can be seen from table IV.2, services exports achieved more moderate increases than goods exports in the past decade or so, but they withstood the crisis in a much better fashion than goods exports.
The value of CARICOM services exports dropped by slightly over 10% as opposed to a 43% drop in goods exports, with Jamaica and Suriname showing even a negligible variation on 2008 levels.
CARICOM countries have been hurt by the decline in tourist arrivals from Europe and the United States.
While tourism arrivals had already begun to decline when the financial crisis broke out in the second half of 2008, most countries were hit hardest in 2009.
Tourist arrivals rebounded slightly in the first quarter of 2010 for CARICOM as a whole with a 4.5% year-on-year increase.
The performance of the leading CARICOM tourism exporter, Jamaica, was particularly encouraging with an 8.3% increase in arrivals in the first quarter over the same period in the previous year (UNWTO, 2010).
This is especially noteworthy since this country had already recorded buoyant arrival figures in both 2008 and 2009 (see figure IV.1).
Increases in the first quarter of 2010 were The earthquake that devastated Haiti on 12 January 2010 caused great human suffering —including about 220 thousand fatalities—, and large economic costs in terms of destruction and damage to dwellings, buildings and infrastructure.
Exports are highly concentrated in textile and apparel products, which are mainly produced by 23 plants and sold to the United States.
However, after five months, most plants are again operational with employment attendance rates largely back to pre-quake levels (Hornbeck, 2009). also posted for the second and third CARICOM travel exporters, Bahamas (+1.6%), and Barbados (+2%).
In particular, the Bahamas was successful in its “Companion Fly Free Programme”, which brought increases in forward bookings and allowed the hotel sector to reintroduce lastminute offers to fill spare capacity.
Nevertheless, the general consensus is that the recovery —especially in receipts— will most likely not make up for the decline experienced during the recession, as demand in source markets remains low and prices have been cut to attract visitors.
Even though in 2009 the drop in the value of goods exports surpassed by a wide margin the fall in the value of services exports, paradoxically, the countries specialized in the former suffered less than those specialized in the latter. capacity.
The decline in 2009 in the value of goods exports, (mainly fuels and commodities) was due principally to a drop in prices and only marginally to a reduction in volumes sold.
In contrast, in the case of services exports, the drop in the value and the fall in volume were similar as their prices varied little.
In other words, the decline in the volume of goods sold was smaller than the fall in foreign sales of services.
Services producers lost more as a percentage of their GDP than goods producers.
Of this latter group, Guyana and Suriname actually posted positive economic growth in 2009, while Trinidad and Tobago showed only a small drop in its GDP.
The services-oriented economies of CARICOM, including the Bahamas, Barbados, and the OECS economies experienced sharper falls in GDP.
Medium-term trends in the Caribbean trade structure General characteristics As all CARICOM economies are small, foreign trade is crucial.
These countries rely heavily on exports to finance imports, also referred to as the “external or balance of payments constraint”.
The economic development of these countries is in part restricted by the value of imports —crucial not only for consumption but also for investment and intermediate inputs—, which in turn depend on the volume of exports.4 Except for In the short run, imports can also be financed by capital inflows, including foreign direct investment.
But in the long run, the sustainability of the current account depends in large part on exports of goods and services.
Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana, Belize and Suriname, service exports are the main source of foreign exchange for financing the expansion of imports for production in the CARICOM economies.
To alleviate the external constraint, these countries can also use foreign direct investment, official aid and multilateral assistance and debt accumulation to pay for their imports.
The increase in export intensity of CARICOM over time is shaped by Trinidad and Tobago alone.
For the Community as a whole, the ratio of exports of goods and services to GDP rose from 46% in 1990 to 55% of GDP in 2008 (figure IV.2).
The growing share in trade over time reflects two opposite trends: whereas goods exports grew faster than GDP between 1990 and 2008, foreign sales of services grew more slowly, resulting in an increasing share of the former but a declining share of the latter.
The growing export intensity of goods for CARICOM reflects the growing foreign sales of one single member: Trinidad and Tobago.
When this country is excluded, the intensity of goods exports is stable at best.
The trend in services exports to GDP ratio is very similar when Trinidad and Tobago is excluded.
As a share of GDP, goods imports have grown from 1990 to 2008, whereas proportional service imports have remained quite low.
The goods imports intensity has increased over time, both for Trinidad and Tobago, and the other CARICOM members.
The evolution of the trade balance of CARICOM is strikingly different when Trinidad and Tobago is excluded.
The improvement in the regional trade balance between the end of the 1990s and 2006 is mostly due to the dynamic export performance of Trinidad and Tobago.
In 2006, this balance even showed a positive sign for the first time since 1994.
When the largest regional economy and exporter is excluded, the trend changes completely towards a growing deficit until the economic crisis of 2009.
The share of CARICOM in world GDP and goods trade has been relatively stable in the past 20 years, and reflects the dynamism of a few countries and stagnation of the rest (see figure IV.3).
The recent upward trend in its global goods trade share mainly reflects the dynamics of the booming foreign sales of natural gas and petroleum of one single member: Trinidad and Tobago.
The other members of CARICOM, however, have been characterized by a stagnant performance in goods exports.
This trend has been attributed to the erosion of trade preferences, high energy costs, the impact of trade liberalization and the rise of China in manufacturing.
The group has lost market share in the world trade in services.
CARICOM services exports have been unable to keep pace with the growth of the global trade in services, and therefore its share in that trade declined steadily after the mid-1990s (see right panel of figure IV.3).
In particular, the region lost market share in “other services”, which include telecommunications, computers, and financial and business services.
This is significant as “other services” is the fastest growing part of world trade in services.5 CARICOM has a comparative advantage in tourism services, with a 1.2% share in world trade in this category in 1990.
Over time, however, the group lost competitiveness and its market share dropped to below 0.8% in 2008.
Over the past two decades, the growth of world trade of services outpaced that of goods trade, benefitting the opportunities created by the widespread use of information technology which has made services more tradable than some decades ago.
Regional GDP and goods exports are increasingly dominated by Trinidad and Tobago, whereas more countries contribute to regional services exports.
As GDP and goods exports figures of Trinidad and Tobago increased faster than those of any other CARICOM member from 1990 to 2008, its shares in regional GDP and regional exports almost doubled to nearly 40% and 70%, respectively (table IV.3).
Correspondingly, the shares of all other countries and groups in regional GDP and exports fell during the same period.
The goods export performance of the OECS countries –due mainly to the erosion of trade preferences in bananas– has been particularly weak, resulting in a large drop in its share of regional trade.
The dynamics of the country composition of regional service exports is more heterogeneous, with growing shares for the OECS, Belize, Guyana and Suriname at the expense of the share that of the Bahamas.
CARICOM countries, with the exception of Trinidad and Tobago, Guyana and Suriname, are predominantly service exporters.
Although CARICOM as a whole mostly exports goods, this mainly reflects the export basket of Trinidad and Tobago.
For the other economies, excluding Suriname, service exports accounted for over 50% of total exports of goods and services in 2008 (figure IV.4).6 Service exports are concentrated in tourism, especially for Barbados, The Bahamas, and the small island states of the OECS.
The dynamics of the country composition of regional service exports is more heterogeneous, with increasing shares of the OECS, Belize, Guyana and Suriname at the expense of the share held by the Bahamas.
Service exports are concentrated in tourism, especially for Barbados, the Bahamas, and the OECS small island states.
In Jamaica, exports are almost evenly divided between goods and services, and tourism is followed closely by exports of raw materials and of other services.
Regarding goods exports, the economies in the region have added value to these goods.
This is suggested by the reduction in the share of commodities and concomitant increase in the share of manufactures and fuels from 1990 to 2008.
This contrasts with the composition of imports of all CARICOM members, which mainly consist of manufacturing products.
Although little has changed in the overall pattern of destinations of CARICOM exports over the past two decades, some major variations have taken place at the country level.
The United States has remained the main export destination, representing over 40% of the community’s foreign sales.
The European Union has also maintained its relative share over the years.
The only noteworthy change is the small increase in the share of exports within the subregion.
The geographical export composition varies strongly between members: intra-subregional trade accounts for an insignificant share of foreign sales in the Bahamas and Jamaica, whereas it represents half of total exports in the case of the OECS group.
CARICOM doubled its share as an export destination for goods from OECS over the past 1.5 decades, which points to the success of the special treatment within CARICOM of these countries, aimed at boosting their subregional exports.
The product composition of exports by destination country shows significant variations in the case of Jamaica, the Bahamas, Barbados, and the OECS islands.
Jamaica mostly sells raw materials such as metal ores to the European Union and Asia, and mostly food products and manufactures based on natural resources to other CARICOM countries and the United States.
The Bahamas and Barbados have an opposite structure, with commodities dominating intraregional exports, food products being exported to the EU, and mainly manufactures being sold to the United States.
In the case of the OECS islands, exports to the United States are dominated by manufacturing, especially electrical parts, whilst fuels and raw materials are the main exports to the EU.
The high concentration of goods export, coupled with the heavy reliance on tourism in some countries and declining competitiveness, increases the vulnerability of the region to external shocks.
Despite the preferential access to the markets of its major trading partners, CARICOM goods exports are concentrated in a narrow range of products.
Over the period 2001-2006 the top 20 goods exported consisted of four agricultural and food products, six minerals and ores, four manufactured goods and six fuel-related products (World Bank/OAS, 2009).
Moreover, the concentration of the region’s goods exports has increased over time.
Despite the fact that most countries increased the number of products exported over time, several experienced an increase in the concentration of their goods exports, including Antigua and Barbuda, Belize, Haiti, Jamaica and Suriname (figure IV.6).
Poor export performance in both agriculture and manufacturing in most CARICOM countries has been compensated in part by a shift to tourism services, particularly in OECS.
Several countries have become highly specialized in this industry, with tourism receipts accounting for over 50% of total exports of goods and services in Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, the Bahamas, Dominica, Saint Kitts and Nevis and Saint Lucia in 2009.
Nonetheless, the region has lost market share in world tourism trade and cruise passenger arrivals to more competitive Hispanic Caribbean destinations (World Bank/OAS, 2009).
As part of their efforts to diversify exports, some countries have increased their export share of nontraditional goods and new services such as entertainment.
While the share of these new exports may not be very large, they hold great promise in the European Union Economic Partnership Agreement.
Intra-CARICOM trade Intra-subregional trade is a relatively small but growing share of total trade and is skewed towards a few countries and a handful of products.
The share of exports to CARICOM members in total exports grew from 10% in exports are increasingly dominated by Trinidad and Tobago, accounting for 80% of all intraregional exports in 2008, up from 55% in 1990.
This country mainly sells natural gas and petroleum to Jamaica, Barbados, Guyana and smaller amounts to other countries.
Energy products from Trinidad and Tobago represented 65% of all intraregional exports in 2008.
Low cost energy and production restructuring in the late 1990s have given Trinidad and Tobago a competitive advantage in this sector.
Other products traded regionally are food (12%) and different types of other manufactures like construction materials and chemicals (9%).
For the smaller economies of CARICOM, however, intra-subregional trade is very important.
The OECS countries, in particular Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Grenada and Dominica, sell half of their exports in the subregional market.
Over time, trade links have also increased between OECS and Belize and Suriname.7 As regards imports, most goods purchased in the region come from Trinidad and Tobago.
This country represents over 80% of CARICOM intra-subregional imports, and about 90% of subregional imports for Bahamas, Jamaica and Suriname.
The intraregional trade balances differ widely between CARICOM members, reflecting in part the winners and losers in CARICOM internal exchanges.
Trinidad and Tobago posts large surpluses thanks to its exports of gas and petroleum products.
The same is true for Jamaica, where the regional market accounts for less than 3% of its total exports of goods.
The OECS countries are at a disadvantage in intra-subregional trade due to the small scale of production and high costs of energy and logistics.
The concentration of the subregion’s goods exports has increased over time, with the top 5 goods accounting for 85% of total goods exports in 2008 compared with 75% in 1995.
Countries that experienced an increasing concentration of intraregional goods exports over the period 2000-2008 include Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Belize and Jamaica.
Intra-subregional exports are more concentrated than foreign sales to the rest of the world.
The main product exported to the subregion accounts for a higher percentage of the total than in the case of exports to the rest of the world.
In Antigua and Barbuda and Trinidad and Tobago, petroleum products represent around 70% of their total exports to the subregion.
In Dominica, over 50% of intraregional exports are chemical products including soaps, while in Belize, Guyana, and Haiti, the top products are agricultural goods and also represent around half of the total.
The smaller CARICOM economies are basically mono-exporters, with 1 or 2 products accounting for most exports (see figure IV.7).
CARICOM countries still have room to better exploit the opportunities for intra-industry trade that arise from regional integration.
Nevertheless, the small size and scale of economies in the region makes it unlikely that intra-subregional trade will account for a large share of total trade.
Instead, these economies will need to promote their integration in international value chains, especially with their main trading partners being the European Union and the United States (Duran, 2010).
Corrugated carton Roots and tubers Toilet soap The exports from the OECS to these two partners have grown fast.
The OECS sub-regional partners represent 40% of OECS intrasubregional exports, with Antigua and Barbuda and Saint Lucia each accounting for a 10% share of exports (World Bank/OAS, 2009).
The first CARICOM-Brazil summit took place in Brasilia on 26 April 2010.
Its outcome, the Brasilia Declaration, reaffirmed the commitment to integration between Latin America and the Caribbean and to the achievement of a just and democratic society based on peace and cooperation, combating poverty, inequality and all forms of discrimination, on multilateralism, sustainable development and the pursuit of a world free of conflict and nuclear weapons.
In addition, 60 memoranda of understanding were signed, including 47 bilateral agreements for technical cooperation in areas such as health, education, culture, energy, agriculture, civil protection, disaster management, transport and tourism.
Of particular importance was the decision by the Government of Brazil to become a non-borrowing member of the Caribbean Development Bank (CDB).
This initiative has been submitted for approval by the Congress of Brazil and would involve Brazil’s making a substantial contribution to the Bank’s Special Development Fund.
Brazil has also proposed setting up a Brazilian fund for the Caribbean Disaster Emergency Management Agency (CDEMA) in order to improve regional coordination of humanitarian actions.
These measures are designed to mitigate and respond to natural and social disasters, as well as to collaborate with the reconstruction efforts of the CARICOM member countries, in particular Haiti.
During the period 1999-2008, international trade between CARICOM and Brazil expanded very strongly: Caribbean exports to Brazil increased on average by 27.4% per year, while imports grew by 39.8%, before falling back sharply during the 2009 crisis.
Nevertheless, the trade balance has been traditionally negative for CARICOM, whose imports from Brazil in 2009 were 16 times higher than its exports to that country.
The 2009 CARICOM trade deficit with Brazil stood at US$ 3 billion, down from the peak of US$ 4.4 billion recorded in 2008.
While CARICOM exports to Brazil consist mainly of commodities, in particular chemicals and salts, minerals, and iron and steel, its imports from that source include a very wide variety of goods, ranging from agricultural products to high-tech manufactures.
The Government of Brazil also expressed its willingness to prepare a specific study on the pattern of Caribbean exports to Brazil, based on shared information with the CARICOM Secretariat.
Regional integration and treatment of asymmetries Context and achievements Governments and businesses in the region have had a long-standing motivation to promote integration and cooperation in trade and other areas to overcome the constraints of the small size and limited resources of their economies.
Economic integration is critical to enhance the region’s competitiveness, promote development and facilitate integration into the global economy.
A larger market created by integration can promote economies of scale and allow firms to gain the export experience required to penetrate extra-regional markets.
Integration also encourages pooling of resources to reach common goals more effectively.
Regional trade integration in the Caribbean has been gradual, and dates back to 1958.
After independence in 1962, both Trinidad and Tobago and Jamaica withdrew and the Federation collapsed.
In 1973, presidents decided to transform the FTA into a common market under the Treaty of Chaguaramas, which created the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
In 1992, members agreed to establish the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME), which was formalized under the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas of 2001 and entered into force in 2006.
All in all, the CARICOM integration process has amply surpassed, at least in its intentions, those existing in the rest of the Americas.
The integration process has taken a long time in part because of the special case of several small and less developed economies in the region, which have special needs.
Seven of the smaller and less developed members of CARIFTA formed the East Caribbean Common Market (ECCM) in 1968.
The OECS countries created an economic union in 2010, which allows for the free circulation of goods, services, labour, capital and the establishment of a common external tariff.
Most OECS members States have a common monetary authority (Eastern Caribbean Central Bank, 2009) and share a common currency as well as other joint bodies such as the judiciary.
In the single market, all barriers to trade in goods and services, and the movements of several labour categories should be eliminated .
The implementation of the single economy further deepens the integration process by harmonizing the regulatory regime and economic policies and introducing a monetary union.
Important progress has been made towards the implementation of CSME as evidenced from several developments.
Today, CARICOM is, like other regional integration schemes, an imperfect customs union.
First, most CARICOM members have signed, ratified, and enacted into domestic law the 2006 Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas.
The exceptions are the Bahamas and Montserrat, which decided to stay out of CSME, and Haiti which has postponed the enactment.
Second, the free intra-regional circulation of goods is almost a fact, as tariffs on goods originating in the countries of the common market were eliminated in the 1990s.
Several of the non-tariff barriers have also been removed, and a schedule has been adopted to abolish unauthorized import duties and discriminatory taxes.
Third, all countries, except the Bahamas, have adopted the Common External Tariff (CET), which has itself been substantially reduced.
Fourth, CARICOM has adopted a common trade policy towards external partners, albeit with some exceptions.
Fifth, progress has also been made on free intraregional trade in services, the main comparative advantage of the region, for which all members have adopted a negative list whereby all sectors and measures are to be liberalized unless otherwise specified.
Sixth, all member countries have put in place legislation to permit the free movement of highly skilled personnel, including university graduates, media workers, sportsmen, artists and musicians to provide a service or establish a business.
The fund seeks to alleviate the difficulties faced by some disadvantaged members in the transition to an integrated market for goods and services.
Major progress has also been in made in functional cooperation in different areas, such as the arts, education, financial supervision, fisheries, health, security and sports.
Progress in these areas can be attributed to the desire of Governments of the region to pool scarce resources to achieve common objectives in areas which, unlike free trade, are not viewed as threats to domestic economic interests (see box IV.2).
On financial issues, CARICOM members signed the Liliendaal Declaration in 2009 to contain the effects in the region of the global financial crisis and reform the financial sector in the region.
The Declaration introduces new guidelines and regulatory standards for the sector and fosters regional collaboration.
It also calls for increased transparency, early warning systems and stress tests.
In 2009, it reviewed a baseline survey, draft plan and project activities.
In energy, the Caribbean Renewable Energy Development Programme (CREDP) has stepped up its activities with new funds from donors, and in-kind contributions from the Organization of American States (OAS) and regional Governments.
Moreover, the Caribbean Public Health Authority (CARPHA) formed a resource mobilization team and established its main campus in Trinidad and Tobago in 2009.
In the field of security, the CARICOM Implementation Agency for Crime and Security (IMPACS) will introduce a CARICOM Travel Card (CARIPASS), which will reduce travel restrictions for CARICOM residents at regional airports.
Other security initiatives address the issue of violent crimes fuelled by the illicit trade in guns and ammunition and the impact of deportees in the Caribbean.
Within CARICOM, the Organisation of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS) is a subregional integration arrangement among nine small islands.8 OECS has achieved a deeper level of integration than CARICOM.
In addition to free trade, OECS has a single currency and a number of common institutions that provide common services.
These include a central bank, securities exchange, a judiciary and security system, joint pharmaceutical procurement service, joint diplomatic missions, telecommunications regulatory body and a regulatory body for civil aviation.
To compensate for the loss of government revenue relating to the reduction of the CET, several of the smaller members have introduced compensatory measures such as stamp duties, import surcharges, and discriminatory rates of the consumption tax.
Moreover, even though the CET is lower than a decade ago, it remains high for some product The OECS economic union differs from CSME in that the former establishes a governance structure that will render decisions taken by the OECS Authority legally binding for all member Governments.
This arrangement should allow the OECS union to make more rapid progress than CSME.
Owing to their small size and to the lack of a national critical mass for implementing any undertaking, the OECS countries of are subject to binding resource constraints and intensifying global competition and are more willing to give up some sovereignty in exchange for deeper integration to facilitate economic growth and human development.
Another difference is that, unlike CSME where movement of labour is restricted to approved categories, OECS nationals will be able to live and work in any other country of the union without restrictions.
Areas for improvement Notwithstanding the progress towards the establishment of the Caribbean Single Market and Economy (CSME), progress has been relatively slow in several areas.
The latter causes inefficiency and hinders the Community’s market access negotiations with third countries.
Free movement of goods within the single market is still being hindered by non–tariff barriers such as phytosanitary standards and technical barriers to trade.
This reflects the limited progress that has been made towards harmonization of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and technical standards.
The CARICOM Regional Organisation for Standards and Quality (CROSQ) was established in 2003 to promote the harmonization of standards.
However, the ability of CROSQ to fulfill its mandate has been limited as only five member countries have enacted the agreement establishing the organization into domestic law.
Another factor restricting the movement of goods is the unauthorized use of taxes on regional goods by some members. (b) Services trade To promote development of services industries and exports, there is a need for the free movement of capital, skilled labour and managerial expertise.
Services exports are viewed as having the most potential for the diversification of Caribbean economies given relatively high wage rates that render the region uncompetitive in labour-intensive manufacturing and agriculture (The World Bank, 2005).
In this context, increased competition in services within the regional market is necessary to improve competitiveness and prepare service industries for entry into extra-regional markets.
For example, most CARICOM countries have not yet implemented licensing mechanisms for service providers.
There are also impediments to the right of establishment including work permit requirements and discrimination in the granting of fiscal incentives.
Moreover, some sectors, such as air and maritime transport and financial services, continue to face constraints in their trade.
In these activities, existing restrictions are not well identified, which explains in part why there is no agreement on a schedule for their removal.
Also, CARICOM lacks a common services regime and this complicates the negotiation and implementation of services agreements with external trade partners (The World Bank, 2009). (c) Free movement of capital and labour Free movement of factors of production is essential for the progress of the single market.
Exchange controls on intra-subregional movement of capital have been abolished in most member states but movement of labour is restricted to university graduates and other approved categories.
This has been raised as a concern by CARICOM nationals with respect to the status of the CSME.
Intrasubregional travel still requires passports but a Caribbean travel Pass (CARIPASS) is being introduced to facilitate hassle-free intra-subregional travel for frequent travellers.
The free movement of skilled persons has generated some controversy with some member Governments in the region.
They have expressed concern about the potential impact of increased competition in their domestic labour markets.
This concern is probably overblown, as only 6,210 skilled persons moved abroad within the region from 1996 to 2008 (CARICOM Secretariat, 2009). (d) Institutional factors A major constraint is the non-binding nature of decisions made by the various organs of the Caribbean Community.
This problem is exacerbated by the absence of sanctions for non-implementation of decisions.
First, the global economic and financial crisis has dealt a harsh blow to the Caribbean economies whose economies and public finances were already fragile.
CARICOM economies are experiencing rising fiscal deficits, widening trade deficits and increasing external debt.
Moreover, the post-recession adjustment has been pursued at the individual country level (particularly in the case of the MDCs) thereby reducing the relevance of the single market and economy strategy.
The fiscal crisis also tightened further the financial constraints in several member Governments.
Therefore, the implementation of regional integration programs depends largely on the availability of external funding.
The speed of implementation is thus partly determined by the ease with which external funding can be obtained and the quantity of funds available.
For example, the disbursement mechanism of funds under the European Development Program is quite cumbersome and bureaucratic, leading to slow release of funding.
Effective functioning of the single market also requires coordination and harmonization in fiscal policy.
The Revised Treaty (2001) requires member states to harmonize their fiscal and monetary policies.
So far, progress in this area has been limited to regular meetings of the CARICOM finance ministers and governors of the central banks.
The Community has not yet implemented binding rules and procedures for policy coordination, nor have members integrated convergence criteria into the budget formulation processes.
De facto, a large heterogeneity of fiscal indicators and trends can be observed among members.
Much remains to be done in the fields of harmonization and rationalization of tax systems, synchronizing investment incentives, as well as financial policy.
In the latter area, some regional coordination has been taking place in response to the recent financial crisis.
One such step was the establishment in 2001 of the Caribbean Court of Justice whose role is to settle disputes.
The definition and implementation of common sectoral policies and competition policies is another crucial element for the successful implementation of the single market.
The establishment of framework conditions is not sufficient to promote economic growth and development.
CARICOM has to define a regional development strategy that pools scarce resources from several small countries in a bid to reach common and national goals.
The CARICOM Revised Treaty puts emphasis on such policies, in particular in the fields of industry, agriculture, transport, and human development.
Despite expressions of good intentions, no regional policies have been defined yet.
This may be due to a lack of human and financial resources, as well as a lack of political will that prioritizes regional goals over national ones (The World Bank/OAS, 2009).
Progress has also been slow in the fields of the harmonization of competition policies and regulations for consumer protection.
The CARICOM competition policy has only been implemented in Barbados and only three member states have implemented the CARICOM consumer protection regime.
Another factor impeding progress is the weak technical and administrative capacity of member Governments, in part due to financial constraints.
OECS countries find it difficult to provide adequate staff for trade ministries.
Consequently, the development agencies of some of these partner countries are providing financial and technical assistance to strengthen the capacity to implement the single market and economy.
Incomplete implementation of special and differential treatment (SDT) provisions In CARICOM, special and differential treatment of the less developed countries has been a feature of the integration arrangement since its infancy.
By explicitly providing for the financial needs of the LDCs, the CARICOM “Special Regime for LDCs” represents a change in the conceptualization of SDT provisions Under the CARIFTA agreement, LDCs were allowed to suspend duty free treatment of imports from the more developed countries to protect production in their domestic economies and mitigate government revenue losses. (ECLAC, 2007b).
However, the SDT provisions in the Treaty of Chaguaramas were never fully implemented.
Emphasis was placed on the provisions of Article 56, which protected, with some success, the domestic markets of LDCs, but the promise of the innovative financial provisions of the special regime was never realized.12 A significant weakness of the special regime for the LDCs is the absence of guaranteed differential treatment.
As noted by (ECLAC, 2007b), “a regime addressing the needs of the less developed countries of CARICOM should include more than ‘good endeavour’ or ‘conditional clauses or provisions’.
In fact it should include a set of provisions providing for asymmetric treatment to level the playing Article 56 achieved some success to the extent that market protection facilitated the establishment of light manufacturing industries producing products such as beverages, soaps, footwear, paints, and varnishes and corrugated galvanized sheets (ECLAC, 2007b).
In addition, available data show that article 56 products account for more than half of intra-OECS trade and provide employment to about 7,000 workers.
While article 56 promoted intra-OECS trade, the evidence suggests that the provisions were less successful in promoting LDC exports to the MDCs.
Member countries of OECS have recorded persistent and growing intra-CARICOM trade deficits since the 1990s.
For the OECS as a whole, the intra-CARICOM trade deficit increased from US$ 125 million in 1995 to US$ 460 million The Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas (2001) maintained several provisions of the old Treaty.
Special and differential treatment is outlined in chapter VII of the new Treaty and encompasses the special regime for LDCs as well as a regime for countries, regions and sectors that are disadvantaged by the establishment of the CARICOM Single Market and Economy (Article 142).
The designated disadvantaged countries are the OECS member states, Belize and Guyana.
Articles 161, 162, 163 and 166 are clauses of good endeavour in which the needs of the LDCs are to be “taken into account”.
Therefore, as was the case under the old Treaty, the LDCs should be granted differential treatment in the application of the common external tariff, rules of origin and the fiscal incentives regime.
Article 164 replaces article 56 of the treaty of Chaguaramas, whose provisions expired in December 2005.
While article 164 provides for the suspension of community origin treatment on the grounds of production in the LDCs, such suspension is granted for economic reasons and is temporary.
The OECS member states have recommended modifications to the application of Article 164 which provides for the suspension of community origin treatment on the grounds of production in the LDCs, to improve its effectiveness.
In particular, the OECS recommends that quantitative restrictions be replaced by tariffs in order to protect and expand the OECS domestic market share (ECLAC, 2007b).
According to the OECS recommendation, the tariffs would be levied at higher than existing rates hence the CET would have to be suspended.
The tariffs would also be applied on a temporary basis with the time frame for their application being dependent on financial and economic considerations.
In addition, the OECS member states have requested that the MDCs suspend CET treatment with respect to third countries for beer, malt and flour (ECLAC, 2007b).
The CARICOM Development Fund (CDF), which started operations in 2009, is the main mechanism for financial and technical assistance to disadvantaged countries.
Its assistance is temporary, and insufficient to address the structural bottlenecks of the LDCs.
CDF is aimed at facilitating investment promotion and mobilization, handling of structural diversification and infrastructure development needs, and enterprise competitiveness and alleviating the social and economic impact of natural disasters.
It has been suggested that CDF should focus on the basic requirements for economic development including human capital, investment in research and development and infrastructure (ECLAC, 2007b).
Nevertheless, a funding mechanism to address temporary dislocation would still be necessary.
A shortcoming of CDF is the absence of secure funding for its operations.
CDF began operations in August 2009 and will offer loans, grants and technical assistance to disadvantaged member States.
Member countries are required to contribute $120 million, with the remainder to be obtained from international donors.
In addition, CDF has received technical assistance grants from the European Union (834,000), Caribbean Development Bank (US$ 149,000).13 Much remains to be done to meet the target set for external contributions to the capital fund.
The dependence on external funding reflects the fact that, except for Trinidad and Tobago, the more developed countries of the region lack financial resources.
One approach that has been suggested is the provision of additional resources to the Caribbean Export Development Agency to facilitate direct assistance to exporters particularly from the LDCs (The World Bank/OAS, 2009).
The Board of CDF approved two country assistance programmes in July 2010 for Saint Lucia and Belize but details of the amount of assistance could not yet be confirmed. 15 Calculations by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean based on WTO figures (2009). 16 Data provided by CDF.
A central objective of the Agreement is the promotion of sustainable development in the CARIFORUM countries.
Under the EPA, the non-reciprocal trade preferences traditionally offered by the European Union have been replaced with a free trade agreement.
While the EPA is essentially a free trade agreement, it also includes investment and development cooperation.
The European Union is promoting regional integration as the main underpinning of the EPA; this is deemed necessary to expand markets and promote international competitiveness.
Given the institutional and supply-side capacity constraints of CARIFORUM countries, the development cooperation provisions are aimed at capacity-building Liberalization commitments The EPA opted for an asymmetrical approach to tariff liberalization to take account of the lower level of development of the CARIFORUM countries.
Effective January 1, 2008, the EPA grants duty free and quota free (DFQF) access to the European Union market for all CARICOM goods, except sugar and rice in respect of which DFQF treatment was postponed to October 2009 and January 2010, respectively.
These market access conditions are better than those of the to enable these countries to better exploit the trade provisions of the EPA.
Article 8 of the EPA provides for a wide range of support measures.
The development cooperation components of the EPA also need to be more specific with programmes, resources, targets and expected development outcomes.
The funding to be provided by the European Union includes €165 million under the 10th European Development Fund (EDF) and €454 million allocated for national indicative programmes linked to regional integration.
Five of these programmes will target competitiveness while three programmes will contribute to governance and public administration reform and three will focus on infrastructure.
In addition, 50% of the European Union’s traderelated assistance under its Aid for Trade programme is allocated to ACP countries (European Commission, 2008).
CARIFORUM goods imports will be liberalized gradually over a 25 year period.18 Some agricultural products have a long phase-in period, whereas other are excluded from tariff liberalization; they include animal products, vegetable products, animal or vegetable fat, prepared foods, beverages and tobacco.
Other excluded products are chemicals; textiles and clothing; base metals and miscellaneous manufactured articles.
As CARIFORUM countries have a comparative advantage in services, market access in this area is crucial.
The European Union’s commitments in services are consistent with the CARIFORUM countries potential Over the first ten years, 61% of CARIFORUM imports from the European Union in value terms will be liberalized, 83% over 15 years and 87% over 25 years.
The remaining 13% is excluded from liberalization. for development of service exports.
The European Union has granted market access to most service sectors (see table IV.4).
In addition, the European Union liberalization commitments in mode 4 exceed those made by developed countries under the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS).
While the European Union liberalized more than 90% of its services sectors, the CARIFORUM service commitments cover between 65% and 75% of their services sectors, except in the case of the Dominican Republic, which opened more than 90% of its services sectors.
The services sectors liberalized by CARIFORUM countries are sectors in which the region is seeking investment to upgrade infrastructure such as telecommunications, environmental services and transport, as well as sectors that provide opportunities for export development, such as tourism and business services.
The CARIFORUM commitments in mode 4 are limited to key personnel and graduate trainees in EU firms that establish commercial presence within the region.
One major impediment is the delay in the establishment of institutional arrangements required for effective implementation.
At the CARICOM Secretariat, an implementation unit responsible for coordinating implementation of the EPA was established only in February 2009, while few members have established EPA implementation units (Antigua and Barbuda, Barbados, the Bahamas, Dominican Republic and Jamaica).
Most CARIFORUM countries face fiscal constraints, aggravated by the recent economic and financial crisis.
However, the funding of 165 million euros proposed by the European Union under the 10th European Development The region exports both unskilled workers (domestic workers, hotel workers, farm workers) and skilled workers including teachers and nurses.
Fund (EDF) is considered inadequate by CARIFORUM Governments (Brewster, Girvan and Lewis, 2008).20 Unresolved differences between CARICOM and the Dominican Republic also may slow down implementation of the EPA.
An important difference relates to tariff treatment for the Dominican Republic’s exports to CARICOM.
The potential benefits of duty-free and quota-free access to the European Union market for CARIFORUM goods will vary across countries.
The Dominican Republic and Trinidad and Tobago are best positioned to take advantage of market access for goods given their relatively dynamic manufacturing sectors.
For other CARIFORUM countries, exports to the European Union are concentrated in sugar and bananas.
Given the lack of competitiveness of these countries in these traditional agricultural commodities, exporters are adversely affected by preference erosion despite DFQF market access.21 CARIFORUM countries therefore need to use the new market access provided by the EPA as an opportunity to diversify their exports.
The net benefit to CARIFORUM from tariff liberalization on imports from the European Union depends on whether the revenue losses outweigh the potential gains.
The reduction in government revenue due to removal of tariffs will aggravate fiscal deficits.
This is likely to be most problematic for those CARIFORUM countries that rely heavily on taxes on international trade as a source of government revenue.
This implies that these countries will need to take immediate steps to introduce alternative tax measures to compensate for the revenue loss.
Early disbursement of the financial assistance promised by the European Union is also critical.
CARIFORUM countries will gain from tariff liberalization on imports from the European Union to the extent that it results in access to cheaper capital equipment and intermediate inputs.
CARIFORUM countries are lagging behind in technology and are heavily dependent on imported capital goods.
Access to cheaper imports of capital equipment from the European Union offers opportunities for technological upgrading and improved export competitiveness.
The provisions of the EPA regarding trade-related measures require adoption and implementation of international standards that will entail substantial costs for CARIFORUM countries.
These measures include sanitary and phytosanitary standards and technical barriers to trade.
The shortage of the technical personnel required to implement the required policies is also a constraint.
The services provisions of the EPA offer potential benefits that CARIFORUM countries need to take advantage of.
In particular, European Union commitments in mode 4 (temporary presence of natural persons) offers opportunities for CARICOM countries to enter new areas besides tourism and entertainment.
Moreover, opportunities for the temporary movement into the European Union market have the potential to reduce the brain drain, to the extent that such movement may reduce emigration of skilled persons.
Capitalizing on the opportunities offered by market access for services will require strengthening of the capacity of CARIFORUM to supply services, including improvement of institutional arrangements for registration and certification of service providers and modernization of regulatory frameworks.
The financial and technical assistance for service sector development promised by the European Union will be a critical determinant of whether CARIFORUM is able to take advantage of enhanced access to the European Union’s services market.
The opening of the CARIFORUM services market to European Union service providers could benefit CARIFORUM economies by enhancing the competitiveness of other exports, as access to imported services can improve efficiency and reduce costs of production.
The agreement for progressive liberalization of investment, while helpful, may not be sufficient to generate increased inflows of foreign direct investment (FDI) into CARIFORUM countries.
CARIFORUM countries have agreed to liberalize investment in most sectors including agriculture, mining, manufacturing and services.
The exclusions include small and medium-sized enterprises, public utilities, processing of nuclear materials, audio-visual services, national maritime cabotage and air traffic rights.22 Nevertheless, realization of increased inflows of FDI depends on the investment climate in CARIFORUM countries.
Promotion of macroeconomic stability, creation of a skilled workforce, provision of adequate infrastructure and development of strong and independent institutions will have to be given priority so as to improve the investment climate.
CARIFORUM countries are likely to benefit from the wide range of cooperation provisions in the EPA.
These encompass technical assistance and capacity-building in the development of competition policy, cooperation in the development of CARIFORUM innovation systems, institution-building for fiscal reform and cooperation in eco-innovation and renewable energy.
Some countries have established EPA implementation units and are pursuing a strategy designed to take advantage of the opportunities offered by the EPA.
Policies being implemented to support this strategy include strengthening the private sector, building trade capacity and attracting foreign investment.
In the cases of Jamaica and the Dominican Republic, FDI from the EU is being used to upgrade infrastructure and expand tourism accommodation.
At the regional level, the Caribbean Export Development Agency (CaribExport) has implemented European Union-funded programmes to inform firms about export opportunities under the EPA, as well as to enhance export capacity.
In contrast, the President of Guyana has expressed the view that the EPA is inappropriate for vulnerable CARIFORUM countries and should be reviewed (Girvan, 2009).
Regional academics, notably Brewster, Girvan and Lewis have expressed concern that the EPA provisions relating to development assistance are not legally binding (Brewster, Girvan and Lewis, 2008).
Challenges for export diversification and the role of aid for trade Export diversification is critical for various reasons.
First, export diversification is beneficial in itself, since it helps to reduce terms-of-trade variability and it also cushions the effects of real external crises.
Second, export diversification is usually closely related to changes in production structures that tend to promote knowledge incorporation and increases in productivity.
International data show that in many cases comparative advantages are obtained by entering new fields of activity, based on a learning process stemming from direct production experience, investment in human capital and institutional development, as well as in the development of private-sector companies, including micro-enterprises.
Incipient examples of export diversification and related policies Despite the overall increase in export concentration, the region shows several incipient examples of successful export diversification.
Recognizing the need for export diversification, several CARICOM member States have mainstreamed their trade strategies into their national development plans.
In Barbados, diversification is being pursued through production of West Indian Sea Island cotton and value added food industries as well as the diversified use of sugarcane (Springer, 2010).
Guyana launched an agricultural export diversification programme in 2008 to promote agri-business clusters in fruits and vegetables, livestock and aquaculture.
In Saint Lucia, recent policies have focused on the provision of infrastructure, including a tissue culture laboratory; an orchid-production facility; a meat-processing plant; an aqua-culture facility and a fisheries facility.
In Saint Vincent, new agricultural exports include mangoes, avocados, plantains, sweet potatoes, taro and hot peppers.
Policies used to encourage diversification include investment incentives, upgrading of physical infrastructure such as roads and ports and microcredit programmes for small and medium-sized enterprises (USITC, 2008).
In Trinidad and Tobago, petroleum and natural gas have been used to develop new types of petrochemicals including methanol, ammonia and urea.
This was achieved through the attraction of private investors and government participation in joint ventures with foreign investors.
To take advantage of low energy costs, an aluminum smelter (ALUTRINT) was built and several other manufacturing industries were promoted including plastics, packaging, printing, and food and beverages.
Grenada has developed a mineral and aerated water industry, and has created niche markets for products such as jams, jellies, syrups, liqueurs and a nutmeg-based pain reliever.
Guyana is pursuing the development of alternative energy sources including hydro power and bio-fuels.23 Most CARICOM members are diversifying their tourism sector.
Grenada has created a yachting niche market by investing in yachting infrastructure (International Trade Centre, 2007).
Guyana is also targeting niche sectors such as yachting, birding and eco-tourism.
Trinidad and Tobago are increasing the stock of conference facilities and hotel rooms in Trinidad and Tobago to attract more business tourists and making arrangements to increase airlift.
A new Maracas Bay beach facility is planned for completion in 2012.
Another niche market that is being promoted is information technology (IT) services or IT-enabled services, in particular in Guyana and Jamaica.
Guyana is upgrading its telecommunications infrastructure, liberalizing its telecommunications market and modernizing the regulatory framework for this sector.
In Jamaica, policies include the provision of the relevant infrastructure —in particular, the Jamaica digiport to provide the required telecommunications services—, the establishment of a free-trade zone in Montego Bay to attract foreign investors into the industry, and the creation of a training institute to develop the required skills (Jamaica Promotions).
In Saint Lucia, the regulatory framework for the international financial centre is being strengthened to comply with international standards and improve the prospects for expansion of exports of financial services.
The Money Laundering Prevention Act of 2010 has been enacted and negotiations are underway for the signing of additional Tax Information Exchange Agreements (TIEAs) with foreign countries.
Saint Lucia is also seeking to sign double-taxation agreements to promote the competitiveness of its international financial centre.
In Trinidad and Tobago, specific initiatives include the establishment of the Trinidad and Tobago International Financial Centre (TTIFC), a Management Company to manage the financial centre, the creation of a Special Purpose Economic Zone (SPEZ) to attract international firms and the reform of the regulatory framework for the financial sector.23 Government of Trinidad and Tobago (2010) Budget Statement.
The efforts across the region were centred initially in the bigger economies of the region (Trinidad and Tobago, Barbados and Jamaica), but later on also permeated the policy discourse and initiatives of the smaller OECS economies of .
CI encompass multiple activities linked to music, film, and arts and crafts among others, based on individual talent and creativity.
These activities can be an important contributor to exports, GDP and employment.
They differ from commodity or traditional service a ctivities as they depend largely on endogenous rather than exogenous factors.
Finally, they have forward and backward linkages to other traditional and non-traditional sectors.
In several CARICOM countries, CI contribute significantly to trade, GDP and employment.
Moreover, this sector has the potential to increase its exports more than four times compared with other economic activities (James, 2010).
In Trinidad and Tobago, these activities represented 0.5% of goods exports and 6% of service exports in 2006 (Ministry of Trade and Industry) and employed about 11,000 people (mainly in music and Carnival).
In Barbados, employment in the cultural sector also amounts to 11,000 persons.
In Jamaica, entertainment is identified as a priority sector in the national export strategy.
Policies used to encourage film production include tax incentives, active export promotion, and a “onestop-shop” for the provision of services required by film production companies.
This “one-stop-shop” assists foreign film producers to find suitable locations, actors and production crews (United States International Trade Commission) (USITC, 2008).
The Government of Barbados has also identified the creative industries as a key pillar of its economic development.
Draft legislation (the Cultural Industries Bill) provides exemptions from corporation or income tax and import duties for “cultural practitioners and approved corporate, governmental and other entities as a means of facilitating the requisite investment and capitalization for cultural projects”.
Saint Lucia created a National Endowment for the Creative Industries (2010-2011), whose aim is to promote the creative sector by formalizing existing financial assistance to local artists.
Supply-side constraints Export diversification in CARICOM countries is mostly constrained by supply side factors and not lack of market access.
Insufficient open markets of trading partners are not an issue given the multiple preferential trade arrangements.
CARICOM countries benefit from preferential access to the markets of their major trading partners under the Generalized System of Preferences (GSP) offered by developed countries as well as other arrangements including the Caribbean-Canada Trade Agreement (CARIBCAN) and the Caribbean Basin Initiative (CBI) with the United States.
The export performance of CARICOM suggests that market access by itself is not sufficient to promote export diversification.
Available data indicate that the utilization rate for the CBI and CARIBCAN has been low, averaging between 10% and 12% (World Trade Organization/IADB, 2009).
The utilization rates for individual countries vary from 33% for Trinidad and Tobago to minuscule rates for the small OECS countries (World Trade Organization/IADB, 2009).
It has also been argued that preferences have promoted inertia and reduced the capacity for diversification (The World Bank/OAS, 2009)(The World Bank, 2005).
It should be noted that some CARICOM members, such as the Bahamas and Barbados, do not receive preferential treatment from their trading partners owing to their high per-capita income .
The poor response to non-reciprocal trade preferences has been attributed to supply-side constraints (World Trade Organization/IADB, 2009) (ECLAC, 2007a).
This is true not only for the small islands, but also for larger countries such as Guyana and Suriname.
The Global Competitiveness report (2009-2010) ranked the quality of Guyana’s infrastructure at 91 out of 133 countries, while Suriname’s infrastructure was ranked at 86.
Second, a shortage of skilled personnel affects several countries of the region.
The World Bank (2005) notes that “skill shortages now appear to be an acute hindrance to increased firm competitiveness in some Caribbean countries” (p. 146).
Other constraints include high energy and telecommunications costs, inadequate access to capital, low levels of innovation, an underdeveloped enterprise sector, weak institutions and underdeveloped financial markets (World Trade Organization/IADB, 2009).
In the case of the smaller islands the inability to take advantage of economies of scale contributes to high production costs and lack of competitiveness (The World Another important factor is the pattern of specialization that has been promoted by the incentive structure in the region.
While the region has attracted relatively high inflows of FDI, this investment has for the most part failed to develop new types of products or services.
The incentive policy employed in the region has focused on the use of tax incentives to attract maximum FDI, rather than on policies for attracting FDI into new dynamic sectors.
This incentive policy has reinforced specialization in resource-based activities including mining, agriculture and tourism (ECLAC, 2003).
In addition, the foreign enterprises in the Caribbean tend to have limited linkages with the rest of the economy.
The role of aid for trade External assistance through aid for trade (AfT) is essential for overcoming the various supply-side restrictions in the CARICOM countries.
This need has become even more urgent since the recent crisis, which further aggravated the already weak public finances in the region.
This can be done by helping members to adjust to and exploit opportunities arising from (unilateral, bilateral regional or multilateral) trade liberalization, as discussed at the Second Regional Review of aid for trade for Latin America and the Caribbean, held in Montego Bay, Jamaica, on 7 and 8 May 2009).
The cost of implementing the EPA has been estimated at US$ 400million (World Trade Organization/IADB, 2009). buyers, which may exceed the official ones set by trading partners.
Fourth, AfT can enhance the capacity of privatesector firms to produce innovative goods and services and to penetrate export markets.
Fifth, AfT can serve other purposes such as sharing experiences that encourage countries to implement reforms, promoting value chain analysis and facilitating South-South cooperation.
Recently the number of AfT initiatives underway in the Caribbean has substantially increased.
Phase I of this programme (2.6 million euros) was completed in June 2007, while Phase II (7.9 million euros) will end in 2011.
The three-year project, started in 2010, will provide 4 million euros to the beneficiary countries.
Most funds were committed for building economic infrastructure and productive capacity which are critical for export diversification (Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), Creditor Reporting system cited in (World Trade Organization, 2009).
There is room for improvement in the implementation and effectiveness of AfT.
The main deficiencies that Caribbean officials identified in the AfT initiatives include unpredictability of funding, insufficient focus on development of local capacity and too little input from Caribbean countries in the design of AfT interventions (World Trade Organization/IADB, 2009).
Conclusions and recommendations The global economic and financial crisis has exacerbated the economic difficulties of Caribbean economies and exposed their vulnerability.
Fostering integration into the global economy is essential to prevent the marginalization of the region.
This requires the deepening of integration to strengthen economies and promote growth.
Diversification of exports, developing local skills and gearing them towards knowledge-based activities will also be necessary to reduce economic vulnerability and promote economic growth and productivity.
As financial resources of the Caribbean countries are very limited, aid for trade has an important role to play in strengthening the capacity of the economies of the region to take advantage of international trade opportunities.
Export promotion is of the utmost importance for all CARICOM countries, in particular because they face a major external constraint on their economic growth and development.
Over the medium term, the value of imports is limited to the value of exports.
Smaller economies can only build their economic infrastructure and develop through foreign direct investment and by enhancing local capacity, such as creative industries and microenterprises, or by building resource-based and technological industries.
It follows that countries must earn the foreign exchange required to finance their imports.
In other words, they must export or, more to the point, their import capacity cannot exceed their export potential.
In the long run, countries must maintain equilibrium in their balance of payments.
Countries can only grow over the long run at rates of growth compatible with their external position.
This is the main reason why the performance of small open economies and their pattern of development have been and are shaped to a great extent by the vicissitudes of the external sector.
Any policy experiment, whether monetary or fiscal, which fails to take this into account, will be short-lived and ultimately, policymakers must reconcile themselves to this reality.
Over the medium term, CARICOM economies went through a period of restructuring of exports and production after the collapse of the European Union price support and the WTO push for trade openness.
Several economies have switched from goods to services exports in the search for new engines of growth.
The crisis has arrested this process, which calls for fiscal consolidation while stimulating medium term growth.
With regard to Caribbean regional integration, it is key to accelerate the pace of regional integration, to promote international competitiveness and facilitate integration into the global economy.
Therefore, CARICOM needs to establish a mechanism for managing the implementation of decisions taken by the Heads of Government Conference in order to advance the integration process.
Non-implementation of decisions is a long-standing problem and has delayed the progress of regional integration.
These include completion of the harmonization of sanitary and phytosanitary measures and technical standards; removal of unauthorized taxes on regional goods; implementation of the CARICOM consumer protection regime; removal of work permit requirements for services providers and implementation of licensing arrangements for service providers.
The implementation of the single economy component of the CSME, which should have started in 2008, needs to be fast-tracked.
This creates opportunities for the integration of development and trade policy that will allow the region to maximize the benefits gained from trade agreements.
Increased financial support for regional integration should therefore be provided to the extent that this is possible under current economic conditions.
Delays in the release of assistance funds delays the implementation of regional decisions.
Therefore, Caribbean Governments need to encourage the European Union to speed up the disbursement of funds allocated for the promotion of regional integration.
Special treatment of disadvantaged members of CARICOM through the recently established Development Fund may not be sufficient.
Because of the lack of secure funding for CDF, the inadequacy of its capital fund and the temporary nature of its assistance, it is possible that CDF will not be able to achieve its goals.
Therefore, CDF needs to have more secure funding and a larger pool of resources.
Governments in the region could also consider the World Bank’s recommendation that additional resources should be found for the Caribbean Export Development Agency to support exporters in disadvantaged countries.
The assistance provided by the Caribbean Export Development Agency could also be used to address the short-term adjustment needs.
The modification of article 164 of the Revised Treaty of Chaguaramas (that is, the replacement of quantitative restrictions by tariffs) requested by OECS needs to be implemented to allow OECS countries to expand the market share in their own markets.
With regard to extra–regional integration, the Economic Partnership Agreement with the European Union provides opportunities for export diversification, increased inflows of investment, and financial and technical assistance to promote regional integration.
Concerns about the slow disbursement of EDF funds notwithstanding, those Caribbean Governments that have not yet established EPA implementation units need to move quickly to do so.
This is necessary to facilitate effective coordination of implementation and to allow for realization of the potential benefits of the EPA.
CARICOM should seek to obtain clarification of the development cooperation components of the EPA.
The European Union-CARIFORUM agreement provides insufficient information with respect to the specific programmes, targets and expected outcomes of the development cooperation provisions.
CARICOM and the Dominican Republic need to strive to resolve their differences relating to tariff treatment for exports from the Dominican Republic to CARICOM.
CARICOM countries need to position themselves to use the market access opportunities offered under the EPA to diversify their exports.
This repositioning will require CARICOM to use the financial and technical assistance available under the EPA to build production capacity, strengthen institutions and improve competitiveness.
To attract inflows of foreign direct investment from the European Union, CARICOM needs to improve the business climate.
Required measures include promotion of macroeconomic stability, creation of a skilled workforce, provision of adequate infrastructure and development of strong independent institutions.
Lastly, export diversification efforts underway in the Caribbean are moving in the right direction, but the process needs to be accelerated.
Export diversification is critical to reducing the effects of external shocks, enhancing productivity, creating new comparative advantages and promoting economic growth.
Supply-side constraints must be addressed if export diversification is to be successful.
Significant constraints that require urgent attention include: deficient physical infrastructure, including roads, ports and telecommunications; weak private sectors; weak institutions and an inadequate supply of expertise.
Foreign technologies have little spillovers without the development of local capacity to innovate.
Deepening the regional integration process will by itself not solve these fundamental issues of low technical capacity and limited development in human capital.
In particular, tourism services should create linkages with sectors, such as the creative industries and domestic agriculture, which allow for local value added .
Export promotion has little effect on growth if exports are not diversified, intersectoral linkages are not strengthened and macroeconomic balance is not restored.
In short, trade policy must be linked to development policy and should not be an end in itself.
After many years of market access, the Caribbean remains very vulnerable with limited capacity to resist external shocks.
Given the limited financial resources of Caribbean countries, Aid–for–Trade will have to play a significant role in relaxing the supply-side constraints that limit their ability to capitalize on international trade opportunities.
AfT can help to promote export diversification by providing financial and technical assistance to implement the EPA, improve infrastructure, strengthen institutional capacity and improve the innovative and marketing capacities of private firms.
CARICOM should encourage donors to improve the implementation and effectiveness of Aid–for–Trade initiatives by correcting the main deficiencies identified by beneficiaries.
Most important, the predictability of AfT funding needs to be improved to facilitate speedy and efficient implementation of export diversification programmes.
Other improvements that should be considered include increasing input from Caribbean countries in the design of AfT initiatives and placing more emphasis on the development of local capacity.
Durán Lima, José and Alessia Lo Turco (2010), “El comercio intrarregional en América Latina: patrón de especialización y cálculo de potencial exportador”, Opciones de política comercial para mitigar los impactos de la crisis internacional en América Latina: ¿hay margen para el diseño de políticas regionales?, Montevideo, Mercosur Economic Research Network.
The suggestion was that regional cooperation efforts be focused on eight areas, four of them intraregional (intraregional trade promotion, infrastructure investment, social cohesion and action against asymmetries) and the other four oriented towards confronting global challenges (innovation and competitiveness, the forging of joint ties with the Asia-Pacific region, international financial system reform and climate change) (ECLAC, 2009 and 2010a).
Halfway around the planet, the current situation of the Asian economies is completely different.
Following many years of market-led integration, they are now deepening their formal integration to a degree exceeding anything currently being considered in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The issues being addressed within Asian integration frameworks go beyond market integration, with the agenda explicitly including matters such as industrial development, competitiveness and scientific and technological development.
The measures put forward by ECLAC to promote cooperation and integration in Latin America and the Caribbean closely match the historical experience of the Asian countries.
Thus, stronger economic relations with Asia do not have to mean just trade and investment, but should include the cooperation agenda too.
Our region can learn a great deal from Asia and benefit from greater interregional cooperation, since the new international context requires both intraregional and interregional forms of cooperation.
What will be examined in this chapter are the most recent strategies adopted by Japan to enhance its economic relations with Latin America and the Caribbean.
Where investment is concerned, the Japanese private sector and government have been coordinating their efforts in pursuit of a public-private partnership to capitalize on opportunities in the region.
Latin America and the Caribbean have been in the sights of Japanese firms for a number of reasons, and of late the attention of the Japanese private sector has been focused mainly on the region’s natural and energy resources.
This tendency will undoubtedly continue, but these sectors will be joined by a further two: infrastructure and food security.
It is a good time for the region to enhance its relations with Japan, not just through investment but through cooperation as well, and to learn from Japan what that country has passed on to its neighbours in Asia, a region which presents Latin America and the Caribbean with both opportunities and a number of challenges.
One of the great questions for the twenty-first century will be how to compete with the Asian economies.
Viewed through Japan, Asia provides a number of clues to the routes that could be followed.
Also analysed are Japanese-led economic partnership agreements and Japanese official development assistance (ODA).
The type of economic partnership agreement offered by Japan sets out from the premise that free trade is not enough and that trade liberalization has to be supplemented by cooperation.
The Japanese ODA model that has been applied in Asia emphasizes infrastructure improvements and human resource training with a view to revitalizing the production sector and promoting trade and investment with the recipient country.
Japan is not just the largest donor for Asia, but the leading Asian donor in Latin America and the Caribbean.
It is also the country that has recently been putting the most substantial funds into aid for trade initiatives worldwide.
All this means that it is the right time for Japan and Latin America and the Caribbean to recast their economic relationship in terms of ODA as well.
The rediscovery of Latin America and the Caribbean by the Japanese public-private partnership The relationship between Japan and Latin America and the Caribbean has centred mainly on economic issues, and there is still scope for strengthening this relationship by enhancing and expanding some areas of cooperation.
In the 2010 Diplomatic Bluebook, the Government of Japan emphasized the increasing economic presence of the Latin America and Caribbean region in the world.
From the Japanese perspective, the basic data underpinning this perception are fairly clear: a population of 560 million, a growing regional GDP that is currently three times that of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) and the presence of mineral, energy and food resources (MOFA, 2010b).
At the same time, the region has traditionally had friendly diplomatic relations with Japan and is home to the world’s largest community of Japanese-descended people.
The economic growth experienced in recent years and progress with democracy are factors that, from the Japanese perspective, give the region a stronger voice in the global context.
Shared basic values in the realms of both economics (market economy) and politics (democracy) mean that the Latin America and Caribbean region is regarded by Japan as an important partner.
Against this background, Japanese diplomacy towards the region rests on three pillars: stronger economic relations, support for stable development in the region and the promotion of cooperation in the international community.
To strengthen economic relations with Latin America and the Caribbean, the Government of Japan is trying to give the country’s firms a degree of support to facilitate their operations in the region.
In this context, Japan is trying to establish (and strengthen) the necessary legal frameworks, such as economic partnership agreements and bilateral investment treaties, and to promote dialogue and cooperation with the different countries.
As will be analysed later, Japanese economic partnership agreements are characterized by their inclusion of certain issues that go beyond trade liberalization, with bilateral cooperation foremost among them.
The Government of Japan has also lent its weight to major economic projects in the region, including the expansion of Japanese digital television standards and the participation of Japan in the widening of the Panama Canal.
The second pillar of Japanese foreign policy is the provision of cooperation resources for the region, chiefly in the form of ODA.
The third pillar is the effort to create common positions and collaborate with the region’s countries on different international agendas such as climate change, the global economic and financial crisis and reform of the United Nations Security Council.
The 33 votes of Latin America and the Caribbean at different international organizations and bodies give the region a fairly substantial weight from the Japanese perspective.
Economic relations between Japan and Latin America and Latin America and the Caribbean have the potential and attractiveness to further strengthen their economic relationship and cooperation with Japan.
In recent decades, the strengthening of economic interdependence with Asia left Japan little scope for considering Latin America and the Caribbean as a strategic base within its global design.
Economic partnership agreements and bilateral investment treaties are expected to encourage Japanese firms to do business and invest in the region.
In the last five years, Japanese exports to Latin America and the Caribbean have increased by more in percentage terms than those to any other region.
A similar rise was observed in Japanese imports, with the region taking second place.
Although further down the ranking in terms of the actual amounts involved, the trade of Japan with Latin America and the Caribbean has been growing rapidly (see table V.1).
This tendency is expected to strengthen over the coming years, particularly as the Japanese economy and the region’s recover.
Studies by the Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO, 2010a) reveal that the Latin America and Caribbean region presents a wide range of new business opportunities, such as food packaging in Chile and the aeronautical industry in Mexico, which could enlarge the current Japanese investment and import “basket”.
In late 2009, ECLAC forecast average growth of 4.3% for 2010 in Latin America and the Caribbean, but the pace of expansion has been faster.
Percentage increase Percentage increase Latin America and the Caribbean need to make a greater effort if Japan is to come to regard the region as a hub of its global business strategy.
Many Japanese business people still have the shock of the “lost decade” at the back of their minds.
Just as there are Japanese firms that are optimistic about the region’s future, so others are more cautious.
Japan was one of the countries that had to pay for the most “broken crockery” because of the region’s external debt crisis.
When the crisis broke out in August 1982, Japanese banks were engaged in private-sector financing operations worth over US$ 30 billion, including over US$ 13 billion in syndicated loans (Stallings, 1990).
Japanese banks were also participants in the region’s largest projects, such as the Peruvian oil pipeline, the metallurgical industry in Mexico and the development of the Amazon basin.
The crisis not only meant the Government of Japan using large sums of public money to participate in the debt rescheduling programme, but also led many Japanese companies to pull out of the region at a time when Asia was becoming a better option.
The countries of Latin America and the Caribbean need to join the initiatives of Brazil and Mexico with a view to participating in the Japanese and global value chain.
In 2008, Japanese foreign direct investment (FDI) in the mining sector was up almost fourfold on the previous year, becoming the main driver of Japanese investment in Latin America.
Amidst an accelerating rise in international raw material prices, investment increased in Brazil, where a group of Japanese steelmaking companies joined forces with the largest Korean steelmaker to purchase 40% of the shares of NAMISA for roughly US$ 3.12 billion.
The small proportion of Japanese investment in the region that goes to the manufacturing sector is also concentrated in Brazil (JBIC, 2010).
That country and Mexico have been the main recipients of Japanese FDI in the region.
The new role of Japanese economic actors in the region On the corporate side, the large general trading companies (sogo shosha) are still making the running, accompanied by other Japanese firms.
The Government of Japan continues to make supporting the private sector its first priority.
Traditionally, they have had four basic functions: trade, financing, economic information and organization.
These firms, which conduct operations almost worldwide, played the role of “pathfinders” when Japan began to invest in Latin America and the Caribbean in the 1950s and 1960s (Horisaka, 1993).
Today they act mainly as though they were investment banks, participating directly in the management of the firms they invest in.
Although the role of the sogo shosha has changed over the years, their strengths derive from their original nature.
As Kuwayama (1997) put it, “the power of the sogo shosha derives mainly from their responsiveness as intermediaries between sellers and potential buyers, backed by their extremely up-to-date trade information systems, their effectiveness with transport and storage and their ability to provide short-term credits for trade financing and medium- and long-term funding for major projects.
They also maintain ties with private banks and links to a whole range of production and distribution companies.” These firms also act as intermediaries between governments to develop ODA projects.
During fiscal year 2010, the sogo shosha are expected to implement worldwide investments totalling what looks set to be a record of over US$ 27.5 billion.
Latin America and the Caribbean need to exert themselves to attract this capital.
In early fiscal year 2010 (April 2010 to March 2011), the six leading sogo shosha (Mitsubishi Corp., Mitsui & Co., Sumitomo Corp., Itochu Corp., Marubeni Corp. and Sojitz Corp.) outlined their respective investment plans.2 The total was almost twice as high as the previous year’s, apparently indicating a return to the dynamism that existed before the global financial crisis.
Although the details of the investment plans and their geographical distribution are unknown, the common denominator is the focus on natural resource and energy projects and on infrastructure in emerging economies.
While there is some uncertainty about the impact the credit crisis in Europe may have, the investments of the sogo shosha are being driven by rising commodity prices.
Each of the firms is expected to invest between 30% and 40% in natural resources (such as natural gas, coal and steel), a sector that has become their main source of earnings.
The second pillar of their investment packages is infrastructure in emerging economies, including water pipelines, electricity generation, transport and new energy projects, among others.
The new Japanese investment strategy In mid-2008, Japan announced the strategic use it planned to make of its bilateral investment treaties.
Investment liberalization, protection and facilitation are stipulated in a chapter of the economic partnership agreements signed by Japan.
Negotiating an economic partnership agreement is not always a viable option, however, given the wide variety of subjects they cover.
In these cases, an alternative Japan has employed has been the negotiation of bilateral investment treaties.
A bilateral investment treaty with Peru came into force in December 2009, making it the third country in Latin America and the Caribbean to put this legal framework in place after Mexico and Chile had done so with their respective economic partnership agreements.
Following a round of three negotiations, the bilateral investment treaty was signed in November the same year.
Japan has now settled its criteria for choosing candidates for forthcoming bilateral investment treaties, and some Latin American and Caribbean countries with natural and food resources are in its sights.
There is also an alternative mechanism for studying the viability of a bilateral investment treaty at the request of the Japanese private sector or the government of the other country.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, Colombia means to follow in the footsteps of Peru and is currently negotiating an agreement of this type with Japan.
Within this framework, the Japanese public-private partnership has been studying the difficulties involved in promoting investment in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The Council is headed by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MOFA) and the Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry (METI) on the government side, and is also participated in by the main institutions providing assistance to the public and private sectors, such as the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and the Japan Bank for International Cooperation (JBIC), among others.
The private sector is represented by Nippon Keidanren, the country’s largest business association, and other employers’ organizations involved with the issue of investment.
The main agenda of the Council has been the promotion of bilateral investment treaties and strategies to help Japanese firms investing (or planning to invest) in four geographical regions: (1) Latin America and the Caribbean; (2) the Middle East; (3) North Africa; and (4) South Asia and countries in the Caucasus, the Russian Federation and central and eastern Europe.
Latin America and the Caribbean could cooperate here, in pursuit of more and better Japanese investment in the region.
The idea is for this approach to generate a virtuous circle that attracts more investment, contributing at the same time to the development of human resources and infrastructure through ODA and other Japanese cooperation tools.
The next task for Japan would be to strengthen this assistance mechanism by increasing the resources allocated to the region.
Another pending task is to streamline interaction between government institutions, as there is no “one-stop shop” for dealings with Japanese firms.
New opportunities In addition to natural and energy resources, the attention of Japan in Latin America and the Caribbean over the coming years will be centred on infrastructure and food security.
Latin America and the Caribbean is a region where demand for infrastructure is growing but financial resources to build it are lacking.
Japanese firms have already begun to expand their business in this sector.
Although Asia is the main emergingmarket focus for the Japanese private sector, in the short term Latin America and the Caribbean is the region that is competing most strongly against Asia for investment and business opportunities with Japan in the area of infrastructure.
As of mid-2009, indeed, the two regions were dividing between them the main emerging-economy projects in this sector implemented by the sogo shosha (see table V.2).
By way of a “structural reform” to make them less dependent on raw materials at times when international prices for these are fluctuating very sharply, the sogo shosha have tried to expand their infrastructure business with a view to this sector becoming as important to their operations as natural and energy resources.
The main motivation, though, is the increased demand for infrastructure because of economic growth in emerging economies.
The experience gained with infrastructure projects in a Japanese ODA context is allowing the sogo shosha to expand their business in this sector without having to start from the ground up.
ODA divides into non-reimbursable financial assistance, technical cooperation (also non-reimbursable) and loan assistance.
In addition to bilateral ODA, Japan also channels its assistance through international organizations.
The Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO) is an institution associated with METI whose objective is to promote trade and investment between Japan and the rest of the world through its offices in the major cities of the world.
A Japanese economic assistance policy has already begun to be implemented with a view to procuring rare metals.
Japan is providing loan assistance for infrastructure projects in the vicinity of mines where rare metals are extracted, including assistance for viability studies on these metals.
As of mid-2009, three of the seven projects of this type were being implemented in South America (Argentina, Chile and Peru), making Latin America and the Caribbean the leading destination over other geographical regions (see table V.3).
Additionally, in April 2010 a new Japanese comprehensive assistance strategy was announced, including industrial and infrastructure development.
The Plurinational State of Bolivia became the first country in the world to benefit from this strategy (see table V.4).
Japan has begun to adopt a new industrial policy in which infrastructure exports are a central plank.
This means that Latin America and the Caribbean will be able to import infrastructure systems and equipment on better terms, including more active economic aid.
In recent decades, the Japanese economy has been sustained by two strong export sectors: automobiles and electronics.
However, the country’s dependence on these two sectors has made it necessary to strengthen other industries.
In June 2010, METI published a proposal for a new industrial policy aimed at strengthening five sectors: (1) infrastructure-related industries, (2) new-generation energy solutions, (3) cultural industries such as fashion, tourism and manga, (4) medicine and health care in general and (5) leading-edge technologies, such as robotics and the space industry.
The infrastructure sector would include the following branches: water-related businesses, coal-fired electricity generation and coal gasification, electricity transmission, nuclear energy, railways, recycling, the space industry, community development, renewable energies, information and communication technologies (ICTs) and urban development (METI, 2010).
There is great potential medium- and long-term demand in all these sectors in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The fact that Japan is not only investing in infrastructure but also planning to boost its exports will make Latin America and the Caribbean a more attractive region for Japanese firms.
The agricultural trade of Latin America and the Caribbean needs support, investment and innovation policies in the face of a new international food security situation.
According to a report by ECLAC, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations and the Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture (ECLAC/FAO/IICA, 2010), food security in Latin America and the Caribbean has regressed to levels not seen since the early 1990s, with some 52 million people suffering from malnutrition.
The same report stresses that the agricultural sector is “a complex system integrated into both international and local economies, dependent on climate change, linked through production chains with other economic sectors and boasting considerable poverty-reduction potential”.
The region, which has a limited group of agricultural commodities as a stable source of revenue, is facing a global context whose agenda includes the reduction of trade barriers, intraregional trade facilitation and improvements in the workings of national markets.
At the same time, FDI in the agricultural sector (most of it from multinationals) also needs to take account of social and environmental factors, as well as the sector’s development and food security (UNCTAD, 2009).
The Japanese public-private partnership has the agricultural sector of Latin America and the Caribbean in its sights.
Japan has now established guidelines for promoting Japanese investment at the bilateral level.
Japan is a country with few food resources that can only meet 40% of its domestic demand (based on calories).
From the Japanese perspective, one way of contributing towards a solution to the problem of food security would be to strengthen global agricultural production.
At the Group of Eight (G8) Summit of July 2009, Japan proposed the creation of an international framework to promote international investment in the agricultural sector.
To promote responsible investment in this sector, in September the same year Japan, the United Nations and the World Bank jointly organized a meeting of top officials during the sixty-fourth session of the General Assembly in New York.
A month beforehand, Japan established its own “guidelines for the promotion of foreign investment in the interests of food security”, which lay down principles of action for Japanese economic actors themselves.
These principles include agricultural sustainability in the countries receiving investments, transparency, respect for the law, due consideration for farmers and citizens in the different regions and consideration of the environmental dimension and the food supply (MOFA, 2009b).
On the basis of these principles, a number of countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, including Argentina, Brazil and Paraguay, are already on the list of candidates chosen by Japan for enhanced cooperation on food security.
Investment in the agricultural sector would attract more Japanese ODA and promote technology transfer to the region.
Japan would use its ODA to build the necessary production and distribution infrastructure (such as highways and ports) and to promote technology transfer (see figure V.3).
Aid (general assistance) Japanese public sector An improved investment climate • Intergovernmental agreement Signing of bilateral investment treaties and economic partnership agreements • Consultation on economic issues Intergovernmental dialogue [Related government institutions] Financial and technical cooperation • Connection with ODA (assistance for infrastructure, technical cooperation, etc.) • Financial assistance for the private sector • Insurance for commercial activities abroad, etc.
Besides improving the business environment, it is up to the region’s governments to develop and harmonize strategic criteria to facilitate negotiations over Japanese investment and cooperation.
If this is not done, other geographical regions such as South Asia and eastern Europe could prove prompter and more effective negotiators.
Beyond free trade: the economic partnership agreements promoted by Japan The Japanese economic partnership agreement strategy Besides trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, Japanese economic partnership agreements include other measures to strengthen economic relations, such as harmonization of regimes and international cooperation.
Other countries, such as Colombia, are also looking to sign an economic partnership agreement with Japan.
There are some countries in Latin America with which the Japanese private sector would like the government to negotiate trade agreements to facilitate its operations.
In a survey conducted by the Japan External Trade Organization (JETRO) in seven countries of the region between July and August 2009, 71.9% of firms (120) replied that the negotiation of an agreement would be helpful in facilitating their operations in these countries.
The first five on the list are the Bolivarian Republic of Argentina (78.1%) and Brazil (66.7%).
Concerning the effects of any trade agreement, 73.7% of firms (115) replied that they would expect them to include a better business environment, encompassing improved legal security generally and better customs procedures, among other points.
While 70.5% of firms thought they would benefit from tariff liberalization, almost 30% would like to see an easing of restrictions on the movement of business people and specialist staff (JETRO, 2010b).
The dynamic of the first trans-Pacific Japanese Economic Partnership Agreement Japan signed its first “full” economic partnership agreement with Mexico after agreeing to open up its farm sector.
The main disadvantage was the level of tariffs Japanese firms had to pay, averaging 16%.
Mexico negotiated the Economic Partnership Agreement with the intention that this should be the cornerstone of its strategy to expand and diversify trade and investment with Asia.
This was the first trade agreement signed by Mexico in Asia and the last one the country needed in order to have agreements with all the leading industrialized countries.
Where exports were concerned, the agreement was intended to enhance the presence of Mexican products in new markets.
Regarding imports, the idea was to facilitate the supply of low-cost products, especially those with a large technology component, with a view to boosting output of high value added products in Mexico.
Two of them (pork and orange juice) were products that had already been exported to Japan, while the other three (beef, chicken and fresh oranges) were new products Mexico was looking to introduce into the Japanese market.
Ever since Japan began to study the viability of an economic partnership agreement with Mexico, what most stood in the way of starting negotiations was the stance of the farm sector.
In 2001, the year before negotiations began, the food sector accounted for 20.6% of all Japanese imports from Mexico.
Farming is the sector that Japan protects most in its bilateral, regional and multilateral trade negotiations (Kochi, 2008).
On the whole, the effects of the Economic Partnership Agreement have been positive.
In its first five years of operation (2004-2008), Japanese exports rose by 60%, driven mainly by the automotive sector and steel products.
The automotive sector is also the one that has contributed most to the growth of Japanese investment in Mexico.
Trade and investment are expected to return to their pre-global crisis growth rates once the international and Mexican economies recover.
According to a study by the Japanese embassy in Mexico, in 2008 Mexico imported mainly intermediate goods from Japan (such as parts and components), to the value of US$ 11 billion, using them to make final products and export these to the United States, Europe and other markets in a trade worth US$ 14.3 billion (Nakamae, 2009).
Bilateral cooperation, with special reference to the Economic Partnership Agreement between Japan and Mexico The Economic Partnership Agreement between Japan and Mexico included a specific chapter on bilateral cooperation, the first time an agreement of this type signed by Japan had ever done so.
Thanks to the Mexican negotiating strategy, the Asian countries opted to follow the same path in their negotiations with Japan.
Bilateral cooperation encompasses nine areas: trade and investment promotion, support industries, SMEs, science and technology, technical and vocational education and training, intellectual property, agriculture, tourism and the environment.
Japanese ODA is an important part of the cooperation provided for under the economic partnership agreement, but this cooperation is conceived within a broader context, with technical cooperation as the common denominator.
Although the areas of cooperation depend on the outcome of negotiations, this also encompasses collaboration through regional governments, different government institutions, universities and research centres, among others.
In Asia, cooperation has been extended into innovative areas such as monitoring of financial institutions and transactions and the expansion of electronic trading.
Goods trade negotiations have revealed a strong demand for collaboration in agriculture and in SMEs, while in services negotiations the demand is mainly for cooperation on ICTs and tourism.
Human resource development is in demand in practically all negotiations (MOFA, 2007).
Trade and investment promotion Corporate mission sent to Mexico by Japanese car manufacturers established in the United States Financial cooperation (insurance) to fund the planned expansion of the telecommunications network in Mexico - Technical cooperation to promote the export of pork to Japan Cooperation with Mexico to improve security in goods transportation 2.
Backing for support industries and SMEs - Technical cooperation to develop metal press technology - Technical cooperation to train human resources in SMEs Technical cooperation to strengthen the automotive support industry - Technical cooperation to improve quality and productivity 3.
Technical and vocational education and training - arious seminars, symposia and training courses in advanced technology Technical cooperation to improve design in a variety of finished products 4.
Intellectual property - Bilateral cooperation for periodic information sharing between the Mexican authorities and the Japanese embassy and firms (once a month) - Technical cooperation to detect pirated products at customs 5.
Agriculture Financial cooperation to develop a stem rust-resistant strain of wheat Technical cooperation to develop and expand tropical fruit production on small farms 6.
Tourism - echnical cooperation for training to develop sustainable local tourism Seminars on tourism and citizen security, among other topics Facilitation of migration procedures for Japanese citizens (forms in Japanese) - ooperation to implement a value added tax (VAT) refund system for tourists 7.
The environment - Technical cooperation on six large-scale projects (such as the creation of a water quality monitoring network on the coasts) - Various seminars, symposia and training courses - Technical cooperation to study water quality 8.
Using economic partnership agreements to improve the business environment Measures to improve the business environment are another original feature and are covered by a specific chapter in each of the economic partnership agreements signed by Japan, starting with Mexico.
The business patterns of Japanese firms are not dominated by external trade with firms from third countries.
Many of them have to go outside Japan to do business and invest in a world where global competition increases daily.
For this reason, economic partnership agreements seek not just to liberalize and facilitate trade and investment but also to improve the business environment in the signatory countries in order to enhance the bilateral economic relationship.
Even in Asia, Japanese firms face a number of difficulties that in practice constitute non-tariff barriers.
Latin America and the Caribbean could become a rival to Asia if the region succeeds in solving the problems with its business environment over the medium or long term.
The main problems affecting Japanese firms in China, India and the large ASEAN economies are similar (JETRO, 2010c): continual abrupt changes in laws and regulations affecting business, lack of transparency in administrative procedures, inadequate infrastructure, concern about citizen security and noncompliance with intellectual property standards, among others.
The perception of Japanese firms (and thus of other industrialized countries) can serve as an index of business-friendliness.
As already mentioned, another of the major problems for Japanese firms operating in Latin America and the Caribbean is the business environment, and the region cannot compete with Asia if it fails to deal with the issue.
This can be seen as a great opportunity to improve the region’s standing in the global economy.
Economic partnership agreements stipulate the establishment of a committee for the improvement of the business environment involving representatives of the two governments and, where circumstances call for it, representatives of business.
The committee (or subcommittee) is to lay out the problems affecting the area concerned, discuss ways and means of solving them and make the necessary recommendations.
The committee also has the function of monitoring the measures taken once some recommendation has been formulated.
Under the Economic Partnership Agreement between Japan and Mexico, efforts have been made to integrate firms from both countries more closely into the global value chain, develop economies of scale and increase productivity.
Thanks to the work of the committee, it was possible to enhance the capacity of Mexican firms as suppliers to Japanese electronics manufacturers operating in Mexico.
It may come about that a certain area (intellectual property, for instance) is dealt with simultaneously within this framework and as part of the bilateral cooperation determined by the economic partnership agreement.
Japanese official development assistance The interaction between investment, trade and official development assistance: the case of Asia The public-private partnership concept in Japan arose out of the country’s successful cooperation in Asia, where it played an important part in building what is now known as “factory Asia”.
A new stage in the economic history of Asia began after the Japanese private sector unleashed an inward investment boom in the region in the mid-1980s.
In the early part of that decade, newly industrialized economies and South-East Asian countries began a series of reforms whose goal was the construction of export-oriented industrialized economies.
One of the linchpins of their policies was the creation of a favourable environment to attract FDI from multinational enterprises, and Japan was the driving force behind a first wave of FDI of this type.
Because of the overvaluation of the yen from 1986 onward as a result of the Plaza Accord, many Japanese firms substantially expanded their production activities in newly industrialized economies and in South-East Asia to avoid losing export competitiveness.
Firms from Japan (and other industrialized countries) not only provided fresh capital but also transferred technology and took with them the administrative resources needed to implement their business operations in Asia.
In other words, multinational enterprises of Japanese origin played a leading role in the industrialization of Asia.6 Over the years, recently industrialized countries would also become major investors in South-East Asia.
Japanese ODA played a decisive role in creating a favourable investment climate via the creation of infrastructure and the development of human The pattern of trade thus created by investment flows is also known by the analogy of the “flying geese”.
The geese carry investment and other necessary resources to the countries invested in.
Thanks to these resources, there is a process of inter-industry specialization in the countries concerned that ultimately generates a high level of productivity and competitiveness.
When a country begins to lose its comparative advantage in a given sector, the geese fly to another country where that comparative advantage does exist.
The geese flew first from Japan to the newly industrialized countries and thence to China and South-East Asia (ESCAP, 2000). resources, which became a comparative advantage of the region relative to other geographical areas.
Recently industrialized economies, the countries of ASEAN and China were the main recipients of Japanese ODA, which was channelled primarily through lending to develop infrastructure such as highways, railways, ports and electrical power installations.
From a basic conceptual standpoint, building infrastructure has a direct effect on an economy, as it provides work for a variety of firms.
Once installed, infrastructure helps firms carry out their operations more productively, giving it a large indirect impact on the economy, something that is of the greatest importance for developing countries (Watanabe, 2010).
In short, Japanese ODA has nurtured systemic competitiveness, both at the individual country level and regionally, and is characterized by the large proportion provided in the form of loans.
Technical cooperation is also an important element for developing the human resources needed to get the most out of the infrastructure built.
The next target of Japan is to double the economic size of all Asia by 2020, and to achieve this it has been implementing an initiative since mid-2009 whose main component is an ODA package of up to US$ 20 billion in the region.
Following a series of prior consultations with the countries of Asia, in April 2009 Japan announced its Growth Initiative towards Doubling the Size of Asia’s Economy, the two pillars of which are enhancement of Asian growth potential and strengthening of domestic demand in the region’s countries.
The aims include attracting investment for major infrastructure projects, fomenting industrial development initiatives in the region and strengthening social security systems, the health sector and education to increase consumption in the intermediate social stratum of the region (METI, 2009b).
To achieve these tasks, Japan prepared an aid package that maximized the use of the financial resources available.
Asia is now the most economically important region for Japan and the country’s main objective is to grow with the region.
The evolution of Japanese official development assistance in Latin America and the Caribbean Latin America and the Caribbean also need Japanese ODA, not only for their economic and social development but also to promote innovation and scientific and technological development with a view to participating more effectively in the global economy.
The demand for loan assistance has declined because some countries in the region are now more cautious about external borrowing.
Because of this contraction, Japan is concentrating a large part of its ODA resources in Asia on technical cooperation.
It is important for the region’s countries to convey their technical cooperation priorities and needs more explicitly to Japan.
Non-reimbursable financial cooperation and technical cooperation totalled a cumulative US$ 12.081 billion in 2008.
Since the last decade, Japan has been the main donor in 27 of the 33 countries in the region, including the largest economies.
In 1994, Mexico figured for the first time on the list of the 10 countries receiving most Japanese ODA throughout the world, standing in sixth place (US$ 183 million).
The following year it dropped to seventh, but on a larger total of US$ 288 million, a figure that represented 79% of all the ODA received by the country that year.
Until recently, Japan was the main donor in that country, supplying half of all the ODA it received in 2003.
It still receives loans from Japan and assistance in the other areas of ODA, and in 2008 it received more Japanese assistance of this kind than anywhere else in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Asia is the region that receives most technical cooperation from Japanese ODA.
In 2008, that region’s countries occupied nine of the top 10 positions in the worldwide ranking of recipients of Japanese technical cooperation.
Japanese ODA in the region has been concentrated in four main areas, of which the last is the most innovative: sustainable development, environmental protection and climate change, poverty reduction, and triangular and macroregional cooperation (Kuramoto, 2009).
The goal of triangular cooperation is to promote South-South cooperation with four countries in the region (Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico).
Programmes of economic and social development in other countries of the region and in some Portuguese-speaking countries have been implemented jointly (see table V.8).
For its part, macroregional cooperation operates for a particular group of countries or regional integration framework.
One of the most interesting initiatives based on this type of cooperation is being implemented in Central America (the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras and Nicaragua) to improve the standard of mathematics teaching in primary schools.
Since 1989, teaching materials and texts have been prepared for students and a training programme has been implemented so that teachers use the new texts.
Among other projects, mention may be made of one to promote tourism in the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) and one to develop fishing and forestry in the Caribbean Community (CARICOM).
The future shape of Japanese official development assistance in the region Japan has fewer resources than before and needs to focus them on fewer projects within the region.
In 1999, the region received US$ 814 million of Japanese ODA, but the amount was gradually reduced until by 2008 it stood at less than a third of this figure.
This was the outcome of a “structural reform” in Japanese ODA due chiefly to fiscal constraints that have forced the country to reduce the amount of its worldwide assistance and concentrate on other regions and on certain issues, with assistance for trade and climate change foremost among them.
Some in Japan think that more attention should be paid to the “strengths” of developing countries, as the traditional ODA strategy has always concentrated more on their problems (Nishigaki, Shimomura and Tsuji, 2009, pp. 341-343).
Latin America and the Caribbean now have many more strengths than a few decades ago, making this the right time for a fresh effort by Japan to help the region help itself.
Aid for economic integration and growth: infrastructure, development of SMEs and promotion of tourism, among other things. 2.
Environmental protection: cooperation with the 15 countries in the region that are supporting the Japanese Cool Earth Partnership initiative; measures to strengthen forestry protection systems and improve the living environment in cities, among others; assistance for the development of renewable energies and energy saving, among other things. 3.
Strategy for countries with larger economies: combination of loan assistance and technical cooperation. 4.
Strategy for countries with smaller economies: combination of nonreimbursable financial cooperation and technical cooperation. 5.
Assistance for regional integration mechanisms: education, health care, the environment, disaster prevention for mechanisms such as the Central American Integration System and CARICOM; monitoring of energy production, quality and economy measures in MERCOSUR. 6.
Anti-poverty efforts: social development (education and health, for example) and rural development to improve living standards and increase employment. 7.
P r o m o t i o n o f S o u t h - S o u t h cooperation. 8.
Enhancement of ties with other development institutions: InterAmerican Development Bank (IDB) and others.
Cross-border trade and financial flows, which expanded rapidly in the 1990s, slowed heavily after the financial crisis of 2008 and 2009.
Cross-border digital flows were not affected by the crisis and maintained their exponential growth.
The slowdown in trade, foreign direct investment and other financial flows reflects lacklustre global economic growth in the post-crisis period and has led to high unemployment and wage stagnation, particularly in Europe.
In addition, income distribution has deteriorated in practically all the advanced economies in the past few decades, and immigration to the United States and Europe has risen steadily.
Another source of the mounting discontent in developed countries is the lack of coordination or global public goods capable of mitigating the social and political tensions associated with this phase of hyperglobalization.
The region’s participation in the global economy continues to lag: its share in global exports of goods and services remains stagnant and it has lost ground in trade of high-technology goods and modern services.
Although the share of Latin America and the Caribbean in global foreign direct investment flows has risen, its low-technology specialization has deepened.
The region’s participation in global value chains has increased this century, but remains below the global average and consists mainly of providing raw materials for third countries’ exports.
Poor digital connectivity also hampers the region’s capacity to enter new dynamic sectors.
Amid still-sluggish regional and global economic growth, the Latin American and Caribbean region’s exports and imports will fall for the fourth year running in 2016.
TPP could make up the largest free trade area in the world, as measured by its members’ combined GDP, and it differs from most previous trade agreements in that it is both plurilateral and interregional, as well as for the breadth of subjects it covers.
TPP has a strong regulatory harmonization component in such areas as e-commerce, public procurement and various labour and environmental matters.
The agreement has raised great controversy and there is great uncertainty as to whether it will be ratified. 11Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Summary A.
The Trans-Pacific Partnership: a preliminary analysis 13Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Summary From the 1990s onwards, economic relations between countries entered a new phase, known as hyperglobalization, characterized by rapid growth in cross-border flows of goods, services and capital.
Dissatisfaction with hyperglobalization From the 1990s onwards, economic relations between countries entered a new phase, known as hyperglobalization, characterized by rapid growth in cross-border flows of goods, services and capital.
In addition, since the 2000s there has also been a surge in cross-border data flows.
Another trend has been the increase in the proportion of migrants in the population of industrialized countries, even though their share in the world population held steady.
Hyperglobalization is also characterized by the low presence of global public goods and international coordination mechanisms that would correct or reduce the tensions associated with this phenomenon.
This is particularly evident in the United Kingdom’s decision to vote in favour of leaving the European Union (a process termed “Brexit”) in June 2016, the outcome of the presidential elections in the United States in November 2016 and the strengthening of anti-globalization movements in several countries.
More generally speaking, broad swathes of the population in these countries are questioning the benefits of trade and investment by foreign companies (see figure 1).
First, a recessionary bias has held back the recovery of the world economy and global trade since the 2008-2009 crisis.
The weak economic recovery has led to major social costs, particularly in European countries that have not yet returned to pre-crisis employment levels.
Second, despite the reduction in poverty at the global level, income distribution has deteriorated in almost all advanced economies in recent decades.
In a highly heterogeneous world, where countries’ technological capacities and competitiveness vary greatly, current account imbalances tend to arise and persist.
Without coordination mechanisms or global public goods in the international system, deficit countries are forced to reduce their growth, employment levels and social welfare spending in order to avoid deepening their external imbalances.
This leads to rising inequality and a recessionary bias whereby social equilibrium is sacrificed to avoid worsening current account imbalances.
The decline in aggregate demand and more intense global competition also have an impact on employment and wages in developed countries, especially among less skilled workers, among whom discontent with hyperglobalization has increased most.
One of the ways in which the recessionary bias has manifested itself is in weak trade in recent years (see figure 2).
In 2015, the value of world goods trade fell by 14%, while its volume grew by just 2.7%.
In 2016, the volume of world goods trade is expected to grow by a mere 1.7%, the weakest expansion since the global economic crisis and the fifth consecutive year of growth below 3%.
The only precedent in recent history for the current weakness of global trade was in the 1980s.
The value of world services trade also fell in 2015, though less markedly than trade in goods (-6.4%).
A number of factors account for the persistent weakness of world trade, including sluggish global demand, slower trade liberalization and slackening global value chain expansion.
All this has been compounded by the drop in commodity prices, which has driven down demand for imports from commodity-exporting countries.
Lower demand for imports in China has also played an important role in this.
No strong recovery in global trade is anticipated in the medium term, as the structural factors that have caused its growth to weaken over recent years are expected to persist.
The recessionary bias of the global economy has lasted longer than anticipated, as demonstrated by the successive downward revisions of growth projections over recent years.
The economies of the advanced countries have continued to perform poorly in 2016.
In the United States, economic growth was lower than expected in the first 15Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Summary half of this year.
The incipient recovery in the European economy will be undermined by the uncertainty surrounding the consequences of Brexit.
The Japanese economy stagnated in the second quarter of 2016 after growing by just 0.5% in the first.
All the other large emerging economies, except China and India, will grow more slowly in 2016 than in 2015.
This is due in part to lower demand in industrialized countries and the decline in commodity prices.
The application of restrictive fiscal and monetary policies in a number of developing countries to deal with negative external shocks has further dampened growth.
Global growth has taken longer than expected to recover for several reasons.
First, the expansionary monetary policies adopted since the global financial crisis had less of an impact than expected on the largest advanced economies.
Monetary policy seems to have exhausted its potential to stimulate aggregate demand.
Meanwhile, fiscal policy in the developed countries has turned restrictive after an initial period of expansion in response to the crisis.
The ineffectiveness of monetary policy as a tool for reactivating the leading economies has recently led to a reassessment of the role of fiscal policy.
For example, the new multi-year stimulus plan announced by the Government of Japan in August 2016 suggests a shift towards a greater role for fiscal policy, breaking with the tendency to take austerity measures at times of crisis.
This is illustrated by the sharp rise in financial assets: their value rose from rough parity with world GDP in 1980 to over 10 times world GDP by the second half of the 2000s.
Another sign of the decoupling of real and financial activity is the slower pace of world trade growth compared with the expansion of cross-border capital flows.
Rising global liquidity has led to many emerging economies increasing their external leverage and, with it, their exposure to global liquidity cycles.
Even though its economy is still growing at close to 6.5%, China’s demand for imports has fallen as its growth model is transitioning from an economy driven by investment and manufactures exports to one with a greater focus on consumption and services.
Furthermore, Chinese manufacturing firms have been reducing the imported content of their production.
As a result, the volume of Chinese imports fell year-on-year for six consecutive quarters between the first quarter of 2015 and the second quarter of 2016.
Fourth, the growing disequilibria between the current account balances of the main economies in 2016 have intensified the recessionary bias around the world.
Since 2013, current account surpluses have increased in a number of countries, including Germany and other surplus countries in the eurozone, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
Other than in Japan, these rising current account surpluses are largely accounted for by higher trade surpluses.
A lack of import dynamism in the surplus economies has contributed to the stagnation of global demand.
The narrowing of current account deficits in a number of countries that have traditionally run them, mainly in the eurozone, has, in turn, also worsened the global recessionary bias.
The heterogeneity of different countries’ production structures has been a prime cause of the persistence of current account disequilibria.
In particular, there is a strong correlation between different countries’ current account balances and their export manufacturing competitiveness.
As competitiveness cannot be changed in the short term, surplus and deficit countries tend to maintain their respective positions over a period of years.
As a result, deficit countries have taken on more external debt in the last two decades, a situation that could become unsustainable, except for the United States, as the issuer of the leading international reserve currency (see figure 3).
The recessionary bias of the global economy has lasted longer than anticipated, as demonstrated by the successive downward revisions of growth projections over recent years. 16 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Summary The heterogeneity of different countries’ production structures has been a prime cause of persistent current account disequilibria.
The heterogeneity of production structures is magnified by innovation and the spread of technology.
In the context of the current technological revolution, the distance between the leading countries and follower economies has tended to increase, since gaps are harder to close when the international technology frontier is moving quickly.
The current digital revolution is generating both fragmentation and concentration in production.
On the one hand, there has been a proliferation of small producers using digital platforms to access market niches by meeting local requirements or the demand for personalized products and services.
On the other, markets characterized by scale economies are increasingly concentrated in the hands of large firms from developed countries and some emerging Asian economies.
Investments in digital platforms have created innovation ecosystems in all economic activities.
Examples include the automotive sector (with the development of autonomous or smart vehicles) and agriculture (the expansion of the industrial Internet with machine-to-machine (M2M) connections).
The industrial Internet is turning global value chains into global value platforms.
The most radical transformation is due to the digitalization of manufacturing, which is changing how and where production is carried out and redefining the global production dynamic.
The trend points to the reshoring of production units to developed countries as a result of the virtualization of processes and services.
Automatization is expected to increase highly skilled employment, but will cause a larger fall in jobs in other segments involving routine tasks.
Competitive asymmetries have been increasing exponentially with progress in the new manufacturing age.
The mass take-up of digital technologies via the industrial Internet will blur the boundaries between goods and services.
This will create scope for greater product differentiation, giving rise to smart, connected products.
In this way, manufacturing will continue to play a much more important role in productivity growth and global exports than in relation to value added and employment.
The manufacturing sector is responsible for much of the investment in technological research and development (R&D), particularly in pharmaceuticals and chemicals, computing and electronics, aerospace, electricity, automobiles and vehicle parts.
It can be, therefore, concluded that the manufacturing sector will continue to play a key role in the processes of structural change. 17Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Summary The globalization process has helped to reduce global poverty and inequality.
For the first time in history, the percentage of the world’s population living in extreme poverty could fall below 10%.
This decrease is due mainly to the high growth rates of Asian countries, particularly China.
These countries have benefited from the opportunities that globalization has opened up and, in turn, China’s economic expansion favoured the reduction of poverty in the natural-resource-exporting countries, such as those in South America.
The rapid expansion of trade (up to the global crisis) and swift pace of technological progress have had a significant effect on income distribution.
Jobs are redistributed across sectors and regions of the world as countries’ competitiveness shifts, manufacturing plants move and production processes evolve.
In particular, a significant proportion of manufacturing jobs in advanced economies have moved to developing countries with lower labour costs.
The change in demand for skills also modifies the wage premium workers with more years of education and training receive relative to unskilled workers.
Meanwhile, the sharp fall in the rate of unionization in developed countries since the 1980s has increased the income share of the wealthiest segments.
An analysis of global income distribution reveals a paradox: in the past three decades, global inequality has decreased, whereas inequality within most countries increased, particularly in the developed part of the world.
This situation can be explained in part by a close look at the changes in income by percentile of the world population between 1988 and 2008.
Large gains were seen for the seven lowest income deciles of the world’s population (reflecting in particular the rise in incomes in China and other emerging economies) and for the world’s richest decile, while the incomes of the working class and middle class in developed countries stagnated.
The change in income for each decile of the population between 1998 and 2008 varies between the developed countries, sub-Saharan Africa and China, on the one hand, and Latin America and the Caribbean, on the other.
In the first group, the percentage increase in income was greater for the highest deciles.
By contrast, in the region the poorest deciles showed larger gains in percentage terms (see figure 4).
This difference can be explained by the strong growth in commodity prices towards the end of this period and the adoption, especially in the countries of South America, of redistributive policies favouring lower income segments of the population.
The governance mechanisms of the global economy have not mitigated or solved the problems discussed above because of their partial and fragmented nature and their sluggish response to economic changes and the technological revolution.
The challenges are particularly acute in four areas of global governance, namely trade, foreign direct investment (FDI), taxation and financial transactions.
Within the multilateral system, developed countries’ demands —that developing countries open up further in the areas of manufacturing, services and investment— run counter to developing countries’ calls for greater liberalization of agriculture and the movement of labour in Europe and the United States.
To overcome these obstacles, current trends within WTO favour sectoral and plurilateral negotiations, led by developed countries, such as those currently under way on environmental goods and services.
Another response has been the emergence of a new generation of trade negotiations, known as mega-regional negotiations, which have a strong regulatory harmonization component.
One agreement resulting from such negotiations is the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP), which is analysed in detail in chapter III.
However, opposition to these trade negotiations grows when they touch on domestic public policy matters, such as labour and environmental standards, financial regulation or consumer protection.
Questions have also been raised about the contribution of trade agreements to combating the effects of climate change.
Developed countries Av er ag ch re co by ec Av er ag ch re co by ec Income distribution decile Income distribution decile C.
Despite various attempts from the 1990s onwards, it has so far proved impossible to establish a multilateral system of governance for FDI.
There are currently more than 2,600 treaties in force on investment, resulting in a fragmented international structure, marked by inconsistent or contradictory provisions.
The primary criticism of these agreements is that they do not adequately protect the regulatory space for States to carry out their public policy objectives.
This situation is exacerbated by the existence of investor-State dispute settlement mechanisms. 19Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Summary The international tax system is similarly fragmented, being made up of more than 3,800 bilateral treaties that regulate the taxation of companies with overseas activities.
Their proliferation has led to inconsistencies and legal loopholes that allow multinational companies to channel their profits to jurisdictions with lower tax rates.
Against this backdrop, in 2015, more than 80 countries —including eight from the region— agreed on the Action Plan on Base Erosion and Profit Shifting (BEPS) within the framework of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) and the Group of 20 (G20).
The plan establishes actions that seek to minimize inconsistencies between the different national tax rules that allow transnational companies to reduce their tax burden.
It was also agreed that a multilateral tax treaty would be negotiated to implement these recommendations and amend bilateral tax treaties.
Before the global crisis of 2008-2009, international financial regulation emphasized compliance with the minimum capital requirements established by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS).
These requirements and the lack of quantitative standards for liquidity contributed to the 2008 crisis.
In response, Basel III was adopted in September 2010 to limit risks at both the microprudential (individual banks) and macroprudential (systemic risks) levels.
This agreement, which will enter into force in January 2019, is insufficient to ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole, as a broader macroprudential regulatory approach is required.
Unlike in developed countries, there has not been strong opposition to globalization in Latin America and the Caribbean to date, owing, in part, to the reduction in poverty and inequality between 2004 and 2013.
However, recent slowdowns in the global economy and world trade and falling commodity prices have hit the region hard, especially South America.
The question now is how to avoid a reversal in poverty and inequality reduction, which could lead to political tensions similar to those seen in developed countries.
The loss of momentum has taken place as the region has fallen behind in the technological and production spheres, especially in sectors at the forefront of the new industrial revolution.
Latin America and the Caribbean must recognize that the world is going through a disruptive process of technological and economic change.
Not recognizing the importance of these changes will hinder the productive restructuring needed to boost growth in the long term, sustain the progress made in reducing poverty and improving income distribution, and promote the transition to a low-carbon growth path.
However, the majority of the region’s countries have not had an industrial policy, or if they have it has been exclusively defensive and thus unable to adapt to new technology and competition patterns.
In addition to reactivating and renewing industrial policies, the region must actively contribute to efforts to improve governance of the global economy by creating global public goods.
The proposals put forward by ECLAC in this regard are linked to the implementation of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
First, the perception must be dispelled that the tensions caused by globalization are other countries’ problems and do not impact the region beyond their effects on the prices of the main export products.
Second, institutional weaknesses and fragmentation at the national and regional levels must be overcome, as these increase citizens’ scepticism about governments’ priorities and capacities to take on the challenges of globalization.
As the rules of the game are being redefined in the international economy, weak and fragmented efforts at regional integration could put Latin America and the Caribbean at a strategic disadvantage. 20 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Summary B.
The region’s foreign trade: adverse conditions continue The region’s position in the economic globalization process is vulnerable, as is evident in the stagnation of its share in global exports of goods and services over the past 15 years.
In the case of high-technology exports, the region’s share has fallen outright.
By contrast, over the same period, the developing Asian countries —and China in particular— sharply increased their share of global exports (see table 1).
This is one of the few variables in which the region shows a pattern similar to that of the successful developing Asian economies.
The sectoral distribution of the region’s FDI inflows shows a predominance of services, followed by manufacturing and natural resources.
Most significant among services are investments in telecommunications, the hotel industry and tourism, financial services, retail and transport.
The largest FDI flows into manufacturing activities go to the automotive industry, mainly in Brazil and Mexico.
Investment in natural-resourcesrelated activities is directed chiefly towards metal mining and the coal, natural gas and oil sector.
In the last five years, investment in renewable energies has grown in importance, especially in solar and wind power.
Outward investment by Latin America, conversely, despite having risen in the 1990s and 2000s, remains limited to just a few companies headquartered in the region.
The effect of FDI on the region’s production patterns and role in globalization has been ambivalent.
On the one hand, in countries where FDI is focused on extraction and basic processing of natural resources, it has entrenched the specialization trend and even strengthened low-technology lock-in.
On the other hand, FDI has made a substantial contribution to the expansion and modernization of advanced sectors, such as finance, telecommunications and, to a lesser extent, business services.
Although the participation of Latin America and the Caribbean in global value chains has risen during this century, it is smaller than the global average and than that of the United States, the European Union and Asia (see figure 5).
Regional specialization is mainly in forward linkages, as a supplier of inputs —mostly commodities— to thirdcountry exports.
The region has fewer backward linkages (i.e., the share of foreign value added in the region’s exports) than other regions (particularly the European Union and South-East Asia) and their number has been declining.
Within the region, only Mexico and Costa Rica show a high degree of integration into North American value chains.
The sectors in which their firms participate most are automobiles, electronics, and medical and telecommunications equipment, in the case of Mexico, and electronics and medical equipment in the case of Costa Rica.
Another area where the region continues to lag behind is digital connectivity.
Although the number of households with Internet access almost doubled from 22.4% in 2010 to 43.4% in 2015, a considerable divide remains between the region and the average for the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD), which is 85% of households.
Likewise, broadband speed is lower than in other world regions, which limits participation in activities on the technology frontier, such as telemedicine and advanced manufacturing.
The region’s delicate international position, as described above, together with slacker global demand in recent years, has adversely affected its foreign trade performance.
In 2016, the region will total four consecutive years of falling value for both exports and imports.
The global financial crisis of 2008-2009, which produced a sharp drop in export value in 2009, was short-lived by comparison with the steady erosion of export value in recent years, in step with plummeting raw materials prices.
In 2016, the regional export price index continued to fall, though at a slower rate (-7.6%).
The value of the region’s exports is projected to shrink by 5% in 2016 —much less than the 15% drop of 2015— owing to a price drop of 6.7% combined with a volume rise of 1.7%.
By subregion, the Caribbean and South America will see the heaviest declines in export value in 2016.
By country, only Argentina, Costa Rica, Paraguay and, to a lesser extent, the Dominican Republic, show a rise in their export values.
Among the countries whose export values will fall the most are those most reliant on hydrocarbon exports (Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador and Plurinational State of Bolivia).
Unlike exports, imports are not yet showing signs of recovery: the projected decrease in their value in 2016 (-9.4%) is similar to that of 2015 (-10%).
As in 2014 and 2015, the volume of imports is projected to fall in 2016 amid sluggish aggregate demand in the region, especially in South America.
By sector, import volumes will fall the most in capital goods (machinery and equipment) and intermediate inputs (pieces, parts and 22 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Summary semi-processed materials), which reflects weak investment.
In terms of import value, the largest drops will occur in fuels and intermediate goods, while capital goods will drop less than the overall figure.
These three categories together account for over 80% of the region’s total import value (see figure 6).
Projections for 2016 show that, as in 2015, intraregional exports will decline much more sharply than exports to the rest of the world (-10%, compared with 4%).
This is true of trade in all the subregions and integration schemes, especially in South America.
The region will thus mark four consecutive years of declining intraregional trade and the third in which intraregional trade will shrink more than trade with the rest of the world.
This pattern will result in the intraregional trade ratio (measured by imports) falling to 15% in 2016, the lowest level in a decade.
This trend is of particular concern given that the region’s manufacturing exports go chiefly to other countries within the region.
Weak intraregional trade thus limits the region’s potential to diversify its exports.
ECLAC projections for 2017-2020 suggest a modest recovery in the region’s trade, with an average annual growth rate close to 3% for both exports and imports (see figure 7).
Patterns in flows of goods, services and FDI and the digital revolution suggest that the region faces mounting challenges in terms of entering new markets and diversifying its production structure.
The region’s share in global merchandise trade has stagnated since 2000, while its model of technological specialization has regressed due to the rising weight of natural resources.
On the services side, the region has lost ground to its Asian competitors, which is most apparent in more dynamic services as well as in those with high technology content.
Finally, as regards FDI, although transnational corporations have driven modern sectors such as telecommunications, investments in smart assets for research and development (R&D) continue to be limited.
China’s economic slowdown is set to continue in the next few years, which will hold down commodity demand and prices.
This, combined with persistently sluggish global economic conditions, means that the modest projections for regional export growth over the rest of this decade come as no surprise.
On the import side, growth over the next few years will be limited by the weak recovery in regional demand.
Before the end of the present decade, trade is, in short, unlikely to play such a strong role in the region’s economic growth as it did in 2004-2008 and 2010-2011.
Accordingly, the region urgently needs public policies and investment projects to foster growth in more sophisticated export sectors that are less prone to price volatility than those of the existing export basket.
This requires recognizing the technological changes taking place in value chain structure and the organization of production, fully integrating trends towards advanced manufacturing and the Internet of Things.
Many tools of the past, focused on clearly defined sectors, must be replaced by flexible and systemic tools based on the data revolution and analytics.
Finally, the worrying performance of intraregional trade in recent years is evidence of the urgent need to revisit the regional integration agenda with greater conviction, to explore synergies between ongoing initiatives and to overcome political blockages that impede their progress.
This is the first of a new generation of trade negotiations of vast scope, known as megaregional agreements.
TPP would create the largest free trade area in the world, measured by its members’ joint GDP, and the second largest, after the European Union, by total trade among its members.
Together, its members represent 38% of global GDP and a quarter of global trade.
Likewise, in 2015 they received a third of global FDI flows and generated 40% of them.
TPP differs from most previous trade agreements in that it is both plurilateral and interregional, as well as for the breadth of subjects it covers.
In addition to the traditional issues of access to goods and services markets, investment and government procurement, it sets rules on matters that the agreements under the World Trade Organization (WTO) have regulated to a limited extent or not at all.
This is the case of e-commerce, State enterprises, regulatory coherence and various labour and environmental matters.
In these and other areas, such as intellectual property, TPP would encourage regulatory harmonization among its members, despite the fact that they have quite dissimilar levels of economic and institutional development as well as diverse political and legal systems.
The rules agreed upon essentially reflect the interests of the United States, the agreement’s main proponent.
At the same time, some of the provisions of TPP (on labour and environmental issues and in relation to small- and medium-sized enterprises, among others) appear to indicate an effort to achieve greater coherence between international trade governance and the push towards sustainable development, embodied in the recent 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development.
Underlying TPP negotiations are three strategic aims of the United States: to strengthen its economic and geopolitical presence in Asia and the Pacific (counterbalancing China’s growing influence); to write the new rules for global trade and investment over the coming decades; and to modernize the provisions of the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).
In particular, TPP provisions on e-commerce, intellectual property, services and investment are geared towards strengthening United States leadership in the digital economy.
Given the challenges WTO is facing as a forum for negotiating the new rules of global trade, the commitments negotiated within the framework of megaregional agreements such as TPP could well become global standards.
The potential significance of TPP is even greater when seen in the current context of weak international trade.
TPP is a trade agreement of a magnitude and complexity rarely seen.
This has made it very controversial since its inception, even in the United States.
In fact, during his campaign, the country’s President-elect declared his opposition to trade agreements signed by prior administrations and to TPP in particular.
The future of TPP is thus highly uncertain, given that it must be ratified by at least six of its members, jointly representing at least 85% of the signatories’ total GDP, in order to enter into effect.
This means that its entry into force is impossible without the ratification of the United States and Japan.
The possible impacts of TPP on Chile, Mexico and Peru may be considered in terms of two basic criteria: the extent to which it can help to diversify their production and exports and how much it may restrict their freedom to steer their public policies according to their own priorities and development strategies.
TPP would create the largest free trade area in the world, measured by its members’ combined GDP. 25Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Summary TPP would establish standards on issues not yet covered by WTO. market access benefits for the three Latin American participants at the aggregate level are likely to be minimal.
Additionally, the cumulation of origin allowed between Chile, Mexico and Peru, and between them and other TPP partners, could strengthen their production chains and better integrate them into international value chains.
In any event, these are opportunities that will have to be unlocked through industrial, technological and innovation policies.
The experience of the region’s countries with free trade deals suggests that the entry into force of TPP would not, by itself, be sufficient to trigger production and export diversification.
In terms of restrictions on policy space, the degree of regulatory harmonization driven by TPP will vary from country to country.
Generally speaking, it would impose a lighter load of new obligations on the three Latin American members than on other developing member countries.
This is mainly because Chile, Mexico and Peru have had agreements in force with the United States for many years, and have thus already taken on commitments in highly sensitive areas that were subsequently reflected in TPP.
This is true of provisions on intellectual property, investment (for example, investor-State dispute settlement), services, government procurement and labour and environmental issues.
On the other hand, Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia and Viet Nam, which had no pre-existing free trade arrangements with the United States, would have to do more to reform their regulatory frameworks in various areas under TPP.
Assessing the potential impact of TPP on non-member countries in the region is an even more complex task.
Some of those countries could see their exports displaced from TPP markets, particularly the United States, as a result of their being excluded from tariff preferences and other benefits enjoyed by TPP members.
ECLAC estimates that the value of United States imports from the region would drop by 1% in the first year of the entry into effect of TPP (see table 2).
The magnitude and sectoral breakdown of the export diversion would depend on factors such as the weight of TPP markets for each country, the type of products they export to those markets and whether trade agreements exist with other TPP members.
On the other hand, the reduction of non-tariff barriers to trade among TPP countries as a result of regulatory harmonization could also favour trade with third countries, including within the region itself.
This is because commitments such as the harmonization of technical regulations or of foreign trade documentation, by their very nature, are often applied on a most-favoured-nation (in other words non-preferential) basis.
A clear example of the trade diversion that some of the region’s countries could experience from TPP is the case of apparel exports from Central American and Caribbean countries to the United States.
These exports already face strong competition in that market from Viet Nam, despite greater geographical proximity and much lower tariffs (see figure 8).
This competition will only grow with the tariff reductions that would benefit Viet Nam if TPP enters into effect. 2 Chile has agreements in place with all other TPP members.
Mexico has agreements with Canada and the United States (NAFTA), Chile, Japan and Peru, which together accounted for 99% of its export value to TPP members in 2015.
Such overlapping of regulations could lead to interpretation conflicts where an issue is bound by the provisions of two or more agreements.
This would undermine one of the main advantages TPP is supposed to provide: a common set of rules for trade and investment relations among its members.
TPP could (at least initially) thus worsen, rather than improve, issues arising from the proliferation of preferential agreements with mutually inconsistent provisions in trans-Pacific trade relations.
TPP has an accession clause, under which new countries can join once it has entered into force.
This would heighten its commercial and strategic value, especially in the case of large economies integrated into Asian value chains, such as the Republic of Korea and Thailand.
Both countries have expressed their interest in joining TPP, as have other countries from Latin America and the Caribbean.
In the medium term, TPP could become a building block for a Free Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific (FTAAP) among the 21 economies that make up the Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) forum.
This project, which dates back to 2004, attracted renewed interest in 2014, especially from China.
Implementing FTAAP would likely require gradual convergence between TPP and other large-scale economic integration projects currently in negotiation in the Asia-Pacific region, particularly the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).
In any case, any convergence between these two projects would be highly complex, as it would require reconciling the dissimilar positions of the United States and China on trade regulation and foreign investment.
Finally, if it enters into effect, TPP would also have important implications for the future of regional economic integration processes in Latin America and the Caribbean.
The three Latin American TPP members are also members of the Pacific Alliance, whose fourth member, Colombia, has also expressed an interest in eventually joining TPP.
One hypothetical scenario consists in the Pacific Alliance being absorbed, de facto, by TPP, which could complicate its negotiating position vis-à-vis possible convergence with MERCOSUR.
That would make it more difficult to reach agreements aimed at tapping the potential of an expanded Latin American market, which is crucial in the context of the emergence of megaregional blocs on a global level.
Therefore, if TPP enters into force, it is essential that Chile, Mexico and Peru negotiate conditions that would allow the Pacific Alliance to continue fulfilling a constructive role in processes of regional convergence over the coming years.
The value of United States imports from the region would drop by 1% in the first year of TPP. 29Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I Dissatisfaction with hyperglobalization A.
Globalization, along with the ongoing digital revolution, has changed the roles that the different regions of the world play in global production, with major consequences in terms of income distribution.
Several developing countries, particularly China and other Asian economies, are emerging as winners by increasing their share in production, trade and foreign direct investment (FDI).
In the light of the continued weakness of the global economy following the 2008-2009 crisis, globalization is being increasingly called into question.
Although concerns have been voiced more insistently in industrialized countries, the lacklustre economic recovery is also weighing heavily on developing countries, and in the region, particularly on South America, where growth rates have fallen and no further gains have been made in the process of social inclusion and the reduction of inequality achieved between 2004 and 2012.
As the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) analysed in detail in its position paper for the thirty-sixth session of ECLAC (ECLAC, 2016a), globalization has gone hand in hand with environmentally unsustainable production and consumption patterns.
The international community is reacting to the risks that environmental destruction represents for the well-being of future generations; hence the demand for new institutions and agreements to rebuild global governance around the Sustainable Development Goals and the reduction of inequality.
This chapter seeks to develop an understanding of the main determinants of globalization and some of its implications for the global economy and the region.
The introduction presents an overview of the main flows associated with globalization since 1990 and identifies the main political tensions arising from the process.
Next, concerns about globalization are tied in with the current recessionary bias of the global economy, with shifts in production, technology and income distribution, and with deficiencies in global economic governance. 1.
Flows of goods, services, investment and data Economic globalization is characterized by increasing cross-border flows of goods, services, direct investment and financing, as well as digital flows since the expansion of broadband in the mid-2000s.
From a medium-term perspective (1990-2015) there were four notable phases (see figure I.1).
During the first phase (1990-2000), flows grew faster than the global economy, coinciding with the liberalization of trade in goods and services and of capital flows.
During the second phase (2001-2008), the growth rates of all flows doubled compared with the previous decade, with the strongest performances in FDI and financial flows.
Digital flows began increasing exponentially from 2005, thanks to the emergence of various global digital platforms.
The global financial crisis triggered a third phase of deep economic recession, with sharp declines in all flows in 2009, particularly financial flows.
In 2010 and 2011, trade in goods and services returned to pre-crisis levels, but financial operations did not.
During this phase, only cross-border data flows were unaffected by the crisis.
During the fourth phase (from 2012) all flows recorded feeble growth or remained flat apart from digital flows, which continued to gain momentum.
Between 2013 and 2015, global trade in goods grew less than GDP, while global trade in services also 33Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I decelerated and declined in value in 2015.
The digital economy is now leading the globalization charge: cross-border digital flows multiplied by a factor of 43 between 2005 and 2014 (McKinsey Global Institute, 2016a).
Although economic motivations are generally behind this phenomenon, political factors such as conflict and deteriorating human rights situations are playing an increasingly important role.
Hence, while migration from Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean to the United States is driven mainly by weak job growth in the countries of origin, the recent wave of migration from the Middle East and Africa towards Europe is due primarily to political and humanitarian factors.
Against this backdrop, although the number of migrants as a percentage of the global population remained stable at 3% between 1990 and 2015, this figure rose from 7% to 11% in industrialized countries (see figure I.2).
Rising tensions, few solutions From the 1990s until the outset of the crisis, high levels of GDP growth and trade attenuated the tensions associated with the intense globalization process.
Nonetheless, after the crisis, both variables plummeted (see figure I.3) and underlying tensions bubbled to the surface.
Second, despite the reduction in poverty and inequality at the global level (see section D), income distribution has deteriorated in almost all advanced economies at the national level.
Growing inequality is reflected in the flat real incomes of the majority of the population, particularly low-and semi-skilled workers.
Technological advances and growing import competition from developing countries led to a situation in which highly skilled workers in developed countries prospered while those with lower education levels saw their wages remain flat and their employment stability deteriorate (Autor, Dorn and Hanson, 2013).
Third, the sustained increase in immigration in the United States and Europe has exacerbated labour market tensions, particularly in Europe, where the weak economic recovery has undermined job creation.
However, tensions associated with migration are not exclusively economic, and also stem from cultural or racial prejudice.
Lastly, there is a growing perception among the citizens of developed countries that the economic and political elites are not paying enough attention to issues such as rising unemployment and wage stagnation.
Stiglitz (2016) noted that “globalization’s opponents in the emerging markets and developing countries have been joined by tens of millions in the advanced economies”.
In several Latin American countries, particularly those that export raw materials, strong political tensions emerged at the end of the commodities supercycle.
The end of the boom halted the progress made in reducing poverty, improving income distribution and boosting the consumption of a large percentage of the previously marginalized population.
As a result, social demands have increased and governments’ ability to address them has diminished.
In some countries in the region, social conflict and political tensions have increased significantly in the past few years, along with citizens’ mistrust of the political class. 3.
Heterogeneity and global governance: an analytical framework The tensions arising from globalization are the result of a system in which the relationships between the production structure, technology and global imbalances tend to reinforce each other.
The cyclical occurrence of crises of varying magnitudes reflects these endogenous instability mechanisms, as shown in diagram I.1.
Diagram I.1 Global imbalances and low-growth trapPRODUCTION STRUCTURE Recessionary bias Trade imbalances Employment and wages Financialization Inequality The global economy is made up of countries with very different production structures and technological capacities (1).
Technology and production structures interact, as diversified structures favour innovation, which in turn promotes the creation and growth of new sectors, particularly in the framework of the ongoing technology revolution.
The heterogeneity of production structures and capacities creates imbalances in international trade (2).
Deficit countries react with fiscal austerity and the lowering of real wages, which drives down aggregate demand and explains the recessionary bias of the global economy (4).
The fall in employment and wages (3) results in greater inequality (5), which in turn reinforces the recessionary bias, forming a low-growth trap.1 1 An example of this dynamic is the Greek economy after the introduction of the euro.
The production structures of European Union countries vary significantly, with those in the north being more technologically advanced than those in the south.
Once the euro was introduced, these differences resulted in enormous current account deficits in Greece that could not be financed after the 2008-2009 global financial crisis.
The fall in employment and the social spending cuts that the government was forced to implement with a view to balancing its accounts led to a drastic decline in aggregate demand.
Although Greece’s current account is now balanced, the price paid was a deep recession that has spread its deflationary effects across Europe. 36 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I There is a financial flip side to external imbalances (6).
The accumulation of current account imbalances fuels the issuing of debt securities, which in turn are multiplied by the creation of various financial instruments.
This multiplication of financial assets leads to the financialization (6) of the global economy, that is, the growing autonomy of capital flows compared with goods and services flows.
Financialization encourages the concentration of income (above all for the wealthiest 1% of the population) but is also stimulated by it, as households turn increasingly to bank loans to sustain their consumption.
In addition to its effects on the production structure, technology directly affects employment, wages and the qualifications sought on the job market.
Here too, are factors that reinforce each other: “skill-biased technical change” favours workers who are more qualified and increases the difference in pay based on years of education.
At the international level, as the technology gap associated with the new industrial revolution widens, current account imbalances worsen, especially if technology boosts concentration in markets where returns are very high.
To sum up, left to itself the system generates crises and low-growth traps for GDP and trade.
However, it can be stabilized with policies that introduce mechanisms to offset instability and weak growth.
As Schumpeter observed, motorcars are travelling faster than they otherwise would because they are provided with brakes.
ECLAC (2016a) has emphasized that shifting from an analytical to a regulatory perspective implies identifying global economic governance mechanisms and national policies that could offset mutual reinforcement in the international system.
Some policies to correct imbalances aim to create global public goods that require international coordination.
Some imbalances also require more active national policies than those seen in the past (see diagram I.2).
The first global public good is macroeconomic coordination to increase spending in surplus economies and implement Keynesian mechanisms to reduce imbalances.
If surplus countries allowed their currencies to appreciate and increased wages and public spending, demand would increase for deficit countries, which would reduce their deficits without limiting growth.
Diagram I.2 does not include the environmental aspect, but this can be easily incorporated into the analysis.
Expansionary fiscal policies should take advantage of investment opportunities provided by the transition from current production and consumption patterns to a low-carbon growth path, which ECLAC (2016a) has dubbed the “environmental big push”.
Expansionary fiscal policies that aim to build new energy and transport infrastructure and invest in research and development (R&D) and education based on environmental innovation could stimulate aggregate demand with a view to restoring global growth levels while decoupling growth from greenhouse gas emissions.
The international community’s efforts to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals and the Paris Agreement, adopted at the twentyfirst session of the Conference of the Parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (COP21) in December 2015, are significant steps in this direction.
A second mechanism, which also requires international coordination, is the regulation of financial flows, which should weaken the link between current account imbalances and financialization.
Many countries have made progress in this respect, but there is still much to do in order to reduce the significant weight of financial assets in global GDP and their destabilization potential.
To this end, steps must be taken to monitor banks’ solvency, and to control capital movements and financial institutions’ influence on purchasing power.
In addition to global public goods, there is a need for domestic policies that correct asymmetries in income distribution and production and technology capacity.
On one hand, social policies that lessen inequalities associated with the recessionary bias and with asymmetries in capacity among countries and economic agents are required.
These would put a stop to transmission mechanisms from a weaker labour market and higher wage dispersion to greater inequality.
On the other hand, industrial and technology policies must address capacity asymmetries (technology and productivity gaps) that affect growth and distribution.
While Keynesian and social policies play an important role in reducing the impact of these imbalances, industrial and technology policies act on their main determinants.
A combination of different types of policies is needed for economies to follow an economically sustainable path, with greater stability, and to guarantee growth and improve distribution.
All of these policies require an institutional framework that limits globalization-related tensions in the spheres of production, finance, trade, technology and distribution.
Indeed, one of the most successful periods of globalization in the twentieth century (under the Bretton Woods system) included an institutional framework that produced global public goods over a long period of time.
Between the end of the 1940s and the mid-1970s, trade and investment posted the strongest growth of the entire period since the end of the Second World War.
This solid performance stemmed from policies that helped correct the asymmetries in technology and capital between some advanced economies.
In parallel, the building of Welfare States provided protection for workers and stimulated effective demand, which in turn helped trade expand.
Post-war Keynesian policies were the foundation of the successful globalization and integration movement in Europe, which was supported by the external deficits of the United States and by the closing of the technology gaps between that country and Europe and Japan.
The fact that post-war globalization took place amid the creation of international and national institutions focused on reducing conflict and instability was the result of an analysis of the motives for the Second World War.
The protectionist spiral of the 1930s was seen as a key factor in creating the rivalries that led to the confrontation.
For this reason, the creation of an open and non-discriminatory multilateral trade system, as well as the European integration process, was intended to eliminate the threat of a new war.
The cold war also created a favourable environment for social protection systems in European countries.
These policies achieved what Keynes proposed by rethinking economic theory, which was to safeguard and consolidate an international liberal order.
In this respect it was successful, although it failed to integrate developing countries into the new international post-war order.
The discussion above suggests that globalization is not a linear or inevitable process, and that its growth is threatened by the lack of adequate governance (a theme which will be addressed again in section E).
Against this backdrop, hyperglobalization is defined as the deepening of globalization without global public goods or coordination and cooperation mechanisms.
While Keynesian policies were the foundation of the strong growth in trade and European integration up to the mid-1970s, hyperglobalization (with its related fiscal austerity, dismantling of social welfare systems and weak trade unions) is associated with their deterioration.
The rise of candidates outside the mainstream political parties points in the same direction, reflecting society’s reaction to the break-up of institutions and existing production and social models.
Diagram I.3 describes the Bretton Woods system and hyperglobalization, drawing comparisons between the two in various areas: international governance, technology, and economic and political dynamics.
Although this is a stylized characterization, it covers some key components of both systems.
In particular, it shows that in contrast with the current situation, the existence of global public goods under Bretton Woods made the expansion of trade compatible with that of welfare States in developed countries.
This was also helped by the spread of technology from the United States to Europe, Japan and later on to various developing economies, particularly in Asia.
Governance Multilateral regulation of trade; fixed-rate monetary system; short- and long-term multilateral financing.
Economy Growth in trade; stable exchange rates; near full employment and reduced inequality in developed economies.
Technology Emergence of and interaction between new technology paradigms; concentration of capacities and markets; larger barriers to entry into leading-edge sectors.
Governance Weak financial architecture and multilateralism; fragmentation of trade and foreign direct investment (FDI); tax loopholes and “race to the bottom” in FDI legislation.
Economy Recessionary bias, global imbalances, speculation in currencies, commodities and real estate; increase in inequality in developed countries, but not in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Political tensions Increasing in developed countries, with the return of nationalism and the loss of credibility of the political elites. 40 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I 4.
Hyperglobalization and recessionary bias Recent social and political strains originate from the contradiction between governments’ external balance and welfare goals, on the one hand, and the dynamics of hyperglobalization, on the other (Rodrik, 2011).
The negative effects of hyperglobalization particularly impact lower-skilled segments of the workforce in higher-income countries.
These groups have few prospects of adapting to the rapid change in competition conditions resulting from the fragmentation of production processes, the disruptive emergence of China and other Asian economies in the global market, the intensity of technological change and the destabilizing forces of global financial flows.
Conversely, economic elites set global strategies and can maximize benefits by exploiting their ability to move resources across borders.
When political elites are perceived to be aligning themselves with economic elites, a widening gap opens up between them and a substantial part of the electorate, setting off reactions that polarize the political system.
The changes and political strains triggered by globalization also tend to be intense in developing economies, where disequilibria and external vulnerability are greater than in advanced economies.
The scale of these disequilibria is linked to heavy dependence on commodity exports and a lack of economic diversification and technological development in many of these countries.
This is where the productive heterogeneity presented in diagram I.1 manifests itself.
Research on the tensions between external and domestic dynamics, in particular, has a long history in Latin America.
The external constraint and stop-go growth cycles have been a constant in the continent’s economic history, giving rise not only to economic fluctuations, but to political upheavals too.
The constraints on national governments’ room for manoeuvre as a result of the international mobility of certain factors (particularly capital) have been summarized in the literature in the shape of various trilemmas.
A trilemma is a set of three conditions such that any two but never all three can obtain together.
The best known is the macroeconomic trilemma whereby a country cannot simultaneously have an independent monetary policy, a fixed exchange rate and a fully open capital account.
Rodrik (2011) has proposed a trilemma whereby governments cannot simultaneously retain sovereignty and democracy in a context of hyperglobalization.
In this stylized formulation, hyperglobalization in a system of nation States is incompatible with the full exercise of democracy.
This is because national governments are forced to adopt policies that differ from their voters’ preferences so as not to jeopardize participation in the hyperglobalization process.
This trilemma restricts the options of developing economies most, but it is also applicable to other economies that are uncompetitive internationally, such as those of the European periphery.
The possible combinations are as follows (see diagram I.4): • Sustainable external balance plus hyperglobalization.
If a deficit country decides to give priority to external equilibrium in a context of hyperglobalization, it must do so by making some sacrifice in terms of social equilibrium to do so (by giving up on the goal of full employment and cutting social spending).
Since there is no mechanism for encouraging surplus countries to increase their imports from deficit countries, the latter will be forced to adjust through contractionary policies, which generates a recessionary bias. 41Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I • Social equilibrium plus hyperglobalization.
If the deficit country decides to prioritize social equilibrium in a context of hyperglobalization, its external equilibrium will be compromised.
Economies that are uncompetitive internationally build up current account deficits when they apply expansionary fiscal policies to protect employment, social programmes and measures for the enhancement of income distribution.2 This build-up is unsustainable, as the rise in the country’s borrowing causes inflows of external financing to slow down or go into reverse. • Social equilibrium plus external sustainability.
A country can simultaneously achieve social equilibrium and external sustainability despite asymmetries in capabilities, but only if institutional arrangements are implemented at the global level that are incompatible with hyperglobalization.
International macroeconomic coordination means that the adjustment costs of correcting external disequilibria can be shared with surplus countries instead of falling disproportionately on deficit countries.
Likewise, public goods for financing and trade need to provide for mechanisms to reduce technological and production asymmetries.
Only if this is done and the export basket of less advanced economies is reconfigured will Keynesian policies be of more than limited effectiveness in correcting disequilibria.
Diagram I.4 Hyperglobalization, productive heterogeneity and recessionary bias Recessionary bias Build-up of current account deficits International coordination (global public goods) Of the three possible combinations, the first is politically unstable, the second is economically unsustainable and the third requires a degree of international policy coordination that has proven very hard to achieve.
This is demonstrated by Keynes’s proposal at the Bretton Woods Conference to create an international clearing union that would penalize 2 This is not true of commodity-exporting countries during periods of strong commodity prices, when they may even generate current account surpluses.
However, these cycles tend to be short-lived, so the overall argument is not invalidated. 42 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I the build-up of both current account deficits and surpluses, thereby ensuring greater trade reciprocity.
This in turn would check the recessionary bias of the external disequilibria adjustment process, since struggling economies would adjust through higher exports and not just lower imports.
The proposal was not accepted, though, and the system adopted placed the whole burden of adjustment on deficit economies.
The difficulty of coordinating policy internationally can be represented in terms of a classical prisoner’s dilemma.
Hyperglobalization may be viewed as a non-cooperative game, without international coordination and without global public goods (see box I.1).
In this context, each country must decide what strategy to follow: an expansionary Keynesian strategy oriented towards social equilibrium, or an export-oriented strategy that prioritizes the external sector.
If country A follows the Keynesian strategy in isolation while B follows a strategy that prioritizes exports, country A will increase its imports without obtaining reciprocity from its trading partners, forfeiting some of the increase in effective demand.
This strategy is highly favourable to country B and unfavourable to country A (yielding benefits of 4 and 1 that mainly accrue to country B).
If it is country B that follows a Keynesian strategy while country A adopts the non-cooperative strategy of pursuing surpluses, then the countries’ positions are reversed and it is A that obtains almost all the benefits.
For A, this is the strategy that gives the best outcome irrespective of the strategy of B, and vice versa.
However, since it is not possible for all actors to improve their trade balance at the same time, countries are trapped in a low-growth equilibrium: the recessionary bias scenario in the bottom right-hand quadrant.
Keynesian policy, if adopted in isolation, is the one that offers the worst outcome for the country applying it, but the one that leads to the best overall outcome when adopted in coordination by both actors.
For the greatest possible equilibrium to be achieved (upper left-hand quadrant), there need to be institutions and rules of cooperation which ensure that both countries follow Keynesian-type strategies to ensure coordinated expansion and prevent free riding.
Throughout their economic history, the Latin American countries have had repeated cycles of rapid growth brought to an end by external crises (Bertola and Ocampo, 2012).
The expansionary policies adopted in the region when there is an improvement in the terms of trade (as in the 2000s) or in access to external financing (as in the 1970s and 1990s) are dramatically reversed when international conditions change, owing to the vulnerability of its production structures and exchange-rate appreciation.
The difficulties 43Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I the Southern Cone economies have recently been going through are an example of this kind of reversal.
The Greek experience since monetary union, touched on earlier, is another example, this time in a European context, of the impact of heterogeneity on growth.
There are no endogenous forces capable of bringing about regular, short-lived shuffles in the positions of major trading economies so that disequilibria balance out over time.
On the contrary, increasing returns and technological dynamics reinforce Kaldorian cumulative processes.
Surplus countries could, in principle, adopt policies that slowed the build-up of reserves.
In parallel with the build-up of disequilibria and recessionary bias, political tensions accumulate.
International demands for reciprocity and a rebalancing of the growth model increase.
Domestically, the strains derive from unemployment and external crises in the less advanced economies and from migration pressures and rising inequality in a context of pay constraints in the leading economies.
The accumulation of these tensions explains the current situation of rising political resistance to hyperglobalization.
In this context, greater international coordination and the construction of global public goods would serve both to deal with the recessionary bias in the world economy and to endow globalization with greater political legitimacy.
The slowest trade expansion since the crisis The forces creating a recessionary bias, discussed in the previous section, are expected to carry on operating in the coming years.
The effect is to place downward pressure on growth in both trade and global output.
The evolution of these two variables, which will now be analysed, confirms the persistence of the recessionary bias.
In 2015, the volume of world goods trade grew by just 2.7%, while its dollar value fell by 14%.
This sharp drop was due mainly to the strengthening of the dollar against some of the major global currencies and to lower prices for commodities, particularly fuels, which dropped by 45% in 2015.
WTO projections are for the volume of world trade in goods to grow by just 1.7% in 2016, the weakest expansion since the global economic crisis and the fifth consecutive year of growth below 3% (see figure I.4).
The only precedent in recent history for the current weakness of global trade was in the 1980s, when volumes grew by less than 3% in five of the six years in the period from 1980 to 1985, actually contracting in two of them (WTO, 2016b).
Global trade in services, whose gross value is just over a fifth of that for global trade in goods and services, also declined in value in 2015, albeit by less than goods trade (-6.4%) (see figure I.4).
Trade in transport services was most affected, dropping by almost 10%, with maritime dry bulk cargo transportation rates at historic lows.
Trade in other types of services, such as travel and other commercial services, fell by The difficulty of coordinating policy internationally can be represented in terms of a classical prisoner’s dilemma.
A number of factors account for the persistent weakness of world trade, including sluggish global demand, slower trade liberalization and slackening global value chain expansion (European Central Bank, 2016b; World Bank, 2016; IMF, 2016c; OECD, 2016).
The persistent weakness of global economic activity, particularly investment (which is more import-intensive than other components of demand), is one of the main factors behind the slowdown in world trade.
By contrast with the pre-crisis period, when trade liberalization and global value chains were strong drivers of world trade growth, these factors have been a drag on this growth in recent years.
First, trade liberalization has stalled or even reversed since the crisis, as is suggested by the growing use of trade-restrictive measures and the difficulties being encountered by initiatives such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
More recently, the faltering expansion of global value chains has also contributed to the slowing of world trade growth.3 This could be attributed to chains maturing and shortening (especially in the case of China), as reductions in trade logistics costs, which have a strong influence on flows associated with international value chains, have levelled off.
Even if the rate of expansion in the global economy increased significantly, trade would be unlikely to resume its pre-crisis growth rates (IMF, 2016c; European Central Bank, 2016b).
The long period of weak economic dynamism appears to have affected countries’ growth potential, owing to low investment and the adverse effects that weak trade growth has on productivity.
Economic recovery keeps being deferred The recessionary bias of the global economy has lasted longer than anticipated, as demonstrated by the successive downward revisions to growth projections over recent years.
Between January 2015 and May 2016, for example, the United Nations cut its 2016 growth projections from 3.3% to 2.4%, after likewise cutting its projections in the three previous years.
Although they have been revised downward for both advanced and developing countries, the revision has been greater in absolute terms for the latter (see figure I.5).
Other international bodies such as the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) have also revised their projections systematically downward. 4 Excluding the eurozone, the elasticity of world trade is estimated to have fallen from 1.8 in 1995-2007 to 0.9 in 2012-2015 (European Central Bank, 2016b).
Much of this drop can be explained by the shifting geographical composition of world trade and GDP.
In the United States, economic growth was lower than anticipated in the first half of this year.
Private consumption, which represents almost 70% of GDP, was sluggish despite low oil prices.
Net export growth was likewise low, in a context of weakening global demand and energy sector investment.
As a result of these factors, output growth of about 1.8% is anticipated in 2016 (United Nations, 2016).
On the supply side, labour market dynamics have become increasingly disconnected from GDP.
While employment continues to rise and the unemployment rate is very low, there are still a great many people outside the workforce who would be willing to work.
Among the leading eurozone economies, Germany and Spain were the most dynamic in 2015 and the first half of 2016, followed by France and Italy.
European exports and their contribution to growth increased considerably in 2015, when they were stimulated by the depreciation of the euro.
The trade balance of the eurozone countries also improved in this period as the value of imports declined.
Consumption has been fairly dynamic, driven by a gradual reduction in the unemployment rate and lower oil prices.
The incipient recovery in the European economy will be affected by uncertainty about the consequences of the future departure of the United Kingdom from the European Union (see box I.2).
The latter figure is half the rate forecast in April 2016 (IMF, 2016c).5 5 These projections assume that an agreement is reached that retains free access for British firms to the European Single Market.
If it is not, the negative impact on growth in both the eurozone and the United Kingdom will be greater.
The vote for the United Kingdom to leave the European Union in the June 2016 referendum increased uncertainty in the global economy, reinforcing its recessionary bias.
Negotiations to set the terms of the country’s relationship with the European Union after departure are expected to begin in the first half of 2017.
One of the key issues is whether it will continue to have unfettered access to the European Single Market, which took 47% of its exports in 2014.
A number of European countries have made this conditional on the United Kingdom retaining the right for citizens of any European Union member country to reside there.
However, greater control over immigration from the European Union and elsewhere was one of the main promises of the pro-Brexit campaign.
Another source of uncertainty is the trade policy that the United Kingdom (which accounted for 3.7% of global imports in 2015) will adopt after leaving the European Union and its common trade policy.
A key aspect is its future participation in the numerous trade agreements signed by the grouping with outside countries, including several in Latin America and the Caribbean, and in ongoing trade negotiations, particularly with the United States over the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).
In short, the expectation is that the negotiations over the withdrawal of the United Kingdom from the European Union will be very complex both technically and politically and will last for at least two years.
The Japanese economy stagnated in the second quarter of 2016 after growing by just 0.5% in the first.6 This slowdown is attributed to lower demand for its exports, especially from emerging economies.
Private investment has been growing moderately, while consumption has shown signs of weakening.
Similarly, Summers (2016) describes the problem as one of an increased propensity to save combined with a reduced propensity to invest.
In all the main industrialized economies, gross fixed capital formation as a share of GDP is lower now than in the immediate run-up to the crisis (see figure I.6).
It should be borne in mind that investment responds to growth expectations, which largely determine predicted returns.
These expectations are not favourable in most sectors, the exceptions being those where technical change is most intensive and the potential for productivity growth greatest.
The increased propensity to save in the industrialized countries has originated in a combination of factors, such as rising inequality (high-income individuals tend to save proportionally more), greater life expectancy and uncertainty about conditions after retirement, ongoing financial deleveraging in the wake of the crisis and greater difficulty in accessing credit, among other things.
The reduced propensity to invest is the result of the demand factors already mentioned (which lower the expected returns on investment) and supply factors such as lower growth in the active population, reduced capital intensity in the new digital industries and falling prices for capital goods (Summers, 2016).
Growth in 2016 is projected to be similar to the previous year’s (United Nations, 2016).
The application of restrictive fiscal and monetary policies in a number of developing countries to deal with negative external shocks has further cramped growth, while the recessions in Brazil and the Russian Federation have been deeper and longer-lasting than anticipated and had major effects on their respective regions.
The decline in Chinese imports largely explains the reduction in developing countries’ contribution to world import growth, even though China’s economy has slowed less in 2016 than anticipated.
In the first half of 2016, GDP growth held steady at an annualized rate of 6.7%, which was due in part to growth in lending and in public infrastructure investment.
This contributed to a 41% rise in property sales in the first 10 months of 2016 relative to the same period the year before, according to the National Bureau of Statistics of China.
At the same time, fiscal spending between January and September 2016 was up 12.5% on the same period the year before, while private investment was 2.9% higher between January and October, a much more moderate rise than in 2015, when it was over 10%.
These stimuli offset the impact of the recent slackening in the manufacturing sector.
The Chinese economy is faced with major structural challenges, such as overcapacity in a number of industrial sectors and in construction and a high level of public and private debt, this being estimated to have grown from 160% of GDP in 2005 to 247% in 2015.
The increasing unsustainability of this debt is manifested in a historically large non-performing loan portfolio, the equivalent of 7% of GDP in 2015.
Another concern is that over half the debt is held by State enterprises, whose revenues and earnings have been dropping since 2015.
Also troubling is the sharp drop in investment returns: in 2009, it took 1 yuan of additional lending to raise GDP by 1 yuan, but by 2015 an estimated 4 yuan were required to generate the same increase (IMF, 2016a).
All the other large emerging economies except India will grow by less in 2016 than in 2015.
Growth in commodity-exporting economies in particular has declined because of lower commodity prices.
Combined with the resulting depreciation of their currencies, this has cut their demand for imports, contributing to the persistent lack of dynamism in world trade.
In summary, eight years on from the start of the crisis, the global economy seems to be mired in low growth that is expected to last at least until the end of this decade.
The different political and structural factors that have contributed to this long period of stagnation will now be analysed. 3.
Monetary policy exhaustion and the lack of fiscal stimulus Despite the expansionary monetary policies adopted since the global financial crisis, growth in the developed countries has taken longer than expected to recover.
A number of these countries have lowered their interest rates to near zero or even below it in recent years.
Furthermore, their central banks have made massive purchases of debt securities, both sovereign and private, to reduce the interest rates charged by banks and thus stimulate consumption and investment.
In the United States, the Federal Reserve has decided to delay raising the interest rate in 2016 in view of the weakness of the global economy, inflation expectations that have been persistently below the 2% target, low private-sector fixed investment and financial market volatility (Federal Reserve, 2016).
Similarly, the European Central Bank has kept its policy interest rates unchanged and stated that its extraordinary quantitative easing measures will remain in place until March 2017 or as long as necessary for the inflation target to be met (European Central Bank, 2016a).
The Bank of England, expecting the economy to weaken because of the United Kingdom’s exit from the European Union, decided to cut the policy interest rate in August 2016.
The Bank of Japan, lastly, has announced that its package of quantitative and qualitative easing with a negative interest rate will continue.
Negative monetary policy rates in Japan and the eurozone have not as yet had the desired effect of stimulating consumption and investment.
At the same time, this policy could have negative externalities, for example by eroding bank profitability and encouraging excessive investment risk-taking, thereby causing further instability.
Even if the United States Federal Reserve policy interest rate does rise, interest rates are expected to remain at historically low levels in the medium term, reducing the scope for reacting to any economic crisis (Yellen, 2016).
This would reaffirm a situation in which excess liquidity or a liquidity trap does not translate into productive investment (Krugman, 2016; ECLAC, 2015b).
Meanwhile, fiscal policy in the developed countries turned restrictive after an initial period of expansion in response to the crisis.
These countries built up a growing public debt during that stage, with the monetary authorities making large bond purchases.
Fiscal consolidation policies subsequently prevailed (see figure I.8), as it was feared that the debt build-up would negatively affect medium-run growth (Van Riet, 2010).
Some policymakers adopted the theory that fiscal austerity would bring about such a large shift in expectations that the effect of austerity on investment and aggregate demand would be positive by the end of the adjustment process (contrary to what traditional Keynesian theory suggests).
This theory was not borne out, with the result that the recovery in Europe has been slower and weaker than would have been possible had the usual countercyclical remedies been adopted.
Thus, some analysts have concluded that there are few benefits to reducing public debt, especially in developed countries with a tradition of fiscal prudence, and that the costs of fiscal consolidation in terms of increased unemployment and inequity are high (Ostry, Loungani and Furceri, 2016).
Furthermore, it has been argued that public investment is particularly effective in low interest-rate situations (United Nations, 2016).
Also in the United States, Summers (2016) has proposed an ambitious programme of public infrastructure investment to support recovery.
IMF has also recently pointed to the role of fiscal policy and public investment in particular in revitalizing growth in the Group of 20 (G20) countries (IMF, 2016b).
In this context, the new multi-year stimulus plan announced by the Government of Japan in August 2016 suggests a shift towards a greater role for fiscal policy, breaking with the tendency to take austerity measures at times of crisis (Posen, 2016).
This plan is expected to include early implementation of infrastructure projects such as the magnetic levitation train between Tokyo and Osaka, together with support for SMEs and subsidies for lower-income individuals. 4.
Financial expansion has increased disequilibria One effect of monetary policy in the industrialized countries since the crisis has been to speed up the unprecedented expansion of the financial sector that had been gestating for three decades.
This has been manifested, in particular, in a rise in financial assets that has far outstripped the growth of real activity.
Between 1980 and 2014, the global stock of assets (excluding derivatives) expanded from US$ 12 trillion to US$ 294 trillion, equivalent to 1.1 and 3.8 times world GDP, respectively.
In the same period, the value of derivatives contracts grew exponentially, rising from US$ 1 trillion to US$ 692 trillion.
Thus, the whole stock of financial assets rose from rough parity with world GDP in 1980 to over 10 times world GDP by the second half of the 2000s (see figure I.9).
The sector is led by large and complex financial institutions that tend to be highly interconnected and concentrated and have a liability structure skewed towards procyclical leverage (ECLAC, 2016a).
Another manifestation of the decoupling of real and financial activity is the divergence between growth rates of world trade and cross-border capital flows, especially since central banks in the developed countries implemented their quantitative easing plans (see figure I.10).
Part of the behaviour of activities and variables that was traditionally ascribed to real factors is now due to financial factors as well.
Commodities have become a financial asset, since their prices increasingly respond more to changes in expectations of future conditions than to the current state of the market and of supply and demand.
In short, the world economy is undergoing financialization, defined as a process in which financial markets, institutions and elites become increasingly important to the workings of economies and their governance institutions at both the national and the international levels (Epstein, 2006).
Specifically, where global disequilibria are concerned (see subsection 5), the proliferation of financial assets is increasing the risk of crises in deficit economies.
For one thing, it encourages public and private borrowing during upturns, for example, by lowering interest rates.
For another, whenever there is a shock that depresses growth expectations and solvency in debtor countries, large-scale outflows of assets worsen the contraction and make it harder to implement stabilization and growth policies.
Indeed, non-financial-sector debt globally is at a historic high, equivalent to 225% of world GDP (IMF, 2016d).
Two thirds of debt is in the private sector of developed countries and some of the major emerging economies.
The build-up of private sector debt could trigger a financial crisis if today’s economic stagnation persists, becoming a further risk factor for the world economy.
As Turner (2016) observes, leverage does not disappear but simply moves elsewhere.
The empirical evidence from the period subsequent to the subprime mortgage crisis once again confirms that the direction and size of capital flows are essentially determined by liquidity conditions in the major financial centres and, to a lesser extent, by structural factors in the recipient countries on the periphery (Aizenmann, Binici and Hutchison, 2014; Eichengreen and Gupta, 2014).
This dynamic is particularly in evidence in Latin America, where cross-border capital flows are less regulated than in any other region except Eastern Europe (see figure I.11).
In the aggregate, while the countries of Latin America have intervened more in cross-border capital movements over recent years, they still do so much less than Asian economies or the countries of the BRICS grouping (Brazil, the Russian Federation, India, China and South Africa).
Fernández and others, “Capital control measures: A new dataset”, NBER Working Paper, No. 20970, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), 2015. a This is a de jure indicator of 32 positions potentially subject to regulation (16 relating to capital inflows and 16 to outflows).
Each position (for example, shares, bonds and property) scores 1 if there is some type of regulation and 0 if there is none.
The indicator is constructed by calculating the average for the 32 positions.
The closer to 1 the indicator value is, the greater the level of regulation.
Greater regulation of cross-border capital flows would give recipient countries more room for macroeconomic manoeuvre.
Erten and Ocampo (2013) have observed that regulating cross-border capital flows not only reduces exposure to currency strains but increases the independence of monetary policy.
Capital flow regulation can be seen, then, as indispensable to ensure local macroeconomic and financial stability.
The combination of permissive financial integration plus cross-border capital flows and excess liquidity in global financial markets has enabled regions with current account deficits, such as Latin America and Eastern Europe, to borrow on a scale that may have sustained growth but has entailed a rise in external debt.
As figure I.12 shows, this debt has increased steadily in Latin America, essentially in the private sector, since the central countries implemented their expansionary monetary policies.
The gross amounts of external liabilities and their degree of liquidity are among the new manifestations of external vulnerability (Akyüz, 2014; Kaltenbrunner and Painceira, 2016).
As a result, the traditional criteria for determining the optimum level of reserves have been redefined.
For example, the measure proposed by IMF (2011, 2013) distinguishes different sources of pressure on reserves.
They include 55Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I not just debt, but also shares, monetary aggregates (reflecting residents’ ability to transfer capital abroad) and exports (to include the contingency where a drop in external demand or a terms-of-trade shock reduces currency inflows into the country).
Just as developed countries now seem to have less room for manoeuvre in stimulating their economies (essentially because interest rates cannot be cut below their present levels), there seems to be only limited scope in Latin America for deploying expansionary policies to return to a path of sustained growth, but for different reasons (Abeles and Valdecantos, 2016).
The region’s countries exhibit greater external vulnerability, reflected in a general deterioration of current account balances.
The persistence of financial inflows has spared them the need for large-scale recessionary fiscal adjustments.
The corollary of this, however, has been an increase in external borrowing whose highly liquid character represents a latent threat to the region’s macrofinancial stability. 5.
Disequilibria, productive heterogeneity and lack of macroeconomic coordination The disequilibria between the current account balances of the main economies have contributed to the persistence of recessionary bias around the world.
In 2016, these disequilibria have increased modestly and changed in composition (see figure I.13).
There has been a continuation of the trend towards rising current account surpluses seen since 2013 in a number of countries, including Germany and other surplus countries in the eurozone, China, Japan and the Republic of Korea.
In the case of Germany, the positive balance of the current account was 8.5% of GDP in 2015.
A lack of import dynamism in the surplus economies has contributed to the stagnation of global demand.8 These countries could have stimulated domestic demand more, for example through increased fiscal spending, currency appreciation or higher wages, to promote growth and raise imports.
Instead, in a context of low domestic dynamism, they set out to dynamize their exports and improve their current account balances yet further through policies that have contributed to depreciation of their currencies.
This strategy has made it harder for deficit countries to adjust their economies by raising exports rather than drastically cutting imports.
The situation is being compounded in the case of China by the negative effect on imports of the ongoing rebalancing in the economy and import substitution measures in a number of industries. 8 Conversely, the surpluses of countries that export oil and other commodities gradually vanished between 2013 and 2015 as their prices fell.
In 2016, the group of oil-exporting countries recorded its first deficit since 1998.
Meanwhile, Asian countries that are oil importers increased their surpluses between 2012 and 2016.
The narrowing of deficits in a number of countries that have traditionally run them, mainly in the eurozone, has also worsened the global recessionary bias (see figure I.15).
By applying adjustment policies designed to reduce their fiscal deficits, deficit countries on the European periphery have lowered fiscal and consumer spending while raising taxes.
Some of the factors that have prolonged the current recessionary bias cannot be easily altered in the short term.
In particular, as the previous section highlighted, the heterogeneity of production structures has been a prime cause of the emergence and persistence of disequilibria.
The strong correlation between different countries’ current account balances and their manufacturing competitiveness implies that surplus and deficit countries will probably tend to maintain their respective positions in the medium run.
In particular, the current account position is strongly associated with competitiveness in the capital goods segment (see box I.3).
The United States is a special case because, as the issuer of the leading international reserve currency, it is under less pressure to adjust despite its large deficits, providing liquidity to the rest of the world.
In summary, surplus countries should pursue currency appreciation and stimulate aggregate demand to relieve recessionary pressures in deficit economies.
Fiscal policy has a key role to play, especially in a global context of near-zero interest rates in a number of the main surplus countries.
The resultant outflow of capital from these economies has caused their currencies to depreciate, making imports more expensive and the recessionary bias even more acute (Caballero, Farhi and Gourinchas, 2016).
Quantitative easing has had further effects in Latin America, as the region’s economies have taken on more and more external debt.
This borrowing has negatively affected the region’s ability to use fiscal policy as a countercyclical instrument, a subject that is analysed below. 58 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I The literature has identified a number of factors affecting current account balances.
They include demographics, per capita GDP growth levels and rates, the oil price and net trade balance, the net international investment position at the outset, the general government budget balance, the extent of trade liberalization, and financial market openness and depth (Barnes, Lawson and Radziwill, 2010).
A clear empirical correlation exists between current account balances and export manufacturing competitiveness, especially in capital goods.
The positive current account balances of China and the eurozone in recent years can be explained in part by their specialization in the production and export of this type of goods.
The following chart shows this relationship for a large group of countries.
The apparent correlation between the two variables is even stronger when countries with plentiful natural resources (Australia, Canada, Chile, Indonesia, Norway and South Africa) are excluded.
The capital goods trade balance shows a greater correlation with the current account position than the trade balance in manufacturing as a whole (Grömling, 2014).
To produce capital goods, technological capabilities have to be built up over a long period.
This suggests that countries which are already highly competitive as producers of these goods will maintain their surpluses in the medium run, while countries that do not invest enough in developing these capabilities will continue to run deficits.
Grömling, “A supply-side explanation for current account imbalances”, Intereconomics, vol. 49, No. 1, January 2014; and S.
China’s contribution to global trade dynamism has diminished One unexpected result of the transformations associated with globalization was the resurgence of China as a global economic power, a position it had held until the eighteenth century.
The country grew by an average of 10% a year in the three decades that followed the start of economic reforms in 1978 and accounted for a quarter of the world economy’s growth between 2000 and 2014.
With an exportoriented model, its economy has been successful in adapting technologies and know-how and incorporating them into exports, and at orchestrating structural shifts towards higher-productivity sectors.
Its rate of expansion has recently slowed to a range of 6% to 7%, but remains one of the highest in the world.
China has become a key player in global production and trade thanks to large investment by transnational enterprises, the incorporation and adaptation of technological change, and effective industrial policies.
In 2015, it was the world’s largest producer of manufactures (see figure I.16), its largest exporter of goods and its second-largest importer of goods and services.
It now accounts for a quarter of the world’s production of manufactured goods.
In a number of sectors, such as mobile phones and air conditioning appliances, its global share is close to two thirds.
China has also become a major consumer and importer of raw materials.
In 2013, it accounted for almost half the world’s aluminium, copper and zinc consumption and almost 30% of its soya consumption (ECLAC, 2016a).
In 2011, China displaced the United States as the country where most patent applications are submitted, a position that it maintains to this day and that would have been unthinkable in the early part of this century.
The movement of people and labour from the countryside to cities, to be employed essentially in manufacturing, has created scope for productivity and learning gains that have made it the world leader in manufacturing.
Furthermore, it has implemented a strong import substitution policy, in the iron and steel industry for example, that has increased the domestic value added contents of its exports.
China’s success is not only the outcome of its integration into world trade, but the effect of this integration combined with policies to diversify the economy.
Although China’s scale makes it exceptional, smaller Asian countries such as the Republic of Korea and, more recently, Malaysia and Viet Nam have also managed to use industrial and technological policies to engage dynamically with the globalized economy.
Over the course of this decade, the Chinese Government has tried to reorient the growth model in two respects.
On the supply side, it aims to reduce the share of the manufacturing sector in the economy and increase that of services.
After peaking in 2011, the GDP share of industry began to decline in nominal terms from 2012, largely because of falling prices in the sector.
This trend is similar to that observed in a number of industrialized countries, where the drop in prices has been followed by the reallocation of factors of production (IMF, 2016a).
The employment share of the industrial sector has also been declining since 2013.
Despite the progress made, the authorities remain somewhat reluctant to deal with overcapacity in a number of manufacturing sectors such as aluminium, cement, coal, glass production, refined oil and steel.
For example, according to figures from the China Iron and Steel Association (CISA), installed capacity utilization rates in iron and steel industries in 2015 were 67% and 71%, respectively.
However, steel production was higher between March and July 2016 than in the same period of 2015.
Because the country accounts for over half the world’s steel and aluminium output, higher production there is still depressing global prices for these products, at a time when global demand is weak.
More generally, overcapacity in the economy is a large part of the reason why the producer price index has fallen for more than 57 months in a row since 2011.
Although the government is seeking to cut capacity by cancelling or delaying new investment and closing inefficient and highly polluting plants, progress in this direction has been slow.
On the demand side, the Chinese authorities are seeking a transition from an economy strongly driven by investment and exports to one in which consumption plays a larger role (ECLAC, 2015).
There has been progress in this direction since 2013 (see figure I.17).
Nonetheless, gross fixed capital formation as a share of GDP, at 43%, remains much higher in China than in other economies such as those in Europe, Japan or the United States, where this variable typically represents between 15% and 25% of GDP.
The weakness of consumption as a new driver of growth is negatively affecting Chinese imports, whose volume fell year-on-year for six consecutive quarters between the first quarter of 2015 and the second quarter of 2016 (see figure I.18).
On top of this, Chinese firms have for some years been reducing the imported content of their exports, especially in the case of medium- and high-technology manufactures (ECLAC, 2015).
Indeed, there is a strong correlation between the evolution of nominal Chinese GDP and South American exports (see figure I.19).
A further factor behind the fall-off in Chinese import dynamism recently has been the effort to replace imported inputs with locally produced ones that has been under way in the country for a number of years as part of a deliberate policy to create production and technological capabilities.
This import substitution has taken place as certain industries such as electronics have gradually built up networks of local suppliers (OECD, 2016; Kee C.
The digital revolution: global platforms and employment A key variable in the analytical framework summarized in diagram I.1 is the technological revolution, which widened the gap between leading and laggard economies, thus re-creating the heterogeneity of production structures in the global economy.
The technological revolution and structural heterogeneity are shown combined in the upper part of the diagram.
Gaps are harder to close when the international technology frontier is moving quickly.
One example of this dynamic can be seen in digital technologies, which now underpin communication, the generation of information, entertainment, commerce, the provision of education, health and government services and the implementation of new cyberphysical production systems.
Today, all these transactions have a digital component (McKinsey Global Institute, 2016a).
Digitalization has transformed these flows by reducing transaction costs and marginal production and distribution costs.
This effect has been brought about in three ways: by creating digital goods and services, adding value by incorporating digital features into goods and services that are in principle not digital, and developing production, exchange and consumption platforms (ECLAC, 2016a).
On the other, there has been an increase in the concentration of large firms with a global presence in markets characterized by scale economies, usually in countries at the technology frontier, and acting as platforms for trade, production and innovation.
Digital platforms generate value through network effects on the demand side, in a context of multi-sided markets.
This business model enables them to grow quickly from local ventures into global enterprises, achieving scales that make it hard for new competitors to emerge.
First mover advantages and differences in access to network and scale economies, particularly when it comes to data accumulation, explain the geographical heterogeneity of the platforms that have appeared and the distribution of the revenues they produce.
Europe has platforms valued at US$ 128 billion, led by SAP, a German multinational that designs business management software.
Further behind is Africa, with platforms valued at US$ 74 billion, the leader being Naspers, a South African multinational providing entertainment and Internet services.
The diversification of technological investments by digital platforms has been creating innovation ecosystems in industrial and services activities (see the example of Google in diagram I.5).
A notable case is the automotive sector, where a great deal of investment is going into the development of autonomous or smart vehicles.
Although the partnership between Google and Tesla is the best known, over 30 tie-ups between producers and technology giants are investing heavily in driverless vehicle research and development.
Similarly, agriculture has become one of the greatest growth areas for the industrial Internet with machine-to-machine (M2M) connections, since analysing the data generated by these technologies provides a very effective basis for efficient resource use and conservation.
One example is the announcement that Monsanto, through Climate Corporation, which it acquired in 2013, is building a network of sensors on the ground to expand the reach of data on soil, climate and other variables generated by its digital agriculture tools with the goal of increasing crop yields and cutting costs.
Progress with digitalization has renewed the management, marketing and distribution of products and services and propelled new business models.
The most radical transformation is due to the digitalization of manufacturing, resulting from advances in robotics, the proliferation of online communities and the mass take-up of personal fabrication technologies,11 which are changing how and where production is carried out and redefining the global production dynamic.
The trend is to onshore production units in developed countries by virtualizing processes and services.
Traditional trade agreements are proving increasingly inadequate as physical goods are digitalized and become intangible and as digital flows account for a growing share of international transactions.
Intellectual property rights and rules on cross-border data flows and cybersecurity are now among the main issues confronting the digital economy.
In this context, it is understandable for the United States, the world leader in digital platforms, to be pursuing new trade mega-agreements to regulate these matters, particularly the TPP and the TTIP.
The regulations and standards defined in these agreements could become the global regulatory benchmark for the new digital industrial revolution, which would favour countries with bargaining power that are part of these agreements over those left out (Valladao, 2014).
It is no coincidence that the scope of these agreements matches the concentration of the largest digital platforms, as mentioned earlier, and the participation of the leading actors in negotiations over digital standards, particularly for the Internet of Things. 11 Personal fabrication technologies use the same manufacturing methods as industrial technologies but are smaller, less expensive and easier to use.
These new models have implications not only for productivity, production patterns and business and organizational models, but also for employment in the medium and long run (see diagram I.6).
This has been a huge factor in the rejection of globalization by workers.
The economic implication of the automation of manufacturing is that labour costs become a smaller share of the total.
In the most developed countries, the expectation on current trends is of a net loss of more than 5.1 million jobs between 2015 and 2020, the result of a destruction of 7.1 million jobs (two thirds of them in administrative and office activities) and the creation of 2 million new positions in other job families (World Economic Forum, 2016).
Far fewer jobs are expected to be created in the sectors where employment rises (commercial and financial operations, administration, information technology and mathematics) than are lost in the areas affected adversely (administration and management, manufacturing and production).
These outcomes are likely to be particularly negative for the middle class and women, as they are heavily represented in administrative positions.
By 2020, on average, over a third of the basic skills required in most occupations will consist of capabilities that today are not considered crucial for work.
This scenario is particularly problematic for developing countries, where most population increase is going to occur.
While advanced economies will be faced with a structural labour shortage because of low birth rates and population ageing, the labour supply will continue to grow quickly in Africa and South Asia in particular.
Creating jobs for the young in the context of the technological revolution will prove particularly difficult.
The countries with the highest population growth lack the skills for the new tasks, and they do not have the appropriate institutional framework for an urgent response.
Basic and secondary education is not a solution in itself, as it would not correct the lack of capabilities of the generation already entering labour markets.
Thus, developing countries may to have to cope simultaneously with labour shortages in areas related to new technologies and with youth unemployment.
Despite these problems, greater demand for creative jobs should open up a significant opportunity for the young if the right policies are implemented to give them the necessary skills, supplementing their basic education with training.
Looking beyond formal employment, countries need to prepare new labour regulations fit for a world where most new jobs will be in the gig economy or other kinds of economic structures that cannot be predicted at present.
Against this backdrop, rapid and early access to digital technologies is essential. 2.
The continuing importance of manufacturing Manufacturing has played a key role in globalization, one of whose main drivers has been the offshoring of physical production from the developed countries to countries with low labour costs.
For all the progress of the service economy, and the digital economy in particular, the manufacturing sector has remained a major source of global economic dynamism.
This is reflected in its high share of productivity growth and global exports, far outstripping its impact on value added and employment (see figure I.20).
However, its larger share of the former shows that manufacturing productivity remains above the average for the economy.
Manufactures have continued to account for the bulk of world trade in goods over the last decade, despite the commodity price boom.
Between 2000 and 2014, the share of commodities (agricultural products, fuels, metals and minerals) rose from 24% to 31% of global imports measured at current prices, whereas this share dropped from 24% to 20% when measured at constant prices (see figure I.21).
In the United States, 69Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I manufacturing industry carries out more than two thirds of all private sector R&D, and over 90% of new patents come from that sector and allied engineering and technologyintensive services (ECLAC, 2016b).
The mass take-up of digital technologies in manufacturing via the industrial Internet will blur the boundaries between goods and services.
This will create scope for greater product differentiation, giving rise to smart, connected products (Porter and Heppelmann, 2014).
In this way, the manufacturing industry will remain crucial for technical progress and productivity growth over the coming years. 70 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I In sum, the potential for competitive asymmetries has been increasing exponentially with progress in the new manufacturing age.
This context makes it both more necessary and more difficult to mitigate the strength of cumulative technological and production differentiation processes by means of industrial and technology policy (as suggested in diagram I.2). 3.
Rising concentration in dynamic markets There is a marked trend at the global level towards rising corporate concentration in a number of industries and increasing concentration of knowledge creation in a limited group of countries.
Most sectors evidence increasing concentration, except for certain traditional industries that account for a great deal of employment, such as food and automobiles, and dynamic industries such as software.
The four largest firms’ share of total sales increased in 21 out of 35 sectors.
A recent study in the United States yielded a similar finding for the 50 largest firms in 8 of the 13 industries analysed over the period from 2002 to 2012 (Council of Economic Advisers of the Office of the President of the United States, 2016).
In the area of digital technologies, concentration has increased to the benefit of large global platforms such as Amazon, Apple, Facebook and Google.
For example, Google had 73% of the global search engine market as of July 2016.
Facebook received 44% of visits in the United States in February that year, followed by YouTube (owned by Google) with 22%.
Another manifestation of economic concentration can be seen in the generation of patentable knowledge, which is increasingly confined to just a few countries.
Conversely, the region as a whole accounted for just 2.4% of global patent applications in 2014, which is clear evidence that it is lagging technologically.
Furthermore, information from the European Commission (2015) shows that the patents granted are concentrated in the most advanced manufactures, that is, those that fully incorporate digital technology.
All these indicators suggest that the dominance of large firms in developed countries and a few emerging Asian ones in the most knowledge- and innovationintensive activities has been maintained or even increased.
Their profits have grown far faster than the average firm’s, and this situation is tending to persist over time (The Economist, 2016a).
This has reinforced negative trends in the wage share of output, with the resultant worsening of distribution.
Although the crisis weakened some of these firms and countries, it did not alter the correlation of international economic forces, while digital technologies seem to have consolidated this predominance. 72 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I D.
The lowest poverty level in history The spread of globalization has gone hand in hand with a drop in global poverty levels, which are at an all-time historical low.
The percentage of the world’s population living in extreme poverty —defined as a daily income of less than US$ 1.90, based on purchasing power parity (PPP)— decreased from 44% in 1981 to 13% in 2012 (Ferreira and others, 2015).
According to World Bank projections, the proportion of people living in extreme poverty could fall to 9.6% of the world’s population in 2015, dipping below 10% for the first time in history (Cruz and others, 2015).
This decrease is due mainly to the marked reduction in poverty in Asian countries, especially in China (see figure I.25).
China’s economic expansion helped to reduce poverty levels in the last decade in those South American countries that export natural resources.
China’s growing demand for raw materials and the resulting improvement in the terms of trade eased external constraints and pushed up growth rates and tax revenues, allowing the scope of social and redistributive programmes to be expanded.
While the progress made in Asian countries was underpinned by structural changes, this has not been the case in the countries of the region, where these changes have yet to take place, making their progress extremely sensitive to fluctuations in external conditions.
Therefore, the different implications in each region of greater integration into the global economy must be clearly identified, depending on the macroeconomic and industrial policies adopted in each case. 73Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I 2.
Diverging trends in income distribution The rapid expansion of trade and swift pace of technological progress have also had a significant effect on income distribution.
Jobs are redistributed across economic sectors and regions of the world as countries’ competitiveness shifts, manufacturing plants move and production processes evolve.
Greater demand for skills also means a wider wage gap between workers who are better trained or more highly educated, and unskilled workers.
Developments in technology and trade are not the only factors that influence income distribution patterns: labour market institutions and tax systems also play an important role.
Minimum wages, unionization, social benefits, such as pensions, and instruments, such as taxes and transfers, are all mechanisms that can alter the impact of market forces on income distribution.12 Trade growth and foreign direct investment can benefit everyone, as long as the winners compensate the losers.
However, a number of countries that underwent economic liberalization did not offer such redress.
In addition to economic advantages, the winners accumulated political power, which made it difficult to implement a truly redistributive system of taxes and transfers.
This has been the dominant trend since the 1980s: greater integration into global trade and into financial and investment flows was linked to weaker redistributive systems, especially in several developed countries.
At the same time, there was a sharp fall in the rate of unionization in those countries (see figure I.26).
This is connected with income redistribution within companies in favour of shareholders and executives and workers’ limited ability to turn productivity gains into higher real wages.
At one extreme are the Scandinavian countries, which have highly redistributive tax systems.
At the other end of the scale are most of the Latin American and Caribbean countries, where transfers and, more particularly, taxes have less of an impact on inequality.
The Gini coefficient of a group of 17 Latin American countries decreased by only 3 percentage points after direct taxes and cash transfers, while the coefficient for the OECD countries as a whole fell by 17 percentage points (ECLAC/IEF, 2014).
Global income distribution among countries improved as a result of the fall in poverty in the major economies, which had very low levels of income in the late 1980s, especially China and India.
At the same time, the income share of the richest 10% of the population of all OECD member States has increased steadily over the past four decades: in the 1980s they earned 7.0 times more than the poorest 10%, while in 2014 they earned 9.6 times more (OECD, 2015a).
The drop in global inequality in income distribution can be partly explained by the movement of manufacturing jobs from advanced countries to developing ones.
Between 2000 and 2010, almost 10 million manufacturing jobs were lost in the United States and Europe alone, more than a quarter of the total.
Over the same period, China created more than 45 million jobs in the same sector, while Latin America generated 4 million.13 In the two decades prior to the crisis, income growth varied greatly by percentile of the world population.
As shown in figure I.27, the global growth incidence curve compares the income of each percentile of the world population in 1988 with its income in 2008 (Lakner and Milanovic, 2013a).
While the income of all percentiles increased, incomes grew in percentage terms up to point A, mainly as a result of the strong income growth of workers in China and other Asian countries.
Point B represents the middle class of developed countries, whose incomes stagnated in the period under consideration and, in percentage terms, achieved below average growth.
Thus, the income of this group may have increased even more than shown in figure I.27.
By contrast, the percentage increase in the income of less skilled workers in developed countries was below average.
However, while the global growth incidence curve shows larger gains around the global income distribution median, these are expressed in terms of the income of each percentile in 1988.
Given the extreme inequality in global income distribution, absolute gains are much greater among the top percentiles, even though they are lower in percentage terms.15 There is therefore a polarization of the benefits of globalization, a situation that reflects the social malaise and political tensions seen in developed countries.
For example, in 1988, the 75th to 80th percentiles of the global income distribution were composed mainly of middle-class Latin Americans and Europeans and North Americans from the lowest social strata.
However, by 2008, members of the tenth decile of the Chinese population had entered this bracket of the global income distribution, making it difficult to draw definitive conclusions about winners and losers.
The analysis is also complicated by problems linked to the availability of data (different countries are included in the database for 1988 and for 2008) and demographic factors, as faster population growth in the lowest income brackets automatically pushes those above them further up the global distribution scale, even if the incomes of those groups have not increased.
Despite this, the results strongly suggest that the most disadvantaged groups live in mature economies.17 This analysis can be extended by measuring the change in the income distribution by decile within each country.
The patterns seen in France18 and the United States are very similar: only the richest decile improved its relative position, while all the others lost ground or stagnated.
A similar trend was seen in China, although the polarization is less marked.
The top decile gains the most, but the share of the total income of the seventh decile and above has also increased.
In the same period, the pattern in Latin America differs from that of three aforementioned countries.
The share of the total income of the nine poorest deciles, especially deciles 5, 6, 7 and 8, increased and only the share of richest 10% decreased (by almost 4 percentage points).
Recent trends in income distribution in the region can be explained by two factors.
First, high commodity prices in the period between 2003 and 2014 boosted growth rates, which allowed a significant number of underemployed people to be incorporated into formal employment, thus pushing up average wages.
The increase in the demand for labour was concentrated in low-skilled jobs, which reduced wage inequality.
In addition there was an increase in the supply of skilled workers, particularly in Mexico (Lustig, López-Calva and Ortiz-Juárez, 2013).
The second factor is the adoption, particularly by South American countries, of social and income distribution policies, such as higher minimum wages and non-contributory social protection and conditional transfer programmes.
Windfall tax revenues during the boom and governments’ mounting concerns about the high levels of inequality in the region led to a cycle of redistributive policies that marked a break with the past and that probably improved the population’s perception 77Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I of globalization.
The current concern is whether these policies will be sustainable in a context marked by the end of the commodity supercycle, slowing growth and fiscal consolidation.
Greater social and political tensions in various countries of the region in recent years reflect, in part, the increasing difficulty that governments face in their efforts to continue reducing inequality, and evidence already points to a sharp deceleration in their progress in the last two years (Gasperini, Cruces and Tornarolli, 2016).
Ineffective global governance The governance mechanisms of the global economy have not mitigated or solved the problems discussed above because of their partial and fragmented nature and their sluggish response to economic changes and the technology revolution.
Mechanisms to check the accumulation of imbalances in the system, such as those highlighted in diagram I.2, have not worked.
Global systems, based on the hegemony of one or a few developed countries, have not been able to adapt to a multiplicity of actors, many of whom have considerable political weight.
Consensus mechanisms have achieved a certain amount of success, but the current leadership is unable to provide the necessary effective and efficient responses, particularly to the new challenges that the international community has decided to address and that have been incorporated in the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development and the Sustainable Development Goals (ECLAC, 2016a).
The problems are particularly acute in four areas of global governance, namely trade, FDI, taxation and financial transactions. 1.
A fragmented trade system The 1990s, with the conclusion of the Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) and the establishment of WTO, marked a period of optimism about the future of the multilateral trade system, strengthened by China’s accession to WTO in 2001.
However, the difficulties encountered when it came to launching a new round of trade negotiations, the Doha Round, foreshadowed the tensions that prevented it from being concluded a decade and a half later.
This new round failed, in large part, because of the struggle for control of the agenda between developed and emerging countries.
For half a century, since GATT was established, the industrialized countries, particularly the United States and, since the 1960s, the European Union, have been the driving forces behind the multilateral trade system.
The main emerging economies were not part of the system (China and what is now known as the Russian Federation) or participated in a passive or reactive manner (Brazil and India, among others).19 Thus, the agreements reached mainly reflected the interests of the industrialized countries, as evidenced by the omission of agriculture, textiles and clothing.
Developed countries’ current demands —that developing countries open up further in the areas of manufacturing, services and investment— run counter to developing countries’ calls for greater liberalization of agriculture and the movement of labour in Europe and the United States.
In a consensual system, the search for agreement has been complicated even more by the demands of particular groups, such as least developed countries, small island developing States and Mediterranean countries.
These initiatives are led by developed countries and the participation of developing countries, including the countries of the region, is limited.
Another response to the prolonged stagnation of the Doha Round has been the emergence of a new generation of trade negotiations, known as mega-regional negotiations.
The mega-regional negotiations seek to create trade and investment agreements with a strong regulatory harmonization component, also known as “deep integration”.
The grand scale of these agreements means that, if successful, they will significantly change the global rules on trade and FDI.
These rules would be defined outside WTO for a limited number of countries, mainly those that participate to a greater extent in major value chains.
However, both TPP and TTIP are now facing strong political opposition, which casts doubt on whether TPP will enter into force and the TTIP negotiations will be concluded.
With regard to TPP, the President-elect of the United States has repeatedly expressed his opposition to the agreement, arguing that it would result in the loss of industrial jobs to developing countries with lower labour costs.
Large swathes of its population have expressed concern at the possibility that TTIP will result in unwanted changes in European standards on social, cultural, public health, security and personal data protection matters, among others.
The degree of openness of European agricultural markets to competition from the United States agribusiness has also been a controversial issue.
The decision of the United Kingdom to withdraw from the European Union has affected the internal balance of power on this matter, as it is one the staunchest supporters of TTIP.
Opposition to trade negotiations grows when they touch on domestic public policy matters, such as labour and environmental standards, financial regulation or consumer protection.
The case of TTIP highlights the tensions caused by regulatory harmonization processes, even among countries with high income levels, but whose societies have distinct preferences on those issues for historical and cultural reasons.
The barriers to reaching agreements on such sensitive issues are even greater in North-South negotiations, involving countries with wide differences in their levels of development.
In short, the world trade institutions are currently subject to considerable tensions.
In addition to the difficulties faced by WTO, there is growing opposition to trade negotiations in industrialized countries.
This is further proof of the ambivalence about economic globalization that exists in those countries.
The main drivers of global trade liberalization are now facing strong resistance to the deepening of that process from their own populations.
What is more, questions have also been raised about the contribution of the current trade and FDI regimes to combating climate change.
Weak convergence of FDI regimes Despite various attempts in the 1990s, it has so far proved impossible to establish a multilateral system of governance for FDI.21 The two WTO agreements that address the matter —the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Investment Measures and the General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS)— do so only partially.
This situation has contributed to the proliferation of bilateral and regional investment treaties since the 1980s.
As a result, there are currently 2,322 bilateral investment treaties and 294 trade agreements in force that contain provisions on investment (UNCTAD, 2016).
The absence of a multilateral investment framework and the eruption of agreements have produced a fragmented international structure, marked by inconsistent or contradictory provisions (Sauvant and Ortino, 2014).
The fundamental criticism of investment agreements (or investment chapters in free trade agreements) is their failure to offer adequate protection to the regulatory spaces that States need to be able to carry out their public policy objectives (Rosales, 2016).
This is particularly important for policies on the environment, health and the regulation of capital flows.
A number of issues have been raised, with critics concerned that the right to public regulation is not sufficiently respected; that the protection of the interests of foreign investors is excessive; that the burden of proof lies with States; and that the dispute settlement system is unable to dismiss unsubstantiated claims (“frivolous lawsuits”) quickly.
These agreements include provisions that allow foreign investors to sue host States.
Any investor-State disputes are to be settled by private arbitration, based, in the main, on the rules of the International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes (ICSID).
Consequently a private panel interprets these investment agreements, imposing that interpretation on governments and, in many cases, overriding the relevant national legislation (Schill, 2015; Johnson, Sachs and Hence international investment protection mechanisms need to be reformed.
Ideally, a permanent international investment tribunal would be set up, with a second-tier appeal mechanism, similar to that of WTO.
This international tribunal would replace the current system of private arbitration, and an investment protection system would be established that safeguards legal principles, protects human rights fully and is consistent with the Sustainable Development Goals (Rosales, 2016).
This would require neutral, independent tribunals, dedicated to safeguarding the regulatory spaces that allow public policies to be put into action, including the continuous updating of regulations in the light of technological progress and scientific evidence (Schill, 2015).
It is clear that foreign investment must adapt to the current context of constant technological change, combating the effects of climate change and governments’ commitment to sustainable development.
Similarly, the need, common to all developing economies, to attract foreign investment, forces governments to protect the rights of investors through stable, non-discriminatory legal frameworks.
The challenge is 21 A first attempt was the unsuccessful Multilateral Agreement on Investment negotiations, under the aegis of OECD between 1995 and 1998.
Subsequently, the Doha Round of WTO negotiations sought to address FDI, an initiative that was also unsuccessful. 80 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter I to create better conditions for States and foreign investors to work together and to foster long-term productive relationships that are compatible with the Sustainable Development Goals.
In the wake of the recent international agreements on climate change and the Sustainable Development Goals the time is ripe for developing countries to push for global negotiations on this issue. 3.
Loopholes in the international taxation system Currently more than 3,800 bilateral treaties regulate the taxation of companies with international activities (Grinberg and Pauwelyn, 2015).
While these treaties seek to avoid double taxation, their proliferation has led to inconsistencies and legal loopholes that allow multinational companies to channel their profits to jurisdictions with lower tax rates.
Revenue losses associated with such practices are estimated to be between 4% and 10% of global revenues from corporate income tax (OECD, 2015b).
The actual figures could be higher because it is difficult to monitor cross-border digital transactions.
This loss of revenue has a particularly adverse effect on developing countries because of their heavy reliance on FDI.
This information could be shared among tax authorities in different jurisdictions, allowing harmful or abusive schemes to be identified. • Strengthening the mutual agreement procedure to ensure the proper application and interpretation of bilateral tax treaties. • Improving the transparency of tax administration processes.
It was also agreed that a multilateral tax treaty would be drawn up to implement these recommendations and amend bilateral tax treaties.
To this end, an ad hoc group of 96 countries was established in May 2015 to start negotiations on a multilateral instrument.
Better international tax governance of multinational companies would help to increase fiscal space in Latin American economies, at a time when many of them are facing funding constraints. 81Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter I 4.
Weaknesses in the international financial architecture Before the global crisis, financial regulation was predominantly based on the assumption that the stability of individual institutions would ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole.
At the same time, it was assumed that the stability of individual institutions depended on the proper internalization of the risks that they faced, including credit, liquidity, interest rate and exchange rate risks.
Risk was mainly internalized by establishing capital requirements to protect customers against unexpected losses.
In this context, a large number of countries have chosen to comply with the minimum regulatory capital requirements established by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) to promote financial stability and avoid regulatory arbitration among countries.
In 1988, BCBS set out the capital requirements in the Basel Capital Accord (Basel I), which was amended in 2004 to give rise to Basel II.
After the new accord was signed, 2009 was set as the deadline for its implementation.
Following the 2008 crisis, it was argued that the established minimum capital levels and lack of quantitative standards for liquidity had contributed to the crisis (Shearman & Sterling, LLP, 2011).
In response to that, Basel III was adopted in September 2010, the broadest accord to date.
The purpose of this framework is to limit risks at both the microprudential (individual banks) and macroprudential (systemic risks) levels.
To that end, it seeks to improve the banking sector’s ability to cope with financial and economic difficulties, strengthen risk management and develop a suitable governance system, and improve transparency and disclosure obligations.
Basel III, which will enter into force in January 2019, has limitations.22 Its response to the weaknesses in the capital requirements approach is not enough to ensure the stability of the financial system as a whole.
This would require a broader, macroprudential regulatory approach that complements existing (essentially microprudential) regulation and fills the gaps inherent in that regulation.
Lastly, the debate on the macroprudential policy has focused primarily on developed countries, with little attention given to developing economies.
For example, unlike the United States and the European Union, which have taken steps to implement the Basel III recommendations, Latin American and Caribbean countries are at different stages of its implementation.
This unevenness can be problematic, given the strong credit growth and significant presence of foreign banks in the region.
Conclusions The convergence of intense globalization and accelerating technological change has deepened the feeling of vulnerability among large sections of the global population.
Trade and financial integration have increased steadily since the 1980s, while social inclusion and economic stability mechanisms have weakened.
In this regard, the belief that by guaranteeing property rights the free market would spontaneously create outstanding institutions was particularly problematic. 22 Basel I and Basel II stated that regulatory capital should be at least equal to 8% of risk-weighted assets.
In addition to this requirement, Basel III introduced two “buffers” as of 2016: a capital conservation buffer (2.5% of assets), to absorb losses during periods of financial and economic stress; and a countercyclical buffer (ranging from between 0% and 2.5% of assets) to avoid excessive credit growth in boom periods.
The trends observed in the past four decades show that some of the main lessons learned from the setbacks to globalization of the 1930s have been forgotten.
Instead, the emphasis has been on helping markets to operate with greater freedom, without building the necessary institutions that reduce asymmetries and protect the sectors most affected by technological disruption and increased competition.
By abandoning multilateralism and development as relevant global governance issues, there is a risk of a further drop in support for an open global economy.
Current governance of globalization tends to reproduce asymmetries: the most technologically advanced countries under the old paradigm are again at the cutting edge under the new one and those countries that ran a current account surplus before the crisis are also running one after it.
The less technologically advanced economies are therefore forced to adjust by adopting fiscal austerity measures, which slow growth.
In several developed economies, mainly in Europe, high levels of unemployment persist, particularly among young people.
Stagnant wages and job cuts in many sectors mean that new generations are pessimistic about the future.
For several decades young people could expect to have better living conditions than their parents, but this is no longer the case.
This perception of growing vulnerability feeds into calls for closed economies and the marginalization of different ethnic and social groups.
More generally, the idea that political and economic elites have neglected their responsibilities to the rest of the society has become widespread, casting doubt on the effectiveness of the political representation system.
Most countries of the region reduced poverty and inequality between 2004 and 2013.
As a result there was, generally, little public opposition to global trade integration and the inflow of foreign investment.
However, the production structures deteriorated during the same boom period, as evidenced by the decline in the industrial sector.
The recent slowdown in the global economy and world trade and falling commodity prices therefore hit a number of countries, especially in South America, particularly hard.
The sharp slowdown in growth stemmed efforts to improve distribution; the question now is how to avoid reversals with regard to reductions in poverty and inequality.
The region must recognize that the world is going through a disruptive process of economic change, which includes a technological revolution, increasing business concentration, new organizational and business models, a shift in production location patterns, and radical changes in trade and investment flows, clearly dominated by the demand for intangible or digital goods and services.
These trends will create a new technological and economic system that the region must participate actively in devising, for example by defining standards, setting up global digital platforms and building capacities for new technologies.
Not recognizing the importance of these changes will hinder the productive restructuring needed to accelerate growth in the long term, sustain the progress made in reducing poverty and improving income distribution, and promote the transition to a low-carbon growth path.
However, the majority of the region’s countries have not had an industrial policy, or if they have it has been protectionist, unable to adapt to new technology and face up to competition.
In addition to reactivating and revitalizing industrial policies, the region must actively contribute to efforts to improve governance of the global economy by creating global public goods.
In order to implement global, regional and national strategies, action must be taken in two key areas.
This perception reinforces the idea that countries should just be patient and adjust their economies while waiting for prices to rise again.
This strategy is unsustainable given the social pressure to maintain and even build on the progress made, particularly when the effects of the technological revolution on jobs are being felt in ever more areas of activity.
Given the speed of change, the region is truly facing the Red Queen effect: having to run faster just to stay in the same place.
Lastly, institutional weaknesses and fragmentation at the national and regional levels must be overcome, as these harden citizens’ scepticism about governments’ priorities and capacities.
Actively including the population in efforts to overcome the disadvantages of globalization would improve the popular perception of governments’ concern for and ability and interest to compensate the losers of globalization.
Ferreira, F. and others (2015), “A global count of the extreme poor in 2012: data issues, methodology and initial results “, World Bank Policy Working Paper, No. 7432, October.
Grömling, M. (2014), “A supply-side explanation for current account imbalances”, Intereconomics, vol. 49, No. 1, January.
Diversification and integration: more necessary than ever Bibliography 89Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter IIII Introduction The tensions caused by globalization and weak institutions’ inability to overcome them, analysed in the preceding chapter, have different repercussions, depending on each economy’s production and technological structures and internationalization patterns.
History shows that countries’ ability to respond to international crises depends on the strength of their institutions, which determines to a great extent how proactive and effective their policies can be.
There is no deterministic relationship between globalization and development that necessarily produces negative results for a country or region in the long term.
The international economic system’s inherent complexity creates niches of action for nations willing to integrate into a system that is, by definition, heterogeneous and has serious imbalances of power.
Implementing public and private strategies to tackle pressures from global development patterns must be based on an adequate assessment of the current situation at the unit level (be it national or regional) and of its connection with the system as a whole.
Therefore, this chapter examines the pattern of participation of Latin America and the Caribbean in globalization.
The first section analyses the region’s position in global trade in goods and services and foreign direct investment (FDI) and financing flows in the preceding decades, and more recently in the digital economy.
The second section examines in detail the region’s external trade performance in 2016, paying particular attention to the intraregional trade situation.
The third section sets out different regional foreign trade scenarios for the four-year period, 2017-2020.
The fourth section concludes by asserting the validity of the proposals presented by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC) in these areas.
Limited export diversification and weak participation in value chains Since 2000, the region has maintained its 6% share of world goods exports, with minor variations.
This contrasts with the performance of developing Asian countries, whose weight in global trade increased considerably over the same period.
This increase is largely due to China, whose share more than tripled, up from 4% in 2000 to 14% in 2015 (see figure II.1).
The relative stagnation of its exports reflects the region’s difficulty in overcoming an export structure with limited diversification, in which more than half of the value of its total exports is concentrated in commodities and natural resource-based manufactures.
In fact, commodities account for the region’s greater weight in global exports, around 14%.
The region’s share of world trade in natural resources-based manufactures decreased over the past two decades, reaching 7% by 2015.
With the exception of the last biennium, the same pattern can be seen in the other manufacturing categories (see figure II.2).
By comparison, the share of developing Asian countries has been increasing rapidly since 1990 in all categories, except commodities.
Since 2000, the region has maintained its 6% share of world goods exports, with minor variations.
Since the 1970s, a key feature of economic globalization has been the growing international fragmentation of production, reflected in the emergence of global value chains.
On the one hand, the region’s weight as a source of foreign value added in world exports (forward linkages) remains negligible.
The most recent year for which information is available is 2011. 2 Developed countries are the main source of foreign value added in world exports, although they have lost share in recent decades.
The European Union accounted for 31% of total foreign value added of world exports in 2011, compared to 43% in 1995, and the share of NAFTA countries (mostly the United States) went from 18% to 14% over this period.
Meanwhile, China’s foreign value added share grew significantly in exports from all regions, from 1% to around 7% of the total.
In 2011, only 13% of the value exported by Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Costa Rica was generated in other economies, compared with 19% in the case of NAFTA countries and some 30% in the case of the European Union, China and the rest of Asia.
Mexico, however, has a high share of foreign value added in its exports (32% in 2011).
A feature of global value chains is their regional nature, since a high proportion of the foreign value added in these chains’ exports originates in countries of the region in which they are located.3 However, Latin American countries have limited intraregional production integration.
In 2011, only 16% of the foreign value added in exports from Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Costa Rica was generated in the region (see figure II.3).
However, only 3% of foreign value added in Mexican exports originated in the other five aforementioned Latin American countries.
Analysis of Latin America’s value added in third countries’ exports by sector shows that it originates mainly, and increasingly, in primary sectors (agriculture and mining) and in low- and medium-low technology manufacturing sectors, although services also account for a large share (see figure II.4).
The weight of primary sectors in the value added of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia and Costa Rica in exports from third countries increased from 18% to 32% between 1995 and 2011.
In Mexico, the share of these sectors also grew, from 21% to 37%.
In all cases, this reprimarization is largely explained by the growing weight of mining (including fuels), as a result of the sharp rise in the prices of products such as oil, copper and iron.
The exception to this pattern is Costa Rica, which saw a drop in the share of primary sectors (from 24% to 7% between 1995 and 2011), caused by the decline in the weight of agriculture.
The contribution of services to the region’s value added in exports from third countries, although down, remains significant, particularly that of research and development (R&D), other business services, trade and, to a lesser extent, transport and storage. 2.
The region also lags behind in world services trade Services are an increasingly important component of world trade.
Advances in digital technologies have helped many services that were traditionally considered non-tradable to become tradable.
The strides made in digitization have increasingly blurred the lines between goods and services.
The services sector currently accounts for 22% of world goods and services exports (measured in gross terms, as is customary).
However, its share is estimated to reach 40% of world trade measured in value added, since much of the final value of internationally traded goods is added by services such as design, R&D and marketing, among others.
In industry, this phenomenon is known as the servicification of manufacturing (Lanz and Maurer, 2015).
In line with the trends described, the composition of services trade has undergone major changes in recent decades: while transport and travel have lost share, the category “other services” (also known as “modern services”) has gained economic weight, and 3 For example, the European Union accounted for almost 50% of the foreign value added in its exports in 2011.
Likewise, around 40% of foreign value added in exports from China and the other Asian countries comes from Asia.
In the NAFTA countries, just over 30% of total foreign value added in their exports originates from the bloc. 95Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter II currently accounts for more than half of services trade (see figure II.5).
Among modern services, the most important categories are business, financial and telecommunications services, accounting for 80% of the total (see figure II.6).
The rapid growth in trade in these services has been facilitated by growing Internet use.
This new category covers mainly services associated with manufacturing. b The modern services category corresponds to “other business services” under the balance of payments.
In the past decade, the weight of services in its total exports has only increased slightly, from 14% in 2005 to 15% in 2015.
This share is much smaller than that of services in world exports.
This is lower than the region’s share of world goods exports (5.6% in 2015).
Meanwhile, the share of developing Asian countries in world services trade grew considerably, driven mainly by China and India.
The region’s share in world modern services trade is even less than its share in world services trade as a whole (see table II.1).
The difference with the main Asian competitors is particularly marked in areas such as business services and, in the case of India, telecommunications and information technologies.
On the contrary, the region performs better in the traditional sectors of transport and travel.
Countries that specialize more in services exports are generally located in the Caribbean and Central America (see figure II.8).
Countries in the region are also very heterogeneous in terms of the makeup of their services exports (see figure II.9).
Modern services are the main export category in Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Costa Rica only: in the first three countries, business services predominate in this category, while in Costa Rica the largest component is information technology, especially the outsourcing of information technology-related services.
Travel services are the foremost services exports for the majority of countries, reflecting the importance of the tourism sector.
Finally, manufacturing-related services are the main export category for Honduras and Nicaragua, given the weight of maquila operations.
In terms of the most modern services —digital services— the region has made substantial progress, but gaps still exist.
While Internet use has expanded rapidly, mainly through mobile connections, there are very few regional businesses among digital platform and social network providers causing the region to fall further behind (see point 5 below).
A similar pattern can be seen in an important area of digital services, cross-border e-commerce.
A survey carried out in Argentina, Brazil and Mexico in 2015 revealed that 38% of online shoppers in those three countries had purchased goods and services from the United States, 26% from China and 9% from Japan (PayPal, 2015).
The remaining 27% purchased goods and services from other proveniences, including Latin America and the Caribbean.
The limited regional integration in goods markets is therefore being replicated in the digital market.
Foreign direct investment inflows double FDI flows have been buoyant over the long term and one of the drivers of globalization.
A small number of transnational companies are responsible for most of that investment, while at the same time playing a key role in intra-firm trade and R&D processes.
Since the 1990s, the countries of the region have received increasing FDI flows.
This is one of the few variables in which the region shows a pattern similar to that of the successful developing Asian economies (see figure II.10).
The sectoral distribution of the region’s FDI inflows shows a predominance of services, followed by manufacturing and natural resources (see figure II.11).
Investment in natural resources-related activities is directed chiefly towards metal mining and the coal, natural gas and oil sector.
In the region, the first three clearly predominate, as exemplified by investments in Mexico’s carmakers in the context of NAFTA, sizeable investments directed towards Brazil’s domestic market and investments in mining in the Andean countries.
There is a serious lack of investment in efforts to pursue investigative work and R&D in new technologies and products; the region’s share of global FDI projects involving R&D averaged around 4% between 2003 and 2015, according to figures from fDi Markets.
Outward investment by Latin America, conversely, despite having risen in the 1990s and 2000s, remains limited to just a few companies headquartered in the region, such as Techint from Argentina; Vale, Gerdau, JBS and Petrobras from Brazil; and América Móvil and CEMEX from Mexico.
Most of the Latin American investments abroad are made in the region and follow from the maturing of business capabilities developed over many years of activity in domestic markets.
The effect of FDI on the region’s production patterns and its participation in globalization has been ambiguous.
On the one hand, in countries where FDI is focused on the extraction and basic processing of natural resources, it has entrenched the specialization trend and even strengthened low-technology lock-in.
On the other hand, FDI has made a substantial contribution to the expansion and modernization of advanced sectors in the region, such as finance, telecommunications and, to a lesser extent, business services in general.
This pattern is the result of the passivity of national policies, which have rarely focused on quality over the amount invested. 4.
Financial flows on the rise Cross-border financial movements (bank loans and portfolio and other investments) registered the sharpest growth before the global financial crisis and the steepest decline afterwards.
The accelerated pre-crisis financial globalization was concentrated in the advanced countries, as a result of the sophistication and profitability of their capital markets.
The key players in this process were the banks of these countries, which extended their activities beyond their borders through loans or the establishment of subsidiaries.
Another factor that accelerated these flows was the rapid growth in global trade and the growing asymmetry between the current account balances of China, the United States and natural resource-exporting countries (ECLAC, 2015).
As a percentage of global GDP, the drop was even more pronounced, which dealt a blow to financial globalization.
While financial flows declined across all regions, the biggest fall occurred in the advanced countries.
Among emerging market economies, the fall was comparatively smaller, because their capital markets were less developed and their capital accounts were less open (Bussière, Schmidt and Valla, 2016).
The net capital account balances also changed after the crisis: net inflows to the United States (and many emerging market economies) halved, reflecting their smaller current account deficits.
However, the capital account surplus of China and Germany increased. 101Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter II Another significant trend was the change in the structure of the balances, in particular the marked reduction in the share of the “other investments” component.
This is largely explained by the considerable impact of the financial crisis, which led to global deleveraging and financial disintermediation processes.
Diverging from global trends, the absolute amounts of post-crisis capital inflows into Latin America and the Caribbean did not decrease, although outflows did (see figure II.12).
In the period between 2012 and 2014, portfolio investment inflows rose by 238%, compared to the pre-crisis period (between 2005 and 2007), while portfolio investment outflows and other investments fell by 4% and 6%, respectively.
As with FDI, the region’s share of global inflows and outflows of other investments, mainly in interbank loans, increased between 1990 and 2014.
A problematic integration into the digital economy As stated in chapter I, both the global economy and globalization itself are increasingly digital.
The development of the digital industry directly contributes to economic growth by boosting revenue, employment and corporate tax contributions, and indirectly, through spillover effects, providing inputs to other industries and business creation.
To take 102 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter II advantage of these benefits, the region must integrate digital technologies to a greater extent into economic activities and the production of digital and non-digital services, based on efficient connectivity and an adequate services infrastructure.
Specifically, it must move from an Internet that is almost exclusively focused on consumption to one of consumption and production, taking full advantage of Big Data analysis and the Internet of Things (ECLAC, 2016d).
In the last five years, the number of households in the region with an Internet connection has grown by an annual average of 14%, reaching 43% of all households in 2015.
Although the gap with the countries of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) has narrowed, it remains wide (see figure II.13).
Likewise, the degree of Internet penetration among the countries of the region is highly heterogeneous.
There are also large gaps within countries depending on socioeconomic status and between urban and rural areas (ECLAC, 2016b).
With regard to the quality of connections, the variable commonly referred to is speed.
In the countries that are most advanced in this respect, such as the Republic of Korea and Norway, more than 50% of connections are over 15 Mbps.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, on the contrary, high-speed connections (over 10 Mbps) are still scarce.
In Chile, Uruguay and Mexico, the countries with better services, only 15% of connections are over 10 Mbps and barely 4% over 15 Mbps.
These connection speeds make it difficult to access advanced services and applications (see table II.2).
The number of households in the region with an Internet connection has grown by an annual average of 14%, reaching 43% of all households in 2015.
The region’s relatively low level of digital connectivity, compounded by poor quality, is limiting progress in the digitization of its economy.
In order to achieve greater digitization, two other elements are needed: the development of a local digital services industry and the integration of information and communications technologies (ICT) into production processes.
The intensity of Internet use and the online consumption profile in Latin American are similar to those of developed countries.
The regional monthly average of hours spent connected is 21.7, slightly lower than the world average of 22.8 hours.
The Latin American consumption profile reveals high use of social networks (see figure II.15).
This demand is covered in the main by content generated outside the region and distributed by digital platforms located primarily in the United States, creating a significant imbalance between local supply of and demand for digital services.
Websites created in the region with big market shares are mainly devoted to e-commerce (in the case of sites such as Mercado Libre) or the dissemination of news (newspapers), non-priority categories in the region’s consumption profile (see table II.3).
It thus replicates an import model of high value-added goods (digital services) in which the region is primarily responsible for providing the inputs (telecommunications infrastructure) for these goods to reach the end users.
A market therefore exists that could be served by regionally produced digital services.
This would have a positive impact on the development of the digital economy, harnessing resources that are currently used to import these services.
In summary, increased connectivity has stimulated growth in the region’s digital economy, although there is still room for improvement, by boosting the contents industry, the development of platforms and the integration of new technologies into production processes.
Four years of decline in foreign trade The international context described in chapter I, marked by weak external demand linked to poor macroeconomic performance, imbalances and a lack of global governance, has had a direct impact on regional trade, which, as was already anticipated in 2015, has had its worst performance in 80 years (ECLAC, 2015b). 1.
The decline in exports is decelerating, but not in imports The sharp drop in regional goods exports seen in 2015 was offset in the first half of 2016 by a smaller drop in the price of commodities exported (especially oil, minerals and metals) and higher volumes exported by some countries.
The fall in services exports, which, in 2015, was less severe than that of goods exports, has also slowed down in recent quarters (see figure II.16).
The similar trends seen in both flows are evidence of the strong link between the dynamism of trade in goods and that of freight transport services.
Meanwhile, declining regional demand has adversely affected trade in telecommunications, business and financial services and other modern services.
Regional foreign trade has performed less well in recent years than it did during the crisis of 2008-2009.
While on that occasion the fall in exports lasted 13 months, this time there have been more than 30 months of decline between July 2012 and September 2016, including the past 24 months in the case of goods and the last 6 quarters for services.
Regional goods exports are expected to return to modest growth in the last quarter of 2016.
The recovery of regional exports after the crisis was short-lived, lasting only two and a half years.
It was driven by sustained demand from emerging economies (particularly in Asia), which mitigated the effects of the recession in the eurozone and low growth in the United States (ECLAC, 2012).
However, the persistent recessionary bias in the world economy eventually hit developing economies too, reducing their demand for imports and, consequently, the region’s exports.
Based on foreign trade information from the region and the price of the main export products to September 2016, the value of goods exports is expected to decrease by 5% for the year as a whole.
A breakdown of this contraction reveals a 6.7% drop in prices and 1.7% increase in volume.
The region will thus mark four consecutive years of falling export values (see figure II.17 A).
Unlike exports, regional imports are not yet showing signs of recovery, as they are projected to decrease in 2016 by a similar amount to that of 2015 (-10%).
Similarly, during the first half of 2016, regional services imports dropped more sharply than exports, which can be explained by the decline in South American countries’ imports (see table II.4).
Prices for the region’s commodity exports, which fell at double-digit rates in 2014 and 2015, began to rally in the first half of 2016 (see figure II.18).
However, given sluggish world demand, these prices are expected to remain highly volatile, without a clear trend.
For the whole of 2016, price levels for the region’s basket of exported commodities are expected to fall further, although slightly less than they did in 2015.
Consequently, between 2012 and 2016, the price index of the region’s export basket will have dropped by an accumulated 35%.
Since mid-2015, the fall in regional goods imports has been greater than that in exports.
This reflects both the lower export revenues received by many countries, owing to falling commodity prices, and the sharp slowdown in growth in the region in recent years, particularly the recession affecting several of the largest South American economies.
The Caribbean is expected to see the largest declines in export values in 2016, down by 12.6%, followed by South America (-6.3%) (see figure II.19).
The price and volume of Caribbean exports will fall, with mining and oil products down the most.
Meanwhile, the price of South American exports will drop but their volume will rise, owing to significant expected increases in volumes exported by Argentina, Brazil, Ecuador, Paraguay and Peru (see table II.5).
These increases will take place both in exports of commodities and their derivatives and in those of manufactures.
Among commodities, the largest increases will be in agricultural products (soybeans, rice, wheat, maize, meat, sugar, fats and oils), mining products (iron ore and copper) and fuels (oil).
In the case of manufactures, Brazil saw the largest increase in exported volumes, whose industrial exports grew by 13% between January and September of 2016 (Ministry of Industry, Foreign Trade and Services of Brazil, 2016).
Brazilian products that saw the biggest rise in exports included automobiles (44%), heavy goods vehicles (35%), aeroplanes (31%) and construction equipment (17%).
Central America is the only subregion where the value of exports will fall less than the regional average in 2016, because the prices of its exports will drop less than those of the region as a whole and will be partly offset by a 2.2% increase in volume.
In this subregion, there has been considerable growth in exports of medical equipment and implements and food products from Costa Rica, and of textiles and clothing from El Salvador.
However, export values will rise in Argentina, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, Paraguay and Peru only (see table II.5), largely because the prices of the main commodities exported by the region —particularly oil— are expected to be lower, on average, than in 2015.
In this context, the countries that specialize in hydrocarbon exports, namely the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador and the Plurinational State of Bolivia, will see the biggest falls in their export values.
With regard to imports, the largest fall in value in 2016 will be in South America (-17%), reflecting the recession that several of the subregion’s main economies are experiencing (see figure II.20).
The sharp contraction in the value of South American imports is explained by falling prices and volumes.
By sector, import volumes will fall the most in capital goods (machinery and equipment) and intermediate inputs (pieces, parts and semi-processed materials), which reflects weak investment.
Import volumes and prices are also expected to contract in the Caribbean.
Meanwhile, import volumes will increase in Mexico and Central America, revealing the greater buoyancy of their economies in 2016 compared to the rest of the region.
In the light of the expected 16% drop in oil prices in 2016, the terms of trade of the hydrocarbon-exporting countries will deteriorate the most in the region.
Meanwhile, countries that import oil and food, particularly those in Central America and the Caribbean, will benefit (see figure II.21).
Imports have contracted more than exports, especially in South America, which will lead to a sharp reduction in the region’s trade deficit, from US$ 86 billion in 2015 to US$ 33 billion in 2016.
This change can be largely explained by the increase in the surplus of the Southern Common Market (MERCOSUR) (driven by Brazil) and the cuts to the deficit of the Andean Community (CAN).
The deficit of Mexico and Central America, as a grouping, will grow slightly (see figure II.22).
This is followed by the deficit with the other Asian partners, which is some US$ 34 billion.
Meanwhile, the region has a surplus of around US$ 100 billion with the United States (see figure II.23).
The bulk of the region’s trade deficit with China is concentrated in the manufacturing sector, mainly in machinery and equipment, metals and metal products, telecommunications equipment, automobiles and automobile parts, and components for heavy industry.
The region also has trade deficits with that country in chemical and pharmaceutical products, and final products from the textile, clothing and footwear industries.
In all the aforementioned sectors, China is consolidating itself as the leading supplier of not only final goods, but also intermediate goods, which already account for a quarter of the total value of the region’s imports from China.
This indicates that China is being increasingly incorporated into Latin American value chains (Durán Lima and Pellandra, 2016).
Projections for the region’s trade with its main partners in 2016 reveal that intraregional trade is likely to experience the largest decline (see figure II.24 and section 3.2 below).
Exports to Asia, the United States and the European Union will also shrink, though less than they did in 2015.
Imports from all the major origins will also contract, reflecting weak regional demand. 2.
The worrying performance of intraregional trade Regional trade projections for 2016 show that, as in 2015, intraregional exports will fall much more sharply than sales to the rest of the world (see figure II.25), marking the fourth consecutive year of accumulated declines in intraregional trade.
In addition, 2016 will be the third consecutive year in which intraregional trade has shrunk more than extraregional trade.
This trend is particularly worrying given that the region’s manufactures are chiefly exported to Latin American and Caribbean Regional trade projections for 2016 show that, as in 2015, intraregional exports will fall much more sharply than sales to the rest of the world. 114 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter II countries.
Thus weak intraregional trade limits the region’s potential to diversify and increase its productivity in this area.
As a result of this dynamic, the intraregional trade ratio (measured by imports)4 is expected to fall to 15% in 2016, its lowest level in a decade.
The sharp contraction in trade between South American countries cannot be separated from the recession that several of the subregion’s major economies are experiencing.
For example, during the first eight months of 2016 and the same period in 2015, sales of manufactures from the region to Brazil shrank significantly, especially exports of capital goods (-45%) and intermediate inputs (-21%).
The trading partner that was most affected was Argentina, whose exports to Brazil decreased by 18% over the first nine months of 2016, mainly those of chemical products, machinery and equipment, and automobiles and automobile parts (INDEC, 2016).
Imports to the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela from its MERCOSUR partners dropped across the board (-10%) during the first half of 2016.
In addition to weaker demand, intraregional trade has also been affected by low prices for products such as petroleum, basic chemicals, textiles, clothing and agro-industrial products.
This explains, for example, why, in the first half of the year, the value of intraregional exports from Plurinational State of Bolivia and Ecuador declined, even though their volume increased (SGCAN, 2016).
The only countries whose exports to the region grew in terms of value in the first half of 2016 were Paraguay and Costa Rica (see table II.7).
When intraregional export figures from the first half of 2016 are broken down by sector, distinct trends can be observed between agricultural and fishing products, and other goods.
The export value of agricultural products such as wheat, maize, barley, soybean flour and various fish products increased, particularly in South America and Central America.
Among manufactures, the steepest declines during the first half of 2016 were in the oil and mining sectors, especially petroleum-based oils, gasoline, naphtha and gas.
The sharp contraction of intraregional trade during the first half of 2016 has resulted in a reduction in the intraregional trade ratio (measured by exports), which fell from 17.2% to 16.0% for all products traded among the countries of the region.
However, Central America differs from the other subregions both because of its high intrasubregional trade ratio of manufactures (40%), and because this ratio increased in the first half of 2016 compared with the same period in 2015 (see table II.8).
In addition, although the decline in intraregional exports is widespread, trade between Central American countries has seen moderate growth in agribusiness, chemical, rubber and plastic products and non-metallic minerals.
The intraregional trade ratio registered its biggest fall in the chemical and pharmaceutical sector, from 58% in the first half of 2015 to 52% in the same period of 2016.
The intraregional trade ratio also fell sharply in the non-metallic minerals, wood, pulp and paper, machinery and equipment, and automotive sectors.
The only sectors in which the ratio improved were primary activity sectors, namely agriculture, hunting and fishing, and oil and mining (see table II.9).
The intraregional export ratio is defined as the share of total exports of each sector attributed to intraregional exports. 118 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter II C.
Projections for 2017-2020: a modest trade recovery Based on GDP growth projections for the main trading partners of Latin America and the Caribbean and the expected evolution in the prices of its main export products, three scenarios were developed (pessimistic, optimistic and neutral) for the value of the region’s imports and exports between 2017 and 2020.
It is therefore unlikely to come to pass. 5 The exercise is based on microsimulations carried out using disaggregated trade information (by products and partners) from the United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database (COMTRADE) for 2015.
The economic growth forecasts for trading partners were based on income elasticity data by country and partner, which were used to model the effect of income changes on the volume exported or imported, as appropriate.
The projections indicate that, between 2017 and 2020, the region will see an average annual growth rate of between 1.9% and 5.4% for goods exports, and of between 2.3% and 4.8% for imports, with both variables at about 3% under the neutral scenario (see table II.11).
In other words, a modest expansion of regional trade is expected for the remainder of the current decade, far from the high growth rates for exports seen between 2004 and 2008 and between 2010 and 2011, the last commodity boom (see figure II.26).
Diversification and integration: more necessary than ever Patterns in flows of goods, services and FDI and the digital revolution suggest that the region faces mounting challenges in terms of entering new markets and diversifying its production structure.
The region’s share in global merchandise trade has stagnated since 2000, while its model of technological specialization has regressed, due to the rising weight of natural resources.
On the services side, the region has lost ground to its Asian competitors, which is most apparent in the fastest growing and more technologically advanced services.
Lastly, as regards FDI, although transnational corporations have driven modern sectors such as telecommunications, targeted investments in smart assets for R&D continue to be limited.
In general terms, the region’s integration into value chains and digital platforms ultimately depends on economic agents based in developed countries, so that recent trends towards growing corporate concentration and the increasing concentration of knowledge generation, discussed in chapter I, raise the barriers to the region regaining lost ground.
As discussed in chapter I, China’s economic slowdown is set to continue over the next few years, which will suppress commodity demand and prices.
On the import side, growth over the next few years will be limited by the weak recovery in regional output.
Before the end of the present decade, trade is, in short, unlikely to play such a prominent role in the region’s economic growth as it did in 2004-2008 and 2010-2011.
To this end, the technological changes taking place in value chains and the organization of production activities must be identified, fully integrating trends towards advanced manufacturing and the Internet of Things.
A number of old instruments, specifically focused on clearly defined sectors, must be replaced with systemic and highly flexible tools, based on the data revolution and analytics.
Lastly, the worrying performance of intraregional trade in recent years underscores the urgency of taking up the regional integration agenda again, to explore convergence options between ongoing initiatives and to overcome the political obstacles to that convergence.
Pellandra (2016), “La emergencia de China y su impacto sobre la estructura productiva y comercial de América Latina y el Caribe en el siglo XXI”, Comercio Internacional series, No. 130, Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), unpublished.
Maurer (2015), “Services and global value chains: some evidence on servicification of manufacturing and services networks”, WTO Working Paper, No.
SGCAN (General Secretariat of the Andean Community) (2016), “Exportaciones intra y extra comunitarias.
Trade data for the last available year (in most cases, 2015) from the United Nations Commodities Trade Statistics Database (COMTRADE) were used to capture the import and export structure.
The baseline data are the trade flows (exports and imports) of each country of the region with each of their partners, disaggregated to the three-digit level of the Standard International Trade Classification (SITC), Revision 2.
In the event that no direct country information was available (owing to a lack of reporting), mirror data from the COMTRADE database were used, with the reporting country’s imports being counted as exports from non-reporting countries, and vice versa in the case of imports.
In order to calculate the effect of each country’s GDP growth on trade, a fixed coefficient is applied that weights either growth or deceleration, according to the expectations of national stakeholders.
More details on this coefficient are given in subsection (iii) on the calculation method.
Lastly, the effect of the region’s partners’ demand was modelled using the trade income elasticities (exports/imports) of each major partner (the United States, the European Union, China, the rest of Asia, and Latin America and the Caribbean).
Elasticities were estimated bilaterally, linking each country to a partner or region.
The value of those elasticities was based on ECLAC estimates (2012). (ii) Scenario development The purpose of the three scenarios is to capture the different possibilities for growth in the trading environment of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, in the face of different price assumptions or fluctuating world demand.
A base scenario (Scenario A – NEUTRAL), a more favourable scenario (Scenario B – OPTIMISTIC) and a less favourable scenario (Scenario C – PESSIMISTIC) were developed.
The products or groups of products considered are sugar, copper, gas, iron, manufactures, oil and soybeans, with the implicit assumption that other products will maintain their price levels (i.e. that variation is 0%).
The neutral scenario describes growth in line with objective expectations of changes in the aforementioned world trade determinants.
Data updated in September 2016 were used to measure GDP growth in China.
The Commodity Price Outlook & Risks projections for the month of September were used to estimate the changes in the price of the products considered (IMF, 2016b).
When calculating changes in manufactures prices, the assumption was made that the 2016 levels would be maintained, i.e. that variation would be 0%.
The optimistic scenario paints a picture of strong international demand and rallying prices.
The GDP growth rates of the region’s main partners under consideration are higher than under the neutral scenario, while price movements are positive and price levels are also higher than under the neutral scenario.
On the other hand, the pessimistic scenario describes a prolonged global downturn and stagnant prices.
This translates into lower GDP growth in the region’s main partners and negative variations in prices, or positive variations but with more moderate price levels than under the neutral scenario.
As explained in point (i), the trade values of the previous year Val i,kij,t-1 are taken from COMTRADE for t = 2015 and are then calculated recursively by iterations.
The annual price changes ∆P kt are determined by the defined scenarios.
The annual change in volume ∆Q sj,t is calculated as: where ε is the income elasticity of exports or imports, as appropriate, derived from the trade of country j with the partner region s, GDP is the gross domestic product and θ is a fixed coefficient that weights that country’s growth.
For 30 countries of the region, θ = 0.5 was applied, while θ = 0.75 was used for the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela, Brazil and Ecuador.
Lastly, the annual growth of trade with each partner g si,t was calculated as follows: 127Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter III The Trans-Pacific Partnership: a preliminary analysis A.
The TPP zone: highly diverse and an economic and demographic heavyweight C.
Strategic implications for the region and the world Bibliography 129Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter IIIIII TPP would create the largest free trade area in the world, measured by its members’ joint GDP.
The agreement is currently in the process of being ratified by the signatories, which could take some 18 months.
It is estimated that its entry into force could increase world income by US$ 295 billion and world exports by US$ 444 billion by 2025 (Petri, Plummer and Zhai 2012).
More recent estimates suggest that TPP could raise its members’ GDP by 1.1% on average and their trade by 11% by 2030 (World Bank, 2016).
TPP differs from most previous trade agreements in that it is both plurilateral and interregional, and that it covers a wide range of subjects.
It contemplates not only the elimination of the vast majority of tariffs on the goods trade among its members, but also access to services markets, investment and government procurement.
In addition, it sets rules on matters that World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements have regulated to a limited extent or not at all, such as e-commerce, State-owned enterprises, regulatory coherence and various labour and environmental matters.
Underpinning the TPP negotiations was a strategic aim of the United States to write the new rules for global trade and investment over the coming decades, not only in the trans-Pacific area, but potentially at the global level.
The United States has thus explicitly sought to prevent alternative models, in particular that of China, from occupying this normative space.2 All in all, this is an agreement of a magnitude, complexity and ambition rarely seen.
This has made it controversial since its inception, even in the United States.
In fact during his campaign, the country’s President-elect declared his opposition to TPP.
The main results achieved within the TPP framework are set out in this chapter and their likely effects on the three participating Latin American countries and, more generally, the region as a whole are discussed.
The analysis will focus on possible impacts of TPP on Chile, Mexico and Peru in terms of two basic criteria: production and export diversification and their ability to steer their public policies according to their own priorities and development strategies.
Its implications for the economic integration processes under way in Latin America and the Caribbean are also discussed.
The TPP zone: highly diverse and an economic and demographic heavyweight In addition to the United States and Japan, the world’s first and third largest economies, respectively, three other TPP members are among the world’s 15 largest economies: Canada, Australia and Mexico.
We should write those rules, opening new markets to American products while setting high standards for protecting workers and preserving our environment.
Six TPP members (United States, Singapore, Canada, Mexico, Australia and Chile) were among the top 20 recipients of foreign direct investment (FDI) in 2015, while 5 (United States, Japan, Canada, Singapore and Chile) were among the top 20 foreign investors.
Together, the 12 members represent 38% of global GDP (measured in current dollars) and a quarter of global trade.
Likewise, in 2015 they received a third of global FDI flows and generated 40% of them (see figure III.1).
For example, the GDP of the United States is more than 1,000 times that of the smallest member of the group, Brunei Darussalam, while the United States’ population is 760 times greater.
Likewise, the per capita income of the richest member (Singapore) is 15 times that of the poorest (Viet Nam), measured in purchasing power parities.
The great diversity among the members of the agreement is also evident in their different political regimes, institutional and technological capacities, world economy integration patterns, geography, languages and cultures.
In 2015, exports among member countries totalled US$ 1.91 trillion, equivalent to 12% of world goods exports.
That year, the TPP zone absorbed 48% of the exports of all its members and was the origin of 39% of their imports.
The share of total exports varies between 30% (for Chile and Singapore) and more than 80% (for Canada and Mexico).
Internal trade is concentrated in a small number of bilateral relations; trade between the United States, on one hand, and Canada, Mexico and Japan, on the other, accounts for almost 70% of exports among member countries (see figure III.2).
Meanwhile, the share of the three Latin American member countries in the bloc’s trade is highly asymmetrical.
Mexico is the second largest exporter in the bloc (together with Canada) and the third largest importer, surpassing Japan in both respects.
TPP members are already linked by a dense network of some 25 free trade agreements, including both plurilateral (such as the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Free Trade Area) and bilateral agreements.
Thus, out of 66 possible bilateral relations, only 24 are not covered by an existing agreement, and several pairs of countries are bound by two or even three agreements.
The share of trade between TPP countries not bound by other agreements was only 15% of the total in 2013 (Fergusson, McMinimy and Williams, 2015).
Among trade relations not covered by agreements, the most important in terms of trade flows is that between the United States and Japan, followed at some distance by that between the United States and Viet Nam.
A new generation agreement with major public policy implications The scope of the 30 chapters of TPP is broad.
Given the breadth and complexity of the negotiated commitments, it is impossible to set out here a comprehensive assessment of the potential impact on the participating Latin American countries.
The analysis is complicated by the existence of some 120 side letters, which, in practice, are exceptions to the agreed-upon general commitments.
Nevertheless, the main opportunities, and greater risks, created by TPP for Chile, Mexico and Peru are outlined below.
When possible, the impact on those countries in the region that are not part of the agreement is also analysed.
The analysis focuses on seven topics: market access (including tariff aspects, technical standards, cumulation of origin and public procurement); investment; intellectual property; e-commerce; State-owned enterprises; labour relations; and the environment.
The TPP chapter on cross-border trade in services is not analysed as it essentially consolidates the liberalization agreed in previous trade deals among TPP members.
However, disciplines agreed for other areas, which are analysed below (in particular, investment and e-commerce) are directly relevant to the liberalization of the trade in services. 1.
Market access: limited tariff benefits (except in agriculture) and increased Asian competition in the United States market Analysis of the results of a trade agreement in the area of market access has an offensive component (new export opportunities) and a defensive one (the possibility that local industries will face greater competition).
Both components are directly related to the share of foreign trade of the country concerned held by a partner or partners.
In this regard, the importance of TPP as a market varies widely among the three Latin American countries involved.
While the agreement accounts for approximately one-third of total trade in Chile and Peru measured by exports or imports, its importance is much greater for Mexico (see figure III.4).
This is mainly explained by the share in TPP zone trade of the United States, Mexico’s main trading partner.
In 2015, the United States absorbed 94% of Mexico’s exports to the TPP zone and was the source of 81% of its imports from that bloc.
This is largely due to the high number of free trade agreements among these countries.
In this regard, Chile stands out as the only TPP member country that has agreements with all the other signatories of the Partnership.
Lastly, Mexico has agreements with Canada and the United States (NAFTA), Chile, Japan and Peru, which together absorbed 99% of its TPP exports in that year.
In the light of this preliminary overview, it appears that TPP has little to offer Chile, Mexico and Peru in terms of improving their access to other markets.
Several TPP members maintain tariffs above 15% for a significant percentage of all products, especially in this sector (see figure III.5).
TPP market liberalization commitments with regard to the agricultural sector are much deeper and broader than those contained in previous agreements among its members.
For example, Chile, Mexico and Peru already have bilateral free trade treaties with Japan, but these agreements exclude many agricultural products and foodstuffs.
Under TPP, the Japanese market for products such as meat, citrus fruits, dairy products, food preparations and fish was opened up significantly, with major potential gains for the three Latin American countries.
For example, Chile gained market access for 1,603 (mainly agricultural) products that are excluded from tariff cuts in its agreements with Canada, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico and Viet Nam, and whose exports to these five markets totalled close to US$ 1.4 billion in 2014.
Chile’s access was also improved compared with its bilateral free trade agreements with Japan, Malaysia and Viet Nam for 1,523 products, exports of which to these three countries also exceeded US$ 1.3 billion in the same year (DIRECON, 2016).
The number of its products excluded from tariff cuts in the Japanese market is reduced from 1,062 under their bilateral agreement to only 29 under TPP (rice and its derivatives).
In addition, Peruvian authorities consider that TPP offers significant growth potential for its non-traditional exports, especially food, industry and fisheries, to the markets of Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, New Zealand and Viet Nam, countries with which Peru has not signed bilateral agreements (MINCETUR, 2016).
On the defensive level, TPP should not create great difficulties for the participating Latin American countries.
On the one hand, most of their imports from the other treaty members are already duty-free (or are in the process of becoming so) due to existing bilateral agreements.
On the other hand, the three Latin American countries obtained prolonged tariff phase-out periods for their most sensitive products under TPP.
Peru will also eliminate tariffs on some products during a period of up to 16 years (for example, certain poultry and pork preparations), while for Chile the period would be up to 8 years (for example, on some dairy products) and other products would be excluded from the tariff reduction (e.g. certain poultry products and cheeses originating in Canada).
TPP should also help to reduce non-tariff barriers to trade among its members.
These often arise from discrepancies between countries’ technical standards in areas such as safety, health or environmental protections.
These discrepancies may be justified in some cases by the different levels of development or by the diverse preferences of their societies.
Consequently, absolute harmonization of these standards is not always feasible or even desirable, especially among countries as disparate as the TPP signatories.
However, there are intermediate options that reduce unnecessary discrepancies between national standards, benefiting producers in member countries (and probably also non-member countries) without compromising other important public policy objectives.
This approach has been adopted in TPP, whose chapter on technical barriers to trade includes annexes aimed at reducing barriers to various product categories (see table III.1).
Sector-specific agreements under TPP should reduce non-tariff barriers to trade in various product categories One of the main opportunities offered by TPP to its members is the cumulation of origin.
This “allows products of one country of a free trade area to be further processed or added to products in another country of that free trade area as if they had originated in the latter country”.3 The cumulation of origin would encourage production sharing and value chains among TPP members in two ways.
Firstly, Chile, Mexico and Peru may freely incorporate inputs originating from any member of the Partnership into the final products that they export to any TPP market, without those products losing access to negotiated preferential tariffs.
Pharmaceuticals • Sets out guidelines for carrying out the marketing authorization process in an objective, transparent and procedural manner.
Medical devices • Sets out guidelines for carrying out the marketing authorization process in an objective, transparent and procedural manner. • Establishes labelling regulations.
Proprietary formulas for pre-packaged food and food additives • Ensures that the confidentiality of information about products provided by the manufacturer to the regulatory body of the importing country is respected.
Organic products • Each Party is encouraged to accept as equivalent or recognize the technical regulations, standards or conformity assessment procedures that relate to the production, processing or labelling of products of that other Party as organic.
However, the ability of each country to take advantage of these opportunities will largely depend on its productive and export structure.
Thus, at least initially, Mexico would appear to be better placed than Chile and Peru to benefit from the cumulation of origin, given its more diversified productive structure and the fact that it participates in several manufacturing value chains.
Moreover, countries’ ability to take full advantage of the cumulation of origin could be hampered by the multiplicity of rules of origin agreed upon in the Partnership for different industries, with different minimum levels required for the regional value content and various methods for calculating it (see some examples in table III.2).
Vehicles • Regional value content of 45% (under the net cost method) or 55% (under the build-down method).
Spare parts • Regional value content between 35% and 55%, depending on the type of spare part and calculation method.
Footwear • Regional value content of 55% (under the build-down method). • Footwear uppers must originate in the TPP zone.
Domestic electrical appliances • Regional value content of 45% (under the build-down method).
Textiles and apparel • Yarns and fabrics must be produced in the TPP zone (“yarn forward” rule). • Short Supply List of Products: 194 inputs can be acquired outside of the TPP zone due to insufficient supply in that zone.
Under TPP, Chile, Mexico and Peru have greater access in the area of public procurement than under previous trade agreements, even more, in fact, than other TPP partners.
For example, Australia granted access to public procurement markets at the federal level to all TPP partners, but provided only five countries (the three Latin American countries, Canada and Japan) with access to its state and territory public procurement markets, i.e. at the subnational level.
Under TPP, Canada and Japan have also added more entities to the list covered by commitments on the openness of public procurement markets, compared with existing agreements with Chile, Mexico and Peru.
In addition to these improvements, under TPP, Chile will have access to public procurement markets of three countries (Malaysia, Peru and Vietnam) with which it already has bilateral agreements that do not address this issue.
Among the sectors that would benefit from these opportunities are Peruvian suppliers of professional, technical and scientific services and wood products (MINCETUR, 2015).
The opportunities arising from the reciprocal opening of public procurement markets between Chile and Peru are especially clear.4 Lastly, under TPP, Mexico will have access to six new public procurement markets in Asia and the Pacific (Australia, Brunei Darussalam, Malaysia, New Zealand, Singapore and Viet Nam).
One of the main effects of the entry into force of TPP will be the greater competition that exports of all the countries of the region will face in the United States market, due to tariff reductions that this country will apply to the non-Latin American members of the Partnership.
The share of all TPP members in the total exports of the countries of the region varies widely, between 12% for Uruguay and 85% for the Bahamas.
This is due to the considerable weight of the United States market in exports from neighbouring countries (see figure III.6). 4 This was also agreed under the Additional Protocol to the Framework Agreement of the Pacific Alliance, which entered into force in May 2016.
These are precisely the five TPP members with which the United States has not signed bilateral free trade agreements.
Therefore, tariff reductions applied by the United States after the entry into force of TPP should favour an increase in imports from these countries and could affect the region’s exports.
Although this gap is small in aggregate terms, it is much greater for some sectors and products.
For example, the gaps will be larger in sectors such as leather articles and footwear, tobacco and textiles and apparel, where the United States tariff reduction in favour of its TPP partners will, on average, exceed 5 percentage points (see figure III.8).
The tariff gap may be wider for products such as meat and dairy products, on which the United States imposes high tariffs if they come from countries with which it has not signed a trade agreement.
This would be partly offset by improved access conditions for their exports to those countries.
In order to carry out more in-depth analysis of the impact of TPP on regional exports to the United States, the degree of similarity between the export baskets to that market from TPP member countries and from the countries of the region was estimated.
Bilateral similarity indices were calculated for this purpose.5 Of the three countries in the region that are TPP members, Mexico’s exports were most similar to those of the Asian partners, with whom it has intermediate similarity (except in the case of Japan, where similarity is high).
Meanwhile, Peru has intermediate similarities with Australia, Brunei Darussalam, New Zealand and Viet Nam (see table III.4). 5 The index is defined as follows: , where M represents United States imports, i is a country of the region, and j a TPP member.
The calculations were made using the three-digit disaggregation level of the Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) Rev. 2.
The higher the index level, the greater the similarity between the export baskets of two countries to the United States.
The similarities between the exports of all the Central American countries and those of Viet Nam stand out; they are especially high for El Salvador and Honduras.
Paraguay and the Bolivarian Republic of Venezuela are the South American countries whose baskets of exports to the United States bear little similarity to those of the Asian TPP members.
Among the Caribbean countries, the greatest similarities occur between Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Saint Lucia and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, on the one hand, and Brunei Darussalam on the other, which in terms of scale and comparative advantage could become a competitor for the smaller Caribbean economies.
Among the countries of the region that are TPP members, the biggest impacts would be felt in Mexico and Peru.
The apparel industry in Peru stands out, because tariffs are not currently paid on its exports of underwear and various items of clothing for men, women and children, and it will face competition from similar Vietnamese products.
The average tariff imposed by the United States on apparel exports from Viet Nam will be reduced from 18% today to 8% and, on some garments such as jackets, trousers and men’s and women’s shirts, the tariff will be cut from close to 30% to 0%.
This situation could cause a shift in trade in favour of Japan and Malaysia, at the expense of Mexican suppliers.
Among the South American countries, exports of various agricultural crops from the Southern Cone countries could face greater competition from New Zealand, and Brazilian exports in the automobile, automobile parts and aerospace sectors could be threatened by Japan.
Central America could face growing competition from Viet Nam in the textiles and apparel, footwear and, in particular, knitwear sectors.
In some cases that sector accounts for more than 40% of the total value of national exports to the United States.
The average tariff applied to all of these countries in the United States market is substantially lower than that imposed on Viet Nam (20.3%), because they have signed free trade agreements with the United States or, in the case of Haiti, benefit from unilateral trade preference programmes.
Despite this disadvantage, Viet Nam is already the United States’ second largest supplier of knitted garments and accessories (see table III.6).
The reduction of the average United States tariff applied to the Vietnamese textiles and apparel sector would be almost 10 percentage points in year 1 of TPP (see figure III.9), so United States’ imports from Viet Nam could increase rapidly, displacing those originating from Latin America and the Caribbean and other Asian competitors such as China, Indonesia and India.
The concerns expressed by several countries in the region about stiffer competition from Vietnamese clothing manufacturers in the United States market are partly allayed by the TPP agreed rule of origin for this sector, the so-called “yarn forward rule”.
This requires textiles and clothing manufacturers in Viet Nam —or any other TPP member country— to use as inputs yarns and fabrics originating from other TPP partners, in order to benefit from preferential treatment.
This means that (with some exceptions) Viet Nam will not be able to use cheaper Chinese inputs in the garments it exports to the United States under TPP tariff preferences.7 This would reduce the competitiveness of Viet Nam in that market compared to apparel exports from Latin American countries, whether they are members of the Partnership or not.
Given the potential for stronger competition from Viet Nam, the Central American countries should make their apparel industry more competitive, not by lowering prices, but by increasing added value and further diversifying production.
For example, they could explore both ends of the value chain, such as clothing design and the distribution and marketing of their own brands.
Moreover, by taking advantage of their geographic proximity to the United States market, they could develop specialized maquila and delivery services, making delivery times a determining factor.
These can be procured from non-TPP suppliers (such as China) and incorporated into the final products (apparel) without foregoing the tariff reduction.
The projected increase in United States imports from TPP members is particularly significant in those sectors that would qualify for the largest tariff cuts in year 1 of the agreement, such as textiles and apparel, leather articles and footwear, rubber and plastic, other manufactures, and food, beverages and tobacco.
Likewise, the expected growth in imports would be concentrated in the group of TPP member countries that do not have prior trade agreements with the United States.
Thus, New Zealand could capture 86% of the expected increase in United States imports from TPP in the agriculture, hunting and fishing sector (see table III.7).
In the agro-industrial sector, New Zealand and Malaysia are set to increase their exports to the United States, together with Australia and Canada.
The main benefits for New Zealand would be seen in the dairy products and meat sectors, as well as exports of various fruits and vegetables (New Zealand Ministry of Foreign Affairs and Trade, 2016).
Viet Nam would benefit the most from the expected increase in United States imports from the TPP zone in the textiles and apparel and leather articles and footwear sectors, accounting for 73% and 97%, respectively.
Viet Nam could also take a significant share of the increase in some manufactures in the chemicals and pharmaceuticals 147Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter III and non-metallic minerals sectors, as well as in metals and metal products and other manufactures.
Meanwhile, Japan would capture the bulk of trade created in the main manufacturing sectors, particularly chemicals and pharmaceuticals, rubber and plastics, non-metallic minerals and other manufactures.
This will allow them to continue to benefit from foreign investment originating mainly from Japan.
With regard to the effect of trade diversion on the countries of the region that are not TPP members, it is estimated that the largest diversion will occur in the textiles and apparel, chemicals and pharmaceuticals and a wide range of manufacturing sectors.
In the agricultural and agro-industrial sectors, the countries most affected are in South America and, to a lesser extent, Central America.
In general, the results are consistent with the analysis based on similarity indices.
Investment: in search of a better balance between the rights of foreign investors and the right of host States to regulate The TPP investment chapter is almost identical to the respective chapters of free trade agreements signed by Chile, Mexico and Peru with the United States and to the model followed by the latter in its bilateral investment treaties.
The substantive obligations are very similar and include standards such as national treatment, most-favourednation, prohibition on performance requirements,9 the free transfer of funds related to an investment and guarantees in the event of expropriation, among others.
These commitments are aligned with the regulatory frameworks in place in Chile, Mexico and Peru; thus, the obligations under TPP are not more ambitious than those already imposed by national laws and practices.
It allows foreign investors to sue Parties directly in international arbitration11 if they believe that their rights under the agreement have not been respected.
In recent years, both developed and developing countries have raised questions about this mechanism.
Including an investor-State dispute settlement mechanism in TPP was a fundamental objective of the United States.
Globally, United States-based companies are the primary users of such mechanisms, having initiated 138 of the 696 registered cases as of the end of 2015, 20% of the total (UNCTAD, 2016a).
However, Chile, Mexico and Peru had already accepted this clause in their respective free trade agreements with the United States and several other countries, and in numerous bilateral investment promotion and protection agreements.
The definition of “fair and equitable treatment” in TPP is an improvement on that included in the aforementioned agreements.
In fact, it explicitly states that the mere fact that a Party takes an action that results in lower profits than expected by the foreign investor or that a Party does not issue, renew or maintain a subsidy, does not constitute a breach of the obligation known as the minimum standard of treatment (linked to fair and equitable treatment).
The ambiguity in the interpretation of this obligation has allowed companies in numerous cases of investor-State dispute settlements to allege a breach on the grounds that their expected profits were affected by actions of the State (UNCTAD, 2015).
Therefore, the clarification introduced in TPP could reduce uncertainty surrounding the interpretation of fair and equitable treatment in future disputes, strengthening the position of host States.
Notwithstanding these developments, TPP does not address some problematic aspects of investor-State disputes.
For instance, it does not include the option of a screening process that allows the governments of the two countries involved in a potential dispute to decide whether to pursue or drop the case.
Screening could prevent investing companies from initiating disputes where their economic interests are clearly opposed to the host State’s legitimate public policy objectives.
Given the high political sensitivity of the matter in European public opinion, it has become one of the main sticking points in the negotiations.
Another investment-related issue that has provoked considerable controversy in the trade negotiations with the United States is that of capital controls.
Through its free trade agreements, the United States has sought to restrict its partners’ ability to apply capital controls, even temporarily and in order to preserve financial stability.
In this context, Chile, and later Peru, obtained a limited degree of flexibility in their bilateral agreements with the United States.
In this context, TPP provides that its members may adopt or maintain restrictions on payments or transfers related to capital movements: (i) in the event of serious balance-of-payments and external financing difficulties or threats thereof; or (ii) if, in exceptional circumstances, payments or transfers relating to capital movements cause or threaten to cause serious difficulties for macroeconomic management.
While these restrictions shall not exceed 18 months in duration, they may be extended, in exceptional circumstances, for up to one year.
In short, TPP investment provisions appear to reflect an effort to move towards a more suitable balance between protecting foreign investors and host States’ right to regulate in the public interest.
Clearly, the extent to which that objective has been achieved can only be gauged once the Partnership has entered into force and been put into practice.
Lastly, TPP offers Chilean, Mexican and Peruvian investors better protection standards in those member countries with which Chile, Mexico or Peru have not signed free trade or investment promotion and protection agreements, or with which their trade agreements do not cover investment commitments.16 3.
Intellectual property: protection levels continue to rise Intellectual property (IP) covers a wide range of categories, including patents, copyright and related rights, trademarks, geographical indications and industrial designs.
How these are protected has a direct impact on several aspects of economic and social life, and therefore on public policies, especially those related to education, culture, health, science and technology and industrial development.
This impact is particularly relevant in the context of the knowledge economy and explains why IP is historically one of the most controversial issues in North-South trade negotiations.
In particular, over the past two decades, the United States has used trade agreements to provide ever greater protection under different IP categories compared with the minimum standards established in the WTO Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPS).
Chile, Mexico and Peru had to accept a number of provisions in their free trade agreements with the United States that are stricter than those of the TRIPS Agreement.
The analysis presented below focuses on five particularly relevant topics and is not an exhaustive assessment of the IP chapter; not least because such an assessment will only be possible once the provisions of the agreement have entered into force and have been put into practice.
Often the provisions agreed are, to a certain extent, open to interpretation by the Parties, which can in some instances create conflict or in others prevent it.
Firstly, TPP increases substantially the range of patentable inventions (known as patentable subject matter) compared with NAFTA and the bilateral free trade agreements signed by Chile and Peru with the United States.
In accordance with the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement, under these three treaties, patents may be awarded for any product or process that is new, involves an innovative step and is capable of industrial application.
However, in line with United States legislation, TPP adds that patents shall be available for new uses of a known product, new methods of using a known product, or new processes of using a known product.
The scope of this wording could allow patent holders to introduce minor innovations and thus extend the monopoly that those patents grant them, which in turn could delay the widespread dissemination of new technological advances.
Secondly, TPP is the first free trade agreement that explicitly includes provisions to protect test data required for granting marketing approval of a biologic medicine (Lincicome and Picone, 2016).
The United States’ initial proposal was that all TPP members should agree to 12 years of protection, as is the case under federal law.
Chile has chosen the second option, since its industrial property law grants five years of protection for test data on all types of pharmaceutical products, whether chemical or biological.
The Government of Chile understands that it does not need to amend its legislative framework to comply with the provisions of TPP.18 Mexico and Peru availed themselves of transition periods of five and ten years, respectively, to adapt their legislation to TPP obligations in this area.
The ambiguity surrounding the “other measures” that would complement the five years of data protection could lead to bilateral arrangements to determine what would constitute compliance with this obligation (Artecona and Plank-Brumback, 2016).
A third important issue for Latin American countries is the linkage between the health authorities and patent office of each country.
This obligation seeks to ensure that the health authority does not grant marketing approval for a generic pharmaceutical product until the patent protecting the original version has expired.
This directly affects how and when the population can access generic medicines.
Conversely, the free trade agreement between Chile and the United States only provides for the hard option, which has led to serious interpretive differences between the two countries in its implementation.
In the end, they agreed that, upon the entry into force of TPP, its soft patent linkage system would replace the linkage disciplines of their bilateral free trade agreement.
Therefore, on this issue, TPP is more flexible than some of the free trade agreements negotiated by countries of the region with the United States.
A fourth issue that has given rise to controversy in various TPP member countries, including those of the region, is copyright protection in the digital environment.
The United States’ original proposal in this area was to replicate its national “notice and take down” system in TPP partner countries.
Under this system, if an Internet service provider receives notice that certain content on networks or sites that it administers would infringe a copyright, they must be taken down immediately to avoid any liability and penalties.
TPP contains provisions similar to this system, but with some exceptions and greater flexibility.
Meanwhile, Mexico has availed itself of a three-year transitional period to implement TPP obligations in this area.
A fifth controversial issue is the requirement that TPP member countries accede to the 1991 International Convention for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV Convention).
This Convention governs the International Union for the Protection of New Varieties of Plants (UPOV), an intergovernmental body that seeks to promote the creation of new varieties of plants.
To this end, it grants breeders of these varieties a sui generis type of protection (the breeder’s rights) for a period of at least 20 years and of at least 25 years in the case of trees and vines.
This can be achieved by traditional methods or, alternatively, by creating genetically modified (transgenic) organisms.
The latter process raises a number of concerns, including about its potential impact on human health, its adverse effects on the environment and biodiversity, and the lack of regulatory frameworks in some countries for the control of these products.
It has also been argued that the Convention could restrict the so-called “farmer’s privilege” (the right to use for seed the harvest of a protected plant variety on their own land) and seed exchange between smallholders (Alfaro, 2016).
Seed exchange is a long-standing tradition in many developing countries, including in Latin America.
However, the inclusion of the Convention provisions in Chilean regulations has been highly controversial, and a bill to do that was withdrawn from Congress in March 2013, so that it could be redrafted.23 Peru made the same commitment in its free trade agreement with the United States and acceded to the Convention in 2011.
Mexico however is not yet a party to that treaty, but has a four-year transition period from the entry into force of TPP in which to join.
As TPP was a plurilateral negotiation, the United States faced a greater counterweight than in previous bilateral negotiations.
However, in other areas, TPP substantially raises IP protection levels compared with previous agreements signed by Chile, Peru and particularly Mexico with the United States (see table III.9).
A striking example, with profound implications for innovation policies, is the expansion of patentable subject matter.
The world economy is going through a period of intense digital globalization (see chapter I and ECLAC, 2015).
While world trade in physical goods has lost a considerable amount of momentum since the global crisis of 2008-2009, cross-border digital flows have grown by a factor of 45 between 2005 and 2014.
The growing importance of digital goods is blurring the line between goods and services, posing new challenges to the regulation of world trade.
Meanwhile, the development of 3D printing technology allows imported inputs to be replaced in various industries, stimulating the incipient reshoring processes seen in some countries, especially the United States.
This trend should accelerate in the coming years, reconfiguring regional and global value chains.
In this context, one of the most notable features of TPP is its emphasis on regulating the digital economy.
This stems from the United States’ interest in preserving its leading role in the face of emerging competitors such as China, which in recent years has pursued an aggressive digital industrial policy (Azmeh and Foster, 2016).
While the space for developing traditional industrial policies (for example, through tariff protection, subsidies and domestic content requirements) has been reduced markedly as a result of WTO agreements and North-South trade and investment arrangements, the digital economy remains largely unregulated.
This means that governments have more room to implement measures such as blocking specific Internet sites, imposing network location server requirements or compelling foreign providers to reveal the source code of their software.
TPP is the first trade agreement that contains detailed provisions regulating e-commerce.
While its scope would be limited to its member countries in the short term, the agreed disciplines —together with those that may emerge during the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP) negotiations— could become a model for a future WTO multilateral agreement.
Several of these provisions are clearly meant to counter measures that China has implemented in recent years in an effort to gain ground on the United States.
While very few developing countries have adopted such an aggressive digital industrial policy as China, acceding to TPP severely limits the scope for them to do so in the future. 24 Companies that provide cross-border financial services are exempt from this prohibition. 156 Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)Chapter III 5.
State-owned enterprises: in search of competitive neutrality Today, State-owned enterprises have a large share in global trade and increasingly compete with private firms, sometimes benefiting from preferential financial or legal treatment by their respective governments.
In general, trade agreements have had little effect on the actions of these enterprises.
In this context, TPP establishes a legal framework designed to level the playing field between State-owned and private enterprises in trade and investment, in line with the principle of competitive neutrality.
TPP defines State-owned enterprises as those in which a Party: (i) directly owns more than 50% of the share capital; (ii) controls, through ownership interests, the exercise of more than 50% of the voting rights; or (iii) holds the power to appoint a majority of members of the board of directors or any other equivalent management body.
Following TPP provisions, these companies must act in accordance with commercial considerations in their purchase or sale of goods or services; in other words, granting most-favoured-nation treatment and non-discriminatory treatment to companies from other TPP partners.
Therefore, non-commercial assistance shall not be provided to State-owned enterprises (for example, financing on terms more favourable than those commercially available) with respect to the production and sale of a good and the supply of a service, which could cause adverse effects to the interests of another Party.
A key objective in the State-owned enterprises chapter is to achieve greater transparency.
All Parties to TPP must make publicly available a list of their State-owned enterprises.
In addition, if a Party believes that the activities of a State-owned enterprise may be affecting trade or investment, it may submit a written request for information to the relevant Party concerning the activities, shares, profits and losses, financial reports and audits of that entity, among other things.
Moreover, TPP provides that national courts shall have jurisdiction over civil claims against a State-owned enterprise based on a commercial activity.
These commitments are in line with 157Latin America and the Caribbean in the World Economy • 2016 Chapter III those in the most recent free trade agreements signed by the United States with Peru, Colombia, Panama and the Republic of Korea.
The provisions agreed to in the chapter on labour are binding and therefore subject to dispute settlement.
However, the Parties must submit to a mandatory labour consultation procedure before they can have recourse to dispute settlement.
TPP stipulates that Parties shall not waive their environmental laws in a manner that weakens or reduces the protection afforded in those laws in order to encourage trade or investment.
Other binding agreements include a requirement for each Party to operate a fisheries management system that regulates marine wild capture fishing, in order to prevent overfishing and overcapacity, reduce bycatch and promote the recovery of overfished stocks.
Similarly, subsidies shall not be granted or maintained for fishing or for any fishing vessel that negatively affect fish stocks that are in overfished condition.
The agreement also includes commitments previously agreed to in multilateral environmental agreements, in particular measures to: (i) control the production and consumption of substances that can deplete and otherwise modify the ozone layer; (ii) prevent the pollution of the marine environment; and (iii) combat the illegal take of and illegal trade in wild fauna and flora.
Chile, Mexico and Peru are already signatories of the respective international agreements on which these obligations are based.
For example, it seeks to encourage the transition to a low emissions and resilient economy, based on domestic circumstances and capabilities, and driven by collective action.
Areas of cooperation to this end include energy efficiency, alternative energy sources, sustainable transport and urban infrastructure development, emissions monitoring and the development of low emissions technologies.
The binding obligations contained in the environment chapter are subject to the TPP dispute settlement mechanism.
However, as with labour disputes, there is an extensive prior consultation procedure aimed at finding a mutually satisfactory resolution, which Parties must exhaust before a dispute can be initiated.
Strategic implications for the region and the world In the light of the challenges facing WTO as a forum for negotiating the new rules of world trade, commitments negotiated under megaregional agreements such as TPP could well become global standards.
The potential significance of TPP is even greater in the context of the downturn in international trade seen since 2011.
The United States has attempted to achieve three strategic objectives through TPP: to strengthen its presence in the dynamic Asia-Pacific region, counterbalancing China’s growing influence; to write new rules for global trade and investment in the coming decades; and to update the provisions of NAFTA, which are nearly 25 years old.
In particular, TPP provisions on e-commerce, intellectual property, services and investment create a regulatory framework aimed at strengthening United States leadership in the digital economy.
For TPP to enter into force, it must be ratified by at least six of its members, who together represent at least 85% of the total GDP of the 12 signatory countries.
This means that its entry into force is impossible without ratification by the United States and Japan.
Consequently, the opposition of the President-elect of the United States to TPP means that its entry into force is in serious doubt.
TPP has an accession clause, under which new countries can accede to the agreement once it enters into force.
This would increase its commercial and strategic value, especially in the case of large economies deeply embedded in Asian value chains, such as the Republic of Korea and Thailand.
Both countries have, at different times, expressed their interest in acceding to the Partnership.
Similarly, in the region, Colombia, Costa Rica, Honduras and, most recently, Nicaragua have shown an interest in acceding.
